So why do we remember some things and not others?
Well, there are a few ways to influence the extent and effectiveness of memory retention.
For example, memories that are formed in times of heightened feeling, or even stress, will be better recorded due to the hippocampus' link with emotion.
But one of the major factors contributing to memory consolidation is, you guessed it, a good night's sleep.
Sleep is composed of four stages, the deepest of which are known as slow-wave sleep and rapid eye movement.
EEG machines monitoring people during these stages have shown electrical impulses moving between the brainstem, hippocampus, thalamus, and cortex, which serve as relay stations of memory formation.
And the different stages of sleep have been shown to help consolidate different types of memories.
During the non-REM slow-wave sleep, declarative memory is encoded into a temporary store in the anterior part of the hippocampus.
Through a continuing dialogue between the cortex and hippocampus, it is then repeatedly reactivated, driving its gradual redistribution to long-term storage in the cortex.
REM sleep, on the other hand, with its similarity to waking brain activity, is associated with the consolidation of procedural memory.
So based on the studies, going to sleep three hours after memorizing your formulas and one hour after practicing your scales would be the most ideal.
So hopefully you can see now that skimping on sleep not only harms your long-term health, but actually makes it less likely that you'll retain all that knowledge and practice from the previous night, all of which just goes to affirm the wisdom of the phrase, "Sleep on it."
When you think about all the internal restructuring and forming of new connections that occurs while you slumber, you could even say that proper sleep will have you waking up every morning with a new and improved brain, ready to face the challenges ahead.
As 1905 dawned, the soon-to-be 26-year-old Albert Einstein faced life as a failed academic.
Most physicists of the time would have scoffed at the idea that this minor civil servant could have much to contribute to science.
Yet within the following year, Einstein would publish not one, not two, not three, but four extraordinary papers, each on a different topic, that were destined to radically transform our understanding of the universe.
The myth that Einstein had failed math is just that.
He had mastered calculus on his own by the age of 15 and done well at both his Munich secondary school and at the Swiss Polytechnic, where he studied for a math and physics teaching diploma.
But skipping classes to spend more time in the lab and neglecting to show proper deference to his professors had derailed his intended career path.
Passed over even for a lab assistant position, he had to settle for a job at the Swiss patent office, obtained with the help of a friend's father.
Working six days a week as a patent clerk, Einstein still managed to make some time for physics, discussing the latest work with a few close friends, and publishing a couple of minor papers.
It came as a major surprise when in March 1905 he submitted a paper with a shocking hypothesis.
Despite decades of evidence that light was a wave, Einstein proposed that it could, in fact, be a particle, showing that mysterious phenomena, such as the photoelectric effect, could be explained by his hypothesis.
The idea was derided for years to come, but Einstein was simply twenty years ahead of his time.
Wave-particle duality was slated to become a cornerstone of the quantum revolution.
Two months later in May, Einstein submitted a second paper, this time tackling the centuries old question of whether atoms actually exist.
Though certain theories were built on the idea of invisible atoms, some prominent scientists still believed them to be a useful fiction, rather than actual physical objects.
But Einstein used an ingenious argument, showing that the behavior of small particles randomly moving around in a liquid, known as Brownian motion, could be precisely predicted by the collisions of millions of invisible atoms.
Experiments soon confirmed Einstein's model, and atomic skeptics threw in the towel.
The third paper came in June.
For a long time, Einstein had been troubled by an inconsistency between two fundamental principles of physics.
The well established principle of relativity, going all the way back to Galileo, stated that absolute motion could not be defined.
Yet electromagnetic theory, also well established, asserted that absolute motion did exist.
The discrepancy, and his inability to resolve it, left Einstein in what he described as a state of psychic tension.
But one day in May, after he had mulled over the puzzle with his friend Michele Besso, the clouds parted.
Einstein realized that the contradiction could be resolved if it was the speed of light that remained constant, regardless of reference frame, while both time and space were relative to the observer.
It took Einstein only a few weeks to work out the details and formulate what came to be known as special relativity.
The theory not only shattered our previous understanding of reality but would also pave the way for technologies, ranging from particle accelerators, to the global positioning system.
One might think that this was enough, but in September, a fourth paper arrived as a "by the way" follow-up to the special relativity paper.
Einstein had thought a little bit more about his theory, and realized it also implied that mass and energy, one apparently solid and the other supposedly ethereal, were actually equivalent.
And their relationship could be expressed in what was to become the most famous and consequential equation in history: E=mc^2.
Einstein would not become a world famous icon for nearly another fifteen years.
It was only after his later general theory of relativity was confirmed in 1919 by measuring the bending of starlight during a solar eclipse that the press would turn him into a celebrity.
But even if he had disappeared back into the patent office and accomplished nothing else after 1905, those four papers of his miracle year would have remained the gold standard of startling unexpected genius.
In 2008, something incredible happened: a man was cured of HIV.
In over 70 million HIV cases, that was a first and, so far, a last.
We don't yet understand exactly how he was cured.
We can cure people of various diseases, such as malaria and hepatitis C, so why can't we cure HIV?
Well, first let's examine how HIV infects people and progresses into AIDS.
HIV spreads through exchanges of bodily fluids.
Unprotected sex and contaminated needles are the leading cause of transmission.
It, fortunately, cannot spread through air, water, or casual contact.
Individuals of any age, sexual orientation, gender and race can contract HIV.
Once inside the body, HIV infects cells that are part of the immune system.
It particularly targets helper T cells, which help defend the body against bacterial and fungal infections.
HIV is a retrovirus, which means it can write its genetic code into the genome of infected cells, co-opting them into making more copies of itself.
During the first stage of HIV infection, the virus replicates within helper T cells, destroying many of them in the process.
During this stage, patients often experience flu-like symptoms, but are typically not yet in mortal danger.
However, for a period ranging from a few months to several years, during which time the patient may look and feel completely healthy, the virus continues to replicate and destroy T cells.
When T cell counts drop too low, patients are in serious danger of contracting deadly infections that healthy immune systems can normally handle.
This stage of HIV infection is known as AIDS.
The good news is there are drugs that are highly effective at managing levels of HIV and preventing T cell counts from getting low enough for the disease to progress to AIDS.
With antiretroviral therapy, most HIV-positive people can expect to live long and healthy lives, and are much less likely to infect others.
However, there are two major catches.
One is that HIV-positive patients must keep taking their drugs for the rest of their lives.
Without them, the virus can make a deadly comeback.
So, how do these drugs work?
The most commonly prescribed ones prevent the viral genome from being copied and incorporated into a host cell's DNA.
Other drugs prevent the virus from maturing or assembling, causing HIV to be unable to infect new cells in the body.
But HIV hides out somewhere our current drugs cannot reach it: inside the DNA of healthy T cells.
Most T cells die shortly after being infected with HIV.
But in a tiny percentage, the instructions for building more HIV viruses lies dormant, sometimes for years.
So even if we could wipe out every HIV virus from an infected person's body, one of those T cells could activate and start spreading the virus again.
The other major catch is that not everyone in the world has access to the therapies that could save their lives.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, which accounts for over 70% of HIV patients worldwide, antiretrovirals reached only about one in three HIV-positive patients in 2012.
There is no easy answer to this problem.
A mix of political, economic and cultural barriers makes effective prevention and treatment difficult.
And even in the U.S., HIV still claims more than 10,000 lives per year.
However, there is ample cause for hope.
Researchers may be closer than ever to developing a true cure.
One research approach involves using a drug to activate all cells harboring the HIV genetic information.
This would both destroy those cells and flush the virus out into the open, where our current drugs are effective.
Another is looking to use genetic tools to cut the HIV DNA out of cells genomes altogether.
And while one cure out of 70 million cases may seem like terrible odds, one is immeasurably better than zero.
We now know that a cure is possible, and that may give us what we need to beat HIV for good.
This is the story of three plastic bottles, empty and discarded.
Their journeys are about to diverge with outcomes that impact nothing less than the fate of the planet.
But they weren't always this way.
To understand where these bottles end up, we must first explore their origins.
The heroes of our story were conceived in this oil refinery.
The plastic in their bodies was formed by chemically bonding oil and gas molecules together to make monomers.
In turn, these monomers were bonded into long polymer chains to make plastic in the form of millions of pellets.
Those were melted at manufacturing plants and reformed in molds to create the resilient material that makes up the triplets' bodies.
Machines filled the bottles with sweet bubbily liquid and they were then wrapped, shipped, bought, opened, consumed and unceremoniously discarded.
And now here they lie, poised at the edge of the unknown.
Bottle one, like hundreds of millions of tons of his plastic brethren, ends up in a landfill.
This huge dump expands each day as more trash comes in and continues to take up space.
As plastics sit there being compressed amongst layers of other junk, rainwater flows through the waste and absorbs the water-soluble compounds it contains, and some of those are highly toxic.
Together, they create a harmful stew called leachate, which can move into groundwater, soil and streams, poisoning ecosystems and harming wildlife.
It can take bottle one an agonizing 1,000 years to decompose.
Bottle two's journey is stranger but, unfortunately, no happier.
He floats on a trickle that reaches a stream, a stream that flows into a river, and a river that reaches the ocean.
After months lost at sea, he's slowly drawn into a massive vortex, where trash accumulates, a place known as the Great Pacific Garbage Patch.
Here the ocean's currents have trapped millions of pieces of plastic debris.
This is one of five plastic-filled gyres in the world's seas.
Places where the pollutants turn the water into a cloudy plastic soup.
Some animals, like seabirds, get entangled in the mess.
They, and others, mistake the brightly colored plastic bits for food.
Plastic makes them feel full when they're not, so they starve to death and pass the toxins from the plastic up the food chain.
For example, it's eaten by lanternfish, the lanternfish are eaten by squid, the squid are eaten by tuna, and the tuna are eaten by us.
And most plastics don't biodegrade, which means they're destined to break down into smaller and smaller pieces called micro plastics, which might rotate in the sea eternally.
But bottle three is spared the cruel purgatories of his brothers.
A truck brings him to a plant where he and his companions are squeezed flat and compressed into a block.
Okay, this sounds pretty bad, too, but hang in there.
It gets better.
The blocks are shredded into tiny pieces, which are washed and melted, so they become the raw materials that can be used again.
As if by magic, bottle three is now ready to be reborn as something completely new.
For this bit of plastic with such humble origins, suddenly the sky is the limit.
In 1978, Louise Brown became the world's first baby to be born by in vitro fertilization, or IVF.
Her birth revolutionized the field of reproductive medicine.
Given that approximately one in eight heterosexual couples has difficulty conceiving, and that homosexual couples and single parents often need clinical help to make a baby, the demand for IVF has been growing.
IVF is so common, that more than 5 million babies have been born through this technology.
IVF works by mimicking the brilliant design of sexual reproduction.
In order to understand IVF, we first need to take a look at the natural process of baby making.
Believe it or not, it all starts in the brain.
Roughly fifteen days before fertilization can happen, the anterior pituitary gland secretes follicle stimulating hormone, FSH, which ripens a handful of follicles of the ovary that then release estrogen.
Each follicle contains one egg, and on average, only one follicle becomes fully mature.
As it grows and continues to release estrogen, this hormone not only helps coordinate growth and preparation of the uterus, it also communicates to the brain how well the follicle is developing.
When the estrogen level is high enough, the anterior pituitary releases a surge of luteinizing hormone, LH, which triggers ovulation and causes the follicle to rupture and release the egg.
Once the egg leaves the ovary, it is directed into the Fallopian tube by the finger-like fimbriae.
If the egg is not fertilized by sperm within 24 hours, the unfertilized egg will die, and the entire system will reset itself, preparing to create a new egg and uterine lining the following month.
The egg is the largest cell in the body and is protected by a thick, extracellular shell of sugar and protein called the zona pellucida.
The zona thwarts the entry and fusion of more than one sperm, the smallest cell in the body.
It takes a man two to three months to make sperm, and the process constantly renews.
Each ejaculation during sexual intercourse releases more than 100 million sperm.
But only 100 or so will ultimately make it to the proximity of the egg, and only one will successfully penetrate through the armor of the zona pellucida.
Upon successful fertilization, the zygote immediately begins developing into an embryo, and takes about three days to reach the uterus.
There, it requires another three or so days to implant firmly into the endometrium, the inner lining of the uterus.
Once implanted, the cells that are to become the placenta secrete a hormone that signals to the ovulated follicle that there is a pregnancy in the uterus.
This helps rescue that follicle, now called the corpus luteum, from degenerating as it normally would do in that stage of the menstrual cycle.
The corpus luteum is responsible for producing the progesterone required to maintain the pregnancy until six to seven weeks of gestation, when the placenta develops and takes over, until the baby is born approximately 40 weeks later.
Now, how do you make a baby in a lab?
In patients undergoing IVF, FSH is administered at levels that are higher than naturally occuring to cause a controlled overstimulation of the ovaries so that they ultimately produce multiple eggs.
The eggs are then retrieved just before ovulation would occur, while the woman is under anesthesia, through an aspirating needle that is guided by ultrasound.
Most sperm samples are produced by masturbation.
In the laboratory, the identified eggs are stripped of surrounding cells and prepared for fertilization in a petri dish.
Fertilization can occur by one of two techniques.
In the first, the eggs are incubated with thousands of sperm and fertilization occurs naturally over a few hours.
The second technique maximizes certainty of fertilization by using a needle to place a single sperm inside the egg.
This is particularly useful when there is a problem with the quality of the sperm.
After fertilization, embryos can be further screened for genetic suitability, frozen for later attempted pregnancies, or delivered into the woman's uterus via catheter.
Common convention is to transfer the embryo three days after fertilization, when the embryo has eight cells, or on day five, when the embryo is called a blastocyst, and has hundreds of cells.
If the woman's eggs are of poor quality due to age or toxic exposures, or have been removed due to cancer, donor eggs may be used.
In the case that the intended mother has a problematic uterus, or lacks one, another woman, called the gestational carrier or surrogate, can use her uterus to carry the pregnancy.
To increase the odds of success, which are as high as 40% for a woman younger than 35, doctors sometimes transfer multiple embryos at once, which is why IVF results in twins and triplets more often than natural pregnancies.
However, most clinics seek to minimize the chances of multiple pregnancies, as they are riskier for mothers and babies.
Millions of babies, like Louise Brown, have been born from IVF and have had normal, healthy lives.
The long-term health consequences of ovarian stimulation with IVF medicines are less clear, though so far, IVF seems safe for women.
Because of better genetic testing, delayed childbearing, increased accessibility and diminishing cost, it's not inconceivable that artificial baby making via IVF and related techniques could outpace natural reproduction in years to come.
The constant thud underneath your feet, the constrained space, and the monotony of going nowhere fast.
It feels like hours have gone by, but it's only been eleven minutes, and you wonder, "Why am I torturing myself?
This thing has got to be considered a cruel and unusual punishment."
Actually, that's exactly what it is, or was.
You see, in the 1800s, treadmills were created to punish English prisoners.
At the time, the English prison system was abysmally bad.
Execution and deportation were often the punishments of choice, and those who were locked away faced hours of solitude in filthy cells.
So social movements led by religious groups, philanthropies, and celebrities, like Charles Dickens, sought to change these dire conditions and help reform the prisoners.
When their movement succeeded, entire prisons were remodeled and new forms of rehabilitation, such as the treadmill, were introduced.
Here's how the original version, invented in 1818 by English engineer Sir William Cubitt, worked.
Prisoners stepped on 24 spokes of a large paddle wheel.
As the wheel turned, the prisoner was forced to keep stepping up or risk falling off, similar to modern stepper machines.
Meanwhile, the rotation made gears pump out water, crush grain, or power mills, which is where the name "treadmill" originated.
These devices were seen as a fantastic way of whipping prisoners into shape, and that added benefit of powering mills helped to rebuild a British economy decimated by the Napoleonic Wars.
It was a win for all concerned, except the prisoners.
It's estimated that, on average, prisoners spent six or so hours a day on treadmills, the equivalent of climbing 5,000 to 14,000 feet.
14,000 feet is roughly Mount Everest's halfway point.
Imagine doing that five days a week with little food.
Cubitt's idea quickly spread across the British Empire and America.
Within a decade of its creation, over 50 English prisons boasted a treadmill, and America, a similar amount.
Unsurprisingly, the exertion combined with poor nutrition saw many prisoners suffer breakdowns and injuries, not that prison guards seemed to care.
In 1824, New York prison guard James Hardie credited the device with taming his more boisterous inmates, writing that the "monotonous steadiness, and not its severity...constitutes its terror," a quote many still agree with.
And treadmills lasted in England until the late 19th century, when they were banned for being excessively cruel under the Prison's Act of 1898.
But of course the torture device returned with a vengeance, this time targeting the unsuspecting public.
In 1911, a treadmill patent was registered in the U.S., and by 1952, the forerunner for today's modern treadmill had been created.
When the jogging craze hit the U.S. in the 1970s, the treadmill was thrust back into the limelight as an easy and convenient way to improve aerobic fitness, and lose unwanted pounds, which, to be fair, it's pretty good at doing.
And the machine has maintained its popularity since.
So the next time you voluntarily subject yourself to what was once a cruel and unusual punishment, just be glad you can control when you'll hop off.
If you've watched the news or followed politics chances are you've heard the term Orwellian thrown around in one context or another.
But have you ever stopped to think about what it really means, or why it's used so often?
The term was named after British author Eric Blair known by his pen name George Orwell.
Because his most famous work, the novel "1984," depicts an oppressive society under a totalitarian government, "Orwellian" is often used simply to mean authoritarian.
But using the term in this way not only fails to fully convey Orwell's message, it actually risks doing precisely what he tried to warn against.
Orwell was indeed opposed to all forms of tyranny, spending much of his life fighting against anti-democratic forces of both the left-wing and the right.
But he was also deeply concerned with how such ideologies proliferate.
And one of his most profound insights was the importance that language plays in shaping our thoughts and opinions.
The government of "1984"'s Oceania controls its people's actions and speech in some ways that are obvious.
Their every move and word is watched and heard, and the threat of what happens to those who step out of line is always looming overhead.
Other forms of control are not so obvious.
The population is inundated with a constant barrage of propaganda made up of historical facts and statistics manufactured in the Ministry of Truth.
The Ministry of Peace is the military.
Labor camps are called "Joycamps."
Political prisoners are detained and tortured in the Ministry of Love.
This deliberate irony is an example of doublespeak, when words are used not to convey meaning but to undermine it, corrupting the very ideas they refer to.
The regime's control of language goes even further, eliminating words from the English language to create the official dialect of Newspeak, a crudely limited collection of acronyms and simple concrete nouns lacking any words complex enough to encourage nuanced or critical thought.
This has an effect on the psyche Orwell calls, "Doublethink," a hypnotic state of cognitive dissonance in which one is compelled to disregard their own perception in place of the officially dictated version of events, leaving the individual completely dependent on the State's definition of reality itself.
The result is a world in which even the privacy of one's own thought process is violated, where one may be found guilty of thoughtcrime by talking in their sleep, and keeping a diary or having a love affair equals a subversive act of rebellion.
This might sound like something that can only happen in totalitarian regimes, but Orwell was warning us about the potential for this occurring even in democratic societies.
And this is why "authoritarian" alone does not "Orwellian" make.
In his essay, "Politics and the English Language," he described techniques like using pretentious words to project authority, or making atrocities sound acceptable by burying them in euphemisms and convoluted sentence structures.
But even more mundane abuses of language can affect the way we think about things.
The words you see and hear in everyday advertising have been crafted to appeal to you and affect your behavior, as have the soundbites and talking points of political campaigns which rarely present the most nuanced perspective on the issues.
And the way that we use ready-made phrases and responses gleaned from media reports or copied from the Internet makes it easy to get away with not thinking too deeply or questioning your assumptions.
So the next time you hear someone use the word Orwellian, pay close attention.
If they're talking about the deceptive and manipulative use of language, they're on the right track.
If they're talking about mass surveillance and intrusive government, they're describing something authoritarian but not necessarily Orwellian.
And if they use it as an all-purpose word for any ideas they dislike, it's possible their statements are more Orwellian than whatever it is they're criticizing.
Words have the power to shape thought.
Language is the currency of politics, forming the basis of society from the most common, everyday interactions to the highest ideals.
Orwell urged us to protect our language because ultimately our ability to think and communicate clearly is what stands between us and a world where war is peace and freedom is slavery.
Well, I'm involved in other things, besides physics.
In fact, mostly now in other things.
One thing is distant relationships among human languages.
And the professional, historical linguists in the U.S.
and in Western Europe mostly try to stay away from any long-distance relationships, big groupings, groupings that go back a long time, longer than the familiar families.
They don't like that. They think it's crank. I don't think it's crank.
And there are some brilliant linguists, mostly Russians, who are working on that, at Santa Fe Institute and in Moscow, and I would love to see where that leads.
Does it really lead to a single ancestor some 20, 25,000 years ago?
And what if we go back beyond that single ancestor, when there was presumably a competition among many languages?
How far back does that go? How far back does modern language go?
How many tens of thousands of years does it go back?
Chris Anderson: Do you have a hunch or a hope for what the answer to that is?
Murray Gell-Mann: Well, I would guess that modern language must be older than the cave paintings and cave engravings and cave sculptures and dance steps in the soft clay in the caves in Western Europe, in the Aurignacian Period some 35,000 years ago, or earlier.
I can't believe they did all those things and didn't also have a modern language.
So, I would guess that the actual origin goes back at least that far and maybe further.
But that doesn't mean that all, or many, or most of today's attested languages couldn't descend perhaps from one that's much younger than that, like say 20,000 years, or something of that kind. It's what we call a bottleneck.
CA: Well, Philip Anderson may have been right.
You may just know more about everything than anyone.
So, it's been an honor. Thank you Murray Gell-Mann.
(Applause)
This is a thought experiment.
Let's say at some point in the not so distant future, you're barreling down the highway in your self-driving car, and you find yourself boxed in on all sides by other cars.
Suddenly, a large, heavy object falls off the truck in front of you.
Your car can't stop in time to avoid the collision, so it needs to make a decision: go straight and hit the object, swerve left into an SUV, or swerve right into a motorcycle.
Should it prioritize your safety by hitting the motorcycle, minimize danger to others by not swerving, even if it means hitting the large object and sacrificing your life, or take the middle ground by hitting the SUV, which has a high passenger safety rating?
So what should the self-driving car do?
If we were driving that boxed in car in manual mode, whichever way we'd react would be understood as just that, a reaction, not a deliberate decision.
It would be an instinctual panicked move with no forethought or malice.
But if a programmer were to instruct the car to make the same move, given conditions it may sense in the future, well, that looks more like premeditated homicide.
Now, to be fair, self-driving cars are are predicted to dramatically reduce traffic accidents and fatalities by removing human error from the driving equation.
Plus, there may be all sorts of other benefits: eased road congestion, decreased harmful emissions, and minimized unproductive and stressful driving time.
But accidents can and will still happen, and when they do, their outcomes may be determined months or years in advance by programmers or policy makers.
And they'll have some difficult decisions to make.
It's tempting to offer up general decision-making principles, like minimize harm, but even that quickly leads to morally murky decisions.
For example, let's say we have the same initial set up, but now there's a motorcyclist wearing a helmet to your left and another one without a helmet to your right.
Which one should your robot car crash into?
If you say the biker with the helmet because she's more likely to survive, then aren't you penalizing the responsible motorist?
If, instead, you save the biker without the helmet because he's acting irresponsibly, then you've gone way beyond the initial design principle about minimizing harm, and the robot car is now meting out street justice.
The ethical considerations get more complicated here.
In both of our scenarios, the underlying design is functioning as a targeting algorithm of sorts.
In other words, it's systematically favoring or discriminating against a certain type of object to crash into.
And the owners of the target vehicles will suffer the negative consequences of this algorithm through no fault of their own.
Our new technologies are opening up many other novel ethical dilemmas.
For instance, if you had to choose between a car that would always save as many lives as possible in an accident, or one that would save you at any cost, which would you buy?
What happens if the cars start analyzing and factoring in the passengers of the cars and the particulars of their lives?
Could it be the case that a random decision is still better than a predetermined one designed to minimize harm?
And who should be making all of these decisions anyhow?
Programmers?
Companies?
Governments?
Reality may not play out exactly like our thought experiments, but that's not the point.
They're designed to isolate and stress test our intuitions on ethics, just like science experiments do for the physical world.
Spotting these moral hairpin turns now will help us maneuver the unfamiliar road of technology ethics, and allow us to cruise confidently and conscientiously into our brave new future.
This talk contains mature language Viewer discretion is advised Let's get this out of the way.
I'm here because I wrote a book about civility, and because that book came out right around the 2016 American presidential election, I started getting lots of invitations to come and talk about civility and why we need more of it in American politics.
So great.
The only problem was that I had written that book about civility because I was convinced that civility is ...
bullshit.
(Laughter) Now, that may sound like a highly uncivil thing to say, and lucky for you, and for my publisher, I did eventually come to change my mind.
In the course of writing that book and studying the long history of civility and religious tolerance in the 17th century, I came to discover that there is a virtue of civility, and far from being bullshit, it's actually absolutely essential, especially for tolerant societies, so societies like this one, that promise not only to protect diversity but also the heated and sometimes even hateful disagreements that that diversity inspires.
You see, the thing about disagreement is that there is a reason that "disagreeable" is a synonym for "unpleasant."
As the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes pointed out all the way back in 1642, that's because the mere act of disagreement is offensive.
And Hobbes is still right. It works like this: so, if you and I disagree, and I'm right, because I always am, how am I to make sense of the fact that you are so very, very wrong?
It couldn't possibly be that you've just come to a different conclusion in good faith?
No, you must be up to something, you must be stupid, bigoted, interested.
Maybe you're insane.
And the same goes the other way. Right?
So the mere fact of your disagreeing with me is implicitly an insult not only to my views, but to my intelligence, too.
And things only get worse when the disagreements at stake are the ones that we somehow consider to be fundamental, whether to our worldviews or to our identities.
You know the kinds of disagreement I mean.
One doesn't discuss religion or politics or increasingly, the politics of popular culture, at the dinner table, because these are the disagreements, these are the things that people really, seriously disagree about, and they define themselves against their opponents in the controversy.
But of course those fundamental disagreements are precisely the ones that tolerant societies like the United States propose to tolerate, which perhaps explains why, historically, at least, tolerant societies haven't been the happy-clappy communities of difference that you sometimes hear about.
No, they tend to be places where people have to hold their noses and rub along together despite their mutual contempt.
That's what I learned from studying religious tolerance in early modern England and America.
And I also learned that the virtue that makes that un-murderous coexistence, if you will, possible, is the virtue of civility, because civility makes our disagreements tolerable so that we can share a life together even if we don't share a faith -- religious, political or otherwise.
Still, I couldn't help but notice that when most people talk about civility today -- and boy, do they talk about civility a lot -- they seem to have something else in mind.
So if civility is the virtue that makes it possible to tolerate disagreement so that we can actually engage with our opponents, talking about civility seems to be mainly a strategy of disengagement.
It's a little bit like threatening to take your ball and go home when the game isn't going your way.
Because the funny thing about incivility is that it's always the sin of our opponents.
It's funny.
When it comes to our own bad behavior, well, we seem to develop sudden-onset amnesia, or we can always justify it as an appropriate response to the latest outrage from our opponents.
So, "How can I be civil to someone who is set out to destroy everything I stand for?
And by the way, they started it."
It's all terrifically convenient.
Also convenient is the fact that most of today's big civility talkers tend to be quite vague and fuzzy when it comes to what they think civility actually entails.
We're told that civility is simply a synonym for respect, for good manners, for politeness, but at the same time, it's clear that to accuse someone of incivility is much, much worse than calling them impolite, because to be uncivil is to be potentially intolerable in a way that merely being rude isn't.
So to call someone uncivil, to accuse them of incivility, is a way of communicating that they are somehow beyond the pale, that they're not worth engaging with at all.
So here's the thing: civility isn't bullshit, it's precious because it's the virtue that makes fundamental disagreement not only possible but even sometimes occasionally productive.
It's precious, but it's also really, really difficult.
Civility talk, on the other hand, well, that's really easy, really easy, and it also is almost always complete bullshit, which makes things slightly awkward for me as I continue to talk to you about civility.
(Laughter) Anyway, we tend to forget it, but politicians and intellectuals have been warning us for decades now that the United States is facing a crisis of civility, and they've tended to blame that crisis on technological developments, on things like cable TV, talk radio, social media.
But any historian will tell you that there never was a golden age of disagreement, let alone good feelings, not in American politics.
In my book, though, I argue that the first modern crisis of civility actually began about 500 years ago, when a certain professor of theology named Martin Luther took advantage of a recent advancement in communications technology, the printing press, to call the Pope the Antichrist, and thus inadvertently launch the Protestant Reformation.
So think of the press, if you will, as the Twitter of the 16th century, and Martin Luther as the original troll.
And I'm not exaggerating here.
He once declared himself unable to pray without at the same time cursing his "anti-Christian," i.e. Catholic, opponents.
And of course, those Catholic opponents clutched their pearls and called for civility then, too, but all the while, they gave as good as they got with traditional slurs like "heretic," and, worst of all, "Protestant," which began in the 16th century as an insult.
The thing about civility talk, then as now, was that you could call out your opponent for going low, and then take advantage of the moral high ground to go as low or lower, because calling for civility sets up the speaker as a model of decorum while implicitly, subtly stigmatizing anyone with the temerity to disagree as uncivil.
And so civility talk in the 17th century becomes a really effective way for members of the religious establishment to silence, suppress, exclude dissenters outside of the established church, especially when they spoke out against the status quo.
So Anglican ministers could lecture atheists on the offensiveness of their discourse.
Everyone could complain about the Quakers for refusing to doff and don their hats or their "uncouth" practice of shaking hands.
But those accusations of incivility pretty soon became pretexts for persecution.
So far, so familiar, right?
We see that strategy again and again.
It's used to silence civil rights protesters in the 20th century.
And I think it explains why partisans on both sides of the aisle keep reaching for this, frankly, antiquated, early modern language of civility precisely when they want to communicate that certain people and certain views are beyond the pale, but they want to save themselves the trouble of actually making an argument.
So no wonder skeptics like me tend to roll our eyes when the calls for conversational virtue begin, because instead of healing our social and political divisions, it seems like so much civility talk is actually making the problem worse.
It's saving us the trouble of actually speaking to each other, allowing us to speak past each other or at each other while signaling our superior virtue and letting the audience know which side we're on.
And given this, I think one might be forgiven, as I did, for assuming that because so much civility talk is bullshit, well then, the virtue of civility must be bullshit, too.
But here, again, I think a little historical perspective goes a long way.
Because remember, the same early modern crisis of civility that launched the Reformation also gave birth to tolerant societies, places like Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, and indeed, eventually the United States, places that at least aspired to protect disagreement as well as diversity, and what made that possible was the virtue of civility.
What made disagreement tolerable, what it made it possible for us to share a life, even when we didn't share a faith, was a virtue, but one, I think, that is perhaps less aspirational and a lot more confrontational than the one that people who talk about civility a lot today tend to have in mind.
So I like to call that virtue "mere civility."
You may know it as the virtue that allows us to get through our relations with an ex-spouse, or a bad neighbor, not to mention a member of the other party.
Because to be merely civil is to meet a low bar grudgingly, and that, again, makes sense, because civility is a virtue that's meant to help us disagree, and as Hobbes told us all those centuries ago, disagreeable means unpleasant for a reason.
But if it isn't bullshit, what exactly is civility or mere civility?
What does it require?
Well, to start, it is not and cannot be the same thing as being respectful or polite, because we need civility precisely when we're dealing with those people that we find it the most difficult, or maybe even impossible, to respect.
Similarly, being civil can't be the same as being nice, because being nice means not telling people what you really think about them or their wrong, wrong views.
No, being civil means speaking your mind, but to your opponent's face, not behind her back.
Being merely civil means not pulling our punches, but at the same time, it means maybe not landing all those punches all at once, because the point of mere civility is to allow us to disagree, to disagree fundamentally, but to do so without denying or destroying the possibility of a common life tomorrow with the people that we think are standing in our way today.
And in that sense, I think civility is actually closely related to another virtue, the virtue of courage.
So mere civility is having the courage to make yourself disagreeable, and to stay that way, but to do so while staying in the room and staying present to your opponents.
And it also means that, sometimes, calling bullshit on people's civility talk is really the only civil thing to do.
At least that's what I think.
But look, if I've learned anything from studying the long history of religious tolerance in the 17th century, it's this: if you're talking about civility as a way to avoid an argument, to isolate yourself in the more agreeable company of the like-minded who already agree with you, if you find yourself never actually speaking to anyone who really, truly, fundamentally disagrees with you, well, you're doing civility wrong.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When ultraviolet sunlight hits our skin, it affects each of us a little differently.
Depending on skin color, it will take only minutes of exposure to turn one person beetroot-pink, while another requires hours to experience the slightest change.
So what's to account for that difference and how did our skin come to take on so many different hues to begin with?
Whatever the color, our skin tells an epic tale of human intrepidness and adaptability, revealing its variance to be a function of biology.
It all centers around melanin, the pigment that gives skin and hair its color.
This ingredient comes from skin cells called melanocytes and takes two basic forms.
There's eumelanin, which gives rise to a range of brown skin tones, as well as black, brown, and blond hair, and pheomelanin, which causes the reddish browns of freckles and red hair.
But humans weren't always like this.
Our varying skin tones were formed by an evolutionary process driven by the Sun.
In began some 50,000 years ago when our ancestors migrated north from Africa and into Europe and Asia.
These ancient humans lived between the Equator and the Tropic of Capricorn, a region saturated by the Sun's UV-carrying rays.
When skin is exposed to UV for long periods of time, the UV light damages the DNA within our cells, and skin starts to burn.
If that damage is severe enough, the cells mutations can lead to melanoma, a deadly cancer that forms in the skin's melanocytes.
Sunscreen as we know it today didn't exist 50,000 years ago.
So how did our ancestors cope with this onslaught of UV?
The key to survival lay in their own personal sunscreen manufactured beneath the skin: melanin.
The type and amount of melanin in your skin determines whether you'll be more or less protected from the sun.
This comes down to the skin's response as sunlight strikes it.
When it's exposed to UV light, that triggers special light-sensitive receptors called rhodopsin, which stimulate the production of melanin to shield cells from damage.
For light-skin people, that extra melanin darkens their skin and produces a tan.
Over the course of generations, humans living at the Sun-saturated latitudes in Africa adapted to have a higher melanin production threshold and more eumelanin, giving skin a darker tone.
This built-in sun shield helped protect them from melanoma, likely making them evolutionarily fitter and capable of passing this useful trait on to new generations.
But soon, some of our Sun-adapted ancestors migrated northward out of the tropical zone, spreading far and wide across the Earth.
The further north they traveled, the less direct sunshine they saw.
This was a problem because although UV light can damage skin, it also has an important parallel benefit.
UV helps our bodies produce vitamin D, an ingredient that strengthens bones and lets us absorb vital minerals, like calcium, iron, magnesium, phosphate, and zinc.
Without it, humans experience serious fatigue and weakened bones that can cause a condition known as rickets.
For humans whose dark skin effectively blocked whatever sunlight there was, vitamin D deficiency would have posed a serious threat in the north.
But some of them happened to produce less melanin.
They were exposed to small enough amounts of light that melanoma was less likely, and their lighter skin better absorbed the UV light.
So they benefited from vitamin D, developed strong bones, and survived well enough to produce healthy offspring.
Over many generations of selection, skin color in those regions gradually lightened.
As a result of our ancestor's adaptability, today the planet is full of people with a vast palette of skin colors, typically, darker eumelanin-rich skin in the hot, sunny band around the Equator, and increasingly lighter pheomelanin-rich skin shades fanning outwards as the sunshine dwindles.
Therefore, skin color is little more than an adaptive trait for living on a rock that orbits the Sun.
It may absorb light, but it certainly does not reflect character.
Way before the first selfie, the ancient Greeks and Romans had a myth about someone a little too obsessed with his own image.
In one telling, Narcissus was a handsome guy wandering the world in search of someone to love.
After rejecting a nymph named Echo, he caught a glimpse of his own reflection in a river, and fell in love with it.
Unable to tear himself away, Narcissus drowned.
A flower marked the spot of where he died, and we call that flower the Narcissus.
The myth captures the basic idea of narcissism, elevated and sometimes detrimental self-involvement.
But it's not just a personality type that shows up in advice columns.
It's actually a set of traits classified and studied by psychologists.
The psychological definition of narcissism is an inflated, grandiose self-image.
To varying degrees, narcissists think they're better looking, smarter, and more important than other people, and that they deserve special treatment.
Psychologists recognize two forms of narcissism as a personality trait: grandiose and vulnerable narcissism.
There's also narcissistic personality disorder, a more extreme form, which we'll return to shortly.
Grandiose narcissism is the most familiar kind, characterized by extroversion, dominance, and attention seeking.
Grandiose narcissists pursue attention and power, sometimes as politicians, celebrities, or cultural leaders.
Of course, not everyone who pursues these positions of power is narcissistic.
Many do it for very positive reasons, like reaching their full potential, or helping make people's lives better.
But narcissistic individuals seek power for the status and attention that goes with it.
Meanwhile, vulnerable narcissists can be quiet and reserved.
They have a strong sense of entitlement, but are easily threatened or slighted.
In either case, the dark side of narcissism shows up over the long term.
Narcissists tend to act selfishly, so narcissistic leaders may make risky or unethical decisions, and narcissistic partners may be dishonest or unfaithful.
When their rosy view of themselves is challenged, they can become resentful and aggressive.
It's like a disease where the sufferers feel pretty good, but the people around them suffer.
Taken to the extreme, this behavior is classified as a psychological disorder called narcissistic personality disorder.
It affects one to two percent of the population, more commonly men.
It is also a diagnosis reserved for adults.
Young people, especially children, can be very self-centered, but this might just be a normal part of development.
The fifth edition of the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual describes several traits associated with narcissistic personality disorder.
They include a grandiose view of oneself, problems with empathy, a sense of entitlement, and a need for admiration or attention.
What makes these trait a true personality disorder is that they take over people's lives and cause significant problems.
Imagine that instead of caring for your spouse or children, you used them as a source of attention or admiration.
Or imagine that instead of seeking constructive feedback about your performance, you instead told everyone who tried to help you that they were wrong.
So what causes narcissism?
Twin studies show a strong genetic component, although we don't know which genes are involved.
But environment matters, too.
Parents who put their child on a pedestal can foster grandiose narcissism.
And cold, controlling parents can contribute to vulnerable narcissism.
Narcissism also seems to be higher in cultures that value individuality and self-promotion.
In the United States, for example, narcissism as a personality trait has been rising since the 1970s, when the communal focus of the 60s gave way to the self-esteem movement and a rise in materialism.
More recently, social media has multiplied the possibilities for self-promotion, though it's worth noting that there's no clear evidence that social media causes narcissism.
Rather, it provides narcissists a means to seek social status and attention.
So can narcissists improve on those negative traits?
Yes!
Anything that promotes honest reflection on their own behavior and caring for others, like psychotherapy or practicing compassion towards others, can be helpful.
The difficulty is it can be challenging for people with narcissistic personality disorder to keep working at self-betterment.
For a narcissist, self-reflection is hard from an unflattering angle.
What I'm really here to do today is talk to you about micromanagement and what I learned about micromanagement by being a micromanager over the last few years of my life.
But first off, what is micromanagement?
How do we really define it?
Well, I posit that it's actually taking great, wonderful, imaginative people -- like all of you -- bringing them in into an organization and then crushing their souls -- (Laughter) by telling them what font size to use.
In the history of mankind, has anyone ever said this?
"John, we were never going to close that deal with Times New Roman, but because you insisted on Helvetica -- bam!
Dotted line -- millions of dollars started to flow.
That was the missing piece!"
No one's ever said that, right?
There's actually physical manifestations that we probably see in ourselves by being micromanaged.
Think about the most tired you've ever been in your life, right?
It probably wasn't when you stayed the latest at work, or it wasn't when you came home from a road trip, it was probably when you had someone looking over your shoulder, watching your each and every move.
Kind of like my mother-in-law when she's over right?
(Laughter) I'm like, "I got this," you know?
And so there's actually data to support this.
There was a recent study in the UK.
They took 100 hospital employees, put an activity tracker on them and then let them go about their next 12-hour shift all alone, just a regular 12-hour shift.
At the end of the shift, they asked them, "Do you feel fatigued?"
And what they found was actually really interesting.
It wasn't necessarily the people who moved the most that felt the most fatigued, but it was the folks that didn't have control over their jobs.
So if we know that micromanagement isn't really effective, why do we do it?
Is it that the definition is wrong?
I posited that micromanagement is just bringing in great, wonderful, imaginative people and then crushing their souls, so is it that we actually want to hire -- deep down inside of us -- dull and unimaginative people?
It's one of those questions you probably don't even need to ask.
It's like, "Do you want to get your luggage stolen at the airport?"
Probably not, but I've never been asked, right?
So has anyone asked you, as a manager, "Do you want to hire dull and unimaginative people?"
So, I don't know, this is TED, we better back it up with data.
We actually asked hundreds of people around the country -- hundreds of managers across the country -- do you want to hire dull and unimaginative people?
Alright, it's an interesting question.
Well, interesting results as well.
So, 94% said no -- (Laughter) we don't want to hire dull and unimaginative people.
Six percent probably didn't understand the question -- (Laughter) but, bless their hearts, maybe they do just want to hire dull and unimaginative people.
But 94 percent said they did not, and so why do we do this still then?
Well, I posit that it's something really, really simple that all of us deep down inside know and have actually felt.
So when we get hired into an organization -- it could be a club, it could be a law firm, it could be a school organization, it could be anything -- no one ever jumps to the top of the totem pole, right?
You start at the very bottom.
Doing what?
Doing work.
You actually do the work, right?
And if you're really good at doing the work, what do you get rewarded with?
More work, right?
Yeah, that's right, you guys are all great micromanagers.
(Laughter) You do more work, and then pretty soon, if you're really good at it, you do a little bit of work still, but actually, you start to manage people doing the work.
And if you're really good at that, what happens after that?
You start managing the people who manage the people doing the work, and it's at that point in time, you start to lose control over the output of your job.
I've actually witnessed this firsthand.
So, I started a company called Boxed in our garage, and this was it -- I know it doesn't seem like much -- you know, there's a pressure washer in the back -- this is "living the dream."
And my wife was really proud of me when we started this, or that's what she said, she was really proud of me -- and so she would give me a hug, and I'm pretty sure she had her phone up and she was thinking, "Oh, is John from Harvard still single?"
It was kind of like a lemonade stand gone wrong in the beginning, but we actually went up and said mobile commerce is going to be big, and actually consumer packaged goods were going to change over time, so let's take these big, bulky packs that you don't want to lug home -- so not the two-pack of Oreo cookies but the 24-pack and not the 24-pack of toilet paper but the 48-pack -- and let's ship it to you much like a warehouse club would do except they wouldn't ship it to you.
So that's what we basically did.
We had a really slow printer and what we did was actually say, "OK, this printer is taking forever, man.
Let's scribble something that would delight the customer on the back of these invoices."
So we'd say, "Hey, keep smiling," you know?
"Hey, you're awesome," or, "Hey, enjoy the Doritos," or, "We love Gatorade, too."
Stuff like that.
And so it started breaking up the monotony of the job as well because I was picking and packing all of the boxes, and that's all you basically do for eight, nine, 10, 12 hours a day when you're sitting in the garage.
And so an interesting thing happened.
So we actually started to grow.
And so, you know, over the last -- actually just even 36 months after that, we ended up selling hundreds of millions of dollars worth of stuff, and we actually grew really, really quickly.
But during that time, my role started to change, too.
So, yes, I was the CEO in the garage; I was picking and packing, doing all the work, but then I graduated to actually managing the people who picked and packed, and then pretty soon I managed the people who managed the people picking and packing.
And even now, I manage the C-staff who manage the departments who manage the people who manage the people picking and packing.
And it is at that point in time, I lost control.
So I thought, OK, we were delighting all of these customers with these notes.
They loved them, but I can't write these notes anymore, so you know what I'm going to do?
I'm going to tell these folks how to write these notes.
What pen to use, what color to use, what you should write, what font you should use, don't mess up the margins, this has to be this big, this has to be that big.
And pretty soon this goal of raising morale by breaking up the monotony in the fulfillment center actually became micromanagement, and people started complaining to HR.
It's like, "Dude, this CEO guy has got to get out of my hair, OK?
I know how to write a damn note."
(Laughter) So it was at that point in time, we said, "OK, you know?
We hired these great, wonderful people, let's give them the mission that's 'delight the customer,' let's give them the tool to do so, and that's these notes -- have at it."
And so what we found was actually pretty startling.
Some folks actually took the notes and actually started drawing these really ornate minimurals on them.
When folks ordered diapers, you'd get really fun notes like this: "Say 'hi' to the baby for us!"
And you know, the next size up, if they bought a bigger size, they'd write, "Growing up so fast."
And so people really, really took to it.
But it was at that time that it also went off the rails a few times.
And so we had someone just writing, "Thx, thx," all the time, and it's like, "Alright, dude, my boss used to write that to me," so, let's not write "Thx" anymore.
But you also had interesting things on the other side.
People got a little too creative.
And so, like I said before, we sell everything in bulk: the big packs of diapers, big packs of toilet paper, the big packs of Doritos and Oreo cookies.
We also sell the big packs of contraception, and so -- this is getting a little hairy.
(Laughter) So we sell the 40-pack of condoms, right?
We're all adults in this room -- 40-pack of condoms.
So, someone ordered four 40-packs of condoms -- (Laughter) And that's all they ordered, so, 160 condoms, the packer was like, "I know how to delight the customer."
(Laughter) "This guy ..."
This is what they wrote: [Everyone loves an optimist] (Laughter) (Applause) We didn't know whether to fire him or to promote him, but he's still there.
So, "Everyone loves an optimist."
But here is where it went a little bit off the rails and I felt a little bit conflicted in all of this.
And -- oh, there's a really bad typo -- so if there was only a red T-E-D on stage that I counted on being here, it wouldn't be a typo, right?
(Laughter) (Applause) I promised you I had a really bad sense of humor, and now I'm gratifying that.
So I told you. But I really was conflicted, right?
At this point in time, we started doing things that actually weren't part of our core mission and people started failing at it.
And so, I thought, should we let them fail?
Should we continue to let them do this?
I don't know -- I didn't know at that moment, but I thought this: Is failure really that bad?
I'm not saying we should celebrate failure.
There's a lot of talk in Silicon Valley that says, "Let's celebrate failure."
No, I don't know if we would go all the way there, because like, in our board meetings, our board members are never like, "Hey, Chieh, you failed last quarter, keep doing that, buddy, OK?"
No one's ever said that.
If you're part of an organization like that, give me a call, I want to sit in on that meeting.
In private, I don't think many people celebrate failure, but failure, I posit, is actually pretty necessary for the folks truly in the long-term, for the smart and imaginative people truly trying to fulfill the mission that you give them at hand.
And so failure can actually be seen as a milestone along that mission towards success.
And if the downside of not micromanaging is potentially this perceived notion that you might fail more often, and if it's really not that bad, what is the upside?
Well, we saw the upside and it's pretty great.
We tasked our engineers and said, "Hey, some of our fulfillment centers cost millions of dollars to build, there's miles and miles of conveyor, and so, can you do the same thing, can you make them efficient without spending millions of dollars?"
So, they got to work: they actually did this -- this is not photoshopped, the guy is really grinding.
They built an autonomous guided vehicle.
We didn't tell them what to build, what format it needed to be.
In 90 days they produced the first prototype: powered off Tesla batteries, stereoscopic cameras, lidar systems.
It basically replicates the efficiency of a conveyor belt without the actual capex of a conveyor belt.
So it doesn't actually just stop with engineers.
Our marketing department -- we told them, "Hey, get the word out; do the right thing."
We have this wonderful lady, Nitasha, on the marketing team.
She stopped me in the morning, she's like, "Chieh, what are we doing about the pink tax?"
I went and got my coffee, I sat down, I said, "OK, Nitasha, what is this pink tax?"
And so she told me, it's really interesting.
So, some of you might know that in 32 states across America, we actually charge a luxury goods tax on women's products like feminine care products, so tampons and pads are taxed like luxury goods items.
So I would never dare call my wife -- or if she called me and said, "Hey, hon, bring some pads on the way home," and I said, "Babe, you know, there's a trade war going on, the economy's not that good, so no luxury goods this month but next month I promise -- (Laughter) I'll take a look at it."
I'd be single pretty quickly, right?
But what's super interesting is now -- we didn't tell them what to do -- but now, working with finance, they rebate the tax back to customers all around the country that we unfairly have to collect.
And so at this point in time, you might be thinking, "OK, what is the real, real upside of not micromanaging?"
and it's this: I didn't do any of these projects.
I didn't make the AGV.
I didn't do the "Rethink the Pink Tax" campaign.
I didn't do any of this, but I'm standing here on a TED stage taking all the credit for it.
(Laughter) "This guy does nothing and takes all the credit for it.
He's a real CEO, this guy. He's really got it down."
(Laughter) But the reality is this.
I don't have the CEO thing down 100 percent pat, but I've actually learned the most fundamentally challenging lesson I've ever had to learn, and that's this.
There is only one solution to micromanagement ...
and that's to trust.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the third act of "Swan Lake," the Black Swan pulls off a seemingly endless series of turns, bobbing up and down on one pointed foot and spinning around, and around, and around 32 times.
It's one of the toughest sequences in ballet, and for those thirty seconds or so, she's like a human top in perpetual motion.
Those spectacular turns are called fouetts, which means "whipped" in French, describing the dancer's incredible ability to whip around without stopping.
But while we're marveling at the fouett, can we unravel its physics?
The dancer starts the fouett by pushing off with her foot to generate torque.
But the hard part is maintaining the rotation.
As she turns, friction between her pointe shoe and the floor, and somewhat between her body and the air, reduces her momentum.
So how does she keep turning?
Between each turn, the dancer pauses for a split second and faces the audience.
Her supporting foot flattens, and then twists as it rises back onto pointe, pushing against the floor to generate a tiny amount of new torque.
At the same time, her arms sweep open to help her keep her balance.
The turns are most effective if her center of gravity stays constant, and a skilled dancer will be able to keep her turning axis vertical.
The extended arms and torque-generating foot both help drive the fouett.
But the real secret and the reason you hardly notice the pause is that her other leg never stops moving.
During her momentary pause, the dancer's elevated leg straightens and moves from the front to the side, before it folds back into her knee.
By staying in motion, that leg is storing some of the momentum of the turn.
When the leg comes back in towards the body, that stored momentum gets transferred back to the dancer's body, propelling her around as she rises back onto pointe.
As the ballerina extends and retracts her leg with each turn, momentum travels back and forth between leg and body, keeping her in motion.
A really good ballerina can get more than one turn out of every leg extension in one of two ways.
First, she can extend her leg sooner.
The longer the leg is extended, the more momentum it stores, and the more momentum it can return to the body when it's pulled back in.
More angular momentum means she can make more turns before needing to replenish what was lost to friction.
The other option is for the dancer to bring her arms or leg in closer to her body once she returns to pointe.
Why does this work?
Like every other turn in ballet, the fouett is governed by angular momentum, which is equal to the dancer's angular velocity times her rotational inertia.
And except for what's lost to friction, that angular momentum has to stay constant while the dancer is on pointe.
That's called conservation of angular momentum.
Now, rotational inertia can be thought of as a body's resistance to rotational motion.
It increases when more mass is distributed further from the axis of rotation, and decreases when the mass is distributed closer to the axis of rotation.
So as she brings her arms closer to her body, her rotational inertia shrinks.
In order to conserve angular momentum, her angular velocity, the speed of her turn, has to increase, allowing the same amount of stored momentum to carry her through multiple turns.
You've probably seen ice skaters do the same thing, spinning faster and faster by drawing in their arms and legs.
In Tchaikovsky's ballet, the Black Swan is a sorceress, and her 32 captivating fouetts do seem almost supernatural.
But it's not magic that makes them possible.
It's physics.
He was a powerful king whose break with the church of Rome would forever change the course of English history.
But was he a charismatic reformer or a bullying tyrant?
Find out on History versus Henry VIII.
Judge: Order, order. Now, who do we have here? Looks like quite the dashing fellow.
Defense: Indeed, your honour. This is Henry VIII, the acclaimed king who reformed England's religion and government and set it on course to becoming a modern nation.
Prosecutor: I beg to differ. This is a cruel, impulsive, and extravagant king who had as little regard for his people as he did for his six wives.
Judge: Six wives?
Defense: Your honor, Henry's first marriage was arranged for him when he was only a child.
He only married Catherine of Aragon to strengthen Englands alliance with Spain.
Prosecutor: An alliance he was willing to toss aside with no regard for the nation.
Defense: Henry had every regard for the nation.
It was imperative to secure the Tudor dynasty by producing a male heir  something Catherine failed to do in over twenty years of marriage.
Prosecutor: It takes two to make an heir, your honor.
Defense: Ahem. Regardless, England needed a new queen to ensure stability, but the Pope refused to annul the union and let the king remarry.
Judge: Sounds like quite a pickle. Cant argue with the Pope.
Prosecutor: And yet thats exactly what the king decided to do.
He uprooted the countrys religious foundations and broke the Church of England away from Rome, leading to centuries of strife.
Defense: All Henry did was give the Church honest domestic leadership.
He freed his subjects from the corrupt Roman Catholic establishment.
And by rejecting the more radical changes of the Protestant reformation, he allowed his people to preserve most of their religious traditions.
Prosecutor: Objection! The Church had been a beloved and popular institution that brought comfort and charity to the masses.
Thanks to Henry, church property was seized; hospitals closed, and precious monastic libraries lost forever, all to enrich the Crown.
Defense: Some of the funds were used to build new cathedrals and open secular schools.
And it was necessary for England to bring its affairs under its own control rather than Romes.
Prosecutor: You mean under Henrys control.
Defense: Not true. All of the kings major reforms went through Parliament.
No other country of the time allowed its people such a say in government.
Prosecutor: He used Parliament as a rubber stamp for his own personal will.
Meanwhile he ruled like a tyrant, executing those he suspected of disloyalty.
Among his victims were the great statesman and philosopher Thomas More  once his close friend and advisor  and Anne Boleyn, the new queen Henry had torn the country apart to marry.
Judge: He executed his own wife?
Defense: Thatwasnt King Henrys initiative.
She was accused of treason in a power struggle with the Kings minister, Thomas Cromwell.
Prosecutor: The trial was a sham and she wouldnt have been convicted without Henrys approval.
Besides, he wasnt too upset by the outcome - he married Jane Seymour just 11 days later!
Defense: A marriage that, I note, succeeded in producing a male heir and guaranteeing a stable succession though the new queen tragically died in childbirth.
Prosecutor: This tragedy didnt deter him from an ill conceived fourth marriage to Anne of Cleves, which Henry then annulled on a whim and used as an excuse to execute Cromwell.
As if that werent enough, he then married Catherine Howard  a cousin of Anne Boleyn  before having her executed too.
Defense: She was engaged in adultery to which she confessed!
Regardless, Henrys final marriage to Catherine Parr was actually very successful.
Prosecutor: His sixth! It only goes to show he was an intemperate king who allowed faction and intrigue to rule his court, concerned only with his own pleasure and grandiosity.
Defense: That grandiosity was part of the kings role as a model for his people.
He was a learned scholar and musician who generously patronized the arts, as well as being an imposing warrior and sportsman.
And the lavish tournaments he hosted enhanced Englands reputation on the world stage.
Prosecutor: And yet both his foreign and domestic policies were a disaster.
His campaigns in France and his brutal invasion of Scotland drained the treasury, and his attempt to pay for it by debasing the coinage led to constant inflation.
The lords and landowners responded by removing access to common pastures and turning the peasant population into beggars.
Defense: Beggars who would soon become yeomen farmers.
The enclosures made farming more efficient, and created a labor surplus that laid the foundation for the Industrial Revolution.
England would never have become the great power that it did without them and without Henry.
Judge: Well, I think no matter what, we can all agree he looks great in that portrait.
A devout believer who broke with the Church.
A man of learning who executed scholars.
A king who brought stability to the throne, but used it to promote his own glory, Henry VIII embodied all the contradictions of monarchy on the verge of the modern era.
But separating the ruler from the myth is all part of putting history on trial.
Light, bright, and cheerful.
It's some of the most familiar of all early 18th century music.
It's been featured in uncounted films and television commercials, but what is it and why does it sound that way?
This is the opening of "Spring" from "The Four Seasons," by Italian composer Antonio Vivaldi.
"The Four Seasons" are famous in part because they are a delight to the ear.
However, even more notable is the fact that they have stories to tell.
At the time of their publication in Amsterdam in 1725, they were accompanied by poems describing exactly what feature of that season Vivaldi intended to capture in musical terms.
In providing specific plot content for instrumental music, Vivaldi was generations ahead of his time.
If one were to read the poems simultaneously to hearing the music, one would find the poetic scenes synchronizing nicely with the musical imagery.
We are told that the birds welcome spring with happy song, and here they are doing exactly that.
Soon, however, a thunderstorm breaks out.
Not only is there musical thunder and lightning, there are also more birds, wet, frightened, and unhappy.
In "Summer," the turtle dove sings her name "tortorella" in Italian, before a hail storm flattens the fields.
"Autumn" brings eager hunters dashing out in pursuit of their prey.
The "Winter" concerto begins with teeth chattering in the cold before one takes refuge by a crackling fire.
Then it's back out into the storm where there'll be slips and falls on the ice.
In these first weeks of winter, the old year is coming to a close, and so does Vivaldi's musical exploration of the seasons.
Not until the early 19th century would such expressive instrumental program music, as it was known, become popular.
By then, larger, more varied ensembles were the rule with woodwinds, brass, and percussion to help tell the tale.
But Vivaldi pulled it off with just one violin, strings, and a harpsichord.
Unlike his contemporary Bach, Vivaldi wasn't much interested in complicated fugues.
He preferred to offer readily accessible entertainment to his listeners with melodies that pop back up later in a piece to remind us of where we've been.
So the first movement of the "Spring" concerto begins with a theme for spring and ends with it, too, slightly varied from when it was last heard.
It was an inspired way to attract listeners, and Vivaldi, considered one of the most electrifying violinists of the early 18th century, understood the value of attracting audiences.
Such concerts might feature himself as the star violinist.
Others presented the young musicians of the Piet, a Venetian girls' school where Vivaldi was Director of Music.
Most of the students were orphans.
Music training was intended not only as social skills suitable for young ladies but also as potential careers for those who might fail to make good marriages.
Even in the composer's own time, Vivaldi's music served as diversion for all, not just for the wealthy aristocrats.
300 years later, it's an approach that still works, and Vivaldi's music still sounds like trotting horses on the move.
Communicating underwater is challenging.
Light and odors don't travel well, so it's hard for animals to see or smell.
But sound moves about four times faster in water than in air, so in this dark environment, marine mammals often rely on vocalization to communicate.
That's why a chorus of sounds fills the ocean.
Clicks, pulses, whistles, groans, boings, cries, and trills, to name a few.
But the most famous parts of this underwater symphony are the evocative melodies, or songs, composed by the world's largest mammals, whales.
Whale songs are one of the most sophisticated communication systems in the animal kingdom.
Only a few species are known to sing.
Blue, fin, bowhead minke whales, and of course humpback whales.
These are all baleen whales which use hairy baleen plates instead of teeth to trap their prey.
Meanwhile, toothed whales do use echolocation, and they and other species of baleen whales make social sounds, such as cries and whistles, to communicate.
But those vocalizations lack the complexity of songs.
So how do they do it?
Land mammals like us generate sound by moving air over our vocal cords when we exhale, causing them to vibrate.
Baleen whales have a U-shaped fold of tissue between their lungs and their large inflatable organs called laryngeal sacs.
We don't know this for sure because it's essentially impossible to observe the internal organs of a living, singing whale, but we think that when a whale sings, muscular contractions in the throat and chest move air from the lungs across the U-fold and into the laryngeal sacs, causing the U-fold to vibrate.
The resulting sound resonates in the sacs like a choir singing in a cathedral making songs loud enough to propagate up to thousands of kilometers away.
Whales don't have to exhale to sing.
Instead, the air is recycled back into the lungs, creating sound once more.
One reason whale songs are so fascinating is their pattern.
Units, like moans, cries, and chirps are arranged in phrases.
Repeated phrases are assembled into themes.
Multiple themes repeated in a predictable pattern create a song.
This hierarchical structure is a kind of grammar.
Whale songs are extremely variable in duration, and whales can repeat them over and over.
In one recorded session, a humpback whale sang for 22 hours.
And why do they do it?
We don't yet know the exact purpose, but we can speculate.
Given that the singers are males and they mostly sing during the mating season, songs might be used to attract females.
Or perhaps they're territorial, used to deter other males.
Whales return to the same feeding and breeding grounds annually, and each discrete population has a different song.
Songs evolve over time as units or phrases are added, changed, or dropped.
And when males from different populations are feeding within earshot, phrases are often exchanged, maybe because new songs make them more attractive to breeding females.
This is one of the fastest examples of cultural transmission, where learned behaviors are passed between unrelated individuals of the same species.
We can eavesdrop on these songs using underwater microphones called hydrophones.
These help us track species when sightings or genetic samples are rare.
For example, scientists have been able to differentiate the elusive blue whale's populations worldwide based on their songs.
But the oceans are getting noisier as a result of human activity.
Boating, military sonar, underwater construction, and seismic surveys for oil are occurring more often which may interfere with whale's communication.
Some whales will avoid key feeding or breeding grounds if human noise is too loud.
And humpback whales have been observed to reduce their singing in response to noise 200 kilometers away.
Limiting human activity along migratory routes and in other critical habitats, and reducing noise pollution throughout the ocean would help ensure whales continued survival.
If the whales can keep singing and we can keep listening, maybe one day we'll truly understand what they're saying.
Imagine you're watching a runaway trolley barreling down the tracks straight towards five workers who can't escape.
You happen to be standing next to a switch that will divert the trolley onto a second track.
Here's the problem.
That track has a worker on it, too, but just one.
What do you do?
Do you sacrifice one person to save five?
This is the trolley problem, a version of an ethical dilemma that philosopher Philippa Foot devised in 1967.
It's popular because it forces us to think about how to choose when there are no good choices.
Do we pick the action with the best outcome or stick to a moral code that prohibits causing someone's death?
In one survey, about 90% of respondents said that it's okay to flip the switch, letting one worker die to save five, and other studies, including a virtual reality simulation of the dilemma, have found similar results.
These judgments are consistent with the philosophical principle of utilitarianism which argues that the morally correct decision is the one that maximizes well-being for the greatest number of people.
The five lives outweigh one, even if achieving that outcome requires condemning someone to death.
But people don't always take the utilitarian view, which we can see by changing the trolley problem a bit.
This time, you're standing on a bridge over the track as the runaway trolley approaches.
Now there's no second track, but there is a very large man on the bridge next to you.
If you push him over, his body will stop the trolley, saving the five workers, but he'll die.
To utilitarians, the decision is exactly the same, lose one life to save five.
But in this case, only about 10% of people say that it's OK to throw the man onto the tracks.
Our instincts tell us that deliberately causing someone's death is different than allowing them to die as collateral damage.
It just feels wrong for reasons that are hard to explain.
This intersection between ethics and psychology is what's so interesting about the trolley problem.
The dilemma in its many variations reveal that what we think is right or wrong depends on factors other than a logical weighing of the pros and cons.
For example, men are more likely than women to say it's okay to push the man over the bridge.
So are people who watch a comedy clip before doing the thought experiment.
And in one virtual reality study, people were more willing to sacrifice men than women.
Researchers have studied the brain activity of people thinking through the classic and bridge versions.
Both scenarios activate areas of the brain involved in conscious decision-making and emotional responses.
But in the bridge version, the emotional response is much stronger.
So is activity in an area of the brain associated with processing internal conflict.
Why the difference?
One explanation is that pushing someone to their death feels more personal, activating an emotional aversion to killing another person, but we feel conflicted because we know it's still the logical choice.
"Trolleyology" has been criticized by some philosophers and psychologists.
They argue that it doesn't reveal anything because its premise is so unrealistic that study participants don't take it seriously.
But new technology is making this kind of ethical analysis more important than ever.
For example, driver-less cars may have to handle choices like causing a small accident to prevent a larger one.
Meanwhile, governments are researching autonomous military drones that could wind up making decisions of whether they'll risk civilian casualties to attack a high-value target.
If we want these actions to be ethical, we have to decide in advance how to value human life and judge the greater good.
So researchers who study autonomous systems are collaborating with philosophers to address the complex problem of programming ethics into machines, which goes to show that even hypothetical dilemmas can wind up on a collision course with the real world.
What is bipolar disorder?
The word bipolar means two extremes.
For the many millions experiencing bipolar disorder around the world, life is split between two different realities - elation and depression.
Although there are many variations of bipolar disorder, let's consider a couple.
Type 1 has extreme highs alongside the lows, while Type 2 involves briefer, less extreme periods of elation interspersed with long periods of depression.
For someone seesawing between emotional states, it can feel impossible to find the balance necessary to lead a healthy life.
Type 1's extreme highs are known as manic episodes, and they can make a person range from feeling irritable to invincible.
But these euphoric episodes exceed ordinary feelings of joy, causing troubling symptoms like racing thoughts, sleeplessness, rapid speech, impuslive actions, and risky behaviors.
Without treatment, these episodes become more frequent, intense, and take longer to subside.
The depressed phase of bipolar disorder manifests in many ways - a low mood, dwindling interest in hobbies, changes in appetite, feeling worthless or excessively guilty, sleeping either too much or too little, restlessness or slowness, or persistent thoughts of suicide.
Worldwide, about one to three percent of adults experience the broad range of symptoms that indicate bipolar disorder.
Most of those people are functional, contributing members of society, and their lives, choices, and relationships aren't defined by the disorder, but still, for many, the consequences are serious.
The illness can undermine educational and professional performance, relationships, financial security, and personal safety.
So what causes bipolar disorder?
Researchers think a key player is the brain's intricate wiring.
Healthy brains maintain strong connections between neurons thanks to the brain's continuous efforts to prune itself and remove unused or faulty neural connections.
This process is important because our neural pathways serve as a map for everything we do.
Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, scientists have discovered that the brain's pruning ability is disrupted in people with bipolar disorder.
That means their neurons go haywire and create a network that's impossible to navigate.
With only confusing signals as a guide, people with bipolar disorder develop abnormal thoughts and behaviors.
Also, psychotic symptoms, like disorganized speech and behavior, delusional thoughts, paranoia, and hallucinations can emerge during extreme phases of bipolar disorder.
This is attributed to the overabundance of a neurotransmitter called dopamine.
But despite these insights, we can't pin bipolar disorder down to a single cause.
In reality, it's a complex problem.
For example, the brain's amygdala is involved in thinking, long-term memory, and emotional processing.
In this brain region, factors as varied as genetics and social trauma may create abnormalities and trigger the symptoms of bipolar disorder.
The condition tends to run in families, so we do know that genetics have a lot to do with it.
But that doesn't mean there's a single bipolar gene.
In fact, the likelihood of developing bipolar disorder is driven by the interactions between many genes in a complicated recipe we're still trying to understand.
The causes are complex, and consequently, diagnosing and living with bipolar disorder is a challenge.
Despite this, the disorder is controllable.
Certain medications like lithium can help manage risky thoughts and behaviors by stabilizing moods.
These mood stabilizing medications work by decreasing abnormal activity in the brain, thereby strengthening the viable neural connections.
Other frequently used medications include antipsychotics, which alter the effects of dopamine, and electroconvulsive therapy, which works like a carefully controlled seizure in the brain, is sometimes used as an emergency treatment.
Some bipolar patients reject treatment because they're afraid it will dim their emotions and destroy their creativity.
But modern psychiatry is actively trying to avoid that.
Today, doctors work with patients on a case-by-case basis to administer a combination of treatments and therapies that allows them to live to their fullest possible potential.
And beyond treatment, people with bipolar disorder can benefit from even simpler changes.
Those include regular exercise, good sleep habits, and sobriety from drugs and alcohol, not to mention the acceptance and empathy of family and friends.
Remember, bipolar disorder is a medical condition, not a person's fault, or their whole identity, and it's something that can be controlled through a combination of medical treatments doing their work internally, friends and family fostering acceptance and understanding on the outside, and people with bipolar disorder empowering themselves to find balance in their lives.
Whether its being chained to a burning wheel, turned into a spider, or having an eagle eat ones liver, Greek mythology is filled with stories of the gods inflicting gruesome horrors on mortals who angered them.
Yet one of their most famous punishments is not remembered for its outrageous cruelty, but for its disturbing familiarity.
Sisyphus was the first king of Ephyra, now known as Corinth.
Although a clever ruler who made his city prosperous, he was also a devious tyrant who seduced his niece and killed visitors to show off his power.
This violation of the sacred hospitality tradition greatly angered the gods.
But Sisyphus may still have avoided punishment if it hadnt been for his reckless confidence.
The trouble began when Zeus kidnapped the nymph Aegina, carrying her away in the form of a massive eagle.
Aeginas father, the river god Asopus, pursued their trail to Ephyra, where he encountered Sisyphus.
In exchange for the god making a spring inside the city, the king told Asopus which way Zeus had taken the girl.
When Zeus found out, he was so furious that he ordered Thanatos, or Death, to chain Sisyphus in the underworld so he couldnt cause any more problems.
But Sisyphus lived up to his crafty reputation.
As he was about to be imprisoned, the king asked Thanatos to show him how the chains worked  and quickly bound him instead, before escaping back among the living.
With Thanatos trapped, no one could die, and the world was thrown into chaos.
Things only returned to normal when the god of war Ares, upset that battles were no longer fun, freed Thanatos from his chains.
Sisyphus knew his reckoning was at hand.
But he had another trick up his sleeve.
Before dying, he asked his wife Merope to throw his body in the public square, from where it eventually washed up on the shores of the river Styx.
Now back among the dead, Sisyphus approached Persephone, queen of the Underworld, and complained that his wife had disrespected him by not giving him a proper burial.
Persephone granted him permission to go back to the land of living and punish Merope, on the condition that he would return when he was done.
Of course, Sisyphus refused to keep his promise, now having twice escaped death by tricking the gods.
There wouldnt be a third time, as the messenger Hermes dragged Sisyphus back to Hades.
The king had thought he was more clever than the gods, but Zeus would have the last laugh.
Sisyphuss punishment was a straightforward task  rolling a massive boulder up a hill.
But just as he approached the top, the rock would roll all the way back down, forcing him to start over and over, and over, for all eternity.
Historians have suggested that the tale of Sisyphus may stem from ancient myths about the rising and setting sun, or other natural cycles.
But the vivid image of someone condemned to endlessly repeat a futile task has resonated as an allegory about the human condition.
In his classic essay The Myth of Sisyphus, existentialist philosopher Albert Camus compared the punishment to humanitys futile search for meaning and truth in a meaningless and indifferent universe.
Instead of despairing, Camus imagined Sisyphus defiantly meeting his fate as he walks down the hill to begin rolling the rock again.
And even if the daily struggles of our lives sometimes seem equally repetitive and absurd, we still give them significance and value by embracing them as our own.
In 1965, 17-year-old high school student, Randy Gardner stayed awake for 264 hours.
That's 11 days to see how he'd cope without sleep.
On the second day, his eyes stopped focusing.
Next, he lost the ability to identify objects by touch.
By day three, Gardner was moody and uncoordinated.
At the end of the experiment, he was struggling to concentrate, had trouble with short-term memory, became paranoid, and started hallucinating.
Although Gardner recovered without long-term psychological or physical damage, for others, losing shuteye can result in hormonal imbalance, illness, and, in extreme cases, death.
We're only beginning to understand why we sleep to begin with, but we do know it's essential.
Adults need seven to eight hours of sleep a night, and adolescents need about ten.
We grow sleepy due to signals from our body telling our brain we are tired, and signals from the environment telling us it's dark outside.
The rise in sleep-inducing chemicals, like adenosine and melatonin, send us into a light doze that grows deeper, making our breathing and heart rate slow down and our muscles relax.
This non-REM sleep is when DNA is repaired and our bodies replenish themselves for the day ahead.
In the United States, it's estimated that 30% of adults and 66% of adolescents are regularly sleep-deprived.
This isn't just a minor inconvenience.
Staying awake can cause serious bodily harm.
When we lose sleep, learning, memory, mood, and reaction time are affected.
Sleeplessness may also cause inflammation, halluciations, high blood pressure, and it's even been linked to diabetes and obesity.
In 2014, a devoted soccer fan died after staying awake for 48 hours to watch the World Cup.
While his untimely death was due to a stroke, studies show that chronically sleeping fewer than six hours a night increases stroke risk by four and half times compared to those getting a consistent seven to eight hours of shuteye.
For a handful of people on the planet who carry a rare inherited genetic mutation, sleeplessness is a daily reality.
This condition, known as Fatal Familial Insomnia, places the body in a nightmarish state of wakefulness, forbidding it from entering the sanctuary of sleep.
Within months or years, this progressively worsening condition leads to dementia and death.
How can sleep deprivation cause such immense suffering?
Scientists think the answer lies with the accumulation of waste prducts in the brain.
During our waking hours, our cells are busy using up our day's energy sources, which get broken down into various byproducts, including adenosine.
As adenosine builds up, it increases the urge to sleep, also known as sleep pressure.
In fact, caffeine works by blocking adenosine's receptor pathways.
Other waste products also build up in the brain, and if they're not cleared away, they collectively overload the brain and are thought to lead to the many negative symptoms of sleep deprivation.
So, what's happening in our brain when we sleep to prevent this?
Scientists found something called the glymphatic system, a clean-up mechanism that removes this buildup and is much more active when we're asleep.
It works by using cerebrospinal fluid to flush away toxic byproducts that accumulate between cells.
Lymphatic vessels, which serve as pathways for immune cells, have recently been discovered in the brain, and they may also play a role in clearing out the brain's daily waste products.
While scientists continue exploring the restorative mechanisms behind sleep, we can be sure that slipping into slumber is a necessity if we want to maintain our health and our sanity.
I come to you today to speak of liars, lawsuits and laughter.
The first time I heard about Holocaust denial, I laughed.
Holocaust denial?
The Holocaust which has the dubious distinction of being the best-documented genocide in the world?
Who could believe it didn't happen?
Think about it.
For deniers to be right, who would have to be wrong?
Well, first of all, the victims -- the survivors who have told us their harrowing stories.
Who else would have to be wrong?
The bystanders.
The people who lived in the myriads of towns and villages and cities on the Eastern front, who watched their neighbors be rounded up -- men, women, children, young, old -- and be marched to the outskirts of the town to be shot and left dead in ditches.
Or the Poles, who lived in towns and villages around the death camps, who watched day after day as the trains went in filled with people and came out empty.
But above all, who would have to be wrong?
The perpetrators.
The people who say, "We did it.
Now, maybe they add a caveat.
They say, "I didn't have a choice; I was forced to do it."
But nonetheless, they say, "I did it."
Think about it.
In not one war crimes trial since the end of World War II has a perpetrator of any nationality ever said, "It didn't happen."
Again, they may have said, "I was forced," but never that it didn't happen.
Having thought that through, I decided denial was not going to be on my agenda; I had bigger things to worry about, to write about, to research, and I moved on.
Fast-forward a little over a decade, and two senior scholars -- two of the most prominent historians of the Holocaust -- approached me and said, "Deborah, let's have coffee.
We have a research idea that we think is perfect for you."
Intrigued and flattered that they came to me with an idea and thought me worthy of it, I asked, "What is it?"
And they said, "Holocaust denial."
And for the second time, I laughed.
Holocaust denial?
The Flat Earth folks?
The Elvis-is-alive people?
I should study them?
And these two guys said, "Yeah, we're intrigued.
What are they about?
What's their objective?
How do they manage to get people to believe what they say?"
So thinking, if they thought it was worthwhile, I would take a momentary diversion -- maybe a year, maybe two, three, maybe even four -- in academic terms, that's momentary.
(Laughter) We work very slowly.
(Laughter) And I would look at them.
So I did.
I did my research, and I came up with a number of things, two of which I'd like to share with you today.
One: deniers are wolves in sheep's clothing.
They are the same: Nazis, neo-Nazis -- you can decide whether you want to put a "neo" there or not.
But when I looked at them, I didn't see any SS-like uniforms, swastika-like symbols on the wall, Sieg Heil salutes -- none of that.
What I found instead were people parading as respectable academics.
What did they have?
They had an institute.
An "Institute for Historical Review."
They had a journal -- a slick journal -- a "Journal of Historical Review."
One filled with papers -- footnote-laden papers.
And they had a new name.
Not neo-Nazis, not anti-Semites -- revisionists.
They said, "We are revisionists.
We are out to do one thing: to revise mistakes in history."
But all you had to do was go one inch below the surface, and what did you find there?
The same adulation of Hitler, praise of the Third Reich, anti-Semitism, racism, prejudice.
This is what intrigued me.
It was anti-Semitism, racism, prejudice, parading as rational discourse.
The other thing I found -- many of us have been taught to think there are facts and there are opinions -- after studying deniers, I think differently.
There are facts, there are opinions, and there are lies.
And what deniers want to do is take their lies, dress them up as opinions -- maybe edgy opinions, maybe sort of out-of-the-box opinions -- but then if they're opinions, they should be part of the conversation.
And then they encroach on the facts.
I published my work -- the book was published, "Denying the Holocaust: The Growing Assault on Truth and Memory," it came out in many different countries, including here in Penguin UK, and I was done with those folks and ready to move on.
Then came the letter from Penguin UK.
And for the third time, I laughed ...
mistakenly.
I opened the letter, and it informed me that David Irving was bringing a libel suit against me in the United Kingdom for calling him a Holocaust denier.
David Irving suing me?
Who was David Irving?
David Irving was a writer of historical works, most of them about World War II, and virtually all of those works took the position that the Nazis were really not so bad, and the Allies were really not so good.
And the Jews, whatever happened to them, they sort of deserved it.
He knew the documents, he knew the facts, but he somehow twisted them to get this opinion.
He hadn't always been a Holocaust denier, but in the late '80s, he embraced it with great vigor.
The reason I laughed also was this was a man who not only was a Holocaust denier, but seemed quite proud of it.
Here was a man -- and I quote -- who said, "I'm going to sink the battleship Auschwitz."
Here was a man who pointed to the number tattooed on a survivor's arm and said, "How much money have you made from having that number tattooed on your arm?"
Here was a man who said, "More people died in Senator Kennedy's car at Chappaquiddick than died in gas chambers at Auschwitz."
That's an American reference, but you can look it up.
This was not a man who seemed at all ashamed or reticent about being a Holocaust denier.
Now, lots of my academic colleagues counseled me -- "Eh, Deborah, just ignore it."
When I explained you can't just ignore a libel suit, they said, "Who's going to believe him anyway?"
But here was the problem: British law put the onus, put the burden of proof on me to prove the truth of what I said, in contrast to as it would have been in the United States and in many other countries: on him to prove the falsehood.
What did that mean?
That meant if I didn't fight, he would win by default.
And if he won by default, he could then legitimately say, "My David Irving version of the Holocaust is a legitimate version.
Deborah Lipstadt was found to have libeled me when she called me a Holocaust denier.
Ipso facto, I, David Irving, am not a Holocaust denier."
And what is that version?
There was no plan to murder the Jews, there were no gas chambers, there were no mass shootings, Hitler had nothing to do with any suffering that went on, and the Jews have made this all up to get money from Germany and to get a state, and they've done it with the aid and abettance of the Allies -- they've planted the documents and planted the evidence.
I couldn't let that stand and ever face a survivor or a child of survivors.
I couldn't let that stand and consider myself a responsible historian.
So we fought.
And for those of you who haven't seen "Denial," spoiler alert: we won.
(Laughter) (Applause) The judge found David Irving to be a liar, a racist, an anti-Semite.
His view of history was tendentious, he lied, he distorted -- and most importantly, he did it deliberately.
We showed a pattern, in over 25 different major instances.
Not small things -- many of us in this audience write books, are writing books; we always make mistakes, that's why we're glad to have second editions: correct the mistakes.
(Laughter) But these always moved in the same direction: blame the Jews, exonerate the Nazis.
But how did we win?
What we did is follow his footnotes back to his sources.
And what did we find?
Not in most cases, and not in the preponderance of cases, but in every single instance where he made some reference to the Holocaust, that his supposed evidence was distorted, half-truth, date-changed, sequence-changed, someone put at a meeting who wasn't there.
In other words, he didn't have the evidence.
His evidence didn't prove it.
We didn't prove what happened.
We proved that what he said happened -- and by extension, all deniers, because he either quotes them or they get their arguments from him -- is not true.
What they claim -- they don't have the evidence to prove it.
So why is my story more than just the story of a quirky, long, six-year, difficult lawsuit, an American professor being dragged into a courtroom by a man that the court declared in its judgment was a neo-Nazi polemicist?
What message does it have?
I think in the context of the question of truth, it has a very significant message.
Because today, as we well know, truth and facts are under assault.
Social media, for all the gifts it has given us, has also allowed the difference between facts -- established facts -- and lies to be flattened.
Third of all: extremism.
You may not see Ku Klux Klan robes, you may not see burning crosses, you may not even hear outright white supremacist language.
It may go by names: "alt-right," "National Front" -- pick your names.
But underneath, it's that same extremism that I found in Holocaust denial parading as rational discourse.
We live in an age where truth is on the defensive.
I'm reminded of a New Yorker cartoon.
A quiz show recently appeared in "The New Yorker" where the host of the quiz show is saying to one of the contestants, "Yes, ma'am, you had the right answer.
But your opponent yelled more loudly than you did, so he gets the point."
What can we do?
First of all, we cannot be beguiled by rational appearances.
We've got to look underneath, and we will find there the extremism.
Second of all, we must understand that truth is not relative.
Number three, we must go on the offensive, not the defensive.
When someone makes an outrageous claim, even though they may hold one of the highest offices in the land, if not the world -- we must say to them, "Where's the proof?
Where's the evidence?"
We must hold their feet to the fire.
We must not treat it as if their lies are the same as the facts.
And as I said earlier, truth is not relative.
Many of us have grown up in the world of the academy and enlightened liberal thought, where we're taught everything is open to debate.
But that's not the case.
There are certain things that are true.
There are indisputable facts -- objective truths.
Galileo taught it to us centuries ago.
Even after being forced to recant by the Vatican that the Earth moved around the Sun, he came out, and what is he reported to have said?
"And yet, it still moves."
The Earth is not flat.
The climate is changing.
Elvis is not alive.
(Laughter) (Applause) And most importantly, truth and fact are under assault.
The job ahead of us, the task ahead of us, the challenge ahead of us is great.
The time to fight is short.
We must act now.
Later will be too late.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The family of giants you work for is throwing a fancy dinner party, and they all want to look their best.
But theres a problem  the elder giants favorite shirt is wrinkled!
To fix it, youll need to power up the Giant Iron.
The iron needs two giant batteries to work.
You just had 4 working ones and 4 dead ones in separate piles, but it looks like the baby giant mixed them all up.
You need to get the iron working and press the giant shirt, fast  or youll end up being the main course tonight!
How can you test the batteries so that youre guaranteed to get a working pair in 7 tries or less?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 You could, of course, take all eight batteries and begin testing the 28 possible combinations.
You might get lucky within the first few tries.
But if you dont, moving the giant batteries that many times will take way too long.
You cant rely on luck  you need to assume the worst possibility and plan accordingly.
However, you dont actually need to test every possible combination.
Remember  there are four good batteries in total, meaning that any pile of six you choose will have at least two good batteries in it.
That doesnt help you right away, since testing all six batteries could still take as many as 15 tries.
But it does give you a clue to the solution  dividing the batteries into smaller subsets narrows down the possible results.
So instead of six batteries, lets take any three.
This group has a total of three possible combinations.
Since both batteries have to be working for the iron to power up, a single failure cant tell you whether both batteries are dead, or just one.
But if all three combinations fail, then youll know this group has either one good battery, or none at all.
Now you can set those three aside and repeat the process for another three batteries.
You might get a match, but if every combination fails again, youll know this set can have no more than one good battery.
That would leave only two batteries untried.
Since there are four good batteries in total and youve only accounted for two so far, both of these remaining ones must be good.
Dividing the batteries into sets of 3, 3, and 2 is guaranteed to get a working result in 7 tries or less, no matter what order you test the piles in.
With no time to spare, the iron comes to life, and you manage to get the shirt flawlessly ironed.
The pleased elder and his family show up to the party dressed to the nines  well, almost.
How many people here would like to live to be at least 80 years old?
Yeah.
I think we all have this hopeful expectation of living into old age.
Let's project out into the future, to your future "you's," and let's imagine that we're all 85.
Now, everyone look at two people.
One of you probably has Alzheimer's disease.
(Laughter) Alright, alright.
And maybe you're thinking, "Well, it won't be me."
Then, OK. You are a caregiver.
So -- (Laughter) so in some way, this terrifying disease is likely to affect us all.
Part of the fear around Alzheimer's stems from the sense that there's nothing we can do about it.
Despite decades of research, we still have no disease-modifying treatment and no cure.
So if we're lucky enough to live long enough, Alzheimer's appears to be our brain's destiny.
But maybe it doesn't have to be.
What if I told you we could change these statistics, literally change our brain's destiny, without relying on a cure or advancements in medicine?
Let's begin by looking at what we currently understand about the neuroscience of Alzheimer's.
Here's a picture of two neurons connecting.
The point of connection, this space circled in red, is called the synapse.
The synapse is where neurotransmitters are released.
This is where signals are transmitted, where communication happens.
This is where we think, feel, see, hear, desire ...
and remember.
And the synapse is where Alzheimer's happens.
Let's zoom in on the synapse and look at a cartoon representation of what's going on.
During the business of communicating information, in addition to releasing neurotransmitters like glutamate into the synapse, neurons also release a small peptide called amyloid beta.
Normally, amyloid beta is cleared away metabolized by microglia, the janitor cells of our brains.
While the molecular causes of Alzheimer's are still debated, most neuroscientists believe that the disease begins when amyloid beta begins to accumulate.
Too much is released, or not enough is cleared away, and the synapse begins to pile up with amyloid beta.
And when this happens, it binds to itself, forming sticky aggregates called amyloid plaques.
How many people here are 40 years old or older?
You're afraid to admit it now.
This initial step into the disease, this presence of amyloid plaques accumulating, can already be found in your brains.
The only way we could be sure of this would be through a PET scan, because at this point, you are blissfully unaware.
You're not showing any impairments in memory, language, or cognition ...
yet.
We think it takes at least 15 to 20 years of amyloid plaque accumulation before it reaches a tipping point, then triggering a molecular cascade that causes the clinical symptoms of the disease.
Prior to the tipping point, your lapses in memory might include things like, "Why did I come in this room?"
or "Oh ... what's his name?"
or "Where did I put my keys?"
Now, before you all start freaking out again, because I know half of you did at least one of those in the last 24 hours -- these are all normal kinds of forgetting.
In fact, I would argue that these examples might not even involve your memory, because you didn't pay attention to where you put your keys in the first place.
After the tipping point, the glitches in memory, language and cognition are different.
Instead of eventually finding your keys in your coat pocket or on the table by the door, you find them in the refrigerator, or you find them and you think, "What are these for?"
So what happens when amyloid plaques accumulate to this tipping point?
Our microglia janitor cells become hyper-activated, releasing chemicals that cause inflammation and cellular damage.
We think they might actually start clearing away the synapses themselves.
A crucial neural transport protein called "tau" becomes hyperphosphorylated and twists itself into something called "tangles," which choke off the neurons from the inside.
By mid-stage Alzheimer's, we have massive inflammation and tangles and all-out war at the synapse and cell death.
So if you were a scientist trying to cure this disease, at what point would you ideally want to intervene?
Many scientists are betting big on the simplest solution: keep amyloid plaques from reaching that tipping point, which means that drug discovery is largely focused on developing a compound that will prevent, eliminate, or reduce amyloid plaque accumulation.
So the cure for Alzheimer's will likely be a preventative medicine.
We're going to have to take this pill before we reach that tipping point, before the cascade is triggered, before we start leaving our keys in the refrigerator.
We think this is why, to date, these kinds of drugs have failed in clinical trials -- not because the science wasn't sound, but because the people in these trials were already symptomatic.
It was too late.
Think of amyloid plaques as a lit match.
At the tipping point, the match sets fire to the forest.
Once the forest is ablaze, it doesn't do any good to blow out the match.
You have to blow out the match before the forest catches fire.
Even before scientists sort this out, this information is actually really good news for us, because it turns out that the way we live can influence the accumulation of amyloid plaques.
And so there are things we can do to keep us from reaching that tipping point.
Let's picture your risk of Alzheimer's as a see-saw scale.
We're going to pile risk factors on one arm, and when that arm hits the floor, you are symptomatic and diagnosed with Alzheimer's.
Let's imagine you're 50 years old.
You're not a spring chicken anymore, so you've accumulated some amyloid plaques with age.
Your scale is tipped a little bit.
Now let's look at your DNA.
We've all inherited our genes from our moms and our dads.
Some of these genes will increase our risk and some will decrease it.
If you're like Alice in "Still Alice," you've inherited a rare genetic mutation that cranks out amyloid beta, and this alone will tip your scale arm to the ground.
But for most of us, the genes we inherit will only tip the arm a bit.
For example, APOE4 is a gene variant that increases amyloid, but you can inherit a copy of APOE4 from mom and dad and still never get Alzheimer's, which means that for most of us, our DNA alone does not determine whether we get Alzheimer's.
So what does?
We can't do anything about getting older or the genes we've inherited.
So far, we haven't changed our brain's destiny.
What about sleep?
In slow-wave deep sleep, our glial cells rinse cerebral spinal fluid throughout our brains, clearing away metabolic waste that accumulated in our synapses while we were awake.
Deep sleep is like a power cleanse for the brain.
But what happens if you shortchange yourself on sleep?
Many scientists believe that poor sleep hygiene might actually be a predictor of Alzheimer's.
A single night of sleep deprivation leads to an increase in amyloid beta.
And amyloid accumulation has been shown to disrupt sleep, which in turn causes more amyloid to accumulate.
And so now we have this positive feedback loop that's going to accelerate the tipping of that scale.
What else?
Cardiovascular health.
High blood pressure, diabetes, obesity, smoking, high cholesterol, have all been shown to increase our risk of developing Alzheimer's.
Some autopsy studies have shown that as many as 80 percent of people with Alzheimer's also had cardiovascular disease.
Aerobic exercise has been shown in many studies to decrease amyloid beta in animal models of the disease.
So a heart-healthy Mediterranean lifestyle and diet can help to counter the tipping of this scale.
So there are many things we can do to prevent or delay the onset of Alzheimer's.
But let's say you haven't done any of them.
Let's say you're 65; there's Alzheimer's in your family, so you've likely inherited a gene or two that tips your scale arm a bit; you've been burning the candle at both ends for years; you love bacon; and you don't run unless someone's chasing you.
(Laughter) Let's imagine that your amyloid plaques have reached that tipping point.
Your scale arm has crashed to the floor.
You've tripped the cascade, setting fire to the forest, causing inflammation, tangles, and cell death.
You should be symptomatic for Alzheimer's.
You should be having trouble finding words and keys and remembering what I said at the beginning of this talk.
But you might not be.
There's one more thing you can do to protect yourself from experiencing the symptoms of Alzheimer's, even if you have the full-blown disease pathology ablaze in your brain.
It has to do with neural plasticity and cognitive reserve.
Remember, the experience of having Alzheimer's is ultimately a result of losing synapses.
The average brain has over a hundred trillion synapses, which is fantastic; we've got a lot to work with.
And this isn't a static number.
We gain and lose synapses all the time, through a process called neural plasticity.
Every time we learn something new, we are creating and strengthening new neural connections, new synapses.
In the Nun Study, 678 nuns, all over the age of 75 when the study began, were followed for more than two decades.
They were regularly given physical checkups and cognitive tests, and when they died, their brains were all donated for autopsy.
In some of these brains, scientists discovered something surprising.
Despite the presence of plaques and tangles and brain shrinkage -- what appeared to be unquestionable Alzheimer's -- the nuns who had belonged to these brains showed no signs of having the disease while they were alive.
How can this be?
We think it's because these nuns had a high level of cognitive reserve, which is a way of saying that they had more functional synapses.
People who have more years of formal education, who have a high degree of literacy, who engage regularly in mentally stimulating activities, all have more cognitive reserve.
They have an abundance and a redundancy in neural connections.
So even if they have a disease like Alzheimer's compromising some of their synapses, they've got many extra backup connections, and this buffers them from noticing that anything is amiss.
Let's imagine a simplified example.
Let's say you only know one thing about a subject.
Let's say it's about me.
You know that Lisa Genova wrote "Still Alice," and that's the only thing you know about me.
You have that single neural connection, that one synapse.
Now imagine you have Alzheimer's.
You have plaques and tangles and inflammation and microglia devouring that synapse.
Now when someone asks you, "Hey, who wrote 'Still Alice?'" you can't remember, because that synapse is either failing or gone.
You've forgotten me forever.
But what if you had learned more about me?
Let's say you learned four things about me.
Now imagine you have Alzheimer's, and three of those synapses are damaged or destroyed.
You still have a way to detour the wreckage.
You can still remember my name.
So we can be resilient to the presence of Alzheimer's pathology through the recruitment of yet-undamaged pathways.
And we create these pathways, this cognitive reserve, by learning new things.
Ideally, we want these new things to be as rich in meaning as possible, recruiting sight and sound and associations and emotion.
So this really doesn't mean doing crossword puzzles.
You don't want to simply retrieve information you've already learned, because this is like traveling down old, familiar streets, cruising neighborhoods you already know.
You want to pave new neural roads.
Building an Alzheimer's-resistant brain means learning to speak Italian, meeting new friends, reading a book, or listening to a great TED Talk.
And if, despite all of this, you are someday diagnosed with Alzheimer's, there are three lessons I've learned from my grandmother and the dozens of people I've come to know living with this disease.
Diagnosis doesn't mean you're dying tomorrow.
Keep living.
You won't lose your emotional memory.
You'll still be able to understand love and joy.
You might not remember what I said five minutes ago, but you'll remember how I made you feel.
And you are more than what you can remember.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let's say you despise Western democracy.
Democracy, in all its trappings, free elections, town halls, endless debates about the proper role of government.
Too messy, too unpredictable, too constraining for your taste.
And the way these democracies band together and lecture everyone else about individual rights and freedoms -- it gets under your skin.
So what to do about it?
You can call out the hypocrisy and failures of Western democracies and explain how your way is better, but that's never really worked for you.
What if you could get the people whose support is the very foundation of these democracies to start questioning the system?
Make the idea occur in their own minds that democracy and its institutions are failing them, their elite are corrupt puppet masters and the country they knew is in free fall.
To do that, you'll need to infiltrate the information spheres of these democracies.
You'll need to turn their most powerful asset -- an open mind -- into their greatest vulnerability.
You'll need people to question the truth.
Now, you'll be familiar of hacking and leaks that happened in 2016.
One was the Democratic National Committee's networks, and the personal email accounts of its staff, later released on WikiLeaks.
After that, various online personas, like a supposed Romanian cybercriminal who didn't speak Romanian, aggressively pushed news of these leaks to journalists.
The media took the bait.
They were consumed by how much the DNC hated Bernie.
At the time, it was that narrative that far outshined the news that a group of Russian government sponsored hackers who we called "Advanced Persistent Threat 28," or "APT28" for short, was carrying out these operations against the US.
And there was no shortage of evidence.
This group of Russian government hackers hadn't just appeared out of nowhere in 2016.
And the tools that APT28 used to compromise its victims' networks demonstrated a thoughtful, well-resourced effort that had taken place for now over a decade in Moscow's time zone from about 9 am to 6 pm.
APT28 loved to prey on the emails and contacts of journalists in Chechnya, the Georgian government, eastern European defense attachs -- all targets with an undeniable interest to the Russian government.
We weren't the only ones onto this.
Governments, research teams across the world, were coming to similar conclusions and observing the same types of operations.
But what Russia was doing in 2016 went far beyond espionage.
The DNC hack was just one of many where stolen data was posted online accompanied by a sensational narrative, then amplified in social media for lightning-speed adoption by the media.
This didn't ring the alarm bells that a nation-state was trying to interfere with the credibility of another's internal affairs.
So why, collectively, did we not see this coming?
Why did it take months before Americans understood that they were under a state-sponsored information attack?
The easy answer is politics.
The Obama Administration was caught in a perfect catch-22.
By raising the specter that the Russian government was interfering in the US presidential campaign, the Administration risked appearing to meddle in the campaign itself.
But the better answer, I think, is that the US and the West were utterly unequipped to recognize and respond to a modern information operation, despite the fact that the US had wielded information with devastating success in an era not so long ago.
Look, so while the US and the West spent the last 20 years caught up in cybersecurity -- what networks to harden, which infrastructure to deem critical, how to set up armies of cyber warriors and cyber commands -- Russia was thinking in far more consequential terms.
Before the first iPhone even hit the shelf, the Russian government understood the risks and the opportunity that technology provided and the inter-communication and instant communication it provided us.
As our realities are increasingly based on the information that we're consuming at the palm of our hand and from the news feeds that we're scanning and the hashtags and stories that we see trending, the Russian government was the first to recognize how this evolution had turned your mind into the most exploitable device on the planet.
And your mind is particularly exploitable if you're accustomed to an unfettered flow of information, now increasingly curated to your own tastes.
This panorama of information that's so interesting to you gives a state, or anyone for that matter, a perfect back door into your mind.
It's this new brand of state-sponsored information operations that can be that much more successful, more insidious, and harder for the target audience -- that includes the media -- to decipher and characterize.
If you can get a hashtag trending on Twitter, or chum the waters with fake news directed to audiences primed to receive it, or drive journalists to dissect terabytes of email for a cent of impropriety -- all tactics used in Russian operations -- then you've got a shot at effectively camouflaging your operations in the mind of your target.
This is what Russia's long called "reflexive control."
It's the ability to use information on someone else so that they make a decision on their own accord that's favorable to you.
This is nation-state-grade image control and perception management, and it's conducted by any means, with any tools, network-based or otherwise, that will achieve it.
Take this for another example.
In early February 2014, a few weeks before Russia would invade Crimea, a phone call is posted on YouTube.
In it, there's two US diplomats.
They sound like they're playing kingmaker in Ukraine, and worse, they curse the EU for its lack of speed and leadership in resolving the crisis.
The media covers the phone call, and then the ensuing diplomatic backlash leaves Washington and Europe reeling.
And it creates a fissured response and a feckless attitude towards Russia's land grab in Ukraine.
Mission accomplished.
So while hacked phone calls and emails and networks keep grabbing the headlines, the real operations are the ones that are influencing the decisions you make and the opinions you hold, all in the service of a nation-state's strategic interest.
This is power in the information age.
And this information is all that much more seductive, all that much easier to take at face value and pass on, when it's authentic.
Who's not interested in the truth that's presented in phone calls and emails that were never intended for public consumption?
But how meaningful is that truth if you don't know why it's being revealed to you?
We must recognize that this place where we're increasingly living, which we've quaintly termed "cyberspace," isn't defined by ones and zeroes, but by information and the people behind it.
This is far more than a network of computers and devices.
This is a network composed of minds interacting with computers and devices.
And for this network, there's no encryption, there's no firewall, no two-factor authentication, no password complex enough to protect you.
What you have for defense is far stronger, it's more adaptable, it's always running the latest version.
It's the ability to think critically: call out falsehood, press for the facts.
And above all, you must have the courage to unflinchingly pursue the truth.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Elon, hey, welcome back to TED.
It's great to have you here.
Elon Musk: Thanks for having me.
CA: So, in the next half hour or so, we're going to spend some time exploring your vision for what an exciting future might look like, which I guess makes the first question a little ironic: Why are you boring?
EM: Yeah.
I ask myself that frequently.
We're trying to dig a hole under LA, and this is to create the beginning of what will hopefully be a 3D network of tunnels to alleviate congestion.
So right now, one of the most soul-destroying things is traffic.
It affects people in every part of the world.
It takes away so much of your life.
It's horrible.
It's particularly horrible in LA.
(Laughter) CA: I think you've brought with you the first visualization that's been shown of this.
Can I show this?
EM: Yeah, absolutely. So this is the first time -- Just to show what we're talking about.
So a couple of key things that are important in having a 3D tunnel network.
First of all, you have to be able to integrate the entrance and exit of the tunnel seamlessly into the fabric of the city.
So by having an elevator, sort of a car skate, that's on an elevator, you can integrate the entrance and exits to the tunnel network just by using two parking spaces.
And then the car gets on a skate.
There's no speed limit here, so we're designing this to be able to operate at 200 kilometers an hour.
CA: How much?
EM: 200 kilometers an hour, or about 130 miles per hour.
So you should be able to get from, say, Westwood to LAX in six minutes -- five, six minutes.
(Applause) CA: So possibly, initially done, it's like on a sort of toll road-type basis.
EM: Yeah.
CA: Which, I guess, alleviates some traffic from the surface streets as well.
EM: So, I don't know if people noticed it in the video, but there's no real limit to how many levels of tunnel you can have.
You can go much further deep than you can go up.
The deepest mines are much deeper than the tallest buildings are tall, so you can alleviate any arbitrary level of urban congestion with a 3D tunnel network.
This is a very important point.
So a key rebuttal to the tunnels is that if you add one layer of tunnels, that will simply alleviate congestion, it will get used up, and then you'll be back where you started, back with congestion.
But you can go to any arbitrary number of tunnels, any number of levels.
CA: But people -- seen traditionally, it's incredibly expensive to dig, and that would block this idea.
EM: Yeah.
Well, they're right.
To give you an example, the LA subway extension, which is -- I think it's a two-and-a-half mile extension that was just completed for two billion dollars.
So it's roughly a billion dollars a mile to do the subway extension in LA.
And this is not the highest utility subway in the world.
So yeah, it's quite difficult to dig tunnels normally.
I think we need to have at least a tenfold improvement in the cost per mile of tunneling.
CA: And how could you achieve that?
EM: Actually, if you just do two things, you can get to approximately an order of magnitude improvement, and I think you can go beyond that.
So the first thing to do is to cut the tunnel diameter by a factor of two or more.
So a single road lane tunnel according to regulations has to be 26 feet, maybe 28 feet in diameter to allow for crashes and emergency vehicles and sufficient ventilation for combustion engine cars.
But if you shrink that diameter to what we're attempting, which is 12 feet, which is plenty to get an electric skate through, you drop the diameter by a factor of two and the cross-sectional area by a factor of four, and the tunneling cost scales with the cross-sectional area.
So that's roughly a half-order of magnitude improvement right there.
Then tunneling machines currently tunnel for half the time, then they stop, and then the rest of the time is putting in reinforcements for the tunnel wall.
So if you design the machine instead to do continuous tunneling and reinforcing, that will give you a factor of two improvement.
Combine that and that's a factor of eight.
Also these machines are far from being at their power or thermal limits, so you can jack up the power to the machine substantially.
I think you can get at least a factor of two, maybe a factor of four or five improvement on top of that.
So I think there's a fairly straightforward series of steps to get somewhere in excess of an order of magnitude improvement in the cost per mile, and our target actually is -- we've got a pet snail called Gary, this is from Gary the snail from "South Park," I mean, sorry, "SpongeBob SquarePants."
(Laughter) So Gary is capable of -- currently he's capable of going 14 times faster than a tunnel-boring machine.
(Laughter) CA: You want to beat Gary.
EM: We want to beat Gary.
(Laughter) He's not a patient little fellow, and that will be victory.
Victory is beating the snail.
CA: But a lot of people imagining, dreaming about future cities, they imagine that actually the solution is flying cars, drones, etc.
You go aboveground.
Why isn't that a better solution?
You save all that tunneling cost.
EM: Right. I'm in favor of flying things.
Obviously, I do rockets, so I like things that fly.
This is not some inherent bias against flying things, but there is a challenge with flying cars in that they'll be quite noisy, the wind force generated will be very high.
Let's just say that if something's flying over your head, a whole bunch of flying cars going all over the place, that is not an anxiety-reducing situation.
(Laughter) You don't think to yourself, "Well, I feel better about today."
You're thinking, "Did they service their hubcap, or is it going to come off and guillotine me?"
Things like that.
CA: So you've got this vision of future cities with these rich, 3D networks of tunnels underneath.
Is there a tie-in here with Hyperloop?
Could you apply these tunnels to use for this Hyperloop idea you released a few years ago.
EM: Yeah, so we've been sort of puttering around with the Hyperloop stuff for a while.
We built a Hyperloop test track adjacent to SpaceX, just for a student competition, to encourage innovative ideas in transport.
And it actually ends up being the biggest vacuum chamber in the world after the Large Hadron Collider, by volume.
So it was quite fun to do that, but it was kind of a hobby thing, and then we think we might -- so we've built a little pusher car to push the student pods, but we're going to try seeing how fast we can make the pusher go if it's not pushing something.
So we're cautiously optimistic we'll be able to be faster than the world's fastest bullet train even in a .8-mile stretch.
CA: Whoa. Good brakes.
EM: Yeah, I mean, it's -- yeah.
It's either going to smash into tiny pieces or go quite fast.
CA: But you can picture, then, a Hyperloop in a tunnel running quite long distances.
EM: Exactly.
And looking at tunneling technology, it turns out that in order to make a tunnel, you have to -- In order to seal against the water table, you've got to typically design a tunnel wall to be good to about five or six atmospheres.
So to go to vacuum is only one atmosphere, or near-vacuum.
So actually, it sort of turns out that automatically, if you build a tunnel that is good enough to resist the water table, it is automatically capable of holding vacuum.
CA: Huh.
EM: So, yeah.
CA: And so you could actually picture, what kind of length tunnel is in Elon's future to running Hyperloop?
EM: I think there's no real length limit.
You could dig as much as you want.
I think if you were to do something like a DC-to-New York Hyperloop, I think you'd probably want to go underground the entire way because it's a high-density area.
You're going under a lot of buildings and houses, and if you go deep enough, you cannot detect the tunnel.
Sometimes people think, well, it's going to be pretty annoying to have a tunnel dug under my house.
Like, if that tunnel is dug more than about three or four tunnel diameters beneath your house, you will not be able to detect it being dug at all.
In fact, if you're able to detect the tunnel being dug, whatever device you are using, you can get a lot of money for that device from the Israeli military, who is trying to detect tunnels from Hamas, and from the US Customs and Border patrol that try and detect drug tunnels.
So the reality is that earth is incredibly good at absorbing vibrations, and once the tunnel depth is below a certain level, it is undetectable.
Maybe if you have a very sensitive seismic instrument, you might be able to detect it.
CA: So you've started a new company to do this called The Boring Company.
Very nice. Very funny.
(Laughter) EM: What's funny about that?
(Laughter) CA: How much of your time is this?
EM: It's maybe ...
CA: You've called it a hobby.
This is what an Elon Musk hobby looks like.
(Laughter) EM: I mean, it really is, like -- This is basically interns and people doing it part time.
We bought some second-hand machinery.
It's kind of puttering along, but it's making good progress, so -- CA: So an even bigger part of your time is being spent on electrifying cars and transport through Tesla.
Is one of the motivations for the tunneling project the realization that actually, in a world where cars are electric and where they're self-driving, there may end up being more cars on the roads on any given hour than there are now?
EM: Yeah, exactly.
A lot of people think that when you make cars autonomous, they'll be able to go faster and that will alleviate congestion.
And to some degree that will be true, but once you have shared autonomy where it's much cheaper to go by car and you can go point to point, the affordability of going in a car will be better than that of a bus.
Like, it will cost less than a bus ticket.
So the amount of driving that will occur will be much greater with shared autonomy, and actually traffic will get far worse.
CA: You started Tesla with the goal of persuading the world that electrification was the future of cars, and a few years ago, people were laughing at you.
Now, not so much.
EM: OK.
(Laughter) I don't know. I don't know.
CA: But isn't it true that pretty much every auto manufacturer has announced serious electrification plans for the short- to medium-term future?
EM: Yeah. Yeah.
I think almost every automaker has some electric vehicle program.
They vary in seriousness.
Some are very serious about transitioning entirely to electric, and some are just dabbling in it.
And some, amazingly, are still pursuing fuel cells, but I think that won't last much longer.
CA: But isn't there a sense, though, Elon, where you can now just declare victory and say, you know, "We did it."
Let the world electrify, and you go on and focus on other stuff?
EM: Yeah.
I intend to stay with Tesla as far into the future as I can imagine, and there are a lot of exciting things that we have coming.
Obviously the Model 3 is coming soon.
We'll be unveiling the Tesla Semi truck.
CA: OK, we're going to come to this.
So Model 3, it's supposed to be coming in July-ish.
EM: Yeah, it's looking quite good for starting production in July.
CA: Wow.
One of the things that people are so excited about is the fact that it's got autopilot.
And you put out this video a while back showing what that technology would look like.
EM: Yeah.
CA: There's obviously autopilot in Model S right now.
What are we seeing here?
EM: Yeah, so this is using only cameras and GPS.
So there's no LIDAR or radar being used here.
This is just using passive optical, which is essentially what a person uses.
The whole road system is meant to be navigated with passive optical, or cameras, and so once you solve cameras or vision, then autonomy is solved.
If you don't solve vision, it's not solved.
So that's why our focus is so heavily on having a vision neural net that's very effective for road conditions.
CA: Right. Many other people are going the LIDAR route.
You want cameras plus radar is most of it.
EM: You can absolutely be superhuman with just cameras.
Like, you can probably do it ten times better than humans would, just cameras.
CA: So the new cars being sold right now have eight cameras in them.
They can't yet do what that showed.
When will they be able to?
EM: I think we're still on track for being able to go cross-country from LA to New York by the end of the year, fully autonomous.
CA: OK, so by the end of the year, you're saying, someone's going to sit in a Tesla without touching the steering wheel, tap in "New York," off it goes.
EM: Yeah.
CA: Won't ever have to touch the wheel -- by the end of 2017.
EM: Yeah. Essentially, November or December of this year, we should be able to go all the way from a parking lot in California to a parking lot in New York, no controls touched at any point during the entire journey.
(Applause) CA: Amazing.
But part of that is possible because you've already got a fleet of Teslas driving all these roads.
You're accumulating a huge amount of data of that national road system.
EM: Yes, but the thing that will be interesting is that I'm actually fairly confident it will be able to do that route even if you change the route dynamically.
So, it's fairly easy -- If you say I'm going to be really good at one specific route, that's one thing, but it should be able to go, really be very good, certainly once you enter a highway, to go anywhere on the highway system in a given country.
So it's not sort of limited to LA to New York.
We could change it and make it Seattle-Florida, that day, in real time.
So you were going from LA to New York.
Now go from LA to Toronto.
CA: So leaving aside regulation for a second, in terms of the technology alone, the time when someone will be able to buy one of your cars and literally just take the hands off the wheel and go to sleep and wake up and find that they've arrived, how far away is that, to do that safely?
EM: I think that's about two years.
So the real trick of it is not how do you make it work say 99.9 percent of the time, because, like, if a car crashes one in a thousand times, then you're probably still not going to be comfortable falling asleep.
You shouldn't be, certainly.
(Laughter) It's never going to be perfect.
No system is going to be perfect, but if you say it's perhaps -- the car is unlikely to crash in a hundred lifetimes, or a thousand lifetimes, then people are like, OK, wow, if I were to live a thousand lives, I would still most likely never experience a crash, then that's probably OK.
CA: To sleep.
I guess the big concern of yours is that people may actually get seduced too early to think that this is safe, and that you'll have some horrible incident happen that puts things back.
EM: Well, I think that the autonomy system is likely to at least mitigate the crash, except in rare circumstances.
The thing to appreciate about vehicle safety is this is probabilistic.
I mean, there's some chance that any time a human driver gets in a car, that they will have an accident that is their fault.
It's never zero.
So really the key threshold for autonomy is how much better does autonomy need to be than a person before you can rely on it?
CA: But once you get literally safe hands-off driving, the power to disrupt the whole industry seems massive, because at that point you've spoken of people being able to buy a car, drops you off at work, and then you let it go and provide a sort of Uber-like service to other people, earn you money, maybe even cover the cost of your lease of that car, so you can kind of get a car for free.
Is that really likely?
EM: Yeah. Absolutely this is what will happen.
So there will be a shared autonomy fleet where you buy your car and you can choose to use that car exclusively, you could choose to have it be used only by friends and family, only by other drivers who are rated five star, you can choose to share it sometimes but not other times.
That's 100 percent what will occur.
It's just a question of when.
CA: Wow.
So you mentioned the Semi and I think you're planning to announce this in September, but I'm curious whether there's anything you could show us today?
EM: I will show you a teaser shot of the truck.
(Laughter) It's alive.
CA: OK.
EM: That's definitely a case where we want to be cautious about the autonomy features.
(Laughter) CA: We can't see that much of it, but it doesn't look like just a little friendly neighborhood truck.
It looks kind of badass.
What sort of semi is this?
EM: So this is a heavy duty, long-range semitruck.
So it's the highest weight capability and with long range.
So essentially it's meant to alleviate the heavy-duty trucking loads.
And this is something which people do not today think is possible.
They think the truck doesn't have enough power or it doesn't have enough range, and then with the Tesla Semi we want to show that no, an electric truck actually can out-torque any diesel semi.
And if you had a tug-of-war competition, the Tesla Semi will tug the diesel semi uphill.
(Laughter) (Applause) CA: That's pretty cool. And short term, these aren't driverless.
These are going to be trucks that truck drivers want to drive.
EM: Yes. So what will be really fun about this is you have a flat torque RPM curve with an electric motor, whereas with a diesel motor or any kind of internal combustion engine car, you've got a torque RPM curve that looks like a hill.
So this will be a very spry truck.
You can drive this around like a sports car.
There's no gears. It's, like, single speed.
CA: There's a great movie to be made here somewhere.
I don't know what it is and I don't know that it ends well, but it's a great movie.
(Laughter) EM: It's quite bizarre test-driving.
When I was driving the test prototype for the first truck.
It's really weird, because you're driving around and you're just so nimble, and you're in this giant truck.
CA: Wait, you've already driven a prototype?
EM: Yeah, I drove it around the parking lot, and I was like, this is crazy.
CA: Wow. This is no vaporware.
EM: It's just like, driving this giant truck and making these mad maneuvers.
CA: This is cool. OK, from a really badass picture to a kind of less badass picture.
This is just a cute house from "Desperate Housewives" or something.
What on earth is going on here?
EM: Well, this illustrates the picture of the future that I think is how things will evolve.
You've got an electric car in the driveway.
If you look in between the electric car and the house, there are actually three Powerwalls stacked up against the side of the house, and then that house roof is a solar roof.
So that's an actual solar glass roof.
CA: OK.
EM: That's a picture of a real -- well, admittedly, it's a real fake house.
That's a real fake house.
(Laughter) CA: So these roof tiles, some of them have in them basically solar power, the ability to -- EM: Yeah. Solar glass tiles where you can adjust the texture and the color to a very fine-grained level, and then there's sort of microlouvers in the glass, such that when you're looking at the roof from street level or close to street level, all the tiles look the same whether there is a solar cell behind it or not.
So you have an even color from the ground level.
If you were to look at it from a helicopter, you would be actually able to look through and see that some of the glass tiles have a solar cell behind them and some do not.
You can't tell from street level.
CA: You put them in the ones that are likely to see a lot of sun, and that makes these roofs super affordable, right?
They're not that much more expensive than just tiling the roof.
EM: Yeah.
We're very confident that the cost of the roof plus the cost of electricity -- A solar glass roof will be less than the cost of a normal roof plus the cost of electricity.
So in other words, this will be economically a no-brainer, we think it will look great, and it will last -- We thought about having the warranty be infinity, but then people thought, well, that might sound like were just talking rubbish, but actually this is toughened glass.
Well after the house has collapsed and there's nothing there, the glass tiles will still be there.
(Applause) CA: I mean, this is cool.
So you're rolling this out in a couple week's time, I think, with four different roofing types.
EM: Yeah, we're starting off with two, two initially, and the second two will be introduced early next year.
CA: And what's the scale of ambition here?
How many houses do you believe could end up having this type of roofing?
EM: I think eventually almost all houses will have a solar roof.
The thing is to consider the time scale here to be probably on the order of 40 or 50 years.
So on average, a roof is replaced every 20 to 25 years.
But you don't start replacing all roofs immediately.
But eventually, if you say were to fast-forward to say 15 years from now, it will be unusual to have a roof that does not have solar.
CA: Is there a mental model thing that people don't get here that because of the shift in the cost, the economics of solar power, most houses actually have enough sunlight on their roof pretty much to power all of their needs.
If you could capture the power, it could pretty much power all their needs.
You could go off-grid, kind of.
EM: It depends on where you are and what the house size is relative to the roof area, but it's a fair statement to say that most houses in the US have enough roof area to power all the needs of the house.
CA: So the key to the economics of the cars, the Semi, of these houses is the falling price of lithium-ion batteries, which you've made a huge bet on as Tesla.
In many ways, that's almost the core competency.
And you've decided that to really, like, own that competency, you just have to build the world's largest manufacturing plant to double the world's supply of lithium-ion batteries, with this guy. What is this?
EM: Yeah, so that's the Gigafactory, progress so far on the Gigafactory.
Eventually, you can sort of roughly see that there's sort of a diamond shape overall, and when it's fully done, it'll look like a giant diamond, or that's the idea behind it, and it's aligned on true north.
It's a small detail.
CA: And capable of producing, eventually, like a hundred gigawatt hours of batteries a year.
EM: A hundred gigawatt hours. We think probably more, but yeah.
CA: And they're actually being produced right now.
EM: They're in production already. CA: You guys put out this video.
EM: That's the slowed down version.
(Laughter) CA: How fast does it actually go?
EM: Well, when it's running at full speed, you can't actually see the cells without a strobe light.
It's just blur.
(Laughter) CA: One of your core ideas, Elon, about what makes an exciting future is a future where we no longer feel guilty about energy.
Help us picture this.
How many Gigafactories, if you like, does it take to get us there?
EM: It's about a hundred, roughly.
It's not 10, it's not a thousand.
Most likely a hundred.
CA: See, I find this amazing.
You can picture what it would take to move the world off this vast fossil fuel thing.
It's like you're building one, it costs five billion dollars, or whatever, five to 10 billion dollars.
Like, it's kind of cool that you can picture that project.
And you're planning to do, at Tesla -- announce another two this year.
EM: I think we'll announce locations for somewhere between two and four Gigafactories later this year.
Yeah, probably four.
CA: Whoa.
(Applause) No more teasing from you for here?
Like -- where, continent?
You can say no.
EM: We need to address a global market.
CA: OK.
(Laughter) This is cool.
I think we should talk for -- Actually, global market.
I'm going to ask you one question about politics, only one.
I'm kind of sick of politics, but I do want to ask you this.
You're on a body now giving advice to a guy -- EM: Who?
CA: Who has said he doesn't really believe in climate change, and there's a lot of people out there who think you shouldn't be doing that.
They'd like you to walk away from that.
What would you say to them?
EM: Well, I think that first of all, I'm just on two advisory councils where the format consists of going around the room and asking people's opinion on things, and so there's like a meeting every month or two.
That's the sum total of my contribution.
But I think to the degree that there are people in the room who are arguing in favor of doing something about climate change, or social issues, I've used the meetings I've had thus far to argue in favor of immigration and in favor of climate change.
(Applause) And if I hadn't done that, that wasn't on the agenda before.
So maybe nothing will happen, but at least the words were said.
CA: OK.
(Applause) So let's talk SpaceX and Mars.
Last time you were here, you spoke about what seemed like a kind of incredibly ambitious dream to develop rockets that were actually reusable.
And you've only gone and done it.
EM: Finally. It took a long time.
CA: Talk us through this. What are we looking at here?
EM: So this is one of our rocket boosters coming back from very high and fast in space.
So just delivered the upper stage at high velocity.
I think this might have been at sort of Mach 7 or so, delivery of the upper stage.
(Applause) CA: So that was a sped-up -- EM: That was the slowed down version.
(Laughter) CA: I thought that was the sped-up version.
But I mean, that's amazing, and several of these failed before you finally figured out how to do it, but now you've done this, what, five or six times?
EM: We're at eight or nine.
CA: And for the first time, you've actually reflown one of the rockets that landed.
EM: Yeah, so we landed the rocket booster and then prepped it for flight again and flew it again, so it's the first reflight of an orbital booster where that reflight is relevant.
So it's important to appreciate that reusability is only relevant if it is rapid and complete.
So like an aircraft or a car, the reusability is rapid and complete.
You do not send your aircraft to Boeing in-between flights.
CA: Right. So this is allowing you to dream of this really ambitious idea of sending many, many, many people to Mars in, what, 10 or 20 years time, I guess.
EM: Yeah.
CA: And you've designed this outrageous rocket to do it.
Help us understand the scale of this thing.
EM: Well, visually you can see that's a person.
Yeah, and that's the vehicle.
(Laughter) CA: So if that was a skyscraper, that's like, did I read that, a 40-story skyscraper?
EM: Probably a little more, yeah.
The thrust level of this is really -- This configuration is about four times the thrust of the Saturn V moon rocket.
CA: Four times the thrust of the biggest rocket humanity ever created before.
EM: Yeah. Yeah.
CA: As one does. EM: Yeah.
(Laughter) In units of 747, a 747 is only about a quarter of a million pounds of thrust, so for every 10 million pounds of thrust, there's 40 747s.
So this would be the thrust equivalent of 120 747s, with all engines blazing.
CA: And so even with a machine designed to escape Earth's gravity, I think you told me last time this thing could actually take a fully loaded 747, people, cargo, everything, into orbit.
EM: Exactly. This can take a fully loaded 747 with maximum fuel, maximum passengers, maximum cargo on the 747 -- this can take it as cargo.
CA: So based on this, you presented recently this Interplanetary Transport System which is visualized this way.
This is a scene you picture in, what, 30 years time? 20 years time?
People walking into this rocket.
EM: I'm hopeful it's sort of an eight- to 10-year time frame.
Aspirationally, that's our target.
Our internal targets are more aggressive, but I think -- (Laughter) CA: OK.
EM: While vehicle seems quite large and is large by comparison with other rockets, I think the future spacecraft will make this look like a rowboat.
The future spaceships will be truly enormous.
CA: Why, Elon?
Why do we need to build a city on Mars with a million people on it in your lifetime, which I think is kind of what you've said you'd love to do?
EM: I think it's important to have a future that is inspiring and appealing.
I just think there have to be reasons that you get up in the morning and you want to live.
Like, why do you want to live?
What's the point? What inspires you?
What do you love about the future?
And if we're not out there, if the future does not include being out there among the stars and being a multiplanet species, I find that it's incredibly depressing if that's not the future that we're going to have.
(Applause) CA: People want to position this as an either or, that there are so many desperate things happening on the planet now from climate to poverty to, you know, you pick your issue.
And this feels like a distraction.
You shouldn't be thinking about this.
You should be solving what's here and now.
And to be fair, you've done a fair old bit to actually do that with your work on sustainable energy.
But why not just do that?
EM: I think there's -- I look at the future from the standpoint of probabilities.
It's like a branching stream of probabilities, and there are actions that we can take that affect those probabilities or that accelerate one thing or slow down another thing.
I may introduce something new to the probability stream.
Sustainable energy will happen no matter what.
If there was no Tesla, if Tesla never existed, it would have to happen out of necessity.
It's tautological.
If you don't have sustainable energy, it means you have unsustainable energy.
Eventually you will run out, and the laws of economics will drive civilization towards sustainable energy, inevitably.
The fundamental value of a company like Tesla is the degree to which it accelerates the advent of sustainable energy, faster than it would otherwise occur.
So when I think, like, what is the fundamental good of a company like Tesla, I would say, hopefully, if it accelerated that by a decade, potentially more than a decade, that would be quite a good thing to occur.
That's what I consider to be the fundamental aspirational good of Tesla.
Then there's becoming a multiplanet species and space-faring civilization.
This is not inevitable.
It's very important to appreciate this is not inevitable.
The sustainable energy future I think is largely inevitable, but being a space-faring civilization is definitely not inevitable.
If you look at the progress in space, in 1969 you were able to send somebody to the moon.
1969.
Then we had the Space Shuttle.
The Space Shuttle could only take people to low Earth orbit.
Then the Space Shuttle retired, and the United States could take no one to orbit.
So that's the trend.
The trend is like down to nothing.
People are mistaken when they think that technology just automatically improves.
It does not automatically improve.
It only improves if a lot of people work very hard to make it better, and actually it will, I think, by itself degrade, actually.
You look at great civilizations like Ancient Egypt, and they were able to make the pyramids, and they forgot how to do that.
And then the Romans, they built these incredible aqueducts.
They forgot how to do it.
CA: Elon, it almost seems, listening to you and looking at the different things you've done, that you've got this unique double motivation on everything that I find so interesting.
One is this desire to work for humanity's long-term good.
The other is the desire to do something exciting.
And often it feels like you feel like you need the one to drive the other.
With Tesla, you want to have sustainable energy, so you made these super sexy, exciting cars to do it.
Solar energy, we need to get there, so we need to make these beautiful roofs.
We haven't even spoken about your newest thing, which we don't have time to do, but you want to save humanity from bad AI, and so you're going to create this really cool brain-machine interface to give us all infinite memory and telepathy and so forth.
And on Mars, it feels like what you're saying is, yeah, we need to save humanity and have a backup plan, but also we need to inspire humanity, and this is a way to inspire.
EM: I think the value of beauty and inspiration is very much underrated, no question.
But I want to be clear.
I'm not trying to be anyone's savior.
That is not the -- I'm just trying to think about the future and not be sad.
(Applause) CA: Beautiful statement.
I think everyone here would agree that it is not -- None of this is going to happen inevitably.
The fact that in your mind, you dream this stuff, you dream stuff that no one else would dare dream, or no one else would be capable of dreaming at the level of complexity that you do.
The fact that you do that, Elon Musk, is a really remarkable thing.
Thank you for helping us all to dream a bit bigger.
EM: But you'll tell me if it ever starts getting genuinely insane, right?
(Laughter) CA: Thank you, Elon Musk. That was really, really fantastic.
That was really fantastic.
(Applause)
Getting a college education is a 20-year investment.
When you're growing up poor, you're not accustomed to thinking that far ahead.
Instead, you're thinking about where you're going to get your next meal and how your family is going to pay rent that month.
Besides, my parents and my friends' parents seemed to be doing just fine driving taxis and working as janitors.
It wasn't until I was a teenager when I realized I didn't want to do those things.
By then, I was two-thirds of the way through my education, and it was almost too late to turn things around.
When you grow up poor, you want to be rich.
I was no different.
I'm the second-oldest of seven, and was raised by a single mother on government aid in Queens, New York.
By virtue of growing up low-income, my siblings and I went to some of New York City's most struggling public schools.
I had over 60 absences when I was in seventh grade, because I didn't feel like going to class.
My high school had a 55 percent graduation rate, and even worse, only 20 percent of the kids graduating were college-ready.
When I actually did make it to college, I told my friend Brennan how our teachers would always ask us to raise our hands if we were going to college.
I was taken aback when Brennan said, "Karim, I've never been asked that question before."
It was always, "What college are you going to?"
Just the way that question is phrased made it unacceptable for him not to have gone to college.
Nowadays I get asked a different question.
"How were you able to make it out?"
For years I said I was lucky, but it's not just luck.
When my older brother and I graduated from high school at the very same time and he later dropped out of a two-year college, I wanted to understand why he dropped out and I kept studying.
It wasn't until I got to Cornell as a Presidential Research Scholar that I started to learn about the very real educational consequences of being raised by a single mother on government aid and attending the schools that I did.
That's when my older brother's trajectory began to make complete sense to me.
I also learned that our most admirable education reformers, people like Arne Duncan, the former US Secretary of Education, or Wendy Kopp, the founder of Teach For America, had never attended an inner city public school like I had.
So much of our education reform is driven by a sympathetic approach, where people are saying, "Let's go and help these poor inner city kids, or these poor black and Latino kids," instead of an empathetic approach, where someone like me, who had grown up in this environment, could say, "I know the adversities that you're facing and I want to help you overcome them."
Today when I get questions about how I made it out, I share that one of the biggest reasons is that I wasn't ashamed to ask for help.
In a typical middle class or affluent household, if a kid is struggling, there's a good chance that a parent or a teacher will come to their rescue even if they don't ask for help.
However, if that same kid is growing up poor and doesn't ask for help, there's a good chance that no one will help them.
There are virtually no social safety nets available.
So seven years ago, I started to reform our public education system shaped by my firsthand perspective.
And I started with summer school.
Research tells us that two-thirds of the achievement gap, which is the disparity in educational attainment between rich kids and poor kids or black kids and white kids, could be directly attributed to the summer learning loss.
In low-income neighborhoods, kids forget almost three months of what they learned during the school year over the summer.
They return to school in the fall, and their teachers spend another two months reteaching them old material.
That's five months.
The school year in the United States is only 10 months.
If kids lose five months of learning every single year, that's half of their education.
Half.
If kids were in school over the summer, then they couldn't regress, but traditional summer school is poorly designed.
For kids it feels like punishment, and for teachers it feels like babysitting.
But how can we expect principals to execute an effective summer program when the school year ends the last week of June and then summer school starts just one week later?
There just isn't enough time to find the right people, sort out the logistics, and design an engaging curriculum that excites kids and teachers.
But what if we created a program over the summer that empowered teachers as teaching coaches to develop aspiring educators?
What if we empowered college-educated role models as teaching fellows to help kids realize their college ambitions?
What if empowered high-achieving kids as mentors to tutor their younger peers and inspire them to invest in their education?
What if we empowered all kids as scholars, asked them what colleges they were going to, designed a summer school they want to attend to completely eliminate the summer learning loss and close two-thirds of the achievement gap?
By this summer, my team will have served over 4,000 low-income children, trained over 300 aspiring teachers and created more than 1,000 seasonal jobs across some of New York City's most disadvantaged neighborhoods.
(Applause) And our kids are succeeding.
Two years of independent evaluations tell us that our kids eliminate the summer learning loss and make growth of one month in math and two months in reading.
So instead of returning to school in the fall three months behind, they now go back four months ahead in math and five months ahead in reading.
(Applause) Ten years ago, if you would have told me that I'd graduate in the top 10 percent of my class from an Ivy League institution and have an opportunity to make a dent on our public education system just by tackling two months of the calendar year, I would have said, "Nah. No way."
What's even more exciting is that if we can prevent five months of lost time just by redesigning two months, imagine the possibilities that we can unlock by tackling the rest of the calendar year.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello, friends.
I'm happy to see all of you here today.
This is actually exactly what I say to the people who visit us at the La Crosse Public Library.
And I say it because I mean it.
The children who come into our library are my friends in that I care about their needs and their futures.
I want them to be happy and successful.
I hope that they'll find great books or a movie that delights them.
Or the solution to a tricky problem.
Libraries in general have this wonderful reputation of really caring about our communities.
We put out mission statements and statements of purpose that say that we connect our community to the broader world.
We engage minds, we create lifelong learners.
And these ideals are really important to us as libraries, because we know the power they have to create a better world.
A more connected world, a more engaged and empathetic world.
Books have power, information has power.
And for the powerless in our communities, being able to connect to that is even more important.
In 1995, Betty Hart and Todd Risley published a study that found that working class families and those being served by welfare experience what we now refer to as the "30 million word gap."
Essentially, what they learned is that children in these families are hearing so many fewer words each day that by the time they are three years old, there's this enormous disparity in their learned language.
And that gap in words follows them as they enter school, and it results in later reading, poorer reading skills, a lack of success overall.
Children need to hear words every day and they need to hear not just our day-to-day conversation, they have to hear rare words: those outside the common lexicon we share, of around 10,000.
I'm going to read you a short snippet from a children's book by one of our favorite authors in the children's room, Eric Carle.
Some of you might know his work "The Very Hungry Caterpillar."
But this is from "'Slowly, Slowly, Slowly,' said the Sloth."
"Finally, the sloth replied, 'It is true that I am slow, quiet and boring.
I am lackadaisical, I dawdle and I dillydally.
I am also unflappable, languid, stoic, impassive, sluggish, lethargic, placid, calm, mellow, laid-back and, well, slothful!
I am relaxed and tranquil, and I like to live in peace.
But I am not lazy.' Then the sloth yawned and said, 'That's just how I am.
I like to do things slowly, slowly, slowly.'" So you can see from this very brief example from one book in our library how Eric Carle used 20 different words to get the same idea across to children.
Now we know that a lot of the families visiting us at the library, a lot of our friends, are struggling financially.
We know that some of them are living in poverty, and don't have enough to eat or anywhere safe to live.
We know that our friend James, who comes in after school and is staying at a local shelter, isn't reading at grade level and has probably never read at grade level.
We know we have that 30 million word gap and a corresponding achievement gap by the time kids enter the third grade, both of which directly correlate to income level.
So what's the responsibility of libraries in addressing these gaps?
How can we help our friends be more successful, more educated and some day, better global citizens?
It starts with ensuring free and equitable access to everything libraries offer them.
Books level the playing field by exposing children of every socioeconomic background to words.
At the library, we provide programs that are based on the five tenants of early literacy: playing, singing, talking, reading and writing.
We offer programs for adults on computer classes and job-skills training.
Business start-ups.
We do all of this great work for our community members and at the same time, we counteract it by charging fines and fees of our patrons.
Today in La Crosse, 10,000 of our users are unable to check out library materials because of fines and fees.
If we narrow in on our neighborhoods experiencing the most poverty, those where 82 percent of the student body is considered economically disadvantaged, the number rises to 23 percent of the neighborhood.
And these are local numbers, it's true, but they hold true nationwide.
In libraries across the country that charge fines, the poorest neighborhoods have the most number of people blocked from use.
In fact, the Colorado State Library was so worried about this, they published a white paper and they stated unequivocally that it's the fear of fines that keeps poor families out of libraries.
A colleague of mine took a ride in a Lyft in Atlanta last year, and he started chatting with his driver about libraries, as we do.
And she told him she grew up visiting her local library, she loved it.
But now that she's a parent with three children of her own, there's no way she would allow them to get a library card, because of the strict deadlines libraries impose.
She said, "It would be like another credit card that I can't pay."
Meanwhile, when other libraries have experimented with eliminating fines, like one in San Rafael that took away children's fines, they had a 126-percent increase in child card applications within the first few months.
When people aren't afraid of the fines they might accrue, they line up to access what we have to offer.
So what are we telling people, then?
We have these two disparate ideas.
On the one hand, we're champions of democracy and we claim that we're there so that every citizen can educate themselves.
We're advocates for the power early literacy has to reduce that achievement gap and eliminate the word gap.
We tell people, "We're here to help you."
On the other hand, if you're struggling financially, and you make a mistake, the kind of mistake that anyone in this room could make -- your tote bag that belongs to the library sits by your back door for a couple of weeks longer than it should, you lose a CD, you spill your coffee on a book, suddenly, we're not here for you so much anymore, because if that happens, we're going to make you pay for it.
And if you can't pay for it, you're out of luck.
I have been a librarian for a lot of years.
And in the past few years, I myself have paid over 500 dollars in late fines.
Now, you might wonder why, I mean, I'm there every day, and I certainly know how the system works.
But like all of our friends at the library, I am busy, I lose track of things, my house is sometimes messy, and I have lost a DVD or two under the sofa.
And I have been fortunate enough to be able to pay that 500 dollars over the last several years.
If not happily, I at least had the means to do it.
So is that fair and equitable service if some of us can pay our fines and continue to operate as we always have, and others of us make one mistake and no longer are welcome back?
It's simply not.
Now, why would we continue to operate under a model that hurts our most vulnerable patrons the most?
There are reasons.
There are reasons like responsibility.
There are some libraries that really feel that it's our job to teach people responsibility.
And they haven't figured out that there might be ways to do that that don't equate to dollars.
There's also this idea that we share the resources collectively in a community, and so we have to take turns.
If I keep my "My Little Pony" movie for too long, and somebody else wants to watch it, it's not fair.
And then, there's the money.
Community members often love their libraries, and they don't want us to not be able to sustain the services we offer.
Luckily, we can address all of these things in a variety of ways without scaring away our most vulnerable populations.
Some libraries have gone to a Netflix model.
You might be familiar with this: you check things out, when you're done with them, you return them.
If you don't return them, you can't check more things out, but once you do, it's all forgiven, it's fine.
You can check out again.
Others continue to charge fines, but they want to offer alternatives to their library patrons, and so they do things like food for fines, where you bring in canned goods, or read away your fines, where you can read off your fines.
There's even another library in Wisconsin that offers scratch-off tickets at their counter, so you can scratch off and get 10 or 20 percent off your fines that day.
And there are amnesty days.
One day a year, you bring back your late materials and all is forgiven.
There was a library in San Francisco that did an amnesty day last year, and they welcomed back 5,000 users who had been blocked.
That same day, they received more than 700,000 items that were overdue.
Among them was one book that was 100 years overdue.
So I know that sounds ridiculous, but I know from experience that people will stay away from the library rather than face the authority of the librarian when they have late items.
As Michael might have mentioned, I've been a librarian for 15 years and my mom hasn't been in a library in decades, because when she was young, she lost a book.
So, these are great baby steps.
But they don't go far enough, because they make people jump through hoops.
They have to come on the right days, at the right times.
They might have to have extra food to share.
They want to read away their fines, they need to be literate.
If we want people to use the library again, we should just get rid of fines altogether.
Now, you might think I've forgotten a money piece, where we need to finance libraries, right?
But there's a couple of things to consider when we think about how fines function in library budgets.
The first is that fines have never been a stable source of revenue.
They've always fluctuated, and in fact, they've continued to go down over the last few decades.
When the recession hit, especially, people's ability to pay was hit, as well.
So for a lot of those 10,000 friends that we've got at the library that aren't able to use it, they might never be able to pay us.
When we talk about eliminating their fines, we're not losing money so much as the idea of money.
And thirdly, you might be surprised to know fines on average, nationally, are about one and a half percent of a library's operating budget.
Now that can still be a lot of money.
If you're looking at a large library or a large library system, the dollar amount can be high.
But it's an achievable cut for most libraries to absorb.
And finally, and maybe most importantly, fines cost us money to collect.
When you start to factor in all of the ways that we collect fines, supplies like mailers that we send out to remind people of their fines, services, like collections management services, even telephone and email notifications can cost libraries money.
And staff time is a huge cost for libraries.
So that our frontline staff is standing there, talking to people about their fines, sometimes arguing with people about fines.
When we eliminate all of those pieces, if we got rid of fines, we might actually save money in our libraries.
Or at the very least, we would be able to reallocate our staff time to pursuits that better fit those missions we talked about.
The other thing I want everybody to come away understanding is that fines don't actually work to do what we think they do.
The debate about fines -- whether we should fine, how much we should fine, it isn't new.
We've been talking about it for almost 100 years.
As long as that book was overdue.
Study after study has shown that the reason libraries fine is because of strongly held beliefs about the effectiveness of getting materials back on time backed by no evidence.
Basically, we fine because we've always fined.
So, the best option for your libraries is to put their mission first.
And they will do that if their community members ask it of them.
When you leave here, I hope you'll visit your public library and talk to your librarians, talk to your neighbors and community members who serve on library boards.
Tell them that you know how important literacy is to everyone in your community.
That if our libraries are truly for everyone, that they have to get rid of fines and embrace their entire community.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1956, a documentary by Jacques Cousteau won both the Palme d'Or and an Oscar award.
This film was called, "Le Monde Du Silence," or, "The Silent World."
The premise of the title was that the underwater world was a quiet world.
We now know, 60 years later, that the underwater world is anything but silent.
Although the sounds are inaudible above water depending on where you are and the time of year, the underwater soundscape can be as noisy as any jungle or rainforest.
Invertebrates like snapping shrimp, fish and marine mammals all use sound.
They use sound to study their habitat, to keep in communication with each other, to navigate, to detect predators and prey.
They also use sound by listening to know something about their environment.
Take, for an example, the Arctic.
It's considered a vast, inhospitable place, sometimes described as a desert, because it is so cold and so remote and ice-covered for much of the year.
And despite this, there is no place on Earth that I would rather be than the Arctic, especially as days lengthen and spring comes.
To me, the Arctic really embodies this disconnect between what we see on the surface and what's going on underwater.
You can look out across the ice -- all white and blue and cold -- and see nothing.
But if you could hear underwater, the sounds you would hear would at first amaze and then delight you.
And while your eyes are seeing nothing for kilometers but ice, your ears are telling you that out there are bowhead and beluga whales, walrus and bearded seals.
The ice, too, makes sounds.
It screeches and cracks and pops and groans, as it collides and rubs when temperature or currents or winds change.
And under 100 percent sea ice in the dead of winter, bowhead whales are singing.
And you would never expect that, because we humans, we tend to be very visual animals.
For most of us, but not all, our sense of sight is how we navigate our world.
For marine mammals that live underwater, where chemical cues and light transmit poorly, sound is the sense by which they see.
And sound transmits very well underwater, much better than it does in air, so signals can be heard over great distances.
In the Arctic, this is especially important, because not only do Arctic marine mammals have to hear each other, but they also have to listen for cues in the environment that might indicate heavy ice ahead or open water.
Remember, although they spend most of their lives underwater, they are mammals, and so they have to surface to breathe.
So they might listen for thin ice or no ice, or listen for echoes off nearby ice.
Arctic marine mammals live in a rich and varied underwater soundscape.
In the spring, it can be a cacophony of sound.
(Marine mammal sounds) But when the ice is frozen solid, and there are no big temperature shifts or current changes, the underwater Arctic has some of the lowest ambient noise levels of the world's oceans.
But this is changing.
This is primarily due to a decrease in seasonal sea ice, which is a direct result of human greenhouse gas emissions.
We are, in effect, with climate change, conducting a completely uncontrolled experiment with our planet.
Over the past 30 years, areas of the Arctic have seen decreases in seasonal sea ice from anywhere from six weeks to four months.
This decrease in sea ice is sometimes referred to as an increase in the open water season.
That is the time of year when the Arctic is navigable to vessels.
And not only is the extent of ice changing, but the age and the width of ice is, too.
Now, you may well have heard that a decrease in seasonal sea ice is causing a loss of habitat for animals that rely on sea ice, such as ice seals, or walrus, or polar bears.
Decreasing sea ice is also causing increased erosion along coastal villages, and changing prey availability for marine birds and mammals.
Climate change and decreases in sea ice are also altering the underwater soundscape of the Arctic.
What do I mean by soundscape?
Those of us who eavesdrop on the oceans for a living use instruments called hydrophones, which are underwater microphones, and we record ambient noise -- the noise all around us.
And the soundscape describes the different contributors to this noise field.
What we are hearing on our hydrophones are the very real sounds of climate change.
We are hearing these changes from three fronts: from the air, from the water and from land.
First: air.
Wind on water creates waves.
These waves make bubbles; the bubbles break, and when they do, they make noise.
And this noise is like a hiss or a static in the background.
In the Arctic, when it's ice-covered, most of the noise from wind doesn't make it into the water column, because the ice acts as a buffer between the atmosphere and the water.
This is one of the reasons that the Arctic can have very low ambient noise levels.
But with decreases in seasonal sea ice, not only is the Arctic now open to this wave noise, but the number of storms and the intensity of storms in the Arctic has been increasing.
All of this is raising noise levels in a previously quiet ocean.
Second: water.
With less seasonal sea ice, subarctic species are moving north, and taking advantage of the new habitat that is created by more open water.
Now, Arctic whales, like this bowhead, they have no dorsal fin, because they have evolved to live and swim in ice-covered waters, and having something sticking off of your back is not very conducive to migrating through ice, and may, in fact, be excluding animals from the ice.
But now, everywhere we've listened, we're hearing the sounds of fin whales and humpback whales and killer whales, further and further north, and later and later in the season.
We are hearing, in essence, an invasion of the Arctic by subarctic species.
And we don't know what this means.
Will there be competition for food between Arctic and subarctic animals?
Might these subarctic species introduce diseases or parasites into the Arctic?
And what are the new sounds that they are producing doing to the soundscape underwater?
And third: land.
And by land ...
I mean people.
More open water means increased human use of the Arctic.
Just this past summer, a massive cruise ship made its way through the Northwest Passage -- the once-mythical route between Europe and the Pacific.
Decreases in sea ice have allowed humans to occupy the Arctic more often.
It has allowed increases in oil and gas exploration and extraction, the potential for commercial shipping, as well as increased tourism.
And we now know that ship noise increases levels of stress hormones in whales and can disrupt feeding behavior.
Air guns, which produce loud, low-frequency "whoomps" every 10 to 20 seconds, changed the swimming and vocal behavior of whales.
And all of these sound sources are decreasing the acoustic space over which Arctic marine mammals can communicate.
Now, Arctic marine mammals are used to very high levels of noise at certain times of the year.
But this is primarily from other animals or from sea ice, and these are the sounds with which they've evolved, and these are sounds that are vital to their very survival.
These new sounds are loud and they're alien.
They might impact the environment in ways that we think we understand, but also in ways that we don't.
Remember, sound is the most important sense for these animals.
And not only is the physical habitat of the Arctic changing rapidly, but the acoustic habitat is, too.
It's as if we've plucked these animals up from the quiet countryside and dropped them into a big city in the middle of rush hour.
And they can't escape it.
So what can we do now?
We can't decrease wind speeds or keep subarctic animals from migrating north, but we can work on local solutions to reducing human-caused underwater noise.
One of these solutions is to slow down ships that traverse the Arctic, because a slower ship is a quieter ship.
We can restrict access in seasons and regions that are important for mating or feeding or migrating.
We can get smarter about quieting ships and find better ways to explore the ocean bottom.
And the good news is, there are people working on this right now.
But ultimately, we humans have to do the hard work of reversing or at the very least decelerating human-caused atmospheric changes.
So, let's return to this idea of a silent world underwater.
It's entirely possible that many of the whales swimming in the Arctic today, especially long-lived species like the bowhead whale that the Inuits say can live two human lives -- it's possible that these whales were alive in 1956, when Jacques Cousteau made his film.
And in retrospect, considering all the noise we are creating in the oceans today, perhaps it really was "The Silent World."
Thank you.
(Applause)
A few days after my husband Paul was diagnosed with stage IV lung cancer, we were lying in our bed at home, and Paul said, "It's going to be OK."
And I remember answering back, "Yes.
Paul and I had met as first-year medical students at Yale.
He was smart and kind and super funny.
He used to keep a gorilla suit in the trunk of his car, and he'd say, "It's for emergencies only."
(Laughter) I fell in love with Paul as I watched the care he took with his patients.
He stayed late talking with them, seeking to understand the experience of illness and not just its technicalities.
He later told me he fell in love with me when he saw me cry over an EKG of a heart that had ceased beating.
We didn't know it yet, but even in the heady days of young love, we were learning how to approach suffering together.
We got married and became doctors.
I was working as an internist and Paul was finishing his training as a neurosurgeon when he started to lose weight.
He developed excruciating back pain and a cough that wouldn't go away.
And when he was admitted to the hospital, a CT scan revealed tumors in Paul's lungs and in his bones.
We had both cared for patients with devastating diagnoses; now it was our turn.
We lived with Paul's illness for 22 months.
He wrote a memoir about facing mortality.
I gave birth to our daughter Cady, and we loved her and each other.
We learned directly how to struggle through really tough medical decisions.
The day we took Paul into the hospital for the last time was the most difficult day of my life.
When he turned to me at the end and said, "I'm ready," I knew that wasn't just a brave decision.
It was the right one.
Paul didn't want a ventilator and CPR.
In that moment, the most important thing to Paul was to hold our baby daughter.
Nine hours later, Paul died.
I've always thought of myself as a caregiver -- most physicians do -- and taking care of Paul deepened what that meant.
Watching him reshape his identity during his illness, learning to witness and accept his pain, talking together through his choices -- those experiences taught me that resilience does not mean bouncing back to where you were before, or pretending that the hard stuff isn't hard.
It is so hard.
It's painful, messy stuff.
But it's the stuff.
And I learned that when we approach it together, we get to decide what success looks like.
One of the first things Paul said to me after his diagnosis was, "I want you to get remarried."
And I was like, whoa, I guess we get to say anything out loud.
(Laughter) It was so shocking and heartbreaking ...
and generous, and really comforting because it was so starkly honest, and that honesty turned out to be exactly what we needed.
Early in Paul's illness, we agreed we would just keep saying things out loud.
Tasks like making a will, or completing our advance directives -- tasks that I had always avoided -- were not as daunting as they once seemed.
I realized that completing an advance directive is an act of love -- like a wedding vow.
A pact to take care of someone, codifying the promise that til death do us part, I will be there.
If needed, I will speak for you.
I will honor your wishes.
That paperwork became a tangible part of our love story.
As physicians, Paul and I were in a good position to understand and even accept his diagnosis.
We weren't angry about it, luckily, because we'd seen so many patients in devastating situations, and we knew that death is a part of life.
But it's one thing to know that; it was a very different experience to actually live with the sadness and uncertainty of a serious illness.
Huge strides are being made against lung cancer, but we knew that Paul likely had months to a few years left to live.
During that time, Paul wrote about his transition from doctor to patient.
He talked about feeling like he was suddenly at a crossroads, and how he would have thought he'd be able to see the path, that because he treated so many patients, maybe he could follow in their footsteps.
But he was totally disoriented.
Rather than a path, Paul wrote, "I saw instead only a harsh, vacant, gleaming white desert.
As if a sandstorm had erased all familiarity.
I had to face my mortality and try to understand what made my life worth living, and I needed my oncologist's help to do so."
The clinicians taking care of Paul gave me an even deeper appreciation for my colleagues in health care.
We have a tough job.
We're responsible for helping patients have clarity around their prognoses and their treatment options, and that's never easy, but it's especially tough when you're dealing with potentially terminal illnesses like cancer.
Some people don't want to know how long they have left, others do.
Either way, we never have those answers.
Sometimes we substitute hope by emphasizing the best-case scenario.
In a survey of physicians, 55 percent said they painted a rosier picture than their honest opinion when describing a patient's prognosis.
It's an instinct born out of kindness.
But researchers have found that when people better understand the possible outcomes of an illness, they have less anxiety, greater ability to plan and less trauma for their families.
Families can struggle with those conversations, but for us, we also found that information immensely helpful with big decisions.
Most notably, whether to have a baby.
Months to a few years meant Paul was not likely to see her grow up.
But he had a good chance of being there for her birth and for the beginning of her life.
I remember asking Paul if he thought having to say goodbye to a child would make dying even more painful.
And his answer astounded me.
He said, "Wouldn't it be great if it did?"
And we did it.
Not in order to spite cancer, but because we were learning that living fully means accepting suffering.
Paul's oncologist tailored his chemo so he could continue working as a neurosurgeon, which initially we thought was totally impossible.
When the cancer advanced and Paul shifted from surgery to writing, his palliative care doctor prescribed a stimulant medication so he could be more focused.
They asked Paul about his priorities and his worries.
They asked him what trade-offs he was willing to make.
Those conversations are the best way to ensure that your health care matches your values.
Paul joked that it's not like that "birds and bees" talk you have with your parents, where you all get it over with as quickly as possible, and then pretend it never happened.
You revisit the conversation as things change.
You keep saying things out loud.
I'm forever grateful because Paul's clinicians felt that their job wasn't to try to give us answers they didn't have, or only to try to fix things for us, but to counsel Paul through painful choices ...
when his body was failing but his will to live wasn't.
Later, after Paul died, I received a dozen bouquets of flowers, but I sent just one ...
to Paul's oncologist, because she supported his goals and she helped him weigh his choices.
She knew that living means more than just staying alive.
A few weeks ago, a patient came into my clinic.
A woman dealing with a serious chronic disease.
And while we were talking about her life and her health care, she said, "I love my palliative care team.
They taught me that it's OK to say 'no'."
Yeah, I thought, of course it is.
But many patients don't feel that.
Compassion and Choices did a study where they asked people about their health care preferences.
And a lot of people started their answers with the words "Well, if I had a choice ..."
If I had a choice.
And when I read that "if," I understood better why one in four people receives excessive or unwanted medical treatment, or watches a family member receive excessive or unwanted medical treatment.
It's not because doctors don't get it.
We do.
We understand the real psychological consequences on patients and their families.
The things is, we deal with them, too.
Half of critical care nurses and a quarter of ICU doctors have considered quitting their jobs because of distress over feeling that for some of their patients, they've provided care that didn't fit with the person's values.
But doctors can't make sure your wishes are respected until they know what they are.
Would you want to be on life support if it offered any chance of longer life?
Are you most worried about the quality of that time, rather than quantity?
Both of those choices are thoughtful and brave, but for all of us, it's our choice.
That's true at the end of life and for medical care throughout our lives.
If you're pregnant, do you want genetic screening?
Is a knee replacement right or not?
Do you want to do dialysis in a clinic or at home?
The answer is: it depends.
What medical care will help you live the way you want to?
I hope you remember that question the next time you face a decision in your health care.
Remember that you always have a choice, and it is OK to say no to a treatment that's not right for you.
There's a poem by W.S. Merwin -- it's just two sentences long -- that captures how I feel now.
"Your absence has gone through me like thread through a needle.
Everything I do is stitched with its color."
For me that poem evokes my love for Paul, and a new fortitude that came from loving and losing him.
When Paul said, "It's going to be OK," that didn't mean that we could cure his illness.
Instead, we learned to accept both joy and sadness at the same time; to uncover beauty and purpose both despite and because we are all born and we all die.
And for all the sadness and sleepless nights, it turns out there is joy.
I leave flowers on Paul's grave and watch our two-year-old run around on the grass.
I build bonfires on the beach and watch the sunset with our friends.
Exercise and mindfulness meditation have helped a lot.
And someday, I hope I do get remarried.
Most importantly, I get to watch our daughter grow.
I've thought a lot about what I'm going to say to her when she's older.
"Cady, engaging in the full range of experience -- living and dying, love and loss -- is what we get to do.
Being human doesn't happen despite suffering.
It happens within it.
When we approach suffering together, when we choose not to hide from it, our lives don't diminish, they expand."
I've learned that cancer isn't always a battle.
Or if it is, maybe it's a fight for something different than we thought.
Our job isn't to fight fate, but to help each other through.
Not as soldiers but as shepherds.
That's how we make it OK, even when it's not.
By saying it out loud, by helping each other through ...
and a gorilla suit never hurts, either.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: So Robert spent the last few years think about how weird human behavior is, and how inadequate most of our language trying to explain it is.
And it's very exciting to hear him explain some of the thinking behind it in public for the first time.
Over to you now, Robert Sapolsky.
(Applause) Robert Sapolsky: Thank you.
The fantasy always runs something like this.
I've overpowered his elite guard, burst into his secret bunker with my machine gun ready.
He lunges for his Luger.
I knock it out of his hand.
He lunges for his cyanide pill.
I knock that out of his hand.
He snarls, comes at me with otherworldly strength.
We grapple, we fight, I manage to pin him down and put on handcuffs.
"Adolf Hitler," I say, "I arrest you for crimes against humanity."
Here's where the Medal of Honor version of the fantasy ends and the imagery darkens.
What would I do if I had Hitler?
It's not hard to imagine once I allow myself.
Sever his spine at the neck.
Take out his eyes with a blunt instrument.
Puncture his eardrums. Cut out his tongue.
Leave him alive on a respirator, tube-fed, not able to speak or move or see or hear, just to feel, and then inject him with something cancerous that's going to fester and pustulate until every cell in his body is screaming in agony, until every second feels like an eternity in hell.
That's what I would do to Hitler.
I've had this fantasy since I was a kid, still do sometimes, and when I do, my heart speeds up -- all these plans for the most evil, wicked soul in history.
But there's a problem, which is I don't actually believe in souls or evil, and I think wicked belongs in a musical.
But there's some people I would like to see killed, but I'm against the death penalty.
But I like schlocky violent movies, but I'm for strict gun control.
But then there was a time I was at a laser tag place, and I had such a good time hiding in a corner shooting at people.
In other words, I'm your basic confused human when it comes to violence.
Now, as a species, we obviously have problems with violence.
We use shower heads to deliver poison gas, letters with anthrax, airplanes as weapons, mass rape as a military strategy.
We're a miserably violent species.
But there's a complication, which is we don't hate violence, we hate the wrong kind.
And when it's the right kind, we cheer it on, we hand out medals, we vote for, we mate with our champions of it.
When it's the right kind of violence, we love it.
And there's another complication, which is, in addition to us being this miserably violent species, we're also this extraordinarily altruistic, compassionate one.
So how do you make sense of the biology of our best behaviors, our worst ones and all of those ambiguously in between?
Now, for starters, what's totally boring is understanding the motoric aspects of the behavior.
Your brain tells your spine, tells your muscles to do something or other, and hooray, you've behaved.
What's hard is understanding the meaning of the behavior, because in some settings, pulling a trigger is an appalling act; in others, it's heroically self-sacrificial.
In some settings, putting your hand one someone else's is deeply compassionate.
In others, it's a deep betrayal.
The challenge is to understand the biology of the context of our behaviors, and that's real tough.
One thing that's clear, though, is you're not going to get anywhere if you think there's going to be the brain region or the hormone or the gene or the childhood experience or the evolutionary mechanism that explains everything.
Instead, every bit of behavior has multiple levels of causality.
Let's look at an example.
You have a gun.
There's a crisis going on: rioting, violence, people running around.
A stranger is running at you in an agitated state -- you can't quite tell if the expression is frightened, threatening, angry -- holding something that kind of looks like a handgun.
You're not sure.
The stranger comes running at you and you pull the trigger.
And it turns out that thing in this person's hand was a cell phone.
So we asked this biological question: what was going on that caused this behavior?
What caused this behavior?
And this is a multitude of questions.
We start.
What was going on in your brain one second before you pulled that trigger?
And this brings us into the realm of a brain region called the amygdala.
The amygdala, which is central to violence, central to fear, initiates volleys of cascades that produce pulling of a trigger.
What was the level of activity in your amygdala one second before?
But to understand that, we have to step back a little bit.
What was going on in the environment seconds to minutes before that impacted the amygdala?
Now, obviously, the sights, the sounds of the rioting, that was pertinent.
But in addition, you're more likely to mistake a cell phone for a handgun if that stranger was male and large and of a different race.
Furthermore, if you're in pain, if you're hungry, if you're exhausted, your frontal cortex is not going to work as well, part of the brain whose job it is to get to the amygdala in time saying, "Are you really sure that's a gun there?"
But we need to step further back.
Now we have to look at hours to days before, and with this, we have entered the realm of hormones.
For example, testosterone, where regardless of your sex, if you have elevated testosterone levels in your blood, you're more likely to think a face with a neutral expression is instead looking threatening.
Elevated testosterone levels, elevated levels of stress hormones, and your amygdala is going to be more active and your frontal cortex will be more sluggish.
Pushing back further, weeks to months before, where's the relevance there?
This is the realm of neural plasticity, the fact that your brain can change in response to experience, and if your previous months have been filled with stress and trauma, your amygdala will have enlarged.
The neurons will have become more excitable, your frontal cortex would have atrophied, all relevant to what happens in that one second.
But we push back even more, back years, back, for example, to your adolescence.
Now, the central fact of the adolescent brain is all of it is going full blast except the frontal cortex, which is still half-baked.
It doesn't fully mature until you're around 25.
And thus, adolescence and early adulthood are the years where environment and experience sculpt your frontal cortex into the version you're going to have as an adult in that critical moment.
But pushing back even further, even further back to childhood and fetal life and all the different versions that that could come in.
Now, obviously, that's the time that your brain is being constructed, and that's important, but in addition, experience during those times produce what are called epigenetic changes, permanent, in some cases, permanently activating certain genes, turning off others.
And as an example of this, if as a fetus you were exposed to a lot of stress hormones through your mother, epigenetics is going to produce your amygdala in adulthood as a more excitable form, and you're going to have elevated stress hormone levels.
But pushing even further back, back to when you were just a fetus, back to when all you were was a collection of genes.
Now, genes are really important to all of this, but critically, genes don't determine anything, because genes work differently in different environments.
Key example here: there's a variant of a gene called MAO-A, and if you have that variant, you are far more likely to commit antisocial violence if, and only if, you were abused as a child.
Genes and environment interact, and what's happening in that one second before you pull that trigger reflects your lifetime of those gene-environment interactions.
Now, remarkably enough, we've got to push even further back now, back centuries.
What were your ancestors up to.
And if, for example, they were nomadic pastoralists, they were pastoralists, people living in deserts or grasslands with their herds of camels, cows, goats, odds are they would have invented what's called a culture of honor filled with warrior classes, retributive violence, clan vendettas, and amazingly, centuries later, that would still be influencing the values with which you were raised.
But we've got to push even further back, back millions of years, because if we're talking about genes, implicitly we're now talking about the evolution of genes.
And what you see is, for example, patterns across different primate species.
Some of them have evolved for extremely low levels of aggression, others have evolved in the opposite direction, and floating there in between by every measure are humans, once again this confused, barely defined species that has all these potentials to go one way or the other.
So what has this gotten us to?
Basically, what we're seeing here is, if you want to understand a behavior, whether it's an appalling one, a wondrous one, or confusedly in between, if you want to understand that, you've got take into account what happened a second before to a million years before, everything in between.
So what can we conclude at this point?
Officially, it's complicated.
Wow, that's really helpful.
It's complicated, and you'd better be real careful, real cautious before you conclude you know what causes a behavior, especially if it's a behavior you're judging harshly.
Now, to me, the single most important point about all of this is one having to do with change.
Every bit of biology I have mentioned here can change in different circumstances.
For example, ecosystems change.
Thousands of years ago, the Sahara was a lush grassland.
Cultures change.
In the 17th century, the most terrifying people in Europe were the Swedes, rampaging all over the place.
This is what the Swedish military does now.
They haven't had a war in 200 years.
Most importantly, brains change.
Neurons grow new processes.
Circuits disconnect.
Everything in the brain changes, and out of this come extraordinary examples of human change.
First one: this is a man named John Newton, a British theologian who played a central role in the abolition of slavery from the British Empire in the early 1800s.
And amazingly, this man spent decades as a younger man as the captain of a slave ship, and then as an investor in slavery, growing rich from this.
And then something changed.
Something changed in him, something that Newton himself celebrated in the thing that he's most famous for, a hymn that he wrote: "Amazing Grace."
This is a man named Zenji Abe on the morning of December 6, 1941, about to lead a squadron of Japanese bombers to attack Pearl Harbor.
And this is the same man 50 years later to the day hugging a man who survived the attack on the ground.
And as an old man, Zenji Abe came to a collection of Pearl Harbor survivors at a ceremony there and in halting English apologized for what he had done as a young man.
Now, it doesn't always require decades.
Sometimes, extraordinary change could happen in just hours.
Consider the World War I Christmas truce of 1914.
The powers that be had negotiated a brief truce so that soldiers could go out, collect bodies from no-man's-land in between the trench lines.
And soon British and German soldiers were doing that, and then helping each other carry bodies, and then helping each other dig graves in the frozen ground, and then praying together, and then having Christmas together and exchanging gifts, and by the next day, they were playing soccer together and exchanging addresses so they could meet after the war.
That truce kept going until the officers had to arrive and said, "We will shoot you unless you go back to trying to kill each other."
And all it took here was hours for these men to develop a completely new category of "us," all of us in the trenches here on both sides, dying for no damn reason, and who is a "them," those faceless powers behind the lines who were using them as pawns.
And sometimes, change can occur in seconds.
Probably the most horrifying event in the Vietnam War was the My Lai Massacre.
A brigade of American soldiers went into an undefended village full of civilians and killed between 350 and 500 of them, mass-raped women and children, mutilated bodies.
It was appalling.
It was appalling because it occurred, because the government denied it, because the US government eventually did nothing more than a slap on the wrist, and appalling because it almost certainly was not a singular event.
This man, Hugh Thompson, this is the man who stopped the My Lai Massacre.
He was piloting a helicopter gunship, landed there, got out and saw American soldiers shooting babies, shooting old women, figured out what was going on, and he then took his helicopter and did something that undid his lifetime of conditioning as to who is an "us" and who is a "them."
He landed his helicopter in between some surviving villagers and American soldiers and he trained his machine guns on his fellow Americans, and said, "If you don't stop the killing, I will mow you down."
Now, these people are no more special than any of us.
Same neurons, same neurochemicals, same biology.
What we're left with here is this inevitable cliche: "Those who don't study history are destined to repeat it."
What we have here is the opposite of it.
Those who don't study the history of extraordinary human change, those who don't study the biology of what can transform us from our worst to our best behaviors, those who don't do this are destined not to be able to repeat these incandescent, magnificent moments.
So thank you.
(Applause) CA: Talks that really give you a new mental model about something, those are some of my favorite TED Talks, and we just got one.
Robert, thank you so much for that. Good luck with the book.
That was amazing, and we're going to try and get you to come here in person one year.
Thank you so much.
RS: Thank you. Thank you all.
If you were to take any everyday object, say a coffee cup, and break it in half, then in half again, and keep carrying on, where would you end up?
Could you keep on going forever?
Or would you find a set of indivisible building blocks out of which everything is made?
Physicists have found the latter- that matter is made of fundamental particles, the smallest things in the universe.
Particles interact with each other according to a theory called the Standard Model.
The Standard Model is a remarkably elegant encapsulation of the strange quantum world of indivisible, infinitely small particles.
It also covers the forces that govern how particles move, interact, and bind together to give shape to the world around us.
So how does it work?
Zooming in on the fragments of the cup, we see molecules, made of atoms bound up together.
A molecule is the smallest unit of any chemical compound.
An atom is the smallest unit of any element in the periodic table.
But the atom is not the smallest unit of matter.
Experiments found that each atom has a tiny, dense nucleus, surrounded by a cloud of even tinier electrons.
The electron is, as far as we know, one of the fundamental, indivisible building blocks of the universe.
It was the first Standard Model particle ever discovered.
Electrons are bound to an atoms nucleus by electromagnetism.
They attract each other by exchanging particles called photons, which are quanta of light that carry the electromagnetic force, one of the fundamental forces of the Standard Model.
The nucleus has more secrets to reveal, as it contains protons and neutrons.
Though once thought to be fundamental particles on their own, in 1968 physicists found that protons and neutrons are actually made of quarks, which are indivisible.
A proton contains two up quarks and one down quark.
A neutron contains two down quarks and one up.
The nucleus is held together by the strong force, another fundamental force of the Standard Model.
Just as photons carry the electromagnetic force, particles called gluons carry the strong force.
Electrons, together with up and down quarks, seem to be all we need to build atoms and therefore describe normal matter.
However, high energy experiments reveal that there are actually six quarks down &amp; up, strange &amp; charm, and bottom &amp; top - and they come in a wide range of masses.
The same was found for electrons, which have heavier siblings called the muon and the tau.
Why are there three (and only three) different versions of each of these particles?
This remains a mystery.
These heavy particles are only produced, for very brief moments, in high energy collisions, and are not seen in everyday life.
This is because they decay very quickly into the lighter particles.
Such decays involve the exchange of force-carrying particles, called the W and Z, which  unlike the photon  have mass.
They carry the weak force, the final force of the Standard Model.
This same force allows protons and neutrons to transform into each other, a vital part of the fusion interactions that drive the Sun.
To observe the W and Z directly, we needed the high energy collisions provided by particle accelerators.
Theres another kind of Standard Model particle, called neutrinos.
These only interact with other particles through the weak force.
Trillions of neutrinos, many generated by the sun, fly through us every second.
Measurements of weak interactions found that there are different kinds of neutrinos associated with the electron, muon, and tau.
All these particles also have antimatter versions, which have the opposite charge but are otherwise identical.
Matter and antimatter particles are produced in pairs in high-energy collisions, and they annihilate each other when they meet.
The final particle of the Standard Model is the Higgs boson  a quantum ripple in the background energy field of the universe.
Interacting with this field is how all the fundamental matter particles acquire mass, according to the Standard Model.
The ATLAS Experiment on the Large Hadron Collider is studying the Standard Model in-depth.
By taking precise measurements of the particles and forces that make up the universe, ATLAS physicists can look for answers to mysteries not explained by the Standard Model.
For example, how does gravity fit in?
What is the real relationship between force carriers and matter particles?
How can we describe Dark Matter, which makes up most of the mass in the universe but remains unaccounted for?
While the Standard Model provides a beautiful explanation for the world around us, there is still a universes worth of mysteries left to explore.
Last year, I told you the story, in seven minutes, of Project Orion, which was this very implausible technology that technically could have worked, but it had this one-year political window where it could have happened.
So it didn't happen. It was a dream that did not happen.
This year I'm going to tell you the story of the birth of digital computing.
This was a perfect introduction.
And it's a story that did work. It did happen, and the machines are all around us.
And it was a technology that was inevitable.
If the people I'm going to tell you the story about, if they hadn't done it, somebody else would have.
So, it was sort of the right idea at the right time.
This is Barricelli's universe. This is the universe we live in now.
It's the universe in which these machines are now doing all these things, including changing biology.
I'm starting the story with the first atomic bomb at Trinity, which was the Manhattan Project. It was a little bit like TED: it brought a whole lot of very smart people together.
And three of the smartest people were Stan Ulam, Richard Feynman and John von Neumann.
And it was Von Neumann who said, after the bomb, he was working on something much more important than bombs: he's thinking about computers.
So, he wasn't only thinking about them; he built one. This is the machine he built.
(Laughter) He built this machine, and we had a beautiful demonstration of how this thing really works, with these little bits. And it's an idea that goes way back.
The first person to really explain that was Thomas Hobbes, who, in 1651, explained how arithmetic and logic are the same thing, and if you want to do artificial thinking and artificial logic, you can do it all with arithmetic.
He said you needed addition and subtraction.
Leibniz, who came a little bit later -- this is 1679 -- showed that you didn't even need subtraction.
You could do the whole thing with addition.
Here, we have all the binary arithmetic and logic that drove the computer revolution.
And Leibniz was the first person to really talk about building such a machine.
He talked about doing it with marbles, having gates and what we now call shift registers, where you shift the gates, drop the marbles down the tracks.
And that's what all these machines are doing, except, instead of doing it with marbles, they're doing it with electrons.
And then we jump to Von Neumann, 1945, when he sort of reinvents the whole same thing.
And 1945, after the war, the electronics existed to actually try and build such a machine.
So June 1945 -- actually, the bomb hasn't even been dropped yet -- and Von Neumann is putting together all the theory to actually build this thing, which also goes back to Turing, who, before that, gave the idea that you could do all this with a very brainless, little, finite state machine, just reading a tape in and reading a tape out.
The other sort of genesis of what Von Neumann did was the difficulty of how you would predict the weather.
Lewis Richardson saw how you could do this with a cellular array of people, giving them each a little chunk, and putting it together.
Here, we have an electrical model illustrating a mind having a will, but capable of only two ideas.
(Laughter) And that's really the simplest computer.
It's basically why you need the qubit, because it only has two ideas.
And you put lots of those together, you get the essentials of the modern computer: the arithmetic unit, the central control, the memory, the recording medium, the input and the output.
But, there's one catch. This is the fatal -- you know, we saw it in starting these programs up.
The instructions which govern this operation must be given in absolutely exhaustive detail.
So, the programming has to be perfect, or it won't work.
If you look at the origins of this, the classic history sort of takes it all back to the ENIAC here.
But actually, the machine I'm going to tell you about, the Institute for Advanced Study machine, which is way up there, really should be down there. So, I'm trying to revise history, and give some of these guys more credit than they've had.
Such a computer would open up universes, which are, at the present, outside the range of any instruments.
So it opens up a whole new world, and these people saw it.
The guy who was supposed to build this machine was the guy in the middle, Vladimir Zworykin, from RCA.
RCA, in probably one of the lousiest business decisions of all time, decided not to go into computers.
But the first meetings, November 1945, were at RCA's offices.
RCA started this whole thing off, and said, you know, televisions are the future, not computers.
The essentials were all there -- all the things that make these machines run.
Von Neumann, and a logician, and a mathematician from the army put this together. Then, they needed a place to build it.
When RCA said no, that's when they decided to build it in Princeton, where Freeman works at the Institute.
That's where I grew up as a kid.
That's me, that's my sister Esther, who's talked to you before, so we both go back to the birth of this thing.
That's Freeman, a long time ago, and that was me.
And this is Von Neumann and Morgenstern, who wrote the "Theory of Games."
All these forces came together there, in Princeton.
Oppenheimer, who had built the bomb.
The machine was actually used mainly for doing bomb calculations.
And Julian Bigelow, who took Zworkykin's place as the engineer, to actually figure out, using electronics, how you would build this thing. The whole gang of people who came to work on this, and women in front, who actually did most of the coding, were the first programmers.
These were the prototype geeks, the nerds.
They didn't fit in at the Institute.
This is a letter from the director, concerned about -- "especially unfair on the matter of sugar."
(Laughter) You can read the text.
(Laughter) This is hackers getting in trouble for the first time.
(Laughter).
These were not theoretical physicists.
They were real soldering-gun type guys, and they actually built this thing.
And we take it for granted now, that each of these machines has billions of transistors, doing billions of cycles per second without failing.
They were using vacuum tubes, very narrow, sloppy techniques to get actually binary behavior out of these radio vacuum tubes.
They actually used 6J6, the common radio tube, because they found they were more reliable than the more expensive tubes.
And what they did at the Institute was publish every step of the way.
Reports were issued, so that this machine was cloned at 15 other places around the world.
And it really was. It was the original microprocessor.
All the computers now are copies of that machine.
The memory was in cathode ray tubes -- a whole bunch of spots on the face of the tube -- very, very sensitive to electromagnetic disturbances.
So, there's 40 of these tubes, like a V-40 engine running the memory.
(Laughter) The input and the output was by teletype tape at first.
This is a wire drive, using bicycle wheels.
This is the archetype of the hard disk that's in your machine now.
Then they switched to a magnetic drum.
This is modifying IBM equipment, which is the origins of the whole data-processing industry, later at IBM.
And this is the beginning of computer graphics.
The "Graph'g-Beam Turn On." This next slide, that's the -- as far as I know -- the first digital bitmap display, 1954.
So, Von Neumann was already off in a theoretical cloud, doing abstract sorts of studies of how you could build reliable machines out of unreliable components.
Those guys drinking all the tea with sugar in it were writing in their logbooks, trying to get this thing to work, with all these 2,600 vacuum tubes that failed half the time.
And that's what I've been doing, this last six months, is going through the logs.
"Running time: two minutes. Input, output: 90 minutes."
This includes a large amount of human error.
So they are always trying to figure out, what's machine error? What's human error?
What's code, what's hardware?
That's an engineer gazing at tube number 36, trying to figure out why the memory's not in focus.
He had to focus the memory -- seems OK.
So, he had to focus each tube just to get the memory up and running, let alone having, you know, software problems.
"No use, went home." (Laughter) "Impossible to follow the damn thing, where's a directory?"
So, already, they're complaining about the manuals: "before closing down in disgust ... " "The General Arithmetic: Operating Logs."
Burning lots of midnight oil.
"MANIAC," which became the acronym for the machine, Mathematical and Numerical Integrator and Calculator, "lost its memory."
"MANIAC regained its memory, when the power went off." "Machine or human?"
"Aha!" So, they figured out it's a code problem.
"Found trouble in code, I hope."
"Code error, machine not guilty."
"Damn it, I can be just as stubborn as this thing."
(Laughter) "And the dawn came." So they ran all night.
Twenty-four hours a day, this thing was running, mainly running bomb calculations.
"Everything up to this point is wasted time." "What's the use? Good night."
"Master control off. The hell with it. Way off." (Laughter) "Something's wrong with the air conditioner -- smell of burning V-belts in the air."
"A short -- do not turn the machine on."
"IBM machine putting a tar-like substance on the cards. The tar is from the roof."
So they really were working under tough conditions.
(Laughter) Here, "A mouse has climbed into the blower behind the regulator rack, set blower to vibrating. Result: no more mouse."
(Laughter) "Here lies mouse. Born: ?. Died: 4:50 a.m., May 1953."
(Laughter) There's an inside joke someone has penciled in: "Here lies Marston Mouse."
If you're a mathematician, you get that, because Marston was a mathematician who objected to the computer being there.
"Picked a lightning bug off the drum." "Running at two kilocycles."
That's two thousand cycles per second -- "yes, I'm chicken" -- so two kilocycles was slow speed.
The high speed was 16 kilocycles.
I don't know if you remember a Mac that was 16 Megahertz, that's slow speed.
"I have now duplicated both results.
How will I know which is right, assuming one result is correct?
This now is the third different output.
I know when I'm licked."
(Laughter) "We've duplicated errors before."
"Machine run, fine. Code isn't."
"Only happens when the machine is running."
And sometimes things are okay.
"Machine a thing of beauty, and a joy forever." "Perfect running."
"Parting thought: when there's bigger and better errors, we'll have them."
So, nobody was supposed to know they were actually designing bombs.
They're designing hydrogen bombs. But someone in the logbook, late one night, finally drew a bomb.
So, that was the result. It was Mike, the first thermonuclear bomb, in 1952.
That was designed on that machine, in the woods behind the Institute.
So Von Neumann invited a whole gang of weirdos from all over the world to work on all these problems.
Barricelli, he came to do what we now call, really, artificial life, trying to see if, in this artificial universe -- he was a viral-geneticist, way, way, way ahead of his time.
He's still ahead of some of the stuff that's being done now.
Trying to start an artificial genetic system running in the computer.
Began -- his universe started March 3, '53.
So it's almost exactly -- it's 50 years ago next Tuesday, I guess.
And he saw everything in terms of -- he could read the binary code straight off the machine.
He had a wonderful rapport.
Other people couldn't get the machine running. It always worked for him.
Even errors were duplicated.
(Laughter) "Dr. Barricelli claims machine is wrong, code is right."
So he designed this universe, and ran it.
When the bomb people went home, he was allowed in there.
He would run that thing all night long, running these things, if anybody remembers Stephen Wolfram, who reinvented this stuff.
And he published it. It wasn't locked up and disappeared.
It was published in the literature.
"If it's that easy to create living organisms, why not create a few yourself?"
So, he decided to give it a try, to start this artificial biology going in the machines.
And he found all these, sort of -- it was like a naturalist coming in and looking at this tiny, 5,000-byte universe, and seeing all these things happening that we see in the outside world, in biology.
This is some of the generations of his universe.
But they're just going to stay numbers; they're not going to become organisms.
They have to have something.
You have a genotype and you have to have a phenotype.
They have to go out and do something. And he started doing that, started giving these little numerical organisms things they could play with -- playing chess with other machines and so on.
And they did start to evolve.
And he went around the country after that.
Every time there was a new, fast machine, he started using it, and saw exactly what's happening now.
That the programs, instead of being turned off -- when you quit the program, you'd keep running and, basically, all the sorts of things like Windows is doing, running as a multi-cellular organism on many machines, he envisioned all that happening.
And he saw that evolution itself was an intelligent process.
It wasn't any sort of creator intelligence, but the thing itself was a giant parallel computation that would have some intelligence.
And he went out of his way to say that he was not saying this was lifelike, or a new kind of life.
It just was another version of the same thing happening.
And there's really no difference between what he was doing in the computer and what nature did billions of years ago.
And could you do it again now?
So, when I went into these archives looking at this stuff, lo and behold, the archivist came up one day, saying, "I think we found another box that had been thrown out."
And it was his universe on punch cards.
So there it is, 50 years later, sitting there -- sort of suspended animation.
That's the instructions for running -- this is actually the source code for one of those universes, with a note from the engineers saying they're having some problems.
"There must be something about this code that you haven't explained yet."
And I think that's really the truth. We still don't understand how these very simple instructions can lead to increasing complexity.
What's the dividing line between when that is lifelike and when it really is alive?
These cards, now, thanks to me showing up, are being saved.
And the question is, should we run them or not?
You know, could we get them running?
Do you want to let it loose on the Internet?
These machines would think they -- these organisms, if they came back to life now -- whether they've died and gone to heaven, there's a universe.
My laptop is 10 thousand million times the size of the universe that they lived in when Barricelli quit the project.
He was thinking far ahead, to how this would really grow into a new kind of life.
And that's what's happening!
When Juan Enriquez told us about these 12 trillion bits being transferred back and forth, of all this genomics data going to the proteomics lab, that's what Barricelli imagined: that this digital code in these machines is actually starting to code -- it already is coding from nucleic acids.
We've been doing that since, you know, since we started PCR and synthesizing small strings of DNA.
And real soon, we're actually going to be synthesizing the proteins, and, like Steve showed us, that just opens an entirely new world.
It's a world that Von Neumann himself envisioned.
This was published after he died: his sort of unfinished notes on self-reproducing machines, what it takes to get the machines sort of jump-started to where they begin to reproduce.
It took really three people: Barricelli had the concept of the code as a living thing; Von Neumann saw how you could build the machines -- that now, last count, four million of these Von Neumann machines is built every 24 hours; and Julian Bigelow, who died 10 days ago -- this is John Markoff's obituary for him -- he was the important missing link, the engineer who came in and knew how to put those vacuum tubes together and make it work.
And all our computers have, inside them, the copies of the architecture that he had to just design one day, sort of on pencil and paper.
And we owe a tremendous credit to that.
And he explained, in a very generous way, the spirit that brought all these different people to the Institute for Advanced Study in the '40s to do this project, and make it freely available with no patents, no restrictions, no intellectual property disputes to the rest of the world.
That's the last entry in the logbook when the machine was shut down, July 1958.
And it's Julian Bigelow who was running it until midnight when the machine was officially turned off.
And that's the end.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Namaskar.
I'm a movie star, I'm 51 years of age, and I don't use Botox as yet.
(Laughter) So I'm clean, but I do behave like you saw like a 21-year-old in my movies.
Yeah, I do that.
I sell dreams, and I peddle love to millions of people back home in India who assume that I'm the best lover in the world.
(Laughter) If you don't tell anyone, I'm going to tell you I'm not, but I never let that assumption go away.
(Laughter) I've also been made to understand there are lots of you here who haven't seen my work, and I feel really sad for you.
(Laughter) (Applause) That doesn't take away from the fact that I'm completely self-obsessed, as a movie star should be.
(Laughter) That's when my friends, Chris and Juliet called me here to speak about the future "you."
Naturally, it follows I'm going to speak about the present me.
(Laughter) Because I truly believe that humanity is a lot like me.
(Laughter) It is. It is.
It's an aging movie star, grappling with all the newness around itself, wondering whether it got it right in the first place, and still trying to find a way to keep on shining regardless.
I was born in a refugee colony in the capital city of India, New Delhi.
And my father was a freedom fighter.
My mother was, well, just a fighter like mothers are.
And much like the original homo sapiens, we struggled to survive.
When I was in my early 20s, I lost both my parents, which I must admit seems a bit careless of me now, but -- (Laughter) I do remember the night my father died, and I remember the driver of a neighbor who was driving us to the hospital.
He mumbled something about "dead people don't tip so well" and walked away into the dark.
And I was only 14 then, and I put my father's dead body in the back seat of the car, and my mother besides me, I started driving back from the hospital to the house.
And in the middle of her quiet crying, my mother looked at me and she said, "Son, when did you learn to drive?"
And I thought about it and realized, and I said to my mom, "Just now, Mom."
(Laughter) So from that night onwards, much akin to humanity in its adolescence, I learned the crude tools of survival.
And the framework of life was very, very simple then, to be honest.
You know, you just ate what you got and did whatever you were told to do.
I thought celiac was a vegetable, and vegan, of course, was Mr. Spock's lost comrade in "Star Trek."
(Laughter) You married the first girl that you dated, and you were a techie if you could fix the carburetor in your car.
I really thought that gay was a sophisticated English word for happy.
And Lesbian, of course, was the capital of Portugal, as you all know.
(Laughter) Where was I?
We relied on systems created through the toil and sacrifice of generations before to protect us, and we felt that governments actually worked for our betterment.
Science was simple and logical, Apple was still then just a fruit owned by Eve first and then Newton, not by Steve Jobs, until then.
And "Eureka!" was what you screamed when you wanted to run naked on the streets.
You went wherever life took you for work, and people were mostly welcoming of you.
Migration was a term then still reserved for Siberian cranes, not human beings.
Most importantly, you were who you were and you said what you thought.
Then in my late 20s, I shifted to the sprawling metropolis of Mumbai, and my framework, like the newly industrialized aspirational humanity, began to alter.
In the urban rush for a new, more embellished survival, things started to look a little different.
I met people who had descended from all over the world, faces, races, genders, money-lenders.
Definitions became more and more fluid.
Work began to define you at that time in an overwhelmingly equalizing manner, and all the systems started to feel less reliable to me, almost too thick to hold on to the diversity of mankind and the human need to progress and grow.
Ideas were flowing with more freedom and speed.
And I experienced the miracle of human innovation and cooperation, and my own creativity, when supported by the resourcefulness of this collective endeavor, catapulted me into superstardom.
I started to feel that I had arrived, and generally, by the time I was 40, I was really, really flying.
I was all over the place.
You know? I'd done 50 films by then and 200 songs, and I'd been knighted by the Malaysians.
I had been given the highest civil honor by the French government, the title of which for the life of me I can't pronounce even until now.
(Laughter) I'm sorry, France, and thank you, France, for doing that.
But much bigger than that, I got to meet Angelina Jolie -- (Laughter) for two and a half seconds.
(Laughter) And I'm sure she also remembers that encounter somewhere.
OK, maybe not.
And I sat next to Hannah Montana on a round dinner table with her back towards me most of the time.
Like I said, I was flying, from Miley to Jolie, and humanity was soaring with me.
We were both pretty much flying off the handle, actually.
And then you all know what happened.
The internet happened.
I was in my late 40s, and I started tweeting like a canary in a birdcage and assuming that, you know, people who peered into my world would admire it for the miracle I believed it to be.
But something else awaited me and humanity.
You know, we had expected an expansion of ideas and dreams with the enhanced connectivity of the world.
We had not bargained for the village-like enclosure of thought, of judgment, of definition that flowed from the same place that freedom and revolution was taking place in.
Everything I said took a new meaning.
Everything I did -- good, bad, ugly -- was there for the world to comment upon and judge.
As a matter of fact, everything I didn't say or do also met with the same fate.
Four years ago, my lovely wife Gauri and me decided to have a third child.
It was claimed on the net that he was the love child of our first child who was 15 years old.
Apparently, he had sown his wild oats with a girl while driving her car in Romania.
And yeah, there was a fake video to go with it.
And we were so disturbed as a family.
My son, who is 19 now, even now when you say "hello" to him, he just turns around and says, "But bro, I didn't even have a European driving license."
(Laughter) Yeah.
In this new world, slowly, reality became virtual and virtual became real, and I started to feel that I could not be who I wanted to be or say what I actually thought, and humanity at this time completely identified with me.
I think both of us were going through our midlife crisis, and humanity, like me, was becoming an overexposed prima donna.
I started to sell everything, from hair oil to diesel generators.
Humanity was buying everything from crude oil to nuclear reactors.
You know, I even tried to get into a skintight superhero suit to reinvent myself.
I must admit I failed miserably.
And just an aside I want to say on behalf of all the Batmen, Spider-Men and Supermen of the world, you have to commend them, because it really hurts in the crotch, that superhero suit.
(Laughter) Yeah, I'm being honest. I need to tell you this here.
Really.
And accidentally, I happened to even invent a new dance form which I didn't realize, and it became a rage.
So if it's all right, and you've seen a bit of me, so I'm quite shameless, I'll show you.
It was called the Lungi dance.
So if it's all right, I'll just show you. I'm talented otherwise.
(Cheers) So it went something like this.
Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi dance.
Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi dance.
Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi dance. Lungi.
That's it. It became a rage.
(Cheers) It really did.
Like you notice, nobody could make any sense of what was happening except me, and I didn't give a damn, really, because the whole world, and whole humanity, seemed as confused and lost as I was.
I didn't give up then.
I even tried to reconstruct my identity on the social media like everyone else does.
I thought if I put on philosophical tweets out there people will think I'm with it, but some of the responses I got from those tweets were extremely confusing acronyms which I didn't understand. You know?
ROFL, LOL.
"Adidas," somebody wrote back to one of my more thought-provoking tweets and I was wondering why would you name a sneaker, I mean, why would you write back the name of a sneaker to me?
And I asked my 16-year-old daughter, and she enlightened me.
"Adidas" now means "All day I dream about sex."
(Laughter) Really.
I didn't know if you know that.
So I wrote back, "WTF" in bold to Mr. Adidas, thanking secretly that some acronyms and things won't change at all.
WTF.
But here we are.
I am 51 years old, like I told you, and mind-numbing acronyms notwithstanding, I just want to tell you if there has been a momentous time for humanity to exist, it is now, because the present you is brave.
The present you is hopeful.
The present you is innovative and resourceful, and of course, the present you is annoyingly indefinable.
And in this spell-binding, imperfect moment of existence, feeling a little brave just before I came here, I decided to take a good, hard look at my face.
And I realized that I'm beginning to look more and more like the wax statue of me at Madame Tussaud's.
(Laughter) Yeah, and in that moment of realization, I asked the most central and pertinent question to humanity and me: Do I need to fix my face?
Really. I'm an actor, like I told you, a modern expression of human creativity.
The land I come from is the source of inexplicable but very simple spirituality.
In its immense generosity, India decided somehow that I, the Muslim son of a broke freedom fighter who accidentally ventured into the business of selling dreams, should become its king of romance, the "Badhshah of Bollywood," the greatest lover the country has ever seen ...
with this face.
Yeah.
(Laughter) Which has alternately been described as ugly, unconventional, and strangely, not chocolatey enough.
(Laughter) The people of this ancient land embraced me in their limitless love, and I've learned from these people that neither power nor poverty can make your life more magical or less tortuous.
I've learned from the people of my country that the dignity of a life, a human being, a culture, a religion, a country actually resides in its ability for grace and compassion.
I've learned that whatever moves you, whatever urges you to create, to build, whatever keeps you from failing, whatever helps you survive, is perhaps the oldest and the simplest emotion known to mankind, and that is love.
A mystic poet from my land famously wrote, (Recites poem in Hindi) (Poem ends) Which loosely translates into that whatever -- yeah, if you know Hindi, please clap, yeah.
(Applause) It's very difficult to remember.
Which loosely translates into actually saying that all the books of knowledge that you might read and then go ahead and impart your knowledge through innovation, through creativity, through technology, but mankind will never be the wiser about its future unless it is coupled with a sense of love and compassion for their fellow beings.
The two and a half alphabets which form the word "," which means "love," if you are able to understand that and practice it, that itself is enough to enlighten mankind.
So I truly believe the future "you" has to be a you that loves.
Otherwise it will cease to flourish.
It will perish in its own self-absorption.
So you may use your power to build walls and keep people outside, or you may use it to break barriers and welcome them in.
You may use your faith to make people afraid and terrify them into submission, or you can use it to give courage to people so they rise to the greatest heights of enlightenment.
You can use your energy to build nuclear bombs and spread the darkness of destruction, or you can use it to spread the joy of light to millions.
You may filthy up the oceans callously and cut down all the forests.
You can destroy the ecology, or turn to them with love and regenerate life from the waters and trees.
You may land on Mars and build armed citadels, or you may look for life-forms and species to learn from and respect.
And you can use all the moneys we all have earned to wage futile wars and give guns in the hands of little children to kill each other with, or you can use it to make more food to fill their stomachs with.
My country has taught me the capacity for a human being to love is akin to godliness.
It shines forth in a world which civilization, I think, already has tampered too much with.
In the last few days, the talks here, the wonderful people coming and showing their talent, talking about individual achievements, the innovation, the technology, the sciences, the knowledge we are gaining by being here in the presence of TED Talks and all of you are reasons enough for us to celebrate the future "us."
But within that celebration the quest to cultivate our capacity for love and compassion has to assert itself, has to assert itself, just as equally.
So I believe the future "you" is an infinite you.
It's called a chakra in India, like a circle.
It ends where it begins from to complete itself.
A you that perceives time and space differently understands both your unimaginable and fantastic importance and your complete unimportance in the larger context of the universe.
A you that returns back to the original innocence of humanity, which loves from the purity of heart, which sees from the eyes of truth, which dreams from the clarity of an untampered mind.
The future "you" has to be like an aging movie star who has been made to believe that there is a possibility of a world which is completely, wholly, self-obsessively in love with itself.
A world -- really, it has to be a you to create a world which is its own best lover.
That I believe, ladies and gentlemen, should be the future "you."
Thank you very much.
Shukriya.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
This is Lee Sedol.
Lee Sedol is one of the world's greatest Go players, and he's having what my friends in Silicon Valley call a "Holy Cow" moment -- (Laughter) a moment where we realize that AI is actually progressing a lot faster than we expected.
So humans have lost on the Go board. What about the real world?
Well, the real world is much bigger, much more complicated than the Go board.
It's a lot less visible, but it's still a decision problem.
And if we think about some of the technologies that are coming down the pike ...
Noriko [Arai] mentioned that reading is not yet happening in machines, at least with understanding.
But that will happen, and when that happens, very soon afterwards, machines will have read everything that the human race has ever written.
And that will enable machines, along with the ability to look further ahead than humans can, as we've already seen in Go, if they also have access to more information, they'll be able to make better decisions in the real world than we can.
So is that a good thing?
Well, I hope so.
Our entire civilization, everything that we value, is based on our intelligence.
And if we had access to a lot more intelligence, then there's really no limit to what the human race can do.
And I think this could be, as some people have described it, the biggest event in human history.
So why are people saying things like this, that AI might spell the end of the human race?
Is this a new thing?
Is it just Elon Musk and Bill Gates and Stephen Hawking?
Actually, no. This idea has been around for a while.
Here's a quotation: "Even if we could keep the machines in a subservient position, for instance, by turning off the power at strategic moments" -- and I'll come back to that "turning off the power" idea later on -- "we should, as a species, feel greatly humbled."
So who said this? This is Alan Turing in 1951.
Alan Turing, as you know, is the father of computer science and in many ways, the father of AI as well.
So if we think about this problem, the problem of creating something more intelligent than your own species, we might call this "the gorilla problem," because gorillas' ancestors did this a few million years ago, and now we can ask the gorillas: Was this a good idea?
So here they are having a meeting to discuss whether it was a good idea, and after a little while, they conclude, no, this was a terrible idea.
Our species is in dire straits.
In fact, you can see the existential sadness in their eyes.
(Laughter) So this queasy feeling that making something smarter than your own species is maybe not a good idea -- what can we do about that?
Well, really nothing, except stop doing AI, and because of all the benefits that I mentioned and because I'm an AI researcher, I'm not having that.
I actually want to be able to keep doing AI.
So we actually need to nail down the problem a bit more.
What exactly is the problem?
Why is better AI possibly a catastrophe?
So here's another quotation: "We had better be quite sure that the purpose put into the machine is the purpose which we really desire."
This was said by Norbert Wiener in 1960, shortly after he watched one of the very early learning systems learn to play checkers better than its creator.
But this could equally have been said by King Midas.
King Midas said, "I want everything I touch to turn to gold," and he got exactly what he asked for.
That was the purpose that he put into the machine, so to speak, and then his food and his drink and his relatives turned to gold and he died in misery and starvation.
So we'll call this "the King Midas problem" of stating an objective which is not, in fact, truly aligned with what we want.
In modern terms, we call this "the value alignment problem."
Putting in the wrong objective is not the only part of the problem.
There's another part.
If you put an objective into a machine, even something as simple as, "Fetch the coffee," the machine says to itself, "Well, how might I fail to fetch the coffee?
Someone might switch me off.
OK, I have to take steps to prevent that.
I will disable my 'off' switch.
I will do anything to defend myself against interference with this objective that I have been given."
So this single-minded pursuit in a very defensive mode of an objective that is, in fact, not aligned with the true objectives of the human race -- that's the problem that we face.
And in fact, that's the high-value takeaway from this talk.
If you want to remember one thing, it's that you can't fetch the coffee if you're dead.
(Laughter) It's very simple. Just remember that. Repeat it to yourself three times a day.
(Laughter) And in fact, this is exactly the plot of "2001: [A Space Odyssey]" HAL has an objective, a mission, which is not aligned with the objectives of the humans, and that leads to this conflict.
Now fortunately, HAL is not superintelligent.
He's pretty smart, but eventually Dave outwits him and manages to switch him off.
But we might not be so lucky.
So what are we going to do?
I'm trying to redefine AI to get away from this classical notion of machines that intelligently pursue objectives.
There are three principles involved.
The first one is a principle of altruism, if you like, that the robot's only objective is to maximize the realization of human objectives, of human values.
And by values here I don't mean touchy-feely, goody-goody values.
I just mean whatever it is that the human would prefer their life to be like.
And so this actually violates Asimov's law that the robot has to protect its own existence.
It has no interest in preserving its existence whatsoever.
The second law is a law of humility, if you like.
And this turns out to be really important to make robots safe.
It says that the robot does not know what those human values are, so it has to maximize them, but it doesn't know what they are.
And that avoids this problem of single-minded pursuit of an objective.
This uncertainty turns out to be crucial.
Now, in order to be useful to us, it has to have some idea of what we want.
It obtains that information primarily by observation of human choices, so our own choices reveal information about what it is that we prefer our lives to be like.
So those are the three principles.
Let's see how that applies to this question of: "Can you switch the machine off?" as Turing suggested.
So here's a PR2 robot.
This is one that we have in our lab, and it has a big red "off" switch right on the back.
The question is: Is it going to let you switch it off?
If we do it the classical way, we give it the objective of, "Fetch the coffee, I must fetch the coffee, I can't fetch the coffee if I'm dead," so obviously the PR2 has been listening to my talk, and so it says, therefore, "I must disable my 'off' switch, and probably taser all the other people in Starbucks who might interfere with me."
(Laughter) So this seems to be inevitable, right?
This kind of failure mode seems to be inevitable, and it follows from having a concrete, definite objective.
So what happens if the machine is uncertain about the objective?
Well, it reasons in a different way.
It says, "OK, the human might switch me off, but only if I'm doing something wrong.
Well, I don't really know what wrong is, but I know that I don't want to do it."
So that's the first and second principles right there.
"So I should let the human switch me off."
And in fact you can calculate the incentive that the robot has to allow the human to switch it off, and it's directly tied to the degree of uncertainty about the underlying objective.
And then when the machine is switched off, that third principle comes into play.
It learns something about the objectives it should be pursuing, because it learns that what it did wasn't right.
In fact, we can, with suitable use of Greek symbols, as mathematicians usually do, we can actually prove a theorem that says that such a robot is provably beneficial to the human.
You are provably better off with a machine that's designed in this way than without it.
So this is a very simple example, but this is the first step in what we're trying to do with human-compatible AI.
Now, this third principle, I think is the one that you're probably scratching your head over.
You're probably thinking, "Well, you know, I behave badly.
I don't want my robot to behave like me.
I sneak down in the middle of the night and take stuff from the fridge.
I do this and that."
There's all kinds of things you don't want the robot doing.
But in fact, it doesn't quite work that way.
Just because you behave badly doesn't mean the robot is going to copy your behavior.
It's going to understand your motivations and maybe help you resist them, if appropriate.
But it's still difficult.
What we're trying to do, in fact, is to allow machines to predict for any person and for any possible life that they could live, and the lives of everybody else: Which would they prefer?
And there are many, many difficulties involved in doing this; I don't expect that this is going to get solved very quickly.
The real difficulties, in fact, are us.
As I have already mentioned, we behave badly.
In fact, some of us are downright nasty.
Now the robot, as I said, doesn't have to copy the behavior.
The robot does not have any objective of its own.
It's purely altruistic.
And it's not designed just to satisfy the desires of one person, the user, but in fact it has to respect the preferences of everybody.
So it can deal with a certain amount of nastiness, and it can even understand that your nastiness, for example, you may take bribes as a passport official because you need to feed your family and send your kids to school.
It can understand that; it doesn't mean it's going to steal.
In fact, it'll just help you send your kids to school.
We are also computationally limited.
Lee Sedol is a brilliant Go player, but he still lost.
So if we look at his actions, he took an action that lost the game.
That doesn't mean he wanted to lose.
So to understand his behavior, we actually have to invert through a model of human cognition that includes our computational limitations -- a very complicated model.
But it's still something that we can work on understanding.
Probably the most difficult part, from my point of view as an AI researcher, is the fact that there are lots of us, and so the machine has to somehow trade off, weigh up the preferences of many different people, and there are different ways to do that.
Economists, sociologists, moral philosophers have understood that, and we are actively looking for collaboration.
Let's have a look and see what happens when you get that wrong.
So you can have a conversation, for example, with your intelligent personal assistant that might be available in a few years' time.
Think of a Siri on steroids.
So Siri says, "Your wife called to remind you about dinner tonight."
And of course, you've forgotten. "What? What dinner?
What are you talking about?"
"Uh, your 20th anniversary at 7pm."
"I can't do that. I'm meeting with the secretary-general at 7:30.
How could this have happened?"
"Well, I did warn you, but you overrode my recommendation."
"Well, what am I going to do? I can't just tell him I'm too busy."
"Don't worry. I arranged for his plane to be delayed."
(Laughter) "Some kind of computer malfunction."
(Laughter) "Really? You can do that?"
"He sends his profound apologies and looks forward to meeting you for lunch tomorrow."
(Laughter) So the values here -- there's a slight mistake going on.
This is clearly following my wife's values which is "Happy wife, happy life."
(Laughter) It could go the other way.
You could come home after a hard day's work, and the computer says, "Long day?"
"Yes, I didn't even have time for lunch."
"You must be very hungry."
"Starving, yeah. Could you make some dinner?"
"There's something I need to tell you."
(Laughter) "There are humans in South Sudan who are in more urgent need than you."
(Laughter) "So I'm leaving. Make your own dinner."
(Laughter) So we have to solve these problems, and I'm looking forward to working on them.
There are reasons for optimism.
One reason is, there is a massive amount of data.
Because remember -- I said they're going to read everything the human race has ever written.
Most of what we write about is human beings doing things and other people getting upset about it.
So there's a massive amount of data to learn from.
There's also a very strong economic incentive to get this right.
So imagine your domestic robot's at home.
You're late from work again and the robot has to feed the kids, and the kids are hungry and there's nothing in the fridge.
And the robot sees the cat.
(Laughter) And the robot hasn't quite learned the human value function properly, so it doesn't understand the sentimental value of the cat outweighs the nutritional value of the cat.
(Laughter) So then what happens?
Well, it happens like this: "Deranged robot cooks kitty for family dinner."
That one incident would be the end of the domestic robot industry.
So there's a huge incentive to get this right long before we reach superintelligent machines.
So to summarize: I'm actually trying to change the definition of AI so that we have provably beneficial machines.
And the principles are: machines that are altruistic, that want to achieve only our objectives, but that are uncertain about what those objectives are, and will watch all of us to learn more about what it is that we really want.
And hopefully in the process, we will learn to be better people.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So interesting, Stuart.
We're going to stand here a bit because I think they're setting up for our next speaker.
A couple of questions.
So the idea of programming in ignorance seems intuitively really powerful.
As you get to superintelligence, what's going to stop a robot reading literature and discovering this idea that knowledge is actually better than ignorance and still just shifting its own goals and rewriting that programming?
Stuart Russell: Yes, so we want it to learn more, as I said, about our objectives.
It'll only become more certain as it becomes more correct, so the evidence is there and it's going to be designed to interpret it correctly.
It will understand, for example, that books are very biased in the evidence they contain.
They only talk about kings and princes and elite white male people doing stuff.
So it's a complicated problem, but as it learns more about our objectives it will become more and more useful to us.
CA: And you couldn't just boil it down to one law, you know, hardwired in: "if any human ever tries to switch me off, I comply. I comply."
SR: Absolutely not.
That would be a terrible idea.
So imagine that you have a self-driving car and you want to send your five-year-old off to preschool.
Do you want your five-year-old to be able to switch off the car while it's driving along?
Probably not.
The more rational the person, the more willing you are to be switched off.
If the person is completely random or even malicious, then you're less willing to be switched off.
CA: All right. Stuart, can I just say, I really, really hope you figure this out for us.
Thank you so much for that talk. That was amazing.
SR: Thank you.
Do you ever think about how important the oceans are in our daily lives?
The oceans cover two-thirds of our planet.
They provide half the oxygen we breathe.
They moderate our climate.
And they provide jobs and medicine and food including 20 percent of protein to feed the entire world population.
People used to think that the oceans were so vast that they wouldn't be affected by human activities.
Well today I'm going to tell you about a serious reality that is changing our oceans called ocean acidification, or the evil twin of climate change.
Did you know that the oceans have absorbed 25 percent of all of the carbon dioxide that we have emitted to the atmosphere?
Now this is just another great service provided by the oceans since carbon dioxide is one of the greenhouse gases that's causing climate change.
But as we keep pumping more and more and more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere more is dissolving into the oceans.
And this is what's changing our ocean chemistry.
When carbon dioxide dissolves in seawater, it undergoes a number of chemical reactions.
Now lucky for you, I don't have time to get into the details of the chemistry for today.
But I'll tell you as more carbon dioxide enters the ocean, the seawater pH goes down.
And this basically means that there is an increase in ocean acidity.
And this whole process is called ocean acidification.
And it's happening alongside climate change.
Scientists have been monitoring ocean acidification for over two decades.
This figure is an important time series in Hawaii, and the top line shows steadily increasing concentrations of carbon dioxide, or CO2 gas, in the atmosphere.
And this is directly as a result of human activities.
The line underneath shows the increasing concentrations of carbon dioxide that is dissolved in the surface of the ocean which you can see is increasing at the same rate as carbon dioxide in the atmosphere since measurements began.
The line on the bottom shows then shows the change in chemistry.
As more carbon dioxide has entered the ocean, the seawater pH has gone down, which basically means there has been an increase in ocean acidity.
Now in Ireland, scientists are also monitoring ocean acidification -- scientists at the Marine Institute and NUI Galway.
And we, too, are seeing acidification at the same rate as these main ocean time-series sites around the world.
So it's happening right at our doorstep.
Now I'd like to give you an example of just how we collect our data to monitor a changing ocean.
Firstly we collect a lot of our samples in the middle of winter.
So as you can imagine, in the North Atlantic we get hit with some seriously stormy conditions -- so not for any of you who get a little motion sickness, but we are collecting some very valuable data.
So we lower this instrument over the side of the ship, and there are sensors that are mounted on the bottom that can tell us information about the surrounding water, such as temperature or dissolved oxygen.
And then we can collect our seawater samples in these large bottles.
So we start at the bottom, which can be over four kilometers deep just off our continental shelf, and we take samples at regular intervals right up to the surface.
We take the seawater back on the deck, and then we can either analyze them on the ship or back in the laboratory for the different chemicals parameters.
But why should we care?
How is ocean acidification going to affect all of us?
Well, here are the worrying facts.
There has already been an increase in ocean acidity of 26 percent since pre-industrial times, which is directly due to human activities.
Unless we can start slowing down our carbon dioxide emissions, we're expecting an increase in ocean acidity of 170 percent by the end of this century.
I mean this is within our children's lifetime.
This rate of acidification is 10 times faster than any acidification in our oceans for over 55 million years.
So our marine life have never, ever experienced such a fast rate of change before.
So we literally could not know how they're going to cope.
Now there was a natural acidification event millions of years ago, which was much slower than what we're seeing today.
And this coincided with a mass extinction of many marine species.
So is that what we're headed for?
Well, maybe.
Studies are showing some species are actually doing quite well but many are showing a negative response.
One of the big concerns is as ocean acidity increases, the concentration of carbonate ions in seawater decrease.
Now these ions are basically the building blocks for many marine species to make their shells, for example crabs or mussels, oysters.
Another example are corals.
They also need these carbonate ions in seawater to make their coral structure in order to build coral reefs.
As ocean acidity increases and the concentration of carbonate ions decrease, these species first find it more difficult to make their shells.
And at even even lower levels, they can actually begin to dissolve.
This here is a pteropod, it's called a sea butterfly.
And it's an important food source in the ocean for many species, from krill to salmon right up to whales.
The shell of the pteropod was placed into seawater at a pH that we're expecting by the end of this century.
After only 45 days at this very realistic pH, you can see the shell has almost completely dissolved.
So ocean acidification could affect right up through the food chain -- and right onto our dinner plates.
I mean who here likes shellfish? Or salmon?
Or many other fish species whose food source in the ocean could be affected?
These are cold-water corals.
And did you know we actually have cold-water corals in Irish waters, just off our continental shelf?
And they support rich biodiversity, including some very important fisheries.
It's projected that by the end of this century, 70 percent of all known cold-water corals in the entire ocean will be surrounded by seawater that is dissolving their coral structure.
The last example I have are these healthy tropical corals.
They were placed in seawater at a pH we're expecting by the year 2100.
After six months, the coral has almost completely dissolved.
Now coral reefs support 25 percent of all marine life in the entire ocean.
All marine life.
So you can see: ocean acidification is a global threat.
I have an eight-month-old baby boy.
Unless we start now to slow this down, I dread to think what our oceans will look like when he's a grown man.
We will see acidification.
We have already put too much carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
But we can slow this down.
We can prevent the worst-case scenario.
The only way of doing that is by reducing our carbon dioxide emissions.
This is important for both you and I, for industry, for governments.
We need to work together, slow down global warming slow down ocean acidification and help to maintain a healthy ocean and a healthy planet for our generation and for generations to come.
(Applause)
It's six o'clock in the morning, pitch black outside.
My 14-year-old son is fast asleep in his bed, sleeping the reckless, deep sleep of a teenager.
I flip on the light and physically shake the poor boy awake, because I know that, like ripping off a Band-Aid, it's better to get it over with quickly.
(Laughter) I have a friend who yells "Fire!" just to rouse her sleeping teen.
And another who got so fed up that she had to dump cold water on her son's head just to get him out of bed.
Sound brutal ...
but perhaps familiar?
Every morning I ask myself, "How can I -- knowing what I know and doing what I do for a living -- be doing this to my own son?"
You see, I'm a sleep researcher.
(Laughter) So I know far too much about sleep and the consequences of sleep loss.
I know that I'm depriving my son of the sleep he desperately needs as a rapidly growing teenager.
I also know that by waking him up hours before his natural biological clock tells him he's ready, I'm literally robbing him of his dreams -- the type of sleep most associated with learning, memory consolidation and emotional processing.
But it's not just my kid that's being deprived of sleep.
Sleep deprivation among American teenagers is an epidemic.
Only about one in 10 gets the eight to 10 hours of sleep per night recommended by sleep scientists and pediatricians.
Now, if you're thinking to yourself, "Phew, we're doing good, my kid's getting eight hours," remember, eight hours is the minimum recommendation.
You're barely passing.
Eight hours is kind of like getting a C on your report card.
There are many factors contributing to this epidemic, but a major factor preventing teens from getting the sleep they need is actually a matter of public policy.
Not hormones, social lives or Snapchat.
Across the country, many schools are starting around 7:30am or earlier, despite the fact that major medical organizations recommend that middle and high school start no earlier than 8:30am.
These early start policies have a direct effect on how much -- or really how little sleep American teenagers are getting.
They're also pitting teenagers and their parents in a fundamentally unwinnable fight against their own bodies.
Around the time of puberty, teenagers experience a delay in their biological clock, which determines when we feel most awake and when we feel most sleepy.
This is driven in part by a shift in the release of the hormone melatonin.
Teenagers' bodies wait to start releasing melatonin until around 11pm, which is two hours later than what we see in adults or younger children.
This means that waking a teenager up at 6am is the biological equivalent of waking an adult up at 4am.
On the unfortunate days when I have to wake up at 4am, I'm a zombie.
Functionally useless.
I can't think straight, I'm irritable, and I probably shouldn't be driving a car.
But this is how many American teenagers feel every single school day.
In fact, many of the, shall we say, unpleasant characteristics that we chalk up to being a teenager -- moodiness, irritability, laziness, depression -- could be a product of chronic sleep deprivation.
For many teens battling chronic sleep loss, their go-to strategy to compensate is consuming large quantities of caffeine in the form of venti frappuccinos, or energy drinks and shots.
So essentially, we've got an entire population of tired but wired youth.
Advocates of sleep-friendly start times know that adolescence is a period of dramatic brain development, particularly in the parts of the brain that are responsible for those higher order thinking processes, including reasoning, problem-solving and good judgment.
In other words, the very type of brain activity that's responsible for reining in those impulsive and often risky behaviors that are so characteristic of adolescence and that are so terrifying to us parents of teenagers.
They know that like the rest of us, when teenagers don't get the sleep they need, their brains, their bodies and behaviors suffer with both immediate and lasting effects.
They can't concentrate, their attention plummets and many will even show behavioral signs that mimic ADHD.
But the consequences of teen sleep loss go well beyond the classroom, sadly contributing to many of the mental health problems that skyrocket during adolescence, including substance use, depression and suicide.
In our work with teens from LA Unified School District, we found that teens with sleep problems were 55 percent more likely to have used alcohol in the past month.
In another study with over 30,000 high school students, they found that for each hour of lost sleep, there was a 38 percent increase in feeling sad or hopeless, and a 58 percent increase in teen suicide attempts.
And if that's not enough, teens who skip out on sleep are at increased risk for a host of physical health problems that plague our country, including obesity, heart disease and diabetes.
Then there's the risk of putting a sleep-deprived teen, with a newly minted driver's license, behind the wheel.
Studies have shown that getting five hours or less of sleep per night is the equivalent of driving with a blood alcohol content above the legal limit.
Advocates of sleep-friendly start times, and researchers in this area, have produced tremendous science showing the tremendous benefits of later start times.
The findings are unequivocal, and as a sleep scientist, I rarely get to speak with that kind of certainty.
Teens from districts with later start times get more sleep.
To the naysayers who may think that if schools start later, teens will just stay up later, the truth is, their bedtimes stay the same, but their wake-up times get extended, resulting in more sleep.
They're more likely to show up for school; school absences dropped by 25 percent in one district.
And they're less likely to drop out.
Not surprisingly, they do better academically.
So this has real implications for reducing the achievement gap.
Standardized test scores in math and reading go up by two to three percentage points.
That's as powerful as reducing class sizes by one-third fewer students, or replacing a so-so teacher in the classroom with a truly outstanding one.
Their mental and physical health improves, and even their families are happier.
I mean, who wouldn't enjoy a little more pleasantness from our teens, and a little less crankiness?
Even their communities are safer because car crash rates go down -- a 70 percent reduction in one district.
Given these tremendous benefits, you might think, well, this is a no-brainer, right?
So why have we as a society failed to heed this call?
Often the argument against later start times goes something like this: "Why should we delay start times for teenagers?
We need to toughen them up so they're ready for the real world!"
But that's like saying to the parent of a two-year-old, "Don't let Johnny nap, or he won't be ready for kindergarten."
(Laughter) Delaying start times also presents many logistical challenges.
Not just for students and their families, but for communities as a whole.
Updating bus routes, increased transportation costs, impact on sports, care before or after school.
These are the same concerns that come up in district after district, time and again around the country as school start times are debated.
And they're legitimate concerns, but these are problems we have to work through.
They are not valid excuses for failing to do the right thing for our children, which is to start middle and high schools no earlier than 8:30am.
And in districts around the country, big and small, who have made this change, they found that these fears are often unfounded and far outweighed by the tremendous benefits for student health and performance, and our collective public safety.
So tomorrow morning, when coincidentally we get to set our clocks back by an hour and you get that delicious extra hour of sleep, and the day seems a little longer, and a little more full of hope, think about the tremendous power of sleep.
And think about what a gift it would be for our children to be able to wake up naturally, in harmony with their own biology.
Thank you, and pleasant dreams.
I have a two-year-old daughter named Naya who is under the mistaken impression that this conference is named in honor of her father.
(Laughter) Who am I to contradict my baby girl?
As many of you know, there's something about becoming a parent that concentrates the mind on long-term problems like climate change.
It was the birth of my daughter that inspired me to launch this climate organization, in order to counteract the excessive polarization of this issue in the United States, and to find a conservative pathway forward.
Yes, folks, a Republican climate solution is possible, and you know what?
It may even be better.
(Laughter) Let me try to prove that to you.
What we really need is a killer app to climate policy.
In the technology world, a killer app is an application so transformative that it creates its own market, like Uber.
In the climate world, a killer app is a new solution so promising that it can break through the seemingly insurmountable barriers to progress.
These include the psychological barrier.
Climate advocates have long been encouraging their fellow citizens to make short-term sacrifices now for benefits that accrue to other people in other countries 30 or 40 years in the future.
It just doesn't fly because it runs contrary to basic human nature.
Next is the geopolitical barrier.
Under the current rules of global trade, countries have a strong incentive to free ride off the emissions reductions of other nations, instead of strengthening their own programs.
This has been the curse of every international climate negotiations, including Paris.
Finally, we have the partisan barrier.
Even the most committed countries -- Germany, the United Kingdom, Canada -- are nowhere near reducing emissions at the required scale and speed.
Not even close.
And the partisan climate divide is far more acute here in the United States.
We are fundamentally stuck, and that is why we need a killer app of climate policy to break through each of these barriers.
I'm convinced that the road to climate progress in the United States runs through the Republican Party and the business community.
So in launching the Climate Leadership Council, I started by reaching out to a who's who of Republican elder statesmen and business leaders, including James Baker and George Schultz, the two most respected Republican elder statesmen in America; Martin Feldstein and Greg Mankiw, the two most respected conservative economists in the country; and Henry Paulson and Rob Walton, two of the most successful and admired business leaders.
Together, we co-authored "The Conservative Case For Carbon Dividends."
This represents the first time that Republican leaders put forth a concrete market-based climate solution.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) We presented our plan at the White House two weeks after President Trump moved in.
Almost every leading editorial board in the country has since endorsed our plan, and Fortune 100 companies from a wide range of industries are now getting behind it.
So by now you're probably wondering, what exactly is this plan?
Well, our carbon dividends solution is based on four pillars.
The first is a gradually rising carbon tax.
Although capitalism is a wonderful system, like many operating systems, it's prone to bugs, which, in this case, are called "market failures."
By far the largest is that market prices fail to take social and environmental costs into account.
That means every market transaction is based on incorrect information.
This fundamental bug of capitalism, more than any other single factor, is to blame for our climate predicament.
Now in theory, this should be an easy problem to fix.
Economists agree that the best solution is to put a price on the carbon content of fossil fuels, otherwise known as a carbon tax.
This would discourage carbon emissions in every single economic transaction, every day of the year.
However, a carbon tax by itself has proven to be unpopular and a political dead end.
The answer is to return all the money raised directly to citizens, in the form of equal monthly dividends.
This would transform an unpopular carbon tax into a popular and populist solution, and it would also solve the underlying psychological barrier that we discussed, by giving everyone a concrete benefit in the here and now.
And these benefits would be significant.
Assuming a carbon tax rate that starts at 40 dollars per ton, a family of four would receive 2,000 dollars per year from the get-go.
According to the US Treasury Department, the bottom 70 percent of Americans would receive more in dividends than they would pay in increased energy prices.
That means 223 million Americans would win economically from solving climate change.
And that -- (Applause) is revolutionary, and could fundamentally alter climate politics.
But there's another revolutionary element here.
The amount of the dividend would grow as the carbon tax rate increases.
The more we protect our climate, the more our citizens benefit.
This creates a positive feedback loop, which is crucial, because the only way we will reach our long-term emission-reduction goals is if the carbon tax rate goes up every year.
The third pillar of our program is eliminating regulations that are no longer needed once a carbon dividends plan is enacted.
This is a key selling point to Republicans and business leaders.
So why should we trade climate regulations for a price on carbon?
Well, let me show you.
Our plan would achieve nearly twice the emissions reductions of all Obama-era climate regulations combined, and nearly three times the new baseline after President Trump repeals all of those regulations.
That assumes a carbon tax starting at 40 dollars per ton, which translates into roughly an extra 36 cents per gallon of gas.
Our plan by itself would meet the high end of America's commitment under the Paris Climate Agreement, and as you can see, the emissions reductions would continue over time.
This illustrates the power of a conservative climate solution based on free markets and limited government.
We would end up with less regulation and far less pollution at the same time, while helping working-class Americans get ahead.
Doesn't that sound like something we could all support?
(Applause) The fourth and final pillar of our program is a new climate domino effect, based on border carbon adjustments.
Now that may sound complicated, but it, too, is revolutionary, because it provides us a whole new strategy to reach a global price on carbon, which is ultimately what we need.
Let me show you an example.
Suppose Country A adopts a carbon dividends plan, and Country B does not.
Well, to level the playing field and protect the competitiveness of its industries, Country A would tax imports from Country B based on their carbon content.
Fair enough.
But here's where it gets really interesting, because the money raised at the border would increase the dividends going to the citizens of Country A.
Well, how long do you think it would take the public in Country B to realize that that money should be going to them, and to push for a carbon dividends plan in their own land?
Add a few more countries, and we get a new climate domino effect.
Once one major country or region adopts carbon dividends with border carbon adjustments, other countries are compelled to follow suit.
One by one the dominoes fall.
And this domino effect could start anywhere.
My preference, strongly, is the United States, but it could also start in the United Kingdom, in Germany or another European country, or even in China.
Let's take China as an example.
China is committed to reducing greenhouse gas emissions, but what its leaders care even more about is transitioning their economy to consumer-led economic development.
Well, nothing could do more to hasten that transition than giving every Chinese citizen a monthly dividend.
In fact, this is the only policy solution that would enable China to meet its environmental and economic goals at the same time.
That's why this is the killer app of climate policy, because it would enable us to overcome each of the barriers we discussed earlier: the psychological barrier, the partisan barrier, and, as we've just seen, the geopolitical barrier.
All we need is a country to lead the way.
And one method of finding what you're looking for is to take out an ad.
So let's read this one together.
Wanted: country to pioneer carbon dividends plan.
Cost to country: zero.
Starting date: as soon as possible.
Advantages: most effective climate solution, popular and populist, pro-growth and pro-business, shrinks government and helps the working class.
Additional compensation: gratitude of current and future generations, including my daughter.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Just one question for you, Ted.
I'm actually not sure I've seen a conservative get a standing O at TED before that.
That's pretty cool.
The logic seems really powerful, but some people you talk to in politics say it's hard to imagine this still getting through Congress.
How are you feeling about momentum behind this?
Ted Halstead: So I understand that many are very pessimistic about what's happening in the United States with President Trump.
I'm less pessimistic; here's why.
The actions of this White House, the early actions on climate, are just the first move in a complex game of climate chess.
So far it's been a repeal-only strategy; the pressure is going to mount for a replacement program, which is where we come in.
And there are three reasons why, which I'll go through real quickly.
One, the business community is fundamentally parting ways with the White House on climate change.
In fact, we're finding a number of Fortune 100 companies supporting our program.
Within two months, we're going to be announcing some really surprising names coming out in favor of this program.
Two, there is no issue in American politics where there's a more fundamental gap between the Republican base and the Republican leadership than climate change.
And three, thinking of this analogy of chess, the big decision up ahead is: Does the administration stay in Paris?
Well, let's pan it out both ways.
If it stays in Paris, as many are pushing for in the administration, well then that begs a question: What's the plan?
We have the plan.
But if they don't stay in Paris, the international pressure will be overwhelming.
Our Secretary of State will be asking other countries for NATO contributions, and they'll be saying, "No, give us our Paris commitment.
Come through on your commitments, we'll come through on ours."
So, international, business and even the Republican base will all be calling for a Republican replacement plan.
And, hopefully, we've provided one.
CA: Thank you so much, Ted.
TH: Thank you, Chris.
(Applause)
Take a look at this work of art.
What is it that you see?
At first glance, it looks to be a grandfather clock with a sheet thrown over it and a rope tied around the center.
But a first look always warrants a second.
Look again.
What do you see now?
If you look more closely, you'll realize that this entire work of art is made from one piece of sculpture.
There is no clock, there is no rope, and there is no sheet.
It is one piece of bleached Honduras mahogany.
Now let me be clear: this exercise was not about looking at sculpture.
It's about looking and understanding that looking closely can save a life, change your company and even help you understand why your children behave the way they do.
It's a skill that I call visual intelligence, and I use works of art to teach everybody, from everyday people to those for whom looking is the job, like Navy SEALs and homicide detectives and trauma nurses.
The fact is that no matter how skilled you might be at looking, you still have so much to learn about seeing.
Because we all think we get it in a first glance and a sudden flash, but the real skill is in understanding how to look slowly and how to look more carefully.
The talent is in remembering -- in the crush of the daily urgencies that demand our attention -- to step back and look through those lenses to help us see what we've been missing all along.
So how can looking at painting and sculpture help?
Because art is a powerful tool.
It's a powerful tool that engages both sight and insight and reframes our understanding of where we are and what we see.
Here's an example of a work of art that reminded me that visual intelligence -- it's an ongoing learning process and one that really is never mastered.
I came across this quiet, seemingly abstract painting, and I had to step up to it twice, even three times, to understand why it resonated so deeply.
Now, I've seen the Washington Monument in person thousands of times, well aware of the change in the color of marble a third of the way up, but I had never really looked at it out of context or truly as a work of art.
And here, Georgia O'Keeffe's painting of this architectural icon made me realize that if we put our mind to it, it's possible to see everyday things in a wholly new and eye-opening perspective.
Now, there are some skeptics that believe that art just belongs in an art museum.
They believe that it has no practical use beyond its aesthetic value.
I know who they are in every audience I teach.
Their arms are crossed, their legs are crossed, their body language is saying, "What am I going to learn from this lady who talks fast about painting and sculpture?"
So how do I make it relevant for them?
I ask them to look at this work of art, like this portrait by Kumi Yamashita.
And I ask them to step in close, and even closer still, and while they're looking at the work of art, they need to be asking questions about what they see.
And if they ask the right questions, like, "What is this work of art?
Is it a painting? Is it a sculpture?
What is it made of?" ...
they will find out that this entire work of art is made of a wooden board, 10,000 nails and one unbroken piece of sewing thread.
Now that might be interesting to some of you, but what does it have to do with the work that these people do?
And the answer is everything.
Because we all interact with people multiple times on a daily basis, and we need to get better at asking questions about what it is that we see.
Learning to frame the question in such a way as to elicit the information that we need to do our jobs, is a critical life skill.
Like the radiologist who told me that looking at the negative spaces in a painting helped her discern more discreet abnormalities in an MRI.
Or the police officer who said that understanding the emotional dynamic between people in a painting helped him to read body language at a domestic violence crime scene, and it enabled him to think twice before drawing and firing his weapon.
And even parents can look to see absences of color in paintings to understand that what their children say to them is as important as what they don't say.
So how do I -- how do I train to be more visually intelligent?
It comes down to four As.
Every new situation, every new problem -- we practice four As.
First, we assess our situation.
We ask, "What do we have in front of us?"
Then, we analyze it.
We say, "What's important?
What do I need? What don't I need?"
Then, we articulate it in a conversation, in a memo, in a text, in an email.
And then, we act: we make a decision.
We all do this multiple times a day, but we don't realize what a role seeing and looking plays in all of those actions, and how visual intelligence can really improve everything.
So recently, I had a group of counterterrorism officials at a museum in front of this painting.
El Greco's painting, "The Purification of the Temple," in which Christ, in the center, in a sweeping and violent gesture, is expelling the sinners from the temple of prayer.
The group of counterterrorism officials had five minutes with that painting, and in that short amount of time, they had to assess the situation, analyze the details, articulate what, if anything, they would do if they were in that painting.
As you can imagine, observations and insights differed.
Who would they talk to?
Who would be the best witness?
Who was a good potential witness?
Who was lurking?
Who had the most information?
But my favorite comment came from a seasoned cop who looked at the central figure and said, "You see that guy in the pink?" -- referring to Christ -- he said, "I'd collar him, he's causing all the trouble."
(Laughter) So looking at art gives us a perfect vehicle to rethink how we solve problems without the aid of technology.
Looking at the work of Felix Gonzalez-Torres, you see two clocks in perfect synchronicity.
The hour, minute and second hand perfectly aligned.
They are installed side by side and they're touching, and they are entitled "'Untitled' (Perfect Lovers)."
But closer analysis makes you realize that these are two battery-operated clocks, which in turn makes you understand -- "Hey, wait a minute ...
One of those batteries is going to stop before the other.
One of those clocks is going to slow down and die before the other and it's going to alter the symmetry of the artwork."
Just articulating that thought process includes the necessity of a contingency plan.
You need to have contingencies for the unforeseen, the unexpected and the unknown, whenever and however they may happen.
Now, using art to increase our visual intelligence involves planning for contingencies, understanding the big picture and the small details and noticing what's not there.
So in this painting by Magritte, noticing that there are no tracks under the train, there is no fire in the fireplace and there are no candles in the candlesticks actually more accurately describes the painting than if you were to say, "Well, there's a train coming out of a fireplace, and there are candlesticks on the mantle."
It may sound counterintuitive to say what isn't there, but it's really a very valuable tool.
When a detective who had learned about visual intelligence in North Carolina was called to the crime scene, it was a boating fatality, and the eyewitness told this detective that the boat had flipped over and the occupant had drowned underneath.
Now, instinctively, crime scene investigators look for what is apparent, but this detective did something different.
He looked for what wasn't there, which is harder to do.
And he raised the question: if the boat had really tipped flipped over -- as the eyewitness said that it did -- how come the papers that were kept at one end of the boat were completely dry?
Based on that one small but critical observation, the investigation shifted from accidental death to homicide.
Now, equally important to saying what isn't there is the ability to find visual connections where they may not be apparent.
Like Marie Watt's totem pole of blankets.
It illustrates that finding hidden connections in everyday objects can resonate so deeply.
The artist collected blankets from all different people in her community, and she had the owners of the blankets write, on a tag, the significance of the blanket to the family.
Some of the blankets had been used for baby blankets, some of them had been used as picnic blankets, some of them had been used for the dog.
We all have blankets in our homes and understand the significance that they play.
But similarly, I instruct new doctors: when they walk into a patient's room, before they pick up that medical chart, just look around the room.
Are there balloons or cards, or that special blanket on the bed?
That tells the doctor there's a connection to the outside world.
If that patient has someone in the outside world to assist them and help them, the doctor can implement the best care with that connection in mind.
In medicine, people are connected as humans before they're identified as doctor and patient.
But this method of enhancing perception -- it need not be disruptive, and it doesn't necessitate an overhaul in looking.
Like Jorge Mndez Blake's sculpture of building a brick wall above Kafka's book "El Castillo" shows that more astute observation can be subtle and yet invaluable.
You can discern the book, and you can see how it disrupted the symmetry of the bricks directly above it, but by the time you get to the end of the sculpture, you can no longer see the book.
But looking at the work of art in its entirety, you see that the impact of the work's disruption on the bricks is nuanced and unmistakable.
One thought, one idea, one innovation can alter an approach, change a process and even save lives.
I've been teaching visual intelligence for over 15 years, and to my great amazement and astonishment -- to my never-ending astonishment and amazement, I have seen that looking at art with a critical eye can help to anchor us in our world of uncharted waters, whether you are a paramilitary trooper, a caregiver, a doctor or a mother.
Because let's face it, things go wrong.
(Laughter) Things go wrong.
And don't misunderstand me, I'd eat that doughnut in a minute.
(Laughter) But we need to understand the consequences of what it is that we observe, and we need to convert observable details into actionable knowledge.
Like Jennifer Odem's sculpture of tables standing sentinel on the banks of the Mississippi River in New Orleans, guarding against the threat of post-Katrina floodwaters and rising up against adversity, we too have the ability to act affirmatively and affect positive change.
I have been mining the world of art to help people across the professional spectrum to see the extraordinary in the everyday, to articulate what is absent and to be able to inspire creativity and innovation, no matter how small.
And most importantly, to forge human connections where they may not be apparent, empowering us all to see our work and the world writ large with a new set of eyes.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to start with a simple question: Why do the poor make so many poor decisions?
I know it's a harsh question, but take a look at the data.
The poor borrow more, save less, smoke more, exercise less, drink more and eat less healthfully.
Why?
Well, the standard explanation was once summed up by the British Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
And she called poverty "a personality defect."
(Laughter) A lack of character, basically.
Now, I'm sure not many of you would be so blunt.
But the idea that there's something wrong with the poor themselves is not restricted to Mrs. Thatcher.
Some of you may believe that the poor should be held responsible for their own mistakes.
And others may argue that we should help them to make better decisions.
But the underlying assumption is the same: there's something wrong with them.
If we could just change them, if we could just teach them how to live their lives, if they would only listen.
And to be honest, this was what I thought for a long time.
It was only a few years ago that I discovered that everything I thought I knew about poverty was wrong.
It all started when I accidentally stumbled upon a paper by a few American psychologists.
They had traveled 8,000 miles, all the way to India, for a fascinating study.
And it was an experiment with sugarcane farmers.
You should know that these farmers collect about 60 percent of their annual income all at once, right after the harvest.
This means that they're relatively poor one part of the year and rich the other.
The researchers asked them to do an IQ test before and after the harvest.
What they subsequently discovered completely blew my mind.
The farmers scored much worse on the test before the harvest.
The effects of living in poverty, it turns out, correspond to losing 14 points of IQ.
Now, to give you an idea, that's comparable to losing a night's sleep or the effects of alcoholism.
A few months later, I heard that Eldar Shafir, a professor at Princeton University and one of the authors of this study, was coming over to Holland, where I live.
So we met up in Amsterdam to talk about his revolutionary new theory of poverty.
And I can sum it up in just two words: scarcity mentality.
It turns out that people behave differently when they perceive a thing to be scarce.
And what that thing is doesn't much matter -- whether it's not enough time, money or food.
You all know this feeling, when you've got too much to do, or when you've put off breaking for lunch and your blood sugar takes a dive.
This narrows your focus to your immediate lack -- to the sandwich you've got to have now, the meeting that's starting in five minutes or the bills that have to be paid tomorrow.
So the long-term perspective goes out the window.
You could compare it to a new computer that's running 10 heavy programs at once.
It gets slower and slower, making errors.
Eventually, it freezes -- not because it's a bad computer, but because it has too much to do at once.
The poor have the same problem.
They're not making dumb decisions because they are dumb, but because they're living in a context in which anyone would make dumb decisions.
So suddenly I understood why so many of our anti-poverty programs don't work.
Investments in education, for example, are often completely ineffective.
Poverty is not a lack of knowledge.
A recent analysis of 201 studies on the effectiveness of money-management training came to the conclusion that it has almost no effect at all.
Now, don't get me wrong -- this is not to say the poor don't learn anything -- they can come out wiser for sure.
But it's not enough.
Or as Professor Shafir told me, "It's like teaching someone to swim and then throwing them in a stormy sea."
I still remember sitting there, perplexed.
And it struck me that we could have figured this all out decades ago.
I mean, these psychologists didn't need any complicated brain scans; they only had to measure the farmer's IQ, and IQ tests were invented more than 100 years ago.
Actually, I realized I had read about the psychology of poverty before.
George Orwell, one of the greatest writers who ever lived, experienced poverty firsthand in the 1920s.
"The essence of poverty," he wrote back then, is that it "annihilates the future."
And he marveled at, quote, "How people take it for granted they have the right to preach at you and pray over you as soon as your income falls below a certain level."
Now, those words are every bit as resonant today.
The big question is, of course: What can be done?
Modern economists have a few solutions up their sleeves.
We could help the poor with their paperwork or send them a text message to remind them to pay their bills.
This type of solution is hugely popular with modern politicians, mostly because, well, they cost next to nothing.
These solutions are, I think, a symbol of this era in which we so often treat the symptoms, but ignore the underlying cause.
So I wonder: Why don't we just change the context in which the poor live?
Or, going back to our computer analogy: Why keep tinkering around with the software when we can easily solve the problem by installing some extra memory instead?
At that point, Professor Shafir responded with a blank look.
And after a few seconds, he said, "Oh, I get it.
You mean you want to just hand out more money to the poor to eradicate poverty.
Uh, sure, that'd be great.
But I'm afraid that brand of left-wing politics you've got in Amsterdam -- it doesn't exist in the States."
But is this really an old-fashioned, leftist idea?
I remembered reading about an old plan -- something that has been proposed by some of history's leading thinkers.
The philosopher Thomas More first hinted at it in his book, "Utopia," more than 500 years ago.
And its proponents have spanned the spectrum from the left to the right, from the civil rights campaigner, Martin Luther King, to the economist Milton Friedman.
And it's an incredibly simple idea: basic income guarantee.
What it is?
Well, that's easy.
It's a monthly grant, enough to pay for your basic needs: food, shelter, education.
It's completely unconditional, so no one's going to tell you what you have to do for it, and no one's going to tell you what you have to do with it.
The basic income is not a favor, but a right.
There's absolutely no stigma attached.
So as I learned about the true nature of poverty, I couldn't stop wondering: Is this the idea we've all been waiting for?
Could it really be that simple?
And in the three years that followed, I read everything I could find about basic income.
I researched the dozens of experiments that have been conducted all over the globe, and it didn't take long before I stumbled upon a story of a town that had done it -- had actually eradicated poverty.
But then ...
nearly everyone forgot about it.
This story starts in Dauphin, Canada.
In 1974, everybody in this small town was guaranteed a basic income, ensuring that no one fell below the poverty line.
At the start of the experiment, an army of researchers descended on the town.
For four years, all went well.
But then a new government was voted into power, and the new Canadian cabinet saw little point to the expensive experiment.
So when it became clear there was no money left to analyze the results, the researchers decided to pack their files away in some 2,000 boxes.
Twenty-five years went by, and then Evelyn Forget, a Canadian professor, found the records.
For three years, she subjected the data to all manner of statistical analysis, and no matter what she tried, the results were the same every time: the experiment had been a resounding success.
Evelyn Forget discovered that the people in Dauphin had not only become richer but also smarter and healthier.
The school performance of kids improved substantially.
The hospitalization rate decreased by as much as 8.5 percent.
Domestic violence incidents were down, as were mental health complaints.
And people didn't quit their jobs.
The only ones who worked a little less were new mothers and students -- who stayed in school longer.
Similar results have since been found in countless other experiments around the globe, from the US to India.
So ...
here's what I've learned.
When it comes to poverty, we, the rich, should stop pretending we know best.
We should stop sending shoes and teddy bears to the poor, to people we have never met.
And we should get rid of the vast industry of paternalistic bureaucrats when we could simply hand over their salaries to the poor they're supposed to help.
(Applause) Because, I mean, the great thing about money is that people can use it to buy things they need instead of things that self-appointed experts think they need.
Just imagine how many brilliant scientists and entrepreneurs and writers, like George Orwell, are now withering away in scarcity.
Imagine how much energy and talent we would unleash if we got rid of poverty once and for all.
I believe that a basic income would work like venture capital for the people.
And we can't afford not to do it, because poverty is hugely expensive.
Just look at the cost of child poverty in the US, for example.
It's estimated at 500 billion dollars each year, in terms of higher health care spending, higher dropout rates, and more crime.
Now, this is an incredible waste of human potential.
But let's talk about the elephant in the room.
How could we ever afford a basic income guarantee?
Well, it's actually a lot cheaper than you may think.
What they did in Dauphin is finance it with a negative income tax.
This means that your income is topped up as soon as you fall below the poverty line.
And in that scenario, according to our economists' best estimates, for a net cost of 175 billion -- a quarter of US military spending, one percent of GDP -- you could lift all impoverished Americans above the poverty line.
You could actually eradicate poverty.
Now, that should be our goal.
(Applause) The time for small thoughts and little nudges is past.
I really believe that the time has come for radical new ideas, and basic income is so much more than just another policy.
It is also a complete rethink of what work actually is.
And in that sense, it will not only free the poor, but also the rest of us.
Nowadays, millions of people feel that their jobs have little meaning or significance.
A recent poll among 230,000 employees in 142 countries found that only 13 percent of workers actually like their job.
And another poll found that as much as 37 percent of British workers have a job that they think doesn't even need to exist.
It's like Brad Pitt says in "Fight Club," "Too often we're working jobs we hate so we can buy shit we don't need."
(Laughter) Now, don't get me wrong -- I'm not talking about the teachers and the garbagemen and the care workers here.
If they stopped working, we'd be in trouble.
I'm talking about all those well-paid professionals with excellent rsums who earn their money doing ...
strategic transactor peer-to-peer meetings while brainstorming the value add-on of disruptive co-creation in the network society.
(Laughter) (Applause) Or something like that.
Just imagine again how much talent we're wasting, simply because we tell our kids they'll have to "earn a living."
Or think of what a math whiz working at Facebook lamented a few years ago: "The best minds of my generation are thinking about how to make people click ads."
I'm a historian.
And if history teaches us anything, it is that things could be different.
There is nothing inevitable about the way we structured our society and economy right now.
Ideas can and do change the world.
And I think that especially in the past few years, it has become abundantly clear that we cannot stick to the status quo -- that we need new ideas.
I know that many of you may feel pessimistic about a future of rising inequality, xenophobia and climate change.
But it's not enough to know what we're against.
We also need to be for something.
Martin Luther King didn't say, "I have a nightmare."
(Laughter) He had a dream.
(Applause) So ...
here's my dream: I believe in a future where the value of your work is not determined by the size of your paycheck, but by the amount of happiness you spread and the amount of meaning you give.
I believe in a future where the point of education is not to prepare you for another useless job but for a life well-lived.
I believe in a future where an existence without poverty is not a privilege but a right we all deserve.
So here we are.
Here we are.
We've got the research, we've got the evidence and we've got the means.
Now, more than 500 years after Thomas More first wrote about a basic income, and 100 years after George Orwell discovered the true nature of poverty, we all need to change our worldview, because poverty is not a lack of character.
Poverty is a lack of cash.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a confession.
I have been in an affair since I was 17 years old.
I wish I could talk about butterflies in my stomach or maps I drew on the ground when I think about this affair, but I cannot.
I wish I could talk about sweet words spoken or gifts that I received from this affair, but I cannot.
All I can tell you about is the aftermath, about days I spent constantly asking: Why, why, why me?
I remember how it all began.
I was in my final year of high school, and my class had just won in sports, so we were singing and dancing and hugging each other.
I went and took a shower.
Then I went for dinner.
And when I sat down to eat, my teeth started chattering, and so I couldn't put the spoon in my mouth.
I rushed to the nurse's office, and because I couldn't talk, I just pointed at my mouth.
She didn't know what was happening, so she told me to lie down, and it worked -- after a few minutes, the chattering stopped.
I was about to dash out, and she told me -- no, she insisted -- that I go up to the dormitories to sleep.
Here I was in my final year of high school, just a few months from doing my end of high school exams and a few days from doing a set of exams we call here in Kenya "mocks," which are somehow meant to gauge how prepared one is for the final exams.
There is no way I was going to sleep and let a set of exams mock me.
I went to class, sat down, took my Kenyan history notes, and there I was, down Kenyan coastal town, with the great Mekatilili wa Menza, the Giriama woman who led her people against British colonial rule.
Then, without any notice, my left hand started jerking, and it was as if I was marking imaginary papers.
In and out it went, and with every stroke, one by one, my classmates stopped concentrating on their reading and started looking at me.
And I tried really hard to stop it, but I couldn't, because it had a life of its own.
And then, when it was sure everybody was looking at us, in its final show and official introduction, I had my first full-blown seizure, which was the beginning of what has been a 15-year-long affair.
Seizures are the trademark characteristic for most types of epilepsy, and every first-ever seizure needs to be assessed by a doctor to determine if one has epilepsy or if it's a symptom of something else.
In my case, it was confirmed that I had epilepsy.
I spent a large chunk of my time in hospital and at home, and only went back to do my final exams.
I had seizures in between papers, but managed to get good enough grades to be admitted for an actuarial science degree at the University of Nairobi.
(Applause) Unfortunately, I had to drop out in my second year.
I didn't have good enough coping skills and a support community around me.
I was lucky enough to get a job, but I was fired from that job when I had a seizure in the workplace.
So I found myself in a space where I was constantly asking myself why this had to happen to me.
I lived in denial for a long time, and the denial was maybe because of the things that had happened, dropping out of school and being fired from my job.
Or maybe it was because of the things I had heard about epilepsy and about people living with epilepsy: that they would never live on their own; that they would never travel on their own or even get work; that they were outcasts, with a spirit in them that they needed to be delivered from.
And so the more I thought about these things, the more my seizures became, and I spent days with my legs locked, my speech became blurred and on days on end, this is how I'd be.
Two or three days after a seizure, my head and my hand would still be twitching.
I felt lost, like I'd lost everything, and sometimes, even the will to live.
(Sigh) I had so much frustration in me.
And so I started writing, because the people around me didn't have answers to the questions that I had.
And so I wrote my fears and my doubts.
I wrote about my good days and my bad days and my really ugly days, and I shared them on a blog.
And before long, I began to be seen and heard by people who had epilepsy and their families, and even those who did not have the diagnosis.
And I moved from that girl who constantly asked why me to one who not only self-advocates, but does it for those who are yet to find their voices.
(Applause) My seizures are greatly reduced, from two to three times a day, to sometimes two to three times in one year.
I went on -- (Applause) I went on to employ five people, when I began what was Kenya's first free mental health and epilepsy support line.
And I travel -- (Applause) And I travel to speak about my affair, all these things that I had been told people like me living with epilepsy could never be able to do.
Every year, a population as big as 80 percent of Nairobi gets diagnosed with epilepsy across the globe.
And they, like me, go through the emotions of stigma and exclusion.
And so I have made it my life journey to keep these conversations going, and I keep confessing about my affair so that those people who do not have the diagnosis might know and might have a constant reminder that it is alright to engage with people like us, that as long as they pull down the walls of stigma and exclusion, that we, just like them, can be able to take anything life throws at us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This story begins in 1985, when at age 22, I became the World Chess Champion after beating Anatoly Karpov.
Earlier that year, I played what is called simultaneous exhibition against 32 of the world's best chess-playing machines in Hamburg, Germany.
I won all the games, and then it was not considered much of a surprise that I could beat 32 computers at the same time.
To me, that was the golden age.
(Laughter) Machines were weak, and my hair was strong.
(Laughter) Just 12 years later, I was fighting for my life against just one computer in a match called by the cover of "Newsweek" "The Brain's Last Stand."
No pressure.
(Laughter) From mythology to science fiction, human versus machine has been often portrayed as a matter of life and death.
John Henry, called the steel-driving man in the 19th century African American folk legend, was pitted in a race against a steam-powered hammer bashing a tunnel through mountain rock.
John Henry's legend is a part of a long historical narrative pitting humanity versus technology.
And this competitive rhetoric is standard now.
We are in a race against the machines, in a fight or even in a war.
Jobs are being killed off.
People are being replaced as if they had vanished from the Earth.
It's enough to think that the movies like "The Terminator" or "The Matrix" are nonfiction.
There are very few instances of an arena where the human body and mind can compete on equal terms with a computer or a robot.
Actually, I wish there were a few more.
Instead, it was my blessing and my curse to literally become the proverbial man in the man versus machine competition that everybody is still talking about.
In the most famous human-machine competition since John Henry, I played two matches against the IBM supercomputer, Deep Blue.
Nobody remembers that I won the first match -- (Laughter) (Applause) In Philadelphia, before losing the rematch the following year in New York.
But I guess that's fair.
There is no day in history, special calendar entry for all the people who failed to climb Mt. Everest before Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norgay made it to the top.
And in 1997, I was still the world champion when chess computers finally came of age.
I was Mt. Everest, and Deep Blue reached the summit.
I should say of course, not that Deep Blue did it, but its human creators -- Anantharaman, Campbell, Hoane, Hsu.
Hats off to them.
As always, machine's triumph was a human triumph, something we tend to forget when humans are surpassed by our own creations.
Deep Blue was victorious, but was it intelligent?
No, no it wasn't, at least not in the way Alan Turing and other founders of computer science had hoped.
It turned out that chess could be crunched by brute force, once hardware got fast enough and algorithms got smart enough.
Although by the definition of the output, grandmaster-level chess, Deep Blue was intelligent.
But even at the incredible speed, 200 million positions per second, Deep Blue's method provided little of the dreamed-of insight into the mysteries of human intelligence.
Soon, machines will be taxi drivers and doctors and professors, but will they be "intelligent?"
I would rather leave these definitions to the philosophers and to the dictionary.
What really matters is how we humans feel about living and working with these machines.
When I first met Deep Blue in 1996 in February, I had been the world champion for more than 10 years, and I had played 182 world championship games and hundreds of games against other top players in other competitions.
I knew what to expect from my opponents and what to expect from myself.
I was used to measure their moves and to gauge their emotional state by watching their body language and looking into their eyes.
And then I sat across the chessboard from Deep Blue.
I immediately sensed something new, something unsettling.
You might experience a similar feeling the first time you ride in a driverless car or the first time your new computer manager issues an order at work.
But when I sat at that first game, I couldn't be sure what is this thing capable of.
Technology can advance in leaps, and IBM had invested heavily.
I lost that game.
And I couldn't help wondering, might it be invincible?
Was my beloved game of chess over?
These were human doubts, human fears, and the only thing I knew for sure was that my opponent Deep Blue had no such worries at all.
(Laughter) I fought back after this devastating blow to win the first match, but the writing was on the wall.
I eventually lost to the machine but I didn't suffer the fate of John Henry who won but died with his hammer in his hand.
[John Henry Died with a Hammer in His Hand Palmer C. Hayden] [The Museum of African American Art, Los Angeles] It turned out that the world of chess still wanted to have a human chess champion.
And even today, when a free chess app on the latest mobile phone is stronger than Deep Blue, people are still playing chess, even more than ever before.
Doomsayers predicted that nobody would touch the game that could be conquered by the machine, and they were wrong, proven wrong, but doomsaying has always been a popular pastime when it comes to technology.
What I learned from my own experience is that we must face our fears if we want to get the most out of our technology, and we must conquer those fears if we want to get the best out of our humanity.
While licking my wounds, I got a lot of inspiration from my battles against Deep Blue.
As the old Russian saying goes, if you can't beat them, join them.
Then I thought, what if I could play with a computer -- together with a computer at my side, combining our strengths, human intuition plus machine's calculation, human strategy, machine tactics, human experience, machine's memory.
Could it be the perfect game ever played?
My idea came to life in 1998 under the name of Advanced Chess when I played this human-plus-machine competition against another elite player.
But in this first experiment, we both failed to combine human and machine skills effectively.
Advanced Chess found its home on the internet, and in 2005, a so-called freestyle chess tournament produced a revelation.
A team of grandmasters and top machines participated, but the winners were not grandmasters, not a supercomputer.
The winners were a pair of amateur American chess players operating three ordinary PCs at the same time.
Their skill of coaching their machines effectively counteracted the superior chess knowledge of their grandmaster opponents and much greater computational power of others.
And I reached this formulation.
A weak human player plus a machine plus a better process is superior to a very powerful machine alone, but more remarkably, is superior to a strong human player plus machine and an inferior process.
This convinced me that we would need better interfaces to help us coach our machines towards more useful intelligence.
Human plus machine isn't the future, it's the present.
Everybody that's used online translation to get the gist of a news article from a foreign newspaper, knowing its far from perfect.
Then we use our human experience to make sense out of that, and then the machine learns from our corrections.
This model is spreading and investing in medical diagnosis, security analysis.
The machine crunches data, calculates probabilities, gets 80 percent of the way, 90 percent, making it easier for analysis and decision-making of the human party.
But you are not going to send your kids to school in a self-driving car with 90 percent accuracy, even with 99 percent.
So we need a leap forward to add a few more crucial decimal places.
Twenty years after my match with Deep Blue, second match, this sensational "The Brain's Last Stand" headline has become commonplace as intelligent machines move in every sector, seemingly every day.
But unlike in the past, when machines replaced farm animals, manual labor, now they are coming after people with college degrees and political influence.
And as someone who fought machines and lost, I am here to tell you this is excellent, excellent news.
Eventually, every profession will have to feel these pressures or else it will mean humanity has ceased to make progress.
We don't get to choose when and where technological progress stops.
We cannot slow down.
In fact, we have to speed up.
Our technology excels at removing difficulties and uncertainties from our lives, and so we must seek out ever more difficult, ever more uncertain challenges.
Machines have calculations.
We have understanding.
Machines have instructions.
We have purpose.
Machines have objectivity.
We have passion.
We should not worry about what our machines can do today.
Instead, we should worry about what they still cannot do today, because we will need the help of the new, intelligent machines to turn our grandest dreams into reality.
And if we fail, if we fail, it's not because our machines are too intelligent, or not intelligent enough.
If we fail, it's because we grew complacent and limited our ambitions.
Our humanity is not defined by any skill, like swinging a hammer or even playing chess.
There's one thing only a human can do.
That's dream.
So let us dream big.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to share with you something my father taught me: no condition is permanent.
It's a lesson he shared with me again and again, and I learned it to be true the hard way.
Here I am in my fourth-grade class.
This is my yearbook picture taken in my class in school in Monrovia, Liberia.
My parents migrated from India to West Africa in the 1970s, and I had the privilege of growing up there.
I was nine years old, I loved kicking around a soccer ball, and I was a total math and science geek.
I was living the kind of life that, really, any child would dream of.
But no condition is permanent.
On Christmas Eve in 1989, civil war erupted in Liberia.
The war started in the rural countryside, and within months, rebel armies had marched towards our hometown.
My school shut down, and when the rebel armies captured the only international airport, people started panicking and fleeing.
My mom came knocking one morning and said, "Raj, pack your things -- we have to go."
We were rushed to the center of town, and there on a tarmac, we were split into two lines.
I stood with my family in one line, and we were stuffed into the cargo hatch of a rescue plane.
And there on a bench, I was sitting with my heart racing.
As I looked out the open hatch, I saw hundreds of Liberians in another line, children strapped to their backs.
When they tried to jump in with us, I watched soldiers restrain them.
They were not allowed to flee.
We were the lucky ones.
We lost what we had, but we resettled in America, and as immigrants, we benefitted from the community of supporters that rallied around us.
They took my family into their home, they mentored me.
And they helped my dad start a clothing shop.
I'd visit my father on weekends as a teenager to help him sell sneakers and jeans.
And every time business would get bad, he'd remind me of that mantra: no condition is permanent.
That mantra and my parents' persistence and that community of supporters made it possible for me to go through college and eventually to medical school.
I'd once had my hopes crushed in a war, but because of them, I had a chance to pursue my dream to become a doctor.
My condition had changed.
It had been 15 years since I escaped that airfield, but the memory of those two lines had not escaped my mind.
I was a medical student in my mid-20s, and I wanted to go back to see if I could serve the people we'd left behind.
But when I got back, what I found was utter destruction.
The war had left us with just 51 doctors to serve a country of four million people.
It would be like the city of San Francisco having just 10 doctors.
So if you got sick in the city where those few doctors remain, you might stand a chance.
But if you got sick in the remote, rural rainforest communities, where you could be days from the nearest clinic -- I was seeing my patients die from conditions no one should die from, all because they were getting to me too late.
Imagine you have a two-year-old who wakes up one morning with a fever, and you realize she could have malaria, and you know the only way to get her the medicine she needs would be to take her to the riverbed, get in a canoe, paddle to the other side and then walk for up to two days through the forest just to reach the nearest clinic.
One billion people live in the world's most remote communities, and despite the advances we've made in modern medicine and technology, our innovations are not reaching the last mile.
These communities have been left behind, because they've been thought too hard to reach and too difficult to serve.
Illness is universal; access to care is not.
And realizing this lit a fire in my soul.
No one should die because they live too far from a doctor or clinic.
No condition should be permanent.
And help in this case didn't come from the outside, it actually came from within.
It came from the communities themselves.
Meet Musu.
Way out in rural Liberia, where most girls have not had a chance to finish primary school, Musu had been persistent.
At the age of 18, she completed high school, and she came back to her community.
She saw that none of the children were getting treatment for the diseases they needed treatment for -- deadly diseases, like malaria and pneumonia.
So she signed up to be a volunteer.
There are millions of volunteers like Musu in rural parts around our world, and we got to thinking -- community members like Musu could actually help us solve a puzzle.
Our health care system is structured in such a way that the work of diagnosing disease and prescribing medicines is limited to a team of nurses and doctors like me.
But nurses and doctors are concentrated in cities, so rural communities like Musu's have been left behind.
So we started asking some questions: What if we could reorganize the medical care system?
What if we could have community members like Musu be a part or even be the center of our medical team?
What if Musu could help us bring health care from clinics in cities to the doorsteps of her neighbors?
Musu was 48 when I met her.
And despite her amazing talent and grit, she hadn't had a paying job in 30 years.
So what if technology could support her?
What if we could invest in her with real training, equip her with real medicines, and have her have a real job?
Well, in 2007, I was trying to answer these questions, and my wife and I were getting married that year.
We asked our relatives to forgo the wedding registry gifts and instead donate some money so we could have some start-up money to launch a nonprofit.
I promise you, I'm a lot more romantic than that.
(Laughter) We ended up raising $6,000, teamed up with some Liberians and Americans and launched a nonprofit called Last Mile Health.
Our goal is to bring a health worker within reach of everyone, everywhere.
We designed a three-step process -- train, equip and pay -- to invest more deeply in volunteers like Musu to become paraprofessionals, to become community health workers.
First we trained Musu to prevent, diagnose and treat the top 10 diseases afflicting families in her village.
A nurse supervisor visited her every month to coach her.
We equipped her with modern medical technology, like this $1 malaria rapid test, and put it in a backpack full of medicines like this to treat infections like pneumonia, and crucially, a smartphone, to help her track and report on epidemics.
Last, we recognized the dignity in Musu's work.
With the Liberian government, we created a contract, paid her and gave her the chance to have a real job.
And she's amazing.
Musu has learned over 30 medical skills, from screening children for malnutrition, to assessing the cause of a child's cough with a smartphone, to supporting people with HIV and providing follow-up care to patients who've lost their limbs.
Working as part of our team, working as paraprofessionals, community health workers can help ensure that a lot of what your family doctor would do reaches the places that most family doctors could never go.
One of my favorite things to do is to care for patients with community health workers.
So last year I was visiting A.B., and like Musu, A.B. had had a chance to go to school.
He was in middle school, in the eighth grade, when his parents died.
He became an orphan and had to drop out.
Last year, we hired and trained A.B. as a community health worker.
And while he was making door to door house calls, he met this young boy named Prince, whose mother had had trouble breastfeeding him, and by the age of six months, Prince had started to waste away.
A.B. had just been taught how to use this color-coded measuring tape that wraps around the upper arm of a child to diagnose malnutrition.
A.B. noticed that Prince was in the red zone, which meant he had to be hospitalized.
So A.B. took Prince and his mother to the river, got in a canoe and paddled for four hours to get to the hospital.
Later, after Prince was discharged, A.B. taught mom how to feed baby a food supplement.
A few months ago, A.B. took me to visit Prince, and he's a chubby little guy.
(Laughter) He's meeting his milestones, he's pulled himself up to a stand, and is even starting to say a few words.
I'm so inspired by these community health workers.
I often ask them why they do what they do, and when I asked A.B., he said, "Doc, since I dropped out of school, this is the first time I'm having a chance to hold a pen to write.
My brain is getting fresh."
The stories of A.B. and Musu have taught me something fundamental about being human.
Our will to serve others can actually help us transform our own conditions.
I was so moved by how powerful the will to serve our neighbors can be a few years ago, when we faced a global catastrophe.
In December 2013, something happened in the rainforests across the border from us in Guinea.
A toddler named Emile fell sick with vomiting, fever and diarrhea.
He lived in an area where the roads were sparse and there had been massive shortages of health workers.
Emile died, and a few weeks later his sister died, and a few weeks later his mother died.
And this disease would spread from one community to another.
And it wasn't until three months later that the world recognized this as Ebola.
When every minute counted, we had already lost months, and by then the virus had spread like wildfire all across West Africa, and eventually to other parts of the world.
Businesses shut down, airlines started canceling routes.
At the height of the crisis, when we were told that 1.4 million people could be infected, when we were told that most of them would die, when we had nearly lost all hope, I remember standing with a group of health workers in the rainforest where an outbreak had just happened.
We were helping train and equip them to put on the masks, the gloves and the gowns that they needed to keep themselves safe from the virus while they were serving their patients.
I remember the fear in their eyes.
And I remember staying up at night, terrified if I'd made the right call to keep them in the field.
When Ebola threatened to bring humanity to its knees, Liberia's community health workers didn't surrender to fear.
They did what they had always done: they answered the call to serve their neighbors.
Community members across Liberia learned the symptoms of Ebola, teamed up with nurses and doctors to go door-to-door to find the sick and get them into care.
They tracked thousands of people who had been exposed to the virus and helped break the chain of transmission.
Some ten thousand community health workers risked their own lives to help hunt down this virus and stop it in its tracks.
(Applause) Today, Ebola has come under control in West Africa, and we've learned a few things.
We've learned that blind spots in rural health care can lead to hot spots of disease, and that places all of us at greater risk.
We've learned that the most efficient emergency system is actually an everyday system, and that system has to reach all communities, including rural communities like Emile's.
And most of all, we've learned from the courage of Liberia's community health workers that we as people are not defined by the conditions we face, no matter how hopeless they seem.
We're defined by how we respond to them.
For the past 15 years, I've seen the power of this idea to transform everyday citizens into community health workers -- into everyday heroes.
And I've seen it play out everywhere, from the forest communities of West Africa, to the rural fishing villages of Alaska.
It's true, these community health workers aren't doing neurosurgery, but they're making it possible to bring health care within reach of everyone everywhere.
So now what?
Well, we know that there are still millions of people dying from preventable causes in rural communities around the world.
And we know that the great majority of these deaths are happening in these 75 blue-shaded countries.
What we also know is that if we trained an army of community health workers to learn even just 30 lifesaving skills, we could save the lives of nearly 30 million people by 2030.
Thirty services could save 30 million lives by 2030.
That's not just a blueprint -- we're proving this can be done.
In Liberia, the Liberian government is training thousands of workers like A.B. and Musu after Ebola, to bring health care to every child and family in the country.
And we've been honored to work with them, and are now teaming up with a number of organizations that are working across other countries to try to help them do the same thing.
If we could help these countries scale, we could save millions of lives, and at the same time, we could create millions of jobs.
We simply can't do that, though, without technology.
People are worried that technology is going to steal our jobs, but when it comes to community health workers, technology has actually been vital for creating jobs.
Without technology -- without this smartphone, without this rapid test -- it would have been impossible for us to be able to employ A.B. and Musu.
And I think it's time for technology to help us train, to help us train people faster and better than ever before.
As a doctor, I use technology to stay up-to-date and keep certified.
I use smartphones, I use apps, I use online courses.
But when A.B. wants to learn, he's got to jump back in that canoe and get to the training center.
And when Musu shows up for training, her instructors are stuck using flip charts and markers.
Why shouldn't they have the same access to learn as I do?
If we truly want community health workers to master those lifesaving skills and even more, we've got to change this old-school model of education.
Tech can truly be a game changer here.
I've been in awe of the digital education revolution that the likes of Khan Academy and edX have been leading.
And I've been thinking that it's time; it's time for a collision between the digital education revolution and the community health revolution.
And so, this brings me to my TED Prize wish.
I wish -- I wish that you would help us recruit the largest army of community health workers the world has ever known by creating the Community Health Academy, a global platform to train, connect and empower.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Here's the idea: we'll create and curate the best in digital education resources.
We will bring those to community health workers around the world, including A.B. and Musu.
They'll get video lessons on giving kids vaccines and have online courses on spotting the next outbreak, so they're not stuck using flip charts.
We'll help these countries accredit these workers, so that they're not stuck remaining an under-recognized, undervalued group, but become a renowned, empowered profession, just like nurses and doctors.
And we'll create a network of companies and entrepreneurs who've created innovations that can save lives and help them connect to workers like Musu, so she can help better serve her community.
And we'll work tirelessly to persuade governments to make community health workers a cornerstone of their health care plans.
We plan to test and prototype the academy in Liberia and a few other partner countries, and then we plan to take it global, including to rural North America.
With the power of this platform, we believe countries can be more persuaded that a health care revolution really is possible.
My dream is that this academy will contribute to the training of hundreds of thousands of community members to help bring health care to their neighbors -- the hundreds of millions of them that live in the world's most remote communities, from the forest communities of West Africa, to the fishing villages of rural Alaska; from the hilltops of Appalachia, to the mountains of Afghanistan.
If this vision is aligned with yours, head to communityhealthacademy.org, and join this revolution.
Let us know if you or your organization or someone you know could help us as we try to build this academy over the next year.
Now, as I look out into this room, I realize that our journeys are not self-made; they're shaped by others.
And there have been so many here that have been part of this cause.
We're so honored to be part of this community, and a community that's willing to take on a cause as audacious as this one, so I wanted to offer, as I end, a reflection.
I think a lot more about what my father taught me.
These days, I too have become a dad.
I have two sons, and my wife and I just learned that she's pregnant with our third child.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) I was recently caring for a woman in Liberia who, like my wife, was in her third pregnancy.
But unlike my wife, had had no prenatal care with her first two babies.
She lived in an isolated community in the forest that had gone for 100 years without any health care until ...
until last year when a nurse trained her neighbors to become community health workers.
So here I was, seeing this patient who was in her second trimester, and I pulled out the ultrasound to check on the baby, and she started telling us stories about her first two kids, and I had the ultrasound probe on her belly, and she just stopped mid-sentence.
She turned to me and she said, "Doc, what's that sound?"
It was the first time she'd ever heard her baby's heartbeat.
And her eyes lit up in the same way my wife's eyes and my own eyes lit up when we heard our baby's heartbeat.
For all of human history, illness has been universal and access to care has not.
But as a wise man once told me: no condition is permanent.
It's time.
It's time for us to go as far as it takes to change this condition together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My work is about the behaviors that we all engage in unconsciously, on a collective level.
And what I mean by that, it's the behaviors that we're in denial about, and the ones that operate below the surface of our daily awareness.
And as individuals, we all do these things, all the time, everyday.
It's like when you're mean to your wife because you're mad at somebody else.
Or when you drink a little too much at a party, just out of anxiety.
Or when you overeat because your feelings are hurt, or whatever.
And when we do these kind of things, when 300 million people do unconscious behaviors, then it can add up to a catastrophic consequence that nobody wants, and no one intended.
And that's what I look at with my photographic work.
This is an image I just recently completed, that is -- when you stand back at a distance, it looks like some kind of neo-Gothic, cartoon image of a factory spewing out pollution.
And as you get a little bit closer, it starts looking like lots of pipes, like maybe a chemical plant, or a refinery, or maybe a hellish freeway interchange.
And as you get all the way up close, you realize that it's actually made of lots and lots of plastic cups.
And in fact, this is one million plastic cups, which is the number of plastic cups that are used on airline flights in the United States every six hours.
We use four million cups a day on airline flights, and virtually none of them are reused or recycled.
They just don't do that in that industry.
Now, that number is dwarfed by the number of paper cups we use every day, and that is 40 million cups a day for hot beverages, most of which is coffee.
I couldn't fit 40 million cups on a canvas, but I was able to put 410,000. That's what 410,000 cups looks like.
That's 15 minutes of our cup consumption.
And if you could actually stack up that many cups in real life, that's the size it would be.
And there's an hour's worth of our cups.
And there's a day's worth of our cups.
You can still see the little people way down there.
That's as high as a 42-story building, and I put the Statue of Liberty in there as a scale reference.
Speaking of justice, there's another phenomenon going on in our culture that I find deeply troubling, and that is that America, right now, has the largest percentage of its population in prison of any country on Earth.
One out of four people, one out of four humans in prison are Americans, imprisoned in our country.
And I wanted to show the number.
The number is 2.3 million Americans were incarcerated in 2005.
And that's gone up since then, but we don't have the numbers yet.
So, I wanted to show 2.3 million prison uniforms, and in the actual print of this piece, each uniform is the size of a nickel on its edge.
They're tiny. They're barely visible as a piece of material, and to show 2.3 million of them required a canvas that was larger than any printer in the world would print.
And so I had to divide it up into multiple panels that are 10 feet tall by 25 feet wide.
This is that piece installed in a gallery in New York -- those are my parents looking at the piece.
(Laughter) Every time I look at this piece, I always wonder if my mom's whispering to my dad, "He finally folded his laundry."
(Laughter) I want to show you some pieces now that are about addiction.
And this particular one is about cigarette addiction.
I wanted to make a piece that shows the actual number of Americans who die from cigarette smoking.
More than 400,000 people die in the United States every year from smoking cigarettes.
And so, this piece is made up of lots and lots of boxes of cigarettes.
And, as you slowly step back, you see that it's a painting by Van Gogh, called "Skull with Cigarette."
It's a strange thing to think about, that on 9/11, when that tragedy happened, 3,000 Americans died.
And do you remember the response?
It reverberated around the world, and will continue to reverberate through time.
It will be something that we talk about in 100 years.
And yet on that same day, 1,100 Americans died from smoking.
And the day after that, another 1,100 Americans died from smoking.
And every single day since then, 1,100 Americans have died.
And today, 1,100 Americans are dying from cigarette smoking.
And we aren't talking about it -- we dismiss it.
The tobacco lobby, it's too strong.
We just dismiss it out of our consciousness.
And knowing what we know about the destructive power of cigarettes, we continue to allow our children, our sons and daughters, to be in the presence of the influences that start them smoking.
And this is what the next piece is about.
This is just lots and lots of cigarettes: 65,000 cigarettes, which is equal to the number of teenagers who will start smoking this month, and every month in the U.S.
More than 700,000 children in the United States aged 18 and under begin smoking every year.
One more strange epidemic in the United States that I want to acquaint you with is this phenomenon of abuse and misuse of prescription drugs.
This is an image I've made out of lots and lots of Vicodin.
Well, actually, I only had one Vicodin that I scanned lots and lots of times.
(Laughter) And so, as you stand back, you see 213,000 Vicodin pills, which is the number of hospital emergency room visits yearly in the United States, attributable to abuse and misuse of prescription painkillers and anti-anxiety medications.
One-third of all drug overdoses in the U.S. -- and that includes cocaine, heroin, alcohol, everything -- one-third of drug overdoses are prescription medications.
A strange phenomenon.
This is a piece that I just recently completed about another tragic phenomenon. And that is the phenomenon, this growing obsession we have with breast augmentation surgery.
384,000 women, American women, last year went in for elective breast augmentation surgery.
It's rapidly becoming the most popular high school graduation gift, given to young girls who are about to go off to college.
So, I made this image out of Barbie dolls, and so, as you stand back you see this kind of floral pattern, and as you get all the way back, you see 32,000 Barbie dolls, which represents the number of breast augmentation surgeries that are performed in the U.S. each month.
The vast majority of those are on women under the age of 21.
And strangely enough, the only plastic surgery that is more popular than breast augmentation is liposuction, and most of that is being done by men.
Now, I want to emphasize that these are just examples.
I'm not holding these out as being the biggest issues.
They're just examples.
And the reason that I do this, it's because I have this fear that we aren't feeling enough as a culture right now.
There's this kind of anesthesia in America at the moment.
We've lost our sense of outrage, our anger and our grief about what's going on in our culture right now, what's going on in our country, the atrocities that are being committed in our names around the world.
They've gone missing; these feelings have gone missing.
Our cultural joy, our national joy is nowhere to be seen.
And one of the causes of this, I think, is that as each of us attempts to build this new kind of worldview, this holoptical worldview, this holographic image that we're all trying to create in our mind of the interconnection of things: the environmental footprints 1,000 miles away of the things that we buy; the social consequences 10,000 miles away of the daily decisions that we make as consumers.
As we try to build this view, and try to educate ourselves about the enormity of our culture, the information that we have to work with is these gigantic numbers: numbers in the millions, in the hundreds of millions, in the billions and now in the trillions.
Bush's new budget is in the trillions, and these are numbers that our brain just doesn't have the ability to comprehend.
We can't make meaning out of these enormous statistics.
And so that's what I'm trying to do with my work, is to take these numbers, these statistics from the raw language of data, and to translate them into a more universal visual language, that can be felt.
Because my belief is, if we can feel these issues, if we can feel these things more deeply, then they'll matter to us more than they do now.
And if we can find that, then we'll be able to find, within each one of us, what it is that we need to find to face the big question, which is: how do we change?
That, to me, is the big question that we face as a people right now: how do we change? How do we change as a culture, and how do we each individually take responsibility for the one piece of the solution that we are in charge of, and that is our own behavior?
My belief is that you don't have to make yourself bad to look at these issues.
I'm not pointing the finger at America in a blaming way.
I'm simply saying, this is who we are right now.
And if there are things that we see that we don't like about our culture, then we have a choice.
The degree of integrity that each of us can bring to the surface, to bring to this question, the depth of character that we can summon, as we show up for the question of how do we change -- it's already defining us as individuals and as a nation, and it will continue to do that, on into the future.
And it will profoundly affect the well-being, the quality of life of the billions of people who are going to inherit the results of our decisions.
I'm not speaking abstractly about this, I'm speaking -- this is who we are in this room, right now, in this moment.
Thank you and good afternoon.
(Applause)
(Music) Sophie Hawley-Weld: OK, you don't have to stand up, but ...
we can see you really clearly -- (Laughter) So you have to dance with us.
And we have this, like, choreographed dance thing that we're about to do -- Betta Lemme: Really easy.
SHW: And we're going to flick our wrists like this, and you're going to do it with us.
(Music) (Sings) I know I did not raise a wrist (Both sing) I know I did not capture it It came, it came, it went, it went It conquered quick I was there and then I quit Awoo!
I know I did not raise a wrist I know I did not capture it It came, it came, it went, it went It conquered quick I was there and then I quit Awoo!
BL: (Speaks) There you go!
(Music) SHW: We have another one coming up.
It's a little finger-pointing dance.
(Music) The people sitting down, I want to see your fingers pointing.
Yeah!
(Sings) I know I did not raise a wrist (Both sing) I know I did not capture it It came, it came, it went, it went It conquered quick I was there and then I quit Aaaa ...
(Applause) Awoo!
(Music) (Clapping to the beat) (Music) Aaaa ...
SHW: (Speaks) Alright, hand flick.
(Both sing) I know I did not raise a wrist I know I did not capture it It came, it came, it went, it went It conquered quick I was there and then I quit I know I did not raise a wrist I know I did not capture it It came, it came, it went, it went It conquered quick I was there and then I quit (Music) Tucker Halpern: You guys are way more fun than I thought you'd be.
(Laughter) (Music) Awoo!
(Applause) SHW: Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Silicon Valley is obsessed with disruption, but these days, the biggest disruptor didn't come out of Silicon Valley.
It came out of steel towns in Ohio, rural communities in Pennsylvania, the Panhandle in Florida.
And this last US presidential election was the mother of all disruptions.
Once again, politics is personal.
Millions of Americans became activists overnight, pouring into the streets in record numbers in record time.
(Laughter) The election has done to family holiday dinners what Uber has done to New York City's taxi system.
Couples have broken up and marriages disrupted.
And the election is doing to my private life what Amazon is doing to shopping malls.
These days, the ACLU is on the front lines 24/7, and even if I manage to sneak away for a couple of miles on the treadmill, any cardio benefit I get is instantly obliterated when I read another presidential tweet on the headline scroll.
Even my secret pleasure of studying the Italian painters have been infected by politics.
Now, I study, even stalk, the old masters.
This is my desk, with a postcard exhibition of some famous and obscure paintings mostly from the Italian Renaissance.
Now, art used to provide me with a necessary break from the hurly-burly of politics in my daily work at the ACLU, but not anymore.
I was at the Women's March in San Francisco the day after inauguration, and the crowd was chanting, "This is what democracy looks like."
"This is what democracy looks like."
And there I was holding my sign and my umbrella in the rain, and I flashed on an old painting that first captivated me many years ago.
I struggled to remember the different pieces of an actual painting of good and bad government.
It was almost like the old master was taunting me.
You want to know what democracy looks like?
Go back and look at my frescoes.
And so I did.
In 1339, Ambrogio Lorenzetti finished a monumental commission in the governing council chamber of Siena's Palazzo Pubblico.
It's a painting that speaks to us, even screams to us, today.
"Art is a lie that makes us realize truth," Pablo Picasso once said.
And as we search for the truth about government, we should keep Ambrogio's work, not a lie but an allegory, in our collective mind's eye.
During Lorenzetti's time, the political legitimacy of Italian city-states was often on very shaky ground.
Siena was a republic, but there had been enormous unrest in the two decades leading up to the commission.
Siena's political leaders, who would literally govern under the eyes of these allegorical figures, were Lorenzetti's intended audience.
He was cataloging the obligations of the governing to the governed.
Now, you can spend years studying these frescoes.
Some scholars have.
I'm hardly an art historian, but I am passionate about art, and a work this massive can overwhelm me.
So first, I focus on the big stuff.
This is the allegory of good government.
The majestic figure here in the middle is dressed in Siena's colors and he personifies the republic itself.
Lorenzetti labels him "Commune," and he's basically telling the Sienese that they, and not a king or a tyrant, must rule themselves.
Now, surrounding Commune are his advisors.
Justice is enthroned.
She's looking up at the figure of wisdom, who actually supports her scales of justice.
Concord, or Harmony, holds a string that comes off the scales of justice that binds her to the citizens, making them all compatriots in the republic.
And finally we see Peace.
She looks chilled out, like she's listening to Bob Marley.
When good government rules, Peace doesn't break a sweat.
Now, these are big images and big ideas, but I really love the small stuff.
Along another wall, Lorenzetti illustrates the effects of good government on the real and everyday lives of ordinary people with a series of delicious little details.
In the countryside, the hills are landscaped and farmed.
Crops are being sown, hoed, reaped, milled, plowed, all in one picture.
Crops and livestock are being brought to market.
In the city, builders raise a tower.
People attend a law lecture, a TED Talk of the 14th century.
(Laughter) Schoolchildren play.
Tradesmen thrive.
Dancers larger than life dance with joy.
And watching over the republic is the winged figure Security, whose banner reads, "Everyone shall go forth freely without fear."
Now, what's amazing about these images from 800 years ago is that they're familiar to us today.
We see what democracy looks like.
We experience the effects of good government in our lives, just as Lorenzetti did in his life.
But it is the allegory of bad government that has been haunting me since November 9.
It's badly damaged, but it reads like today's newspapers.
And ruling over bad government is not the Commune but the Tyrant.
He has horns, tusks, crossed eyes, braided hair.
He obviously spends a lot of time on that hair.
(Laughter) Justice now lies helpless at his feet, shackled.
Her scales have been severed.
Justice is the key antagonist to the Tyrant, and she's been taken out.
Now, surrounding the Tyrant, Lorenzetti illustrates the vices that animate bad government.
Avarice is the old woman clutching the strongbox and a fisherman's hook to pull in her fortune.
Vainglory carries a mirror, and Lorenzetti warns us against narcissistic leaders who are guided by their own ego and vanity.
On the Tyrant's right is Cruelty.
Treason, half lamb, half scorpion, lulls us into a false sense of security and then poisons a republic.
Fraud, with the flighty wings of a bat.
On the Tyrant's left, you see Division.
She's dressed in Siena's colors.
"Si" and "No" are painted on her body.
She uses a carpenter's saw to chop her body in half.
And Fury wields the weapons of the mob, the stone and knife.
In the remainder of the fresco, Lorenzetti shows us the inevitable effects of bad government.
The civic ideals celebrated elsewhere in this room have failed us, and we see it.
The once beautiful city has fallen to pieces, the countryside barren, the farms abandoned.
Many are in flames.
And in the sky above is not the winged figure Security, but that of Fear, whose banner reads: "None shall pass along this road without fear of death."
Now, the final image, the most important one, really, is one that Lorenzetti did not paint.
It is of the viewer.
Today, the audience for Lorenzetti's frescoes is not the governing but the governed, the individual who stands in front of his allegories and walks away with insight, who heeds a call to action.
Lorenzetti warns us that we must recognize the shadows of Avarice, Fraud, Division, even Tyranny when they float across our political landscape, especially when those shadows are cast by political leaders loudly claiming to be the voice of good government and promising to make America great again.
And we must act.
Democracy must not be a spectator sport.
The right to protest, the right to assemble freely, the right to petition one's government, these are not just rights.
In the face of Avarice, Fraud and Division, these are obligations.
We have to disrupt -- (Applause) We have to disrupt our lives so that we can disrupt the amoral accretion of power by those who would betray our values.
We and we the people must raise justice up and must bring peace to our nation and must come together in concord, and we have a choice.
We could either paint ourselves into the worst nightmare of Lorenzetti's bad government, or we can stay in the streets, disruptive, messy, loud.
That is what democracy looks like.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: First of all, wow.
Obviously, many people passionately -- you spoke to many people passionately here.
I'm sure there are other people here who'd say, look, Trump was elected by 63 million people.
He's far from perfect, but he's trying to do what he was elected to do.
Shouldn't you give him a chance?
Anthony Romero: I think we have to recognize the legitimacy of him as president versus the legitimacy of his policies.
And when so many of the policies are contrary to fundamental values, that we're all equal under the law, that we're not judged by the color of our skin or the religion we worship, we have to contest those values even as we recognize and honor the fact that our democracy rendered us a president who is championing those values.
CA: And the ACLU isn't just this force on the left, right?
You're making other arguments as well.
AR: Well, you know, very often we piss everyone off at one point.
That's what we do.
And we recently were taking stands for why Ann Coulter needs to be able to speak at Berkeley, and why Milo has free speech rights.
And we even wrote a blog that almost burnt the house down among some of our members, unfortunately, when we talked about the fact that even Donald Trump has free speech rights as president, and an effort to hold him accountable for incitement of violence at his marches or his rallies is unconstitutional and un-American.
And when you put that statement out there to a very frothy base that always is very excited for you to fight Donald Trump, and then you have a new one saying, "Wait, these rights are for everybody, even the president that we don't like."
And that's our job.
(Applause) CA: Anthony, you spoke to so many of us so powerfully.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
(Applause)
(Dominoes fall) (Toy car) (Ball rolls) (Music: "This Too Shall Pass") (Singing) You know you can't keep letting it get you down, and you can't keep dragging that dead weight around.
If there ain't all that much to lug around better run like hell when you hit the ground When the morning comes When the morning comes You can't stop these kids from dancing, but why would you want to, especially when you're already getting yours?
(Xylophone) (Singing) 'Cause if your mind don't move and your knees don't bend, well don't go blaming the kids again.
(Xylophone) (Singing) When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes When the morning comes (Xylophone) (Singing) Let it go, this too shall pass Let it go, this too shall pass You know you can't keep letting it get you down, you can't keep letting it get you down -- this too shall pass If there ain't all that much to lug around, you can't keep letting it get you down -- this too shall pass When the morning comes -- you can't keep letting it get you down, no you can't keep letting it When the morning comes -- you can't keep letting it get you down, no you can't keep letting it When the morning comes -- you can't keep letting it get you down, no you can't keep letting it When the morning comes -- you can't keep letting it get you down, no you can't keep letting it When the morning comes (Paint guns fire) (Applause) Damian Kulash: Thank you, thanks very much.
We are OK Go, and we've been together as a band since 1998.
But in the last decade, we've become known as much for the elaborate music videos, like the one we just saw, as for the songs they accompany.
So we will play along with another one of those in a few minutes, but in the meantime, we want to address this question that we get asked all the time but we've really never come up with an adequate answer for it, and that is, how do we think of those ideas?
The videos are not all Rube Goldberg machines, by the way.
Last year we did a dance in zero gravity, and once we set up an obstacle course out of thousands of musical instruments in the desert, and then played them by stunt driving a car through them.
(Laughter) For one of the videos, we choreographed hundreds of people with umbrellas in an abandoned parking lot outside Tokyo, and then filmed them from a drone a half a mile in the air.
So it's all of these ideas that people are curious about, and the reason we've had so much trouble describing how we think of these ideas is that it doesn't really feel like we think of them at all.
It feels like we find them.
And by way of explanation -- well, I have a compulsive habit.
I play parallax and perspective games with my eyes pretty much all the time, and it's something I've been doing since I was a teenager.
And I think the big contributing factor may have been that this is how I decorated my high school bedroom.
(Laughter) And being a teenager, what I did in there, of course, was just talk on the phone for staggering amounts of time.
So I was in this visual maelstrom just pretty much usually sitting in one place, and I guess just the overload in general -- my brain kind of tried to make sense of it, and I would -- If I could move my head off to one side a little bit, the edge of the desk would line up just perfectly with that poster on the opposite wall; or if I put my thumb out, I could close first my left eye and then my right, and my thumb would bounce back and forth between Jimi Hendrix's left eye and his right.
(Laughter) It was not a conscious thing, of course, this is just kind of the equivalent of doodling while you're talking, and it's still something I do all the time.
This is my wife, Kristin -- (Applause) Yeah!
Woo!
And it's not uncommon that we are out at dinner, and in the middle of a great conversation she'll just stop mid-sentence, and when she stops is when I realize that I'm the one who's acting weird because I'm like bobbing and weaving.
And what I'm trying to do is get that ficus back there to stick out of her head like a ponytail.
(Laughter) The point of telling you all this is that -- for me this is what it feels like to have an idea.
It's like they're made of these disparate parts, these disparate chunks sort of floating out there.
And if you're receptive and you're observant, and crucially, if you're in exactly the right place, you can get them to just line up.
So if you get used to -- if it's your job to think of ideas this way, they'll start beckoning to you the way that Jimi's eyes beckoned from that poster, or the ficus beckons from behind Kristin's head.
Writing music feels like that process just over and over again, like you've got a bunch of sounds or a groove or a chord progression and you're just looking for that thing on the other side, that little chunk over there, that puzzle piece that clicks right in.
And when it does click, it doesn't feel like you thought up that puzzle piece, it feels like you found it -- like it was a set of relationships that you unlocked.
But with the videos in particular, we're usually looking for this specific feeling which is wonder.
And there's always a component of surprise to wonder, so we're not just looking for good ideas, we're looking for good ideas that surprise us in some way.
And this causes something of a problem, because ...
the process that we all use to make stuff, it actually has a very strong bias against surprising ideas.
The process I'm talking about is the one you all know -- we all do it all the time.
You think of an idea.
You just sit and think of your brilliant idea and then you come up with a plan for how you're going to make that idea happen.
And then with that plan in mind, you go back and double-check your original idea and maybe revise it, and then bouncing back and forth between the idea and the plan, the plan and the idea, eventually you come up with a truly great plan.
And then once you have that, and only then, do you go out and you execute.
And this is like -- this is sort of a flawless system in terms of maximizing your resources, because this -- super cheap.
Thinking usually costs very little, but this is really expensive most of the time, so by the time you get there, you want to make sure you're super prepared and you can squeeze every last drop out of what you've got.
But there are problems with this, and math will help us reveal the biggest one.
Go back to that video that we just showed you.
That Rube Goldberg machine, it had about 130 interactions in it.
That was 130 things that we had to have go according to our plan.
So let's assume that we want to make a new video now, similarly complex -- 130 moving parts.
If we're really good planners in that system, it seems like maybe we could be good enough to get every part of that system to be 90 percent reliable.
90 percent sounds good, right?
Well, it's not.
It's terrible actually. The numbers say so.
The chance of getting all 130 things to not fail at the same time is .9 for 90 percent to the 130th power.
So calculate that out and you get ...
(Ding) .000001, which is one ten-thousandth of one percent, so your chance for success is literally one in a million.
(Whistle) (Laughter) I mean that's not a gamble I want to take, so let's ratchet up that reliability to 99 percent.
.99 to the 130th power is ...
(Ding) .27 -- 27 percent.
Significantly less daunting -- like this might even be usable.
But really think about that.
How many parts of your lives are 99 percent reliable?
And could you really get 130 of them all in one place at once?
And if you really could, doesn't it seem like you deserve to succeed?
Like that is -- that thing is going to work, right?
But no, it actually fails three times more often than it succeeds.
So the upshot of all this is that if your project is pretty complex -- like, you know, every ambitious project is -- if you've got a lot of moving parts, you're basically constrained to just reshuffling ideas that have already demonstrably proven that they're 100 percent reliable.
So now go back to me sitting with my thumb in the air trying to line up something surprising.
If the only things I'm allowed to consider in the first place are ideas that have already been done over and over and over again, I am screwed.
However, there are ways around this, because we all know that there are tons of untried ideas still out there, and plenty of them will turn out to be every bit as reliable as we need, it's just that we don't yet know they are reliable when we are at this planning phase.
So what we do is we try to identify some place where there might just be a ton of those untried ideas.
We try to find a sandbox and then we gamble a whole bunch of our resources on getting in that sandbox and playing.
(Laughter) Because we have to trust that it's the process in the sandbox that will reveal to us which ideas are not only surprising, but surprisingly reliable.
So some of the sandboxes that we've started videos with.
Let's play with optical illusions.
Let's try to dance on moving surfaces.
Let's try to make toast with a laser cutter.
Or let's do something in one of those zero-gravity airplanes.
But then instead of actually trying to sit there and think out what that something is, we spent a full third of our budget getting in an actual Vomit Comet and bouncing off the walls for a week.
So this may seem to you like testing, but it really isn't, because at this point we don't yet know what our idea is, we don't have a plan to be testing.
So we're just -- we're just playing, we're just trying everything we can think of, because we need to get this idea space filled up with a chaos like the one in my high school bedroom.
Because then, if we can do the bob and weave thing, if we can put our thumbs up and get just a few things to line up -- (Ding) chances are no one else has ever made those same things line up before.
And when we're done with that project, people will ask us again how we thought of that idea, and we'll be stumped, because from our perspective, it doesn't feel like we thought of it at all, it just feels like we found it.
So we'll play another video for you now and the song along with it.
This is for the song "The One Moment," and for this one, the sandbox was ballistics and math.
So I spent a full month putting together a giant spreadsheet for this.
It was like my playspace was 400 lines long and 25 columns wide -- which I presume that if anybody is going to understand that, it's this crowd.
(Laughter) Nothing is better than a giant spreadsheet, right?
(Laughter) Well, thank you everyone, very much.
We are OK Go, and this is called "The One Moment."
(Applause) [The One Moment] (Explosions) [What you just saw was real and it took 4.2 seconds] (Video) Let me know when it's safe.
(Percussion) [Here's the same moment ...
slowed down.] (Music) (Guitar) (Singing) You're right, there's nothing more lovely, there's nothing more profound than the certainty, than the certainty that all of this will end That all of this will end So open your arms to me, open your arms to me And this will be the one moment that matters, and this will be the one thing we remember, and this will be the reason to have been here, and this will be the one moment that matters -- Oh ...
(Guitar) (Singing) So while the mud reclaims our footprints, and while our bones keep looking back at the overgrowth that's swallowing the path -- but for the grace of God go we, but for the grace of God go we But for the grace of time and chance and entropy's cruel hands -- So open your arms to me, open your arms to me And this will be the one moment that matters, and this will be the one thing we remember, and this will be the reason to have been here, and this will be the one moment that matters Oh ...
So won't you stay here with me and we'll build 'til we've blistered our hands So won't you stay here with me and we'll build us some temples, build us some castles, build us some monuments and burn them all right down (Music) (Singing) So open your arms to me And this will be the one moment that matters, and this will be the reason to have been here, and this will be the one thing we remember, and this will be the one moment that matters So won't you stay here with me, we'll build 'til we blister our hands And this will be the one moment that matters -- So won't you stay here with me and build us some temples -- This will be the one moment that matters -- Build us some temples -- The one moment that matters -- Build us some monuments -- The one moment that matters Build us some temples -- The one moment that matters.
Build us some monuments -- The one moment that matters, oh (Guitar) (Applause)
Zika fever: our newest dread disease.
What is it? Where'd it come from?
What do we do about it?
Well for most adults, it's a relatively mild disease -- a little fever, a little headache, joint pain, maybe a rash.
In fact, most people who get it don't even know they've had it.
But the more we find out about the Zika virus the more terrifying it becomes.
For example, doctors have noticed an uptick of something called Guillain-Barr syndrome in recent outbreaks.
In Guillain-Barr, your immune system attacks your nerve cells it can partially or even totally paralyze you.
Fortunately, that's quite rare, and most people recover.
But if you're pregnant when you're infected you're at risk of something terrible.
Indeed, a child with a deformed head.
Here's a normal baby.
Here's that infant with what's called microcephaly.
a brain in a head that's too small.
And there's no known cure.
It was actually doctors in northeastern Brazil who first noticed, just a year ago, after a Zika outbreak, that there was a peak in the incidence of microcephaly.
It took medical doctors another year to be sure that it was caused by the Zika virus, but they're now sure.
And if you're a "bring on the evidence" type, check out this publication.
So where did it come from, and how did it get here?
And it is here.
Like many of our viruses, it came out of Africa, specifically the Zika forest in Uganda.
Researchers at the nearby Yellow Fever Research Institute identified an unknown virus in a monkey in the Zika forest which is how it got its name.
The first human cases of Zika fever surfaced a few years later in Uganda-Tanzania.
The virus then spread through West Africa and east through equatorial Asia -- Pakistan, India, Malaysia, Indonesia.
But it was still mostly in monkeys and, of course, mosquitoes.
In fact in the 60 years between the time it was first identified in 1947 and 2007 there were only 13 reported cases of human Zika fever.
And then something extraordinary happened on the tiny Micronesian Yap islands.
There was an outbreak that affected fully 75 percent of the population.
How did it get there? By air.
Today we have two billion commercial airline passengers.
An infected passenger can board a plane, fly halfway around the world before developing symptoms -- if they develop symptoms at all.
Then when they land, the local mosquitoes begin to bite them and spread the fever.
Zika fever then next surfaced in 2013 in French Polynesia.
By December of that year, it was being transmitted locally by the mosquitoes.
That led to an explosive outbreak in which almost 30,000 people were affected.
From there it radiated around the Pacific.
There were outbreaks in the Cook Islands, in New Caledonia, in Vanuatu, in the Solomon Islands and almost all the way around to the coast of South America and Easter Island.
And then, in early 2015, there was an upsurge of cases of a dengue-like syndrome in the city of Natal in northeastern Brazil.
The virus wasn't dengue, it was Zika, and it spread rapidly -- Recife down the coast, a big metropolitan center, soon became the epicenter.
Well people have speculated that it was 2014 World Cup soccer fans that brought the virus into the country.
But others have speculated that perhaps it was Pacific Islanders participating in championship canoe races that were held in Rio that year that brought it in.
Well today, this is only a year later.
The virus is being locally transmitted by mosquitoes virtually throughout South America, Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean Islands Until this year, the many thousands of cases that have been diagnosed in the US were contracted elsewhere.
But as of this summer, it's being transmitted locally in Miami.
It's here.
So what do we do about it?
Well, preventing infection is either about protecting people or about eliminating the mosquitoes.
Let's focus on people first.
You can get vaccinated.
You can not travel to Zika areas.
Or you can cover up and apply insect repellent.
Getting vaccinated is not an option, because there isn't a vaccine yet and there probably won't be for a couple of years.
Staying home isn't a foolproof protection either because we now know that it can be sexually transmitted.
Covering up and applying insect repellent does work ...
until you forget.
(Laughter) So that leaves the mosquitoes, and here's how we control them now: spraying insecticides.
The protective gear is necessary because these are toxic chemicals that kill people as well as bugs.
Although it does take quite a lot more to kill a person than to kill a bug.
These are pictures from Brazil and Nicaragua.
But it looks the same in Miami, Florida.
And we of course can spray insecticides from planes.
Last summer, mosquito control officials in Dorchester County, South Carolina, authorized spraying of Naled, an insecticide, early one morning, as recommended by the manufacturer.
Later that day, a beekeeper told reporters that her bee yard looked like it had been nuked.
Oops.
Bees are the good guys.
The citizens of Florida protested, but spraying continued.
Unfortunately, so did the increase in the number of Zika fever cases.
That's because insecticides aren't very effective.
So are there any approaches that are perhaps more effective than spraying but with less downsides than toxic chemicals?
I'm a huge fan of biological controls, and I share that view with Rachel Carson, author of "Silent Spring," the book that is credited with starting the environmental movement.
In this book she tells the story, as an example, of how a very nasty insect pest of livestock was eliminated in the last century.
No one knows that extraordinary story today.
So Jack Block and I, when we were writing an editorial about the mosquito problem today, retold that story.
And in capsule form, it's that pupae -- that's the immature form of the insect -- were irradiated until they were sterile, grown to adulthood and then released from planes all over the Southwest, the Southeast and down into Mexico and into Central America literally by the hundreds of millions from little airplanes, eventually eliminating that terrible insect pest for most of the Western Hemisphere.
Our real purpose in writing this editorial was to introduce readers to how we can do that today -- not with radiation but with our knowledge of genetics.
Let me explain.
This is the bad guy: Aedes aegypti.
It's the most common insect vector of diseases, not just Zika but dengue, Chikungunya, West Nile virus and that ancient plague, yellow fever.
It's an urban mosquito, and it's the female that does the dirty work.
She bites to get a blood meal to feed her offspring.
Males don't bite; they don't even have the mouth parts to bite.
A little British company called Oxitec genetically modified that mosquito so that when it mates with a wild female, its eggs don't develop to adulthood.
Let me show you.
This is the normal reproductive cycle.
Oxitec designed the mosquito so that when the male mates with the wild female the eggs don't develop.
Sounds impossible?
Well let me show you just diagrammatically how they do it.
Now this represents the nucleus of a mosquito cell, and that tangle in the middle represents its genome, the sum total of its genes.
Scientists added a single gene that codes for a protein represented by this orange ball that feeds back on itself to keep cranking out more of that protein.
The extra copies, however, go and gum up the mosquitoes' genes, killing the organism.
To keep it alive in the laboratory they use a compound called tetracycline.
Tetracycline shuts off that gene and allows normal development.
They added another little wrinkle so that they could study what happens.
And that is they added a gene that makes the insect glow under UV light so that when they released it they could follow exactly how far it went how long it lived and all of the kinds of data for a good scientific study.
Now this is the pupal stage, and at this stage the females are larger than the males.
That allows them to sort them into the males and the females and they allow only the males to grow to adulthood.
And let me remind you that males don't bite.
From there it's pretty simple.
They take beakers full of male mosquitoes, load them into milk cartons, and drive around the city, releasing them guided by GPS.
Here's the mayor of a city releasing the first batch of what they call the "friendly Aedes."
Now I wish I could tell you this is an American city, but it's not.
It's Piracicaba, Brazil.
The amazing thing is that in just a year it brought down the cases of dengue by 91 percent.
That's better than any insecticide spraying can do.
So why aren't we using this remarkable biological control in the US?
That's because it's a GMO: a genetically modified organism.
Notice the subtitle here says if the FDA would let them they could do the same thing here, when Zika arrives.
And of course it has arrived.
So now I have to tell you the short form of the long, torturous story of GM regulation in the US In the US, there are three agencies that regulate genetically modified organisms: the FDA, the Food and Drug Administration, the EPA, the Environmental Protection Agency, and the USDA, US Department of Agriculture.
Took these folks two years to decide that it would be the FDA that would regulate the genetically modified mosquito.
And they would do it as a new animal drug, if that makes any sense.
Took them another five years going back and forth and back and forth to convince the FDA that this would not harm people, and it would not harm the environment.
They finally gave them, this summer, permission to run a little test in the Florida Keys, where they had been invited years earlier when they Keys had an outbreak of dengue.
Would that it were that easy.
When the local residents heard that there would be genetically modified mosquitoes tested in their community some of them began to organize protests.
They even organized a petition on the internet with this cuddly logo, which eventually accumulated some 160,000 signatures And they demanded a referendum which will be conducted in just a couple of weeks about whether the trials would be permitted at all.
Well it's Miami that really needs these better ways of controlling insects.
And there the attitudes are changing.
In fact, very recently a bipartisan group of more than 60 legislators wrote to HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell asking that she, at the Federal level, expedite access for Florida to this new technology.
So the bottom line is this: biological control of harmful insects can be both more effective and very much more environmentally friendly than using insecticides, which are toxic chemicals.
That was true in Rachel Carson's time; it's true today.
What's different is that we have enormously more information about genetics than we had then, and therefore more ability to use that information to affect these biological controls.
And I hope that what I've done is aroused your curiosity enough to start your own inquiry -- not into just GM mosquitoes but to the other genetically modified organisms that are so controversial today.
I think if you do that, and you dig down through all of the misinformation, and the marketing on the part of the organic food industry and the Greenpeaces and find the science, the accurate science, you'll be surprised and pleased.
Thank you.
(Applause)
She wrote: "When I become famous, I will tell everyone that I know a hero named Marlon Peterson."
Heroes rarely look like me.
In fact, I'm what garbage looks like.
No, not the most appealing way to open a talk or start a conversation, and perhaps you have some questions going through your head about that.
Why would this man say such a thing about himself?
What does he mean?
How can someone view him as a hero when he sees himself as garbage?
I believe we learn more from questions than we do from answers.
Because when we're questioning something, we're invested in taking in some sort of new information, or grappling with some sort of ignorance that makes us feel uncomfortable.
And that's why I'm here: to push us to question, even when it makes us uncomfortable.
My parents are from Trinidad and Tobago, the southernmost island in the Caribbean.
Trinidad is also home to the only acoustic instrument invented in the 20th century: the steel pan.
Deriving from the African drums and evolving from the genius of one of the ghettos in Trinidad, a city called Laventille, and the disregard of the American military ...
Well, I should tell you, America, during WWII, had military bases set up in Trinidad, and when the war ended, they left the island littered with empty oil drums -- their trash.
So people from Laventille repurposed the old drums left behind into the full chromatic scale: the steel pan.
Playing music now from Beethoven to Bob Marley to 50 Cent, those people literally made music out of garbage.
Twelve days before my 20th birthday, I was arrested for my role in a violent robbery attempt in lower Manhattan.
While people were sitting in a coffee shop, four people were shot.
Two were killed.
Five of us were arrested.
We were all the products of Trinidad and Tobago.
We were the "bad immigrants," or the "anchor babies" that Trump and millions of Americans easily malign.
I was discarded, like waste material -- and justifiably so to many.
I eventually served 10 years, two months and seven days of a prison sentence.
I was sentenced to a decade of punishment in a correctional institution.
I was sentenced to irrelevance -- the opposite of humanity.
Interestingly, it was during those years in prison that a series of letters redeemed me, helped me move beyond the darkness and the guilt associated with the worst moment of my young life.
It gave me a sense that I was useful.
She was 13 years old.
She had wrote that she saw me as a hero.
I remember reading that, and I remember crying when I read those words.
She was one of over 50 students and 150 letters that I wrote during a mentoring correspondence program that I co-designed with a friend who was a teacher at a middle school in Brooklyn, my hometown.
We called it the Young Scholars Program.
Every time those young people shared their stories with me, their struggles, every time they drew a picture of their favorite cartoon character and sent it to me, every time they said they depended on my letters or my words of advice, it boosted my sense of worthiness.
It gave me a sense of what I could contribute to this planet.
It transformed my life.
Because of those letters and what they shared with me, their stories of teen life, they gave me the permission, they gave me the courage to admit to myself that there were reasons -- not excuses -- but that there were reasons for that fateful day in October of 1999; that the trauma associated with living in a community where guns are easier to get than sneakers; that the trauma associated with being raped at gunpoint at the age of 14; that those are reasons for me why making that decision, that fatal decision, was not an unlikely proposition.
Because those letters mattered so much to me, because writing and receiving and having that communication with those folks so hugely impacted my life, I decided to share the opportunity with some friends of mine who were also inside with me.
My friends Bill and Cory and Arocks, all in prison for violent crimes also, shared their words of wisdom with the young people as well, and received the sense of relevancy in return.
We are now published writers and youth program innovators and trauma experts and gun violence prevention advocates, and TED talkers and -- (Laughter) and good daddies.
That's what I call a positive return of investment.
Above all else, what building that program taught me was that when we sow, when we invest in the humanity of people no matter where they're at, we can reap amazing rewards.
In this latest era of criminal justice reform, I often question and wonder why -- why is it that so many believe that only those who have been convicted of nonviolent drug offenses merit empathy and recognized humanity?
Criminal justice reform is human justice.
Am I not human?
When we invest in resources that amplify the relevancy of people in communities like Laventille or parts of Brooklyn or a ghetto near you, we can literally create the communities that we want.
We can do better.
We can do better than investing solely in law enforcement as a resource, because they don't give us a sense of relevancy that is at the core of why so many of us do so many harmful things in the pursuit of mattering.
See, gun violence is just a visible display of a lot of underlying traumas.
When we invest in the redemptive value of relevancy, we can render a return of both personal responsibility and healing.
That's the people work I care about, because people work.
Family, I'm asking you to do the hard work, the difficult work, the churning work of bestowing undeserved kindness upon those who we can relegate as garbage, who we can disregard and discard easily.
I'm asking myself.
Over the past two months, I've lost two friends to gun violence, both innocent bystanders.
One was caught in a drive-by while walking home.
The other was sitting in a caf while eating breakfast, while on vacation in Miami.
I'm asking myself to see the redemptive value of relevancy in the people that murdered them, because of the hard work of seeing the value in me.
I'm pushing us to challenge our own capacity to fully experience our humanity, by understanding the full biography of people who we can easily choose not to see, because heroes are waiting to be recognized, and music is waiting to be made.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Sings) Water Boy (Guitar strum) where are you hidin'?
(Guitar strum) If you don't come right here, I'm gonna tell your pa on you.
(Guitar strum) There ain't no hammer -- (Guitar strum) that's on this mountain (Guitar strum) That ring like mine, boy -- (Guitar strum) that ring like mine.
(Guitar strum) I'm gonna bust this rock, boy -- (Guitar strum) from here to Macon.
(Guitar strum) All the way to the jail, boy -- (Guitar strum) all the way to the jail.
(Guitar strum) You jack of diamonds -- (Music) you jack of diamonds I know you of old boy, I know you of old.
You done robbed my pocket, you done robbed my pocket of silver and gold, boy, of silver and gold.
Water Boy, where are you hidin'?
If you don't come right here, I'm gonna tell your pa on you.
There ain't no hammer that's on this mountain that ring like mine, boy, that ring like mine.
I'm gonna bust this rock, boy, from here to Macon.
All the way to the jail, boy, all the way to the jail.
Water Boy (Guitar strum) where are you hidin'?
(Guitar strum) If you don't come right here, if you don't come right here, if you don't come right here, I'm gonna tell your pa on you.
(Guitar strum) (Applause) Thank you.
That was a song based on numerous work songs, and it was arranged by Odetta, a hero of mine.
And this next song, well, I do a lot of historical music, starting with the Carolina Chocolate Drops and continuing on in my solo endeavors.
And I believe that knowing your history as a musician is super important -- it's important as a person, it's important as a country, it's important as a people.
So I read a lot about where the music comes from and where this country comes from.
I've been reading a lot about the Civil War and about slavery.
And it's really tough.
You know?
It's really tough reading.
And so as an artist, what I do with all that emotion, reading these people's stories, not just, "Oh, slavery was terrible."
Yes, it was.
But it's reading individual narratives of how it was for these people.
You know?
Then it's like, "Yeah, that could've been me."
And it is people now. You know?
So what you do with all that emotion is you've got to do something with it.
As an artist, I write.
So I wrote a song based on some of those narratives that I read, and it's called, "Come Love Come."
We're going to do it for you now.
(Claps) (Sings) Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
(Music) (Sings) When I was four, my loving mam was cornered by the boss's man.
She turned her head and got struck down, they buried her in the cold, cold ground.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
(Music) When I was 12, my father dear was strong of arm and free of fear until the day he raised his hand, then he was sold to Alabama.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
(Music) When I was 16, found my bloom and found my man, we jumped the broom.
We pledged each other the rest of our lives and on Saturday nights we were man and wife.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
(Music) When I was 18, bugles called and boys in blue came o'er the wall.
I took my chance and followed free, they led the way to Tennessee.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
(Music) Now here I sit in a tiny shack with 13 others at my back.
I've sent you word, so all I can do is wait and wait and wait and wait and wait and wait for you.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
Come love come, the road lies low, the way is long and hard, I know.
Come love come, the road lies free, I'll wait for you in Tennessee.
Oh, oh, oh.
Whoa ... oh I'll wait for you.
I'll wait for you.
I'll wait for you I'll wait for you.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, with the dark you have to have the light.
And in the African-American community, it's been the work of many hundreds of years to find a way to lift ourselves up.
So I'm going to end with a couple of tunes from Sister Rosetta Tharpe, one of the more influential American music figures that most of you probably never heard of.
If you have, I'm so happy.
She's one of the innovators of rock 'n' roll guitar, and one of the first crossover artists from gospel to secular.
She's an incredibly important figure, and I'm going to talk about her whenever I can.
So these are a couple of her tunes.
And don't worry -- you're going to get your chance to sing.
(Music) (Sings) Look down, look down that lonesome road before you travel on.
Look up, look up and greet your maker, for Gabriel blows his horn.
Weary totin' such a load, goin' down that lonesome road.
Look down that lonesome road, before you travel on.
Look down, look down that lonesome road before you travel on.
Look up, look up and greet your maker, for Gabriel blows his horn.
Weary totin' such a load, goin' down that lonesome road.
Look down, look down, look down, look down that lonesome road before you travel on.
Up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air music in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air I hear music in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear music in the air music in the air and I really do believe I really do believe there's a Heaven somewhere.
Up above my head up above my head I hear singin' in the air singin' in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear singin' in the air I hear singin' in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear singin' in the air singin' in the air and I really do believe I really do believe there's a Heaven somewhere.
(Speaks) All right now, guitar man!
(Guitar music) That's Hubby Jenkins, y'all.
(Sings) Up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin' in the air shoutin' in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin' in the air I hear shoutin' in the air.
Up above my head up above my head I hear shoutin' in the air, that's right, and I really do believe I really do believe there's a heaven somewhere.
(Speaks) All right now, give me some of that bass.
(Bass solo) Yeah!
Woo!
Jason Sypher on the bass.
Jamie Dick on those drums.
All right now, I'm running out of time.
So it's time for y'all to sing.
This is the call-and-response.
I call, you respond.
There are so many songs like this, y'all know how it goes, don't you?
You're going to sing along?
I said, are you going to sing along?
Audience members: Yes!
Rhiannon Giddens: Here we go!
(Sings) Up above my head AM: up above my head RG: music in the air AM: music in the air.
RG: up above my head AM: up above my head RG: music in the air AM: music in the air RG: up above my head AM: up above my head RG: music in the air AM: music in the air RG: and I really do believe I really do believe there's a heaven somewhere.
One more time!
Up above my head AM: up above my head RG: I hear music in the air AM: music in the air.
RG: Up above my head AM: up above my head RG: I hear music in the air AM: music in the air.
RG: Up above my head AM: up above my head RG: I hear music in the air AM: music in the air RG: and I really do believe I really do believe there's a heaven somewhere.
I said I really do believe I really do believe there's a heaven somewhere.
Heaven somewhere.
(Holds note) (Applause and cheers) (Music ends) (Applause)
First of all, I really want to thank you for letting me speak to TEDxGateway in India about superheroes.
I wish I could be there in person, but this is the next best thing.
I would really love to share some of the things I've learned over the years and share them with any artists and writers in India who might be wanting to create new superheroes and new superhero adventures.
India has been on my mind a lot lately because I've been working with my good friend Sharad Devarajan and with Graphic India to create a new Indian superhero named Chakra The Invincible, who lives in Mumbai.
My goal with Chakra was really simple.
I wanted to bring an Eastern concept, like the chakras, to the Western world of superheroes.
And for me, superheroes will always spark the imagination of people around the world regardless of their background, because I think that people are always looking for something that represents the ideal person or the ideal situation.
Almost all of us have loved fairy tales when we were young.
Just remember stories of giants and witches and wizards and monsters and things that were so colorful and bigger than life.
But then, you get a little older and you're too old to read fairy tales.
But you never outgrow your love of that type of story.
And if you think about it, superheroes stories today are really like fairy tales for grown-ups.
The characters are bigger than life, just like in fairy tales.
They have the same type of superpowers: some can fly, some are extra-strong, some can be invisible.
It gives the viewer and the reader a chance to relive the excitement he or she had when they were young.
They're really reading fairy tales for grown-ups when they read or when they see superhero stories today, and that's why I love them so.
To me, the human aspect of superheroes has always been, perhaps, the most important part.
By that, I mean: OK, we assume your superhero might be extra-strong, or might be able to fly or run as fast as a comet, but unless you care about the superhero's personal life, you're just reading a shallow story.
Just because a person has a superpower doesn't mean he might not have the same personal problems that you or I might have.
Maybe he doesn't have enough money, maybe he has a family problem, maybe the girl he loves doesn't love him.
Or maybe the girl he loves doesn't want to be involved with a superhero.
There are so many things you can think of that round out the character and the personality, so the superhero isn't just one or two dimensional.
You want a three-dimensional superhero who lives and breathes and worries and experiences things just the way you and I do except for the fact that she or he has a superpower.
One thing I might mention, most writers - and I think it's an unfortunate thing - they try to write something that they think a certain audience might enjoy.
I've never been able to do that because I can't put myself in the mind of other people.
I only know what I enjoy, so every time I've written a story, I've always tried to write the sort of story that I, myself would enjoy reading, a story that would interest me while I'm writing it as I'm waiting to find out what happens next.
And I can't know what other people think, but I can know what I think, and I feel I'm not that unusual; if there's a type of story I like, there must be lots of people who like the same type of stories.
Therefore, I have always written to please myself, not to please a certain type of audience, because you can't know the audience as well as you know yourself.
And if I write a story that I'm enjoying while I'm writing it and I can't wait to see what happens next, then I'm hoping that a large proportion of the public will feel the same way, and they'll enjoy it too.
So to sum it up, I have always tried to please myself, not other people, and somehow, it seems to have worked because I guess I'm not that different than other people.
So, to wrap it up, what I suggest is, use your imagination, don't be afraid to come up with the wildest thought in the world.
If what you create is truly different and colorful, and if it's written well, people will enjoy it.
Now when I say "written well," what I mean is you might have the most fantastic notion in the world, suddenly you have a man who can fly faster than the speed of light.
That could be interesting, but you have to make him believable, you have to give the reader or the audience some reason to think he really has the ability to do that.
How did he get that power?
Origins of superpowers are always very interesting.
If you get the right origin, like, for example, Spiderman being bitten by a radioactive spider, at least, then the viewer has something to hold on to and to say, "Well, it might have happened, now I'll enjoy it."
So even though you're writing what amounts to a fairy tale for grown-ups, try to keep enough facts and try to give enough detail that the reader or the audience will say, "Well, it could have happened," and then your public goes along with the fun.
But if you make it too wild, and you don't give any reason why it is as wild as it is, then sometimes it can be overkill.
So what I'm trying to say is, let your imagination flow freely, but always base what happens on some sort of provable fact so that the reader or the viewer will go along with it and enjoy it as much as you enjoy writing it.
So good luck to you!
Thanks for listening and I really enjoyed talking to you.
Excelsior!
So, imagine that you had your smartphone miniaturized and hooked up directly to your brain.
If you had this sort of brain chip, you'd be able to upload and download to the internet at the speed of thought.
Accessing social media or Wikipedia would be a lot like -- well, from the inside at least -- like consulting your own memory.
It would be as easy and as intimate as thinking.
But would it make it easier for you to know what's true?
Just because a way of accessing information is faster it doesn't mean it's more reliable, of course, and it doesn't mean that we would all interpret it the same way.
And it doesn't mean that you would be any better at evaluating it.
In fact, you might even be worse, because, you know, more data, less time for evaluation.
Something like this is already happening to us right now.
We already carry a world of information around in our pockets, but it seems as if the more information we share and access online, the more difficult it can be for us to tell the difference between what's real and what's fake.
It's as if we know more but understand less.
Now, it's a feature of modern life, I suppose, that large swaths of the public live in isolated information bubbles.
We're polarized: not just over values, but over the facts.
One reason for that is, the data analytics that drive the internet get us not just more information, but more of the information that we want.
Our online life is personalized; everything from the ads we read to the news that comes down our Facebook feed is tailored to satisfy our preferences.
And so while we get more information, a lot of that information ends up reflecting ourselves as much as it does reality.
It ends up, I suppose, inflating our bubbles rather than bursting them.
And so maybe it's no surprise that we're in a situation, a paradoxical situation, of thinking that we know so much more, and yet not agreeing on what it is we know.
So how are we going to solve this problem of knowledge polarization?
One obvious tactic is to try to fix our technology, to redesign our digital platforms, so as to make them less susceptible to polarization.
And I'm happy to report that many smart people at Google and Facebook are working on just that.
And these projects are vital.
I think that fixing technology is obviously really important, but I don't think technology alone, fixing it, is going to solve the problem of knowledge polarization.
I don't think that because I don't think, at the end of the day, it is a technological problem.
I think it's a human problem, having to do with how we think and what we value.
In order to solve it, I think we're going to need help.
We're going to need help from psychology and political science.
But we're also going to need help, I think, from philosophy.
Because to solve the problem of knowledge polarization, we're going to need to reconnect with one fundamental, philosophical idea: that we live in a common reality.
The idea of a common reality is like, I suppose, a lot of philosophical concepts: easy to state but mysteriously difficult to put into practice.
To really accept it, I think we need to do three things, each of which is a challenge right now.
First, we need to believe in truth.
You might have noticed that our culture is having something of a troubled relationship with that concept right now.
It seems as if we disagree so much that, as one political commentator put it not long ago, it's as if there are no facts anymore.
But that thought is actually an expression of a sort of seductive line of argument that's in the air.
It goes like this: we just can't step outside of our own perspectives; we can't step outside of our biases.
Every time we try, we just get more information from our perspective.
So, this line of thought goes, we might as well admit that objective truth is an illusion, or it doesn't matter, because either we'll never know what it is, or it doesn't exist in the first place.
That's not a new philosophical thought -- skepticism about truth.
During the end of the last century, as some of you know, it was very popular in certain academic circles.
But it really goes back all the way to the Greek philosopher Protagoras, if not farther back.
Protagoras said that objective truth was an illusion because "man is the measure of all things."
Man is the measure of all things.
That can seem like a bracing bit of realpolitik to people, or liberating, because it allows each of us to discover or make our own truth.
But actually, I think it's a bit of self-serving rationalization disguised as philosophy.
It confuses the difficulty of being certain with the impossibility of truth.
Look -- of course it's difficult to be certain about anything; we might all be living in "The Matrix."
You might have a brain chip in your head feeding you all the wrong information.
But in practice, we do agree on all sorts of facts.
We agree that bullets can kill people.
We agree that you can't flap your arms and fly.
We agree -- or we should -- that there is an external reality and ignoring it can get you hurt.
Nonetheless, skepticism about truth can be tempting, because it allows us to rationalize away our own biases.
When we do that, we're sort of like the guy in the movie who knew he was living in "The Matrix" but decided he liked it there, anyway.
After all, getting what you want feels good.
Being right all the time feels good.
So, often it's easier for us to wrap ourselves in our cozy information bubbles, live in bad faith, and take those bubbles as the measure of reality.
An example, I think, of how this bad faith gets into our action is our reaction to the phenomenon of fake news.
The fake news that spread on the internet during the American presidential election of 2016 was designed to feed into our biases, designed to inflate our bubbles.
But what was really striking about it was not just that it fooled so many people.
What was really striking to me about fake news, the phenomenon, is how quickly it itself became the subject of knowledge polarization; so much so, that the very term -- the very term -- "fake news" now just means: "news story I don't like."
That's an example of the bad faith towards the truth that I'm talking about.
But the really, I think, dangerous thing about skepticism with regard to truth is that it leads to despotism.
"Man is the measure of all things" inevitably becomes "The Man is the measure of all things."
Just as "every man for himself" always seems to turn out to be "only the strong survive."
At the end of Orwell's "1984," the thought policeman O'Brien is torturing the protagonist Winston Smith into believing two plus two equals five.
What O'Brien says is the point, is that he wants to convince Smith that whatever the party says is the truth, and the truth is whatever the party says.
And what O'Brien knows is that once this thought is accepted, critical dissent is impossible.
You can't speak truth to power if the power speaks truth by definition.
I said that in order to accept that we really live in a common reality, we have to do three things.
The first thing is to believe in truth.
The second thing can be summed up by the Latin phrase that Kant took as the motto for the Enlightenment: "Sapere aude," or "dare to know."
Or as Kant wants, "to dare to know for yourself."
I think in the early days of the internet, a lot of us thought that information technology was always going to make it easier for us to know for ourselves, and of course in many ways, it has.
But as the internet has become more and more a part of our lives, our reliance on it, our use of it, has become often more passive.
Much of what we know today we Google-know.
We download prepackaged sets of facts and sort of shuffle them along the assembly line of social media.
Now, Google-knowing is useful precisely because it involves a sort of intellectual outsourcing.
We offload our effort onto a network of others and algorithms.
And that allows us, of course, to not clutter our minds with all sorts of facts.
We can just download them when we need them.
And that's awesome.
But there's a difference between downloading a set of facts and really understanding how or why those facts are as they are.
Understanding why a particular disease spreads, or how a mathematical proof works, or why your friend is depressed, involves more than just downloading.
It's going to require, most likely, doing some work for yourself: having a little creative insight; using your imagination; getting out into the field; doing the experiment; working through the proof; talking to someone.
Now, I'm not saying, of course, that we should stop Google-knowing.
I'm just saying we shouldn't overvalue it, either.
We need to find ways of encouraging forms of knowing that are more active, and don't always involve passing off our effort into our bubble.
Because the thing about Google-knowing is that too often it ends up being bubble-knowing.
And bubble-knowing means always being right.
But daring to know, daring to understand, means risking the possibility that you could be wrong.
It means risking the possibility that what you want and what's true are different things.
Which brings me to the third thing that I think we need to do if we want to accept that we live in a common reality.
That third thing is: have a little humility.
By humility here, I mean epistemic humility, which means, in a sense, knowing that you don't know it all.
But it also means something more than that.
It means seeing your worldview as open to improvement by the evidence and experience of others.
Seeing your worldview as open to improvement by the evidence and experience of others.
That's more than just being open to change.
It's more than just being open to self-improvement.
It means seeing your knowledge as capable of enhancing or being enriched by what others contribute.
That's part of what is involved in recognizing there's a common reality that you, too, are responsible to.
I don't think it's much of a stretch to say that our society is not particularly great at enhancing or encouraging that sort of humility.
That's partly because, well, we tend to confuse arrogance and confidence.
And it's partly because, well, you know, arrogance is just easier.
It's just easier to think of yourself as knowing it all.
It's just easier to think of yourself as having it all figured out.
But that's another example of the bad faith towards the truth that I've been talking about.
So the concept of a common reality, like a lot of philosophical concepts, can seem so obvious, that we can look right past it and forget why it's important.
Democracies can't function if their citizens don't strive, at least some of the time, to inhabit a common space, a space where they can pass ideas back and forth when -- and especially when -- they disagree.
But you can't strive to inhabit that space if you don't already accept that you live in the same reality.
To accept that, we've got to believe in truth, we've got to encourage more active ways of knowing.
And we've got to have the humility to realize that we're not the measure of all things.
We may yet one day realize the vision of having the internet in our brains.
But if we want that to be liberating and not terrifying, if we want it to expand our understanding and not just our passive knowing, we need to remember that our perspectives, as wondrous, as beautiful as they are, are just that -- perspectives on one reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine that when you walked in here this evening, you discovered that everybody in the room looked almost exactly the same: ageless, raceless, generically good-looking.
That person sitting right next to you might have the most idiosyncratic inner life, but you don't have a clue because we're all wearing the same blank expression all the time.
That is the kind of creepy transformation that is taking over cities, only it applies to buildings, not people.
Cities are full of roughness and shadow, texture and color.
You can still find architectural surfaces of great individuality and character in apartment buildings in Riga and Yemen, social housing in Vienna, Hopi villages in Arizona, brownstones in New York, wooden houses in San Francisco.
These aren't palaces or cathedrals.
These are just ordinary residences expressing the ordinary splendor of cities.
And the reason they're like that is that the need for shelter is so bound up with the human desire for beauty.
Their rough surfaces give us a touchable city.
Right? Streets that you can read by running your fingers over brick and stone.
But that's getting harder to do, because cities are becoming smooth.
New downtowns sprout towers that are almost always made of concrete and steel and covered in glass.
You can look at skylines all over the world -- Houston, Guangzhou, Frankfurt -- and you see the same army of high-gloss robots marching over the horizon.
Now, just think of everything we lose when architects stop using the full range of available materials.
When we reject granite and limestone and sandstone and wood and copper and terra-cotta and brick and wattle and plaster, we simplify architecture and we impoverish cities.
It's as if you reduced all of the world's cuisines down to airline food.
(Laughter) Chicken or pasta?
But worse still, assemblies of glass towers like this one in Moscow suggest a disdain for the civic and communal aspects of urban living.
Right? Buildings like these are intended to enrich their owners and tenants, but not necessarily the lives of the rest of us, those of us who navigate the spaces between the buildings.
And we expect to do so for free.
Shiny towers are an invasive species and they are choking our cities and killing off public space.
We tend to think of a facade as being like makeup, a decorative layer applied at the end to a building that's effectively complete.
But just because a facade is superficial doesn't mean it's not also deep.
Let me give you an example of how a city's surfaces affect the way we live in it.
When I visited Salamanca in Spain, I gravitated to the Plaza Mayor at all hours of the day.
Early in the morning, sunlight rakes the facades, sharpening shadows, and at night, lamplight segments the buildings into hundreds of distinct areas, balconies and windows and arcades, each one a separate pocket of visual activity.
That detail and depth, that glamour gives the plaza a theatrical quality.
It becomes a stage where the generations can meet.
You have teenagers sprawling on the pavers, seniors monopolizing the benches, and real life starts to look like an opera set.
The curtain goes up on Salamanca.
So just because I'm talking about the exteriors of buildings, not form, not function, not structure, even so those surfaces give texture to our lives, because buildings create the spaces around them, and those spaces can draw people in or push them away.
And the difference often has to do with the quality of those exteriors.
So one contemporary equivalent of the Plaza Mayor in Salamanca is the Place de la Dfense in Paris, a windswept, glass-walled open space that office workers hurry through on the way from the metro to their cubicles but otherwise spend as little time in as possible.
In the early 1980s, the architect Philip Johnson tried to recreate a gracious European plaza in Pittsburgh.
This is PPG Place, a half acre of open space encircled by commercial buildings made of mirrored glass.
And he ornamented those buildings with metal trim and bays and Gothic turrets which really pop on the skyline.
But at ground level, the plaza feels like a black glass cage.
I mean, sure, in summertime kids are running back and forth through the fountain and there's ice-skating in the winter, but it lacks the informality of a leisurely hangout.
It's just not the sort of place you really want to just hang out and chat.
Public spaces thrive or fail for many different reasons.
Architecture is only one, but it's an important one.
Some recent plazas like Federation Square in Melbourne or Superkilen in Copenhagen succeed because they combine old and new, rough and smooth, neutral and bright colors, and because they don't rely excessively on glass.
Now, I'm not against glass.
It's an ancient and versatile material.
It's easy to manufacture and transport and install and replace and clean.
It comes in everything from enormous, ultraclear sheets to translucent bricks.
New coatings make it change mood in the shifting light.
In expensive cities like New York, it has the magical power of being able to multiply real estate values by allowing views, which is really the only commodity that developers have to offer to justify those surreal prices.
In the middle of the 19th century, with the construction of the Crystal Palace in London, glass leapt to the top of the list of quintessentially modern substances.
By the mid-20th century, it had come to dominate the downtowns of some American cities, largely through some really spectacular office buildings like Lever House in midtown Manhattan, designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill.
Eventually, the technology advanced to the point where architects could design structures so transparent they practically disappear.
And along the way, glass became the default material of the high-rise city, and there's a very powerful reason for that.
Because as the world's populations converge on cities, the least fortunate pack into jerry-built shantytowns.
But hundreds of millions of people need apartments and places to work in ever-larger buildings, so it makes economic sense to put up towers and wrap them in cheap and practical curtain walls.
But glass has a limited ability to be expressive.
This is a section of wall framing a plaza in the pre-Hispanic city of Mitla, in southern Mexico.
Those 2,000-year-old carvings make it clear that this was a place of high ritual significance.
Today we look at those and we can see a historical and textural continuity between those carvings, the mountains all around and that church which is built on top of the ruins using stone plundered from the site.
In nearby Oaxaca, even ordinary plaster buildings become canvasses for bright colors, political murals and sophisticated graphic arts.
It's an intricate, communicative language that an epidemic of glass would simply wipe out.
The good news is that architects and developers have begun to rediscover the joys of texture without backing away from modernity.
Some find innovative uses for old materials like brick and terra-cotta.
Others invent new products like the molded panels that Snhetta used to give the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art that crinkly, sculptural quality.
The architect Stefano Boeri even created living facades.
This is his Vertical Forest, a pair of apartment towers in Milan, whose most visible feature is greenery.
And Boeri is designing a version of this for Nanjing in China.
And imagine if green facades were as ubiquitous as glass ones how much cleaner the air in Chinese cities would become.
But the truth is that these are mostly one-offs, boutique projects, not easily reproduced at a global scale.
And that is the point.
When you use materials that have a local significance, you prevent cities from all looking the same.
Copper has a long history in New York -- the Statue of Liberty, the crown of the Woolworth Building -- but it fell out of fashion for a long time until SHoP Architects used it to cover the American Copper Building, a pair of twisting towers on the East River.
It's not even finished and you can see the way sunset lights up that metallic facade, which will weather to green as it ages.
Buildings can be like people.
Their faces broadcast their experience.
And that's an important point, because when glass ages, you just replace it, and the building looks pretty much the same way it did before until eventually it's demolished.
Almost all other materials have the ability to absorb infusions of history and memory, and project it into the present.
The firm Ennead clad the Utah Natural History Museum in Salt Lake City in copper and zinc, ores that have been mined in the area for 150 years and that also camouflage the building against the ochre hills so that you have a natural history museum that reflects the region's natural history.
And when the Chinese Pritzker Prize winner Wang Shu was building a history museum in Ningbo, he didn't just create a wrapper for the past, he built memory right into the walls by using brick and stones and shingles salvaged from villages that had been demolished.
Now, architects can use glass in equally lyrical and inventive ways.
Here in New York, two buildings, one by Jean Nouvel and this one by Frank Gehry face off across West 19th Street, and the play of reflections that they toss back and forth is like a symphony in light.
But when a city defaults to glass as it grows, it becomes a hall of mirrors, disquieting and cold.
After all, cities are places of concentrated variety where the world's cultures and languages and lifestyles come together and mingle.
So rather than encase all that variety and diversity in buildings of crushing sameness, we should have an architecture that honors the full range of the urban experience.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Paying close attention to something: Not that easy, is it?
It's because our attention is pulled in so many different directions at a time, and it's in fact pretty impressive if you can stay focused.
Many people think that attention is all about what we are focusing on, but it's also about what information our brain is trying to filter out.
There are two ways you direct your attention.
First, there's overt attention.
In overt attention, you move your eyes towards something in order to pay attention to it.
Then there's covert attention.
In covert attention, you pay attention to something, but without moving your eyes.
Think of driving for a second.
Your overt attention, your direction of the eyes, are in front, but that's your covert attention which is constantly scanning the surrounding area, where you don't actually look at them.
I'm a computational neuroscientist, and I work on cognitive brain-machine interfaces, or bringing together the brain and the computer.
I love brain patterns.
Brain patterns are important for us because based on them we can build models for the computers, and based on these models computers can recognize how well our brain functions.
And if it doesn't function well, then these computers themselves can be used as assistive devices for therapies.
But that also means something, because choosing the wrong patterns will give us the wrong models and therefore the wrong therapies.
Right?
In case of attention, the fact that we can shift our attention not only by our eyes but also by thinking -- that makes covert attention an interesting model for computers.
So I wanted to know what are the brainwave patterns when you look overtly or when you look covertly.
I set up an experiment for that.
In this experiment there are two flickering squares, one of them flickering at a slower rate than the other one.
Depending on which of these flickers you are paying attention to, certain parts of your brain will start resonating in the same rate as that flickering rate.
So by analyzing your brain signals, we can track where exactly you are watching or you are paying attention to.
So to see what happens in your brain when you pay overt attention, I asked people to look directly in one of the squares and pay attention to it.
In this case, not surprisingly, we saw that these flickering squares appeared in their brain signals which was coming from the back of their head, which is responsible for the processing of your visual information.
But I was really interested to see what happens in your brain when you pay covert attention.
So this time I asked people to look in the middle of the screen and without moving their eyes, to pay attention to either of these squares.
When we did that, we saw that both of these flickering rates appeared in their brain signals, but interestingly, only one of them, which was paid attention to, had stronger signals, so there was something in the brain which was handling this information so that thing in the brain was basically the activation of the frontal area.
The front part of your brain is responsible for higher cognitive functions as a human.
The frontal part, it seems that it works as a filter trying to let information come in only from the right flicker that you are paying attention to and trying to inhibit the information coming from the ignored one.
The filtering ability of the brain is indeed a key for attention, which is missing in some people, for example in people with ADHD.
So a person with ADHD cannot inhibit these distractors, and that's why they can't focus for a long time on a single task.
But what if this person could play a specific computer game with his brain connected to the computer, and then train his own brain to inhibit these distractors?
Well, ADHD is just one example.
We can use these cognitive brain-machine interfaces for many other cognitive fields.
It was just a few years ago that my grandfather had a stroke, and he lost complete ability to speak.
He could understand everybody, but there was no way to respond, even not writing because he was illiterate.
So he passed away in silence.
I remember thinking at that time: What if we could have a computer which could speak for him?
Now, after years that I am in this field, I can see that this might be possible.
Imagine if we can find brainwave patterns when people think about images or even letters, like the letter A generates a different brainwave pattern than the letter B, and so on.
Could a computer one day communicate for people who can't speak?
What if a computer can help us understand the thoughts of a person in a coma?
We are not there yet, but pay close attention.
We will be there soon.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, this happy pic of me was taken in 1999.
I was a senior in college, and it was right after a dance practice.
I was really, really happy.
And I remember exactly where I was about a week and a half later.
I was sitting in the back of my used minivan in a campus parking lot, when I decided I was going to commit suicide.
I went from deciding to full-blown planning very quickly.
And I came this close to the edge of the precipice.
It's the closest I've ever come.
And the only reason I took my finger off the trigger was thanks to a few lucky coincidences.
And after the fact, that's what scared me the most: the element of chance.
So I became very methodical about testing different ways that I could manage my ups and downs, which has proven to be a good investment. (Laughs) Many normal people might have, say, six to 10 major depressive episodes in their lives.
I have bipolar depression. It runs in my family.
I've had 50-plus at this point, and I've learned a lot.
I've had a lot of at-bats, many rounds in the ring with darkness, taking good notes.
So I thought rather than get up and give any type of recipe for success or highlight reel, I would share my recipe for avoiding self-destruction, and certainly self-paralysis.
And the tool I've found which has proven to be the most reliable safety net for emotional free fall is actually the same tool that has helped me to make my best business decisions.
But that is secondary.
And it is ... stoicism.
That sounds boring.
(Laughter) You might think of Spock, or it might conjure and image like this -- (Laughter) a cow standing in the rain.
It's not sad. It's not particularly happy.
It's just an impassive creature taking whatever life sends its way.
You might not think of the ultimate competitor, say, Bill Belichick, head coach of the New England Patriots, who has the all-time NFL record for Super Bowl titles.
And stoicism has spread like wildfire in the top of the NFL ranks as a means of mental toughness training in the last few years.
You might not think of the Founding Fathers -- Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, George Washington to name but three students of stoicism.
George Washington actually had a play about a Stoic -- this was "Cato, a Tragedy" -- performed for his troops at Valley Forge to keep them motivated.
So why would people of action focus so much on an ancient philosophy?
This seems very academic.
I would encourage you to think about stoicism a little bit differently, as an operating system for thriving in high-stress environments, for making better decisions.
And it all started here, kind of, on a porch.
So around 300 BC in Athens, someone named Zeno of Citium taught many lectures walking around a painted porch, a "stoa."
That later became "stoicism."
And in the Greco-Roman world, people used stoicism as a comprehensive system for doing many, many things.
But for our purposes, chief among them was training yourself to separate what you can control from what you cannot control, and then doing exercises to focus exclusively on the former.
This decreases emotional reactivity, which can be a superpower.
Conversely, let's say you're a quarterback.
You miss a pass. You get furious with yourself.
That could cost you a game.
If you're a CEO, and you fly off the handle at a very valued employee because of a minor infraction, that could cost you the employee.
If you're a college student who, say, is in a downward spiral, and you feel helpless and hopeless, unabated, that could cost you your life.
So the stakes are very, very high.
And there are many tools in the toolkit to get you there.
I'm going to focus on one that completely changed my life in 2004.
It found me then because of two things: a very close friend, young guy, my age, died of pancreatic cancer unexpectedly, and then my girlfriend, who I thought I was going to marry, walked out.
She'd had enough, and she didn't give me a Dear John letter, but she did give me this, a Dear John plaque.
(Laughter) I'm not making this up. I've kept it.
"Business hours are over at five o'clock."
She gave this to me to put on my desk for personal health, because at the time, I was working on my first real business.
I had no idea what I was doing. I was working 14-plus hour days, seven days a week.
I was using stimulants to get going.
I was using depressants to wind down and go to sleep.
It was a disaster.
I felt completely trapped.
I bought a book on simplicity to try to find answers.
And I did find a quote that made a big difference in my life, which was, "We suffer more often in imagination than in reality," by Seneca the Younger, who was a famous Stoic writer.
That took me to his letters, which took me to the exercise, "premeditatio malorum," which means the pre-meditation of evils.
In simple terms, this is visualizing the worst-case scenarios, in detail, that you fear, preventing you from taking action, so that you can take action to overcome that paralysis.
My problem was monkey mind -- super loud, very incessant.
Just thinking my way through problems doesn't work.
I needed to capture my thoughts on paper.
So I created a written exercise that I called "fear-setting," like goal-setting, for myself.
It consists of three pages.
Super simple.
The first page is right here.
"What if I ...?"
This is whatever you fear, whatever is causing you anxiety, whatever you're putting off.
It could be asking someone out, ending a relationship, asking for a promotion, quitting a job, starting a company.
It could be anything.
For me, it was taking my first vacation in four years and stepping away from my business for a month to go to London, where I could stay in a friend's room for free, to either remove myself as a bottleneck in the business or shut it down.
In the first column, "Define," you're writing down all of the worst things you can imagine happening if you take that step.
You want 10 to 20.
I won't go through all of them, but I'll give you two examples.
One was, I'll go to London, it'll be rainy, I'll get depressed, the whole thing will be a huge waste of time.
Number two, I'll miss a letter from the IRS, and I'll get audited or raided or shut down or some such.
And then you go to the "Prevent" column.
In that column, you write down the answer to: What could I do to prevent each of these bullets from happening, or, at the very least, decrease the likelihood even a little bit?
So for getting depressed in London, I could take a portable blue light with me and use it for 15 minutes in the morning.
I knew that helped stave off depressive episodes.
For the IRS bit, I could change the mailing address on file with the IRS so the paperwork would go to my accountant instead of to my UPS address.
Easy-peasy.
Then we go to "Repair."
So if the worst-case scenarios happen, what could you do to repair the damage even a little bit, or who could you ask for help?
So in the first case, London, well, I could fork over some money, fly to Spain, get some sun -- undo the damage, if I got into a funk.
In the case of missing a letter from the IRS, I could call a friend who is a lawyer or ask, say, a professor of law what they would recommend, who I should talk to, how had people handled this in the past.
So one question to keep in mind as you're doing this first page is: Has anyone else in the history of time less intelligent or less driven figured this out?
Chances are, the answer is "Yes."
(Laughter) The second page is simple: What might be the benefits of an attempt or a partial success?
You can see we're playing up the fears and really taking a conservative look at the upside.
So if you attempted whatever you're considering, might you build confidence, develop skills, emotionally, financially, otherwise?
What might be the benefits of, say, a base hit?
Spend 10 to 15 minutes on this.
Page three.
This might be the most important, so don't skip it: "The Cost of Inaction."
Humans are very good at considering what might go wrong if we try something new, say, ask for a raise.
What we don't often consider is the atrocious cost of the status quo -- not changing anything.
So you should ask yourself, if I avoid this action or decision and actions and decisions like it, what might my life look like in, say, six months, 12 months, three years?
Any further out, it starts to seem intangible.
And really get detailed -- again, emotionally, financially, physically, whatever.
And when I did this, it painted a terrifying picture.
I was self-medicating, my business was going to implode at any moment at all times, if I didn't step away.
My relationships were fraying or failing.
And I realized that inaction was no longer an option for me.
Those are the three pages. That's it. That's fear-setting.
And after this, I realized that on a scale of one to 10, one being minimal impact, 10 being maximal impact, if I took the trip, I was risking a one to three of temporary and reversible pain for an eight to 10 of positive, life-changing impact that could be a semi-permanent.
So I took the trip.
None of the disasters came to pass.
There were some hiccups, sure.
I was able to extricate myself from the business.
I ended up extending that trip for a year and a half around the world, and that became the basis for my first book, that leads me here today.
And I can trace all of my biggest wins and all of my biggest disasters averted back to doing fear-setting at least once a quarter.
It's not a panacea.
You'll find that some of your fears are very well-founded.
(Laughter) But you shouldn't conclude that without first putting them under a microscope.
And it doesn't make all the hard times, the hard choices, easy, but it can make a lot of them easier.
I'd like to close with a profile of one of my favorite modern-day Stoics.
This is Jerzy Gregorek.
He is a four-time world champion in Olympic weightlifting, political refugee, published poet, 62 years old.
He can still kick my ass and probably most asses in this room.
He's an impressive guy.
I spent a lot of time on his stoa, his porch, asking life and training advice.
He was part of the Solidarity in Poland, which was a nonviolent movement for social change that was violently suppressed by the government.
He lost his career as a firefighter.
Then his mentor, a priest, was kidnapped, tortured, killed and thrown into a river.
He was then threatened.
He and his wife had to flee Poland, bounce from country to country until they landed in the US with next to nothing, sleeping on floors.
He now lives in Woodside, California, in a very nice place, and of the 10,000-plus people I've met in my life, I would put him in the top 10, in terms of success and happiness.
And there's a punchline coming, so pay attention.
I sent him a text a few weeks ago, asking him: Had he ever read any Stoic philosophy?
And he replied with two pages of text.
This is very unlike him. He is a terse dude.
(Laughter) And not only was he familiar with stoicism, but he pointed out, for all of his most important decisions, his inflection points, when he stood up for his principles and ethics, how he had used stoicism and something akin to fear-setting, which blew my mind.
And he closed with two things.
Number one: he couldn't imagine any life more beautiful than that of a Stoic.
And the last was his mantra, which he applies to everything, and you can apply to everything: "Easy choices, hard life.
Hard choices, easy life."
The hard choices -- what we most fear doing, asking, saying -- these are very often exactly what we most need to do.
And the biggest challenges and problems we face will never be solved with comfortable conversations, whether it's in your own head or with other people.
So I encourage you to ask yourselves: Where in your lives right now might defining your fears be more important than defining your goals?
Keeping in mind all the while, the words of Seneca: "We suffer more often in imagination than in reality."
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to give you four specific examples, I'm going to cover at the end about how a company called Silk tripled their sales; how an artist named Jeff Koons went from being a nobody to making a whole bunch of money and having a lot of impact; to how Frank Gehry redefined what it meant to be an architect.
And one of my biggest failures as a marketer in the last few years -- a record label I started that had a CD called "Sauce."
Before I can do that I've got to tell you about sliced bread, and a guy named Otto Rohwedder.
Now, before sliced bread was invented in the 1910s I wonder what they said?
Like the greatest invention since the telegraph or something.
But this guy named Otto Rohwedder invented sliced bread, and he focused, like most inventors did, on the patent part and the making part.
And the thing about the invention of sliced bread is this -- that for the first 15 years after sliced bread was available no one bought it; no one knew about it; it was a complete and total failure.
And the reason is that until Wonder came along and figured out how to spread the idea of sliced bread, no one wanted it.
That the success of sliced bread, like the success of almost everything we've talked about at this conference, is not always about what the patent is like, or what the factory is like -- it's about can you get your idea to spread, or not.
And I think that the way you're going to get what you want, or cause the change that you want to change, to happen, is to figure out a way to get your ideas to spread.
And it doesn't matter to me whether you're running a coffee shop or you're an intellectual, or you're in business, or you're flying hot air balloons.
That what we are living in is a century of idea diffusion.
That people who can spread ideas, regardless of what those ideas are, win.
When I talk about it I usually pick business, because they make the best pictures that you can put in your presentation, and because it's the easiest sort of way to keep score.
But I want you to forgive me when I use these examples because I'm talking about anything that you decide to spend your time to do.
At the heart of spreading ideas is TV and stuff like TV.
TV and mass media made it really easy to spread ideas in a certain way.
I call it the "TV-industrial complex."
The way the TV-industrial complex works, is you buy some ads, interrupt some people, that gets you distribution.
You use the distribution you get to sell more products.
You take the profit from that to buy more ads.
And it goes around and around and around, the same way that the military-industrial complex worked a long time ago.
That model of, and we heard it yesterday -- if we could only get onto the homepage of Google, if we could only figure out how to get promoted there, or grab that person by the throat, and tell them about what we want to do.
If we did that then everyone would pay attention, and we would win.
Well, this TV-industrial complex informed my entire childhood and probably yours.
I mean, all of these products succeeded because someone figured out how to touch people in a way they weren't expecting, in a way they didn't necessarily want, with an ad, over and over again until they bought it.
And the thing that's happened is, they canceled the TV-industrial complex.
That just over the last few years, what anybody who markets anything has discovered is that it's not working the way that it used to.
This picture is really fuzzy, I apologize; I had a bad cold when I took it.
(Laughter) But the product in the blue box in the center is my poster child.
I go to the deli; I'm sick; I need to buy some medicine.
The brand manager for that blue product spent 100 million dollars trying to interrupt me in one year.
100 million dollars interrupting me with TV commercials and magazine ads and Spam and coupons and shelving allowances and spiff -- all so I could ignore every single message.
And I ignored every message because I don't have a pain reliever problem.
I buy the stuff in the yellow box because I always have.
And I'm not going to invest a minute of my time to solve her problem, because I don't care.
Here's a magazine called "Hydrate." It's 180 pages about water.
(Laughter) Articles about water, ads about water.
Imagine what the world was like 40 years ago, with just the Saturday Evening Post and Time and Newsweek.
Now there are magazines about water.
New product from Coke Japan: water salad.
(Laughter) Coke Japan comes out with a new product every three weeks, because they have no idea what's going to work and what's not.
I couldn't have written this better myself.
It came out four days ago -- I circled the important parts so you can see them here.
They've come out...
Arby's is going to spend 85 million dollars promoting an oven mitt with the voice of Tom Arnold, hoping that that will get people to go to Arby's and buy a roast beef sandwich.
(Laughter) Now, I had tried to imagine what could possibly be in an animated TV commercial featuring Tom Arnold, that would get you to get in your car, drive across town and buy a roast beef sandwich.
(Laughter) Now, this is Copernicus, and he was right, when he was talking to anyone who needs to hear your idea.
"The world revolves around me."
I don't want to get email from anybody; I want to get "memail."
(Laughter) So consumers, and I don't just mean people who buy stuff at the Safeway; I mean people at the Defense Department who might buy something, or people at, you know, the New Yorker who might print your article.
Consumers don't care about you at all; they just don't care.
Part of the reason is -- they've got way more choices than they used to, and way less time.
And in a world where we have too many choices and too little time, the obvious thing to do is just ignore stuff.
And my parable here is you're driving down the road and you see a cow, and you keep driving because you've seen cows before.
Cows are invisible. Cows are boring.
Who's going to stop and pull over and say -- "Oh, look, a cow."
(Laughter) But if the cow was purple -- isn't that a great special effect?
I could do that again if you want.
If the cow was purple, you'd notice it for a while.
I mean, if all cows were purple you'd get bored with those, too.
The thing that's going to decide what gets talked about, what gets done, what gets changed, what gets purchased, what gets built, is: "Is it remarkable?"
And "remarkable" is a really cool word, because we think it just means "neat," but it also means "worth making a remark about."
And that is the essence of where idea diffusion is going.
That two of the hottest cars in the United States is a 55,000-dollar giant car, big enough to hold a Mini in its trunk.
People are paying full price for both, and the only thing they have in common is that they don't have anything in common.
(Laughter) Every week, the number one best-selling DVD in America changes.
It's never "The Godfather," it's never "Citizen Kane," it's always some third-rate movie with some second-rate star.
But the reason it's number one is because that's the week it came out.
Because it's new, because it's fresh.
People saw it and said "I didn't know that was there" and they noticed it.
Two of the big success stories of the last 20 years in retail -- one sells things that are super-expensive in a blue box, and one sells things that are as cheap as they can make them.
The only thing they have in common is that they're different.
We're now in the fashion business, no matter what we do for a living, we're in the fashion business.
And people in the fashion business know what it's like to be in the fashion business -- they're used to it.
The rest of us have to figure out how to think that way.
How to understand that it's not about interrupting people with big full-page ads, or insisting on meetings with people.
But it's a totally different sort of process that determines which ideas spread, and which ones don't.
They sold a billion dollars' worth of Aeron chairs by reinventing what it meant to sell a chair.
They turned a chair from something the purchasing department bought, to something that was a status symbol about where you sat at work.
This guy, Lionel Poilne, the most famous baker in the world -- he died two and a half months ago, and he was a hero of mine and a dear friend.
He lived in Paris.
Every loaf baked in a bakery he owned, by one baker at a time, in a wood-fired oven.
And when Lionel started his bakery, the French pooh-pooh-ed it.
They didn't want to buy his bread.
It wasn't what they expected.
It was neat; it was remarkable; and slowly, it spread from one person to another person until finally, it became the official bread of three-star restaurants in Paris.
Now he's in London, and he ships by FedEx all around the world.
What marketers used to do is make average products for average people.
That's what mass marketing is.
Smooth out the edges; go for the center; that's the big market.
They would ignore the geeks, and God forbid, the laggards.
It was all about going for the center.
But in a world where the TV-industrial complex is broken, I don't think that's a strategy we want to use any more.
I think the strategy we want to use is to not market to these people because they're really good at ignoring you.
But market to these people because they care.
These are the people who are obsessed with something.
And when you talk to them, they'll listen, because they like listening -- it's about them.
And if you're lucky, they'll tell their friends on the rest of the curve, and it'll spread.
They have something I call "otaku" -- it's a great Japanese word.
It describes the desire of someone who's obsessed to say, drive across Tokyo to try a new ramen noodle place, because that's what they do: they get obsessed with it.
To make a product, to market an idea, to come up with any problem you want to solve that doesn't have a constituency with an otaku, is almost impossible.
Instead, you have to find a group that really, desperately cares about what it is you have to say.
Talk to them and make it easy for them to tell their friends.
There's a hot sauce otaku, but there's no mustard otaku.
That's why there's lots and lots of kinds of hot sauces, and not so many kinds of mustard.
Not because it's hard to make interesting mustard -- you could make interesting mustard -- but people don't, because no one's obsessed with it, and thus no one tells their friends.
It has a strategy, and what they do is, they enter a city, they talk to the people, with the otaku, and then they spread through the city to the people who've just crossed the street.
Not everybody wants it but they don't care.
They want to talk to the people who do, and maybe it'll spread.
These guys make the loudest car stereo in the world.
(Laughter) It's as loud as a 747 jet.
You can't get in, the car's got bulletproof glass, because it'll blow out the windshield otherwise.
But the fact remains that when someone wants to put a couple of speakers in their car, if they've got the otaku or they've heard from someone who does, they go ahead and they pick this.
It's really simple -- you sell to the people who are listening, and just maybe, those people tell their friends.
So when Steve Jobs talks to 50,000 people at his keynote, who are all tuned in from 130 countries watching his two-hour commercial -- that's the only thing keeping his company in business -- it's that those 50,000 people care desperately enough to watch a two-hour commercial, and then tell their friends.
Pearl Jam, 96 albums released in the last two years.
Every one made a profit. How?
They only sell them on their website.
Those people who buy them have the otaku, and then they tell their friends, and it spreads and it spreads.
This hospital crib cost 10,000 dollars, 10 times the standard.
But hospitals are buying it faster than any other model.
Hard Candy nail polish, doesn't appeal to everybody, but to the people who love it, they talk about it like crazy.
This paint can right here saved the Dutch Boy paint company, making them a fortune.
It costs 35 percent more than regular paint because Dutch Boy made a can that people talk about, because it's remarkable.
They didn't just slap a new ad on the product; they changed what it meant to build a paint product.
AmIhotornot.com -- everyday 250,000 people go to this site, run by two volunteers, and I can tell you they are hard graders -- (Laughter) They didn't get this way by advertising a lot.
They got this way by being remarkable, sometimes a little too remarkable.
And this picture frame has a cord going out the back, and you plug it into the wall.
My father has this on his desk, and he sees his grandchildren everyday, changing constantly.
And every single person who walks into his office hears the whole story of how this thing ended up on his desk.
And one person at a time, the idea spreads.
These are not diamonds, not really.
They're made from "cremains."
After you're cremated you can have yourself made into a gem.
(Laughter) Oh, you like my ring? It's my grandmother.
(Laughter) Fastest-growing business in the whole mortuary industry.
But you don't have to be Ozzie Osborne -- you don't have to be super-outrageous to do this.
What you have to do is figure out what people really want and give it to them.
A couple of quick rules to wrap up.
The first one is: Design is free when you get to scale.
The people who come up with stuff that's remarkable more often than not figure out how to put design to work for them.
Number two: The riskiest thing you can do now is be safe.
Proctor and Gamble knows this, right?
The whole model of being Proctor and Gamble is always about average products for average people.
That's risky.
The safe thing to do now is to be at the fringes, be remarkable.
And being very good is one of the worst things you can possibly do.
Very good is boring. Very good is average.
It doesn't matter whether you're making a record album, or you're an architect, or you have a tract on sociology.
If it's very good, it's not going to work, because no one's going to notice it.
So my three stories.
Silk put a product that does not need to be in the refrigerated section next to the milk in the refrigerated section.
Sales tripled. Why?
Milk, milk, milk, milk, milk -- not milk.
For the people who were there and looking at that section, it was remarkable.
They didn't triple their sales with advertising; they tripled it by doing something remarkable.
That is a remarkable piece of art.
You don't have to like it, but a 40-foot tall dog made out of bushes in the middle of New York City is remarkable.
(Laughter) Frank Gehry didn't just change a museum; he changed an entire city's economy by designing one building that people from all over the world went to see.
Now, at countless meetings at, you know, the Portland City Council, or who knows where, they said, we need an architect -- can we get Frank Gehry?
Because he did something that was at the fringes.
And my big failure? I came out with an entire -- (Music) A record album and hopefully a whole bunch of record albums in SACD, this remarkable new format -- and I marketed it straight to people with 20,000-dollar stereos.
People with 20,000-dollar stereos don't like new music.
(Laughter) So what you need to do is figure out who does care.
Who is going to raise their hand and say, "I want to hear what you're doing next," and sell something to them.
The last example I want to give you.
As you can see, if that's nowhere, it's in the middle of it.
(Laughter) But they do have a lake.
And people used to come from miles around to swim in the lake.
They don't anymore.
What can we build here?"
And like most committees, they were going to build something pretty safe.
And then an artist came to them -- this is a true artist's rendering -- he wants to build a 55-foot tall lava lamp in the center of town.
That's a purple cow; that's something worth noticing.
I don't know about you, but if they build it, that's where I'm going to go.
Thank you very much for your attention.
Welcome. If I could have the first slide, please?
Contrary to calculations made by some engineers, bees can fly, dolphins can swim, and geckos can even climb up the smoothest surfaces. Now, what I want to do, in the short time I have, is to try to allow each of you to experience the thrill of revealing nature's design.
I get to do this all the time, and it's just incredible.
I want to try to share just a little bit of that with you in this presentation.
The challenge of looking at nature's designs -- and I'll tell you the way that we perceive it, and the way we've used it.
The challenge, of course, is to answer this question: what permits this extraordinary performance of animals that allows them basically to go anywhere?
And if we could figure that out, how can we implement those designs?
Well, many biologists will tell engineers, and others, organisms have millions of years to get it right; they're spectacular; they can do everything wonderfully well.
So, the answer is bio-mimicry: just copy nature directly.
We know from working on animals that the truth is that's exactly what you don't want to do -- because evolution works on the just-good-enough principle, not on a perfecting principle.
And the constraints in building any organism, when you look at it, are really severe. Natural technologies have incredible constraints.
Think about it. If you were an engineer and I told you that you had to build an automobile, but it had to start off to be this big, then it had to grow to be full size and had to work every step along the way.
Or think about the fact that if you build an automobile, I'll tell you that you also -- inside it -- have to put a factory that allows you to make another automobile.
(Laughter) And you can absolutely never, absolutely never, because of history and the inherited plan, start with a clean slate.
So, organisms have this important history.
Really evolution works more like a tinkerer than an engineer.
And this is really important when you begin to look at animals.
Instead, we believe you need to be inspired by biology.
You need to discover the general principles of nature, and then use these analogies when they're advantageous.
This is a real challenge to do this, because animals, when you start to really look inside them -- how they work -- appear hopelessly complex. There's no detailed history of the design plans, you can't go look it up anywhere.
They have way too many motions for their joints, too many muscles.
Even the simplest animal we think of, something like an insect, and they have more neurons and connections than you can imagine.
How can you make sense of this? Well, we believed -- and we hypothesized -- that one way animals could work simply, is if the control of their movements tended to be built into their bodies themselves.
What we discovered was that two-, four-, six- and eight-legged animals all produce the same forces on the ground when they move.
They all work like this kangaroo, they bounce.
And they can be modeled by a spring-mass system that we call the spring mass system because we're biomechanists. It's actually a pogo stick.
They all produce the pattern of a pogo stick. How is that true?
Well, a human, one of your legs works like two legs of a trotting dog, or works like three legs, together as one, of a trotting insect, or four legs as one of a trotting crab.
And then they alternate in their propulsion, but the patterns are all the same. Almost every organism we've looked at this way -- you'll see next week, I'll give you a hint, there'll be an article coming out that says that really big things like T. rex probably couldn't do this, but you'll see that next week.
Now, what's interesting is the animals, then -- we said -- bounce along the vertical plane this way, and in our collaborations with Pixar, in "A Bug's Life," we discussed the bipedal nature of the characters of the ants.
And we told them, of course, they move in another plane as well.
And they asked us this question. They say, "Why model just in the sagittal plane or the vertical plane, when you're telling us these animals are moving in the horizontal plane?" This is a good question.
Nobody in biology ever modeled it this way.
We took their advice and we modeled the animals moving in the horizontal plane as well. We took their three legs, we collapsed them down as one.
We got some of the best mathematicians in the world from Princeton to work on this problem.
And we were able to create a model where animals are not only bouncing up and down, but they're also bouncing side to side at the same time.
And many organisms fit this kind of pattern.
Now, why is this important to have this model?
Because it's very interesting. When you take this model and you perturb it, you give it a push, as it bumps into something, it self-stabilizes, with no brain or no reflexes, just by the structure alone.
It's a beautiful model. Let's look at the mathematics.
(Laughter) That's enough!
(Laughter) The animals, when you look at them running, appear to be self-stabilizing like this, using basically springy legs. That is, the legs can do computations on their own; the control algorithms, in a sense, are embedded in the form of the animal itself.
Why haven't we been more inspired by nature and these kinds of discoveries?
Well, I would argue that human technologies are really different from natural technologies, at least they have been so far.
Think about the typical kind of robot that you see.
Human technologies have tended to be large, flat, with right angles, stiff, made of metal. They have rolling devices and axles. There are very few motors, very few sensors.
Whereas nature tends to be small, and curved, and it bends and twists, and has legs instead, and appendages, and has many muscles and many, many sensors.
So it's a very different design. However, what's changing, what's really exciting -- and I'll show you some of that next -- is that as human technology takes on more of the characteristics of nature, then nature really can become a much more useful teacher.
And here's one example that's really exciting.
This is a collaboration we have with Stanford.
And they developed this new technique, called Shape Deposition Manufacturing.
It's a technique where they can mix materials together and mold any shape that they like, and put in the material properties.
They can embed sensors and actuators right in the form itself.
For example, here's a leg: the clear part is stiff, the white part is compliant, and you don't need any axles there or anything.
It just bends by itself beautifully.
So, you can put those properties in. It inspired them to show off this design by producing a little robot they named Sprawl.
Our work has also inspired another robot, a biologically inspired bouncing robot, from the University of Michigan and McGill named RHex, for robot hexapod, and this one's autonomous.
Let's go to the video, and let me show you some of these animals moving and then some of the simple robots that have been inspired by our discoveries.
Here's what some of you did this morning, although you did it outside, not on a treadmill.
Here's what we do.
(Laughter) This is a death's head cockroach. This is an American cockroach you think you don't have in your kitchen.
This is an eight-legged scorpion, six-legged ant, forty-four-legged centipede.
Now, I said all these animals are sort of working like pogo sticks -- they're bouncing along as they move. And you can see that in this ghost crab, from the beaches of Panama and North Carolina.
It goes up to four meters per second when it runs.
It actually leaps into the air, and has aerial phases when it does it, like a horse, and you'll see it's bouncing here.
What we discovered is whether you look at the leg of a human like Richard, or a cockroach, or a crab, or a kangaroo, the relative leg stiffness of that spring is the same for everything we've seen so far.
Now, what good are springy legs then? What can they do?
Well, we wanted to see if they allowed the animals to have greater stability and maneuverability.
So, we built a terrain that had obstacles three times the hip height of the animals that we're looking at.
And we were certain they couldn't do this. And here's what they did.
The animal ran over it and it didn't even slow down!
It didn't decrease its preferred speed at all.
We couldn't believe that it could do this. It said to us that if you could build a robot with very simple, springy legs, you could make it as maneuverable as any that's ever been built.
Here's the first example of that. This is the Stanford Shape Deposition Manufactured robot, named Sprawl.
It has six legs -- there are the tuned, springy legs.
It moves in a gait that an insect uses, and here it is going on the treadmill. Now, what's important about this robot, compared to other robots, is that it can't see anything, it can't feel anything, it doesn't have a brain, yet it can maneuver over these obstacles without any difficulty whatsoever.
It's this technique of building the properties into the form.
This is a graduate student. This is what he's doing to his thesis project -- very robust, if a graduate student does that to his thesis project.
(Laughter) This is from McGill and University of Michigan. This is the RHex, making its first outing in a demo.
(Laughter) Same principle: it only has six moving parts, six motors, but it has springy, tuned legs. It moves in the gait of the insect.
It has the middle leg moving in synchrony with the front, and the hind leg on the other side. Sort of an alternating tripod, and they can negotiate obstacles just like the animal.
(Laughter) (Voice: Oh my God.) (Applause) Robert Full: It'll go on different surfaces -- here's sand -- although we haven't perfected the feet yet, but I'll talk about that later.
Here's RHex entering the woods.
(Laughter) Again, this robot can't see anything, it can't feel anything, it has no brain. It's just working with a tuned mechanical system, with very simple parts, but inspired from the fundamental dynamics of the animal.
(Voice: Ah, I love him, Bob.) RF: Here's it going down a pathway.
I presented this to the jet propulsion lab at NASA, and they said that they had no ability to go down craters to look for ice, and life, ultimately, on Mars. And he said -- especially with legged-robots, because they're way too complicated.
Nothing can do that. And I talk next. I showed them this video with the simple design of RHex here. And just to convince them we should go to Mars in 2011, I tinted the video orange just to give them the sense of being on Mars.
(Laughter) (Applause) Another reason why animals have extraordinary performance, and can go anywhere, is because they have an effective interaction with the environment. The animal I'm going to show you, that we studied to look at this, is the gecko.
We have one here and notice its position. It's holding on.
Now I'm going to challenge you. I'm going show you a video.
One of the animals is going to be running on the level, and the other one's going to be running up a wall. Which one's which?
They're going at a meter a second. How many think the one on the left is running up the wall?
(Applause) Okay. The point is it's really hard to tell, isn't it? It's incredible, we looked at students do this and they couldn't tell.
They can run up a wall at a meter a second, 15 steps per second, and they look like they're running on the level. How do they do this?
It's just phenomenal. The one on the right was going up the hill.
How do they do this? They have bizarre toes. They have toes that uncurl like party favors when you blow them out, and then peel off the surface, like tape.
Like if we had a piece of tape now, we'd peel it this way.
They do this with their toes. It's bizarre! This peeling inspired iRobot -- that we work with -- to build Mecho-Geckos.
Here's a legged version and a tractor version, or a bulldozer version.
Let's see some of the geckos move with some video, and then I'll show you a little bit of a clip of the robots.
Here's the gecko running up a vertical surface. There it goes, in real time. There it goes again. Obviously, we have to slow this down a little bit.
You can't use regular cameras.
You have to take 1,000 pictures per second to see this.
And here's some video at 1,000 frames per second.
Now, I want you to look at the animal's back.
Do you see how much it's bending like that? We can't figure that out -- that's an unsolved mystery. We don't know how it works.
If you have a son or a daughter that wants to come to Berkeley, come to my lab and we'll figure this out. Okay, send them to Berkeley because that's the next thing I want to do. Here's the gecko mill.
(Laughter) It's a see-through treadmill with a see-through treadmill belt, so we can watch the animal's feet, and videotape them through the treadmill belt, to see how they move.
Here's the animal that we have here, running on a vertical surface.
Pick a foot and try to watch a toe, and see if you can see what the animal's doing.
See it uncurl and then peel these toes.
It can do this in 14 milliseconds. It's unbelievable.
Here are the robots that they inspire, the Mecho-Geckos from iRobot.
First we'll see the animals toes peeling -- look at that.
And here's the peeling action of the Mecho-Gecko.
It uses a pressure-sensitive adhesive to do it.
Peeling in the animal. Peeling in the Mecho-Gecko -- that allows them climb autonomously. Can go on the flat surface, transition to a wall, and then go onto a ceiling.
There's the bulldozer version. Now, it doesn't use pressure-sensitive glue.
The animal does not use that.
But that's what we're limited to, at the moment.
What does the animal do? The animal has weird toes.
And if you look at the toes, they have these little leaves there, and if you blow them up and zoom in, you'll see that's there's little striations in these leaves.
And if you zoom in 270 times, you'll see it looks like a rug.
And if you blow that up, and zoom in 900 times, you see there are hairs there, tiny hairs. And if you look carefully, those tiny hairs have striations. And if you zoom in on those 30,000 times, you'll see each hair has split ends.
And if you blow those up, they have these little structures on the end.
The smallest branch of the hairs looks like spatulae, and an animal like that has one billion of these nano-size split ends, to get very close to the surface. In fact, there's the diameter of your hair -- a gecko has two million of these, and each hair has 100 to 1,000 split ends.
Think of the contact of that that's possible.
We were fortunate to work with another group at Stanford that built us a special manned sensor, that we were able to measure the force of an individual hair.
Here's an individual hair with a little split end there.
When we measured the forces, they were enormous.
They were so large that a patch of hairs about this size -- the gecko's foot could support the weight of a small child, about 40 pounds, easily. Now, how do they do it?
We've recently discovered this. Do they do it by friction?
No, force is too low. Do they do it by electrostatics?
No, you can change the charge -- they still hold on.
Do they do it by interlocking? That's kind of a like a Velcro-like thing.
No, you can put them on molecular smooth surfaces -- they don't do it.
How about suction? They stick on in a vacuum.
How about wet adhesion? Or capillary adhesion?
They don't have any glue, and they even stick under water just fine.
If you put their foot under water, they grab on.
How do they do it then? Believe it or not, they grab on by intermolecular forces, by Van der Waals forces.
You know, you probably had this a long time ago in chemistry, where you had these two atoms, they're close together, and the electrons are moving around. That tiny force is sufficient to allow them to do that because it's added up so many times with these small structures.
What we're doing is, we're taking that inspiration of the hairs, and with another colleague at Berkeley, we're manufacturing them.
And just recently we've made a breakthrough, where we now believe we're going to be able to create the first synthetic, self-cleaning, dry adhesive. Many companies are interested in this.
(Laughter) We also presented to Nike even.
(Laughter) (Applause) We'll see where this goes. We were so excited about this that we realized that that small-size scale -- and where everything gets sticky, and gravity doesn't matter anymore -- we needed to look at ants and their feet, because one of my other colleagues at Berkeley has built a six-millimeter silicone robot with legs. But it gets stuck. It doesn't move very well.
But the ants do, and we'll figure out why, so that ultimately we'll make this move. And imagine: you're going to be able to have swarms of these six-millimeter robots available to run around.
Where's this going? I think you can see it already.
Clearly, the Internet is already having eyes and ears, you have web cams and so forth. But it's going to also have legs and hands.
You're going to be able to do programmable work through these kinds of robots, so that you can run, fly and swim anywhere. We saw David Kelly is at the beginning of that with his fish.
So, in conclusion, I think the message is clear.
If you need a message, if nature's not enough, if you care about search and rescue, or mine clearance, or medicine, or the various things we're working on, we must preserve nature's designs, otherwise these secrets will be lost forever.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The best Christmas my children ever had was also the worst Christmas my husband and I ever had.
Elizabeth, age seven, and her brother, Ian, age five, couldn't imagine why they were getting everything they wanted for Christmas.
The reason Santa was so generous was because of something my husband Pat and I knew and the kids couldn't comprehend.
Something that we had just learned, and it terrified us.
This was 1994 and the story actually starts a few years earlier.
For a couple of years I had noticed a rash on the sides of Elizabeth's neck that looked like prickly heat.
For those same years, my father and brother both died of cancer, and I was probably overanxious about illness.
The doctors assured us there was nothing wrong and I shouldn't worry, but I wasn't so sure.
And so without a referral, and paying out-of-pocket, I took Elizabeth to a dermatologist.
She was probably just allergic to something, but why did it appear just on the sides of her neck, this rash?
So it's two days before Christmas, 1994, and the dermatologist takes a quick look at her neck and says, "She has pseudoxanthoma elasticum."
And then he shuts off the lights and looks in her eyes.
It turns out, by chance, this dermatologist also trained in ophthalmology.
Our lucky day.
I am sick to my stomach.
"Oma?"
Oma's like melanoma, lymphoma -- cancer.
"Why are you looking in her eyes for a skin rash?"
I scream and make no sound.
So there it is.
Elizabeth has pseudoxanthoma elasticum, PXE for short.
Questions mix with fear and erupt like bile in my throat.
Why are you looking in her eyes?
What do you know about this? How do you know for sure?
What is the prognosis?
My training in pastoral counseling did not prepare me for this.
Dr. Bercovitch tells us everything he knows about PXE.
It's a rare genetic disorder, it's systemic, it's a slowly progressing, premature aging disease.
It causes loose wrinkly skin in the flexor areas.
It causes legal blindness, like macular degeneration, and a host of cardiovascular problems.
Little is known about this disease, and some people die in their 30s, say some of the reports at the time.
He then just glances at our son and says, "He has it, too."
We want to flee back to the land of normal.
Two days after Christmas, researchers come from a university in Boston, and they take blood from us and our children for a research project focused on finding the gene.
A few days later, researchers come from a medical center in New York and say they want blood, too.
"These are children.
They're five and seven years old.
Don't make them face the needle twice.
Go and get your share from the other researchers."
They laugh, incredulous.
"Share?"
It is then that we learn that there is little sharing in biomedical research.
This moment, more than any other, lit a fire beneath my husband Pat and me.
Pat and I went to a medical school library and we copied every article we could find on PXE.
We didn't understand a thing.
We bought medical dictionaries and scientific textbooks and read everything we could get our hands on.
And though we still didn't understand, we could see patterns, and it became quickly apparent within a month that there was no systematic effort to understand PXE.
In addition, the lack of sharing that we experienced was pervasive.
Researchers competed with each other because the ecosystem was designed to reward competition rather than to alleviate suffering.
We realized that we would have to do work on this condition ourselves to find solutions for ourselves and others like us.
But we faced two major barriers.
The first one: Pat and I have no science background.
At the time, he's the manager of a construction company, and I'm a former college chaplain stay-at-home mom -- hardly the backgrounds to take the research world by storm.
The second barrier: researchers don't share.
People told us you can't herd cats.
Well, yes you can if you move their food.
(Laughter) (Applause) DNA and clinical data is the food.
So we would collect blood and medical histories, and require that all scientists using these resources would share results with each other and with the people who donated.
Well before the internet was in common use, Pat and I established PXE International, a nonprofit dedicated to initiating research and conducting it on PXE and also supporting individuals with the disease.
Using traditional media, we garnered around 100-150 people around the world who we asked, would you give us your blood, your tissue, your medical histories, your medical records?
And we brought all of that together.
We quickly learned that this shared resource was not going to be enough.
And so we decided we had to do hardcore bench science -- hardcore research.
So we borrowed bench space at a lab at Harvard.
A wonderful neighbor came a couple times a week and sat with the kids from 8pm to 2am while Pat and I extracted DNA, ran and scored gels and searched for the gene.
Generous postdocs tutored us as we went along.
Within a few years, we found the gene.
We patented it so that it would be freely available.
We created a diagnostic test.
We put together a research consortium.
We held research meetings and opened a center of excellence.
We found more than 4,000 people around the world who had PXE, and held patient meetings and did clinical trials and studies.
Through all this, we lived with fear.
Fear of the disease breathing down our neck while the clock ticked.
Fear of researchers, so well credentialed and positioned in a world made for them.
Fear that we were making the wrong choices.
Fear that the naysayers were right and the cats would simply find a new food.
But greater than all these fears was our drive to make a difference for our kids and for all those we had met along the way.
And very quickly, we also realized what we were doing for one disease, we should do for all diseases.
We joined with, and I eventually led, Genetic Alliance -- a network of health advocacy, patient advocacy, research and health organizations.
We built scalable and extensible resources, like biobanks and registries and directories of support for all diseases.
And as I learned about all those diseases and all those disease communities, I realized that there were two secrets in health care that were impacting me greatly.
The first: there are no ready answers for people like my kids or all the people I was working with, whether common or rare conditions.
And the second secret: the answers lie in all of us together, donating our data, our biological samples and ultimately ourselves.
There is a small groundswell of individuals who are working to change this.
Citizen scientists, activists, hacks who are using crowdsourcing, do-it-yourself science are changing the game.
Even President Obama and Vice President Biden are evangelists for the idea that people should be partners in research.
This is a founding principle of our organization.
Sure, it's really hard to discover and develop interventions and therapies.
The science is hard, the regulatory regime is difficult.
There are a lot of stakeholders with lots of interests and misaligned incentives like publishing, promotion and tenure.
I don't fault scientists for following this path, but I challenge them and us to do this differently.
To recognize that people are at the center.
Genetic Alliance has experimented in what it will take to transform these crusty systems.
Our goal is to work without boundaries.
That sounds abstract, but for us it's quite practical.
When we're frustrated that entities won't share data -- data that comes from people who gave their energy, their time, their blood and even their tears -- we need to stop and ask, "How is it true that we could share, but we aren't?"
We're part of this system, too.
How do we make it so that people can share ideas freely?
So that people can take risks and move closer to one another?
This leads to a dissolving of us versus them, not only for organizations but also for individuals.
If I'm going to ask organizations or individuals to strive for these standards, then I too need to explore my own being and my practices.
If I'm going to ask clinicians and researchers and administrators to take risks, then I, Sharon, need to take risks as well.
I need to face my personal fears.
My fear of not having enough impact.
My fear of not leading well.
My fear of not being enough.
Just before they entered their teens, our kids stopped us in our tracks and said, "You have to stop worrying about making a difference, making an impact, and instead, like us, learn to live with disease rather than fight it."
I have to ask, where does all my fear come from?
The kids' declaration shines a spotlight on that fear.
It arises from a bedrock of love.
I love Elizabeth and Ian.
I love people with PXE.
I love people with any disease.
I love people.
Some of my colleagues have discovered that it is not death we fear, it is the enormity of our loving.
This expansive love opens me to great pain as I face loss.
As I discover my fear, I discover that I and all those around me have boundless capacity for love.
And I also discover as I move into this fear, that I can learn many new things and find paths to things like practical solutions as well as the core of healing and health.
I don't fear fear the way I used to.
In fact lately, with enormous support from all my fellow journeyers, I notice that it's not a warning the way it used to be.
I notice that instead, it's an invitation to go forward because in it lies love and the path to greater love.
If I turn with gentle curiosity toward that fear, I find enormous wealth within myself and others and the ability to step into challenges that I never thought I could.
My kids are ahead of me on that path still.
At ages 29 and 27, they declare they are happy and healthy despite having manifestations of PXE in their skin and eyes and arteries.
And so I invite you, us, we, to turn toward our fear; to embrace the things that scare us and find the love at the center.
We'll not only find ourselves there but we'll also be able to step into the shoes of those we fear and those who fear us.
If we breathe into that fear and are vulnerable with the systems and people who challenge us, our power as changemakers grows exponentially.
And when we realize that working on our inner life is working on our outer life and outer work is inner work, we get down to what is real and shit gets done.
(Laughter) There is no limit to what we can accomplish together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My seven-year-old grandson sleeps just down the hall from me, and he wakes up a lot of mornings and he says, "You know, this could be the best day ever."
And other times, in the middle of the night, he calls out in a tremulous voice, "Nana, will you ever get sick and die?"
I think this pretty much says it for me and most of the people I know, that we're a mixed grill of happy anticipation and dread.
So I sat down a few days before my 61st birthday, and I decided to compile a list of everything I know for sure.
There's so little truth in the popular culture, and it's good to be sure of a few things.
For instance, I am no longer 47, although this is the age I feel, and the age I like to think of myself as being.
My friend Paul used to say in his late 70s that he felt like a young man with something really wrong with him.
(Laughter) Our true person is outside of time and space, but looking at the paperwork, I can, in fact, see that I was born in 1954.
My inside self is outside of time and space.
It doesn't have an age.
I'm every age I've ever been, and so are you, although I can't help mentioning as an aside that it might have been helpful if I hadn't followed the skin care rules of the '60s, which involved getting as much sun as possible while slathered in baby oil and basking in the glow of a tinfoil reflector shield.
(Laughter) It was so liberating, though, to face the truth that I was no longer in the last throes of middle age, that I decided to write down every single true thing I know.
People feel really doomed and overwhelmed these days, and they keep asking me what's true.
So I hope that my list of things I'm almost positive about might offer some basic operating instructions to anyone who is feeling really overwhelmed or beleaguered.
Number one: the first and truest thing is that all truth is a paradox.
Life is both a precious, unfathomably beautiful gift, and it's impossible here, on the incarnational side of things.
It's been a very bad match for those of us who were born extremely sensitive.
It's so hard and weird that we sometimes wonder if we're being punked.
It's filled simultaneously with heartbreaking sweetness and beauty, desperate poverty, floods and babies and acne and Mozart, all swirled together.
I don't think it's an ideal system.
(Laughter) Number two: almost everything will work again if you unplug it for a few minutes -- (Laughter) (Applause) including you.
Three: there is almost nothing outside of you that will help in any kind of lasting way, unless you're waiting for an organ.
You can't buy, achieve or date serenity and peace of mind.
This is the most horrible truth, and I so resent it.
But it's an inside job, and we can't arrange peace or lasting improvement for the people we love most in the world.
They have to find their own ways, their own answers.
You can't run alongside your grown children with sunscreen and ChapStick on their hero's journey.
You have to release them.
It's disrespectful not to.
And if it's someone else's problem, you probably don't have the answer, anyway.
(Laughter) Our help is usually not very helpful.
Our help is often toxic.
And help is the sunny side of control.
Stop helping so much.
Don't get your help and goodness all over everybody.
(Laughter) (Applause) This brings us to number four: everyone is screwed up, broken, clingy and scared, even the people who seem to have it most together.
They are much more like you than you would believe, so try not to compare your insides to other people's outsides.
It will only make you worse than you already are.
(Laughter) Also, you can't save, fix or rescue any of them or get anyone sober.
What helped me get clean and sober 30 years ago was the catastrophe of my behavior and thinking.
So I asked some sober friends for help, and I turned to a higher power.
One acronym for God is the "gift of desperation," G-O-D, or as a sober friend put it, by the end I was deteriorating faster than I could lower my standards.
(Laughter) So God might mean, in this case, "me running out of any more good ideas."
While fixing and saving and trying to rescue is futile, radical self-care is quantum, and it radiates out from you into the atmosphere like a little fresh air.
It's a huge gift to the world.
When people respond by saying, "Well, isn't she full of herself," just smile obliquely like Mona Lisa and make both of you a nice cup of tea.
Being full of affection for one's goofy, self-centered, cranky, annoying self is home.
It's where world peace begins.
Number five: chocolate with 75 percent cacao is not actually a food.
(Laughter) Its best use is as a bait in snake traps or to balance the legs of wobbly chairs.
It was never meant to be considered an edible.
Number six -- (Laughter) writing.
Every writer you know writes really terrible first drafts, but they keep their butt in the chair.
That's the secret of life.
That's probably the main difference between you and them.
They just do it.
They do it by prearrangement with themselves.
They do it as a debt of honor.
They tell stories that come through them one day at a time, little by little.
When my older brother was in fourth grade, he had a term paper on birds due the next day, and he hadn't started.
So my dad sat down with him with an Audubon book, paper, pencils and brads -- for those of you who have gotten a little less young and remember brads -- and he said to my brother, "Just take it bird by bird, buddy.
Just read about pelicans and then write about pelicans in your own voice.
And then find out about chickadees, and tell us about them in your own voice.
And then geese."
So the two most important things about writing are: bird by bird and really god-awful first drafts.
If you don't know where to start, remember that every single thing that happened to you is yours, and you get to tell it.
If people wanted you to write more warmly about them, they should've behaved better.
(Laughter) (Applause) You're going to feel like hell if you wake up someday and you never wrote the stuff that is tugging on the sleeves of your heart: your stories, memories, visions and songs -- your truth, your version of things -- in your own voice.
That's really all you have to offer us, and that's also why you were born.
Seven: publication and temporary creative successes are something you have to recover from.
They kill as many people as not.
They will hurt, damage and change you in ways you cannot imagine.
The most degraded and evil people I've ever known are male writers who've had huge best sellers.
And yet, returning to number one, that all truth is paradox, it's also a miracle to get your work published, to get your stories read and heard.
Just try to bust yourself gently of the fantasy that publication will heal you, that it will fill the Swiss-cheesy holes inside of you.
It can't.
It won't.
But writing can.
So can singing in a choir or a bluegrass band.
So can painting community murals or birding or fostering old dogs that no one else will.
Number eight: families.
Families are hard, hard, hard, no matter how cherished and astonishing they may also be.
Again, see number one.
(Laughter) At family gatherings where you suddenly feel homicidal or suicidal -- (Laughter) remember that in all cases, it's a miracle that any of us, specifically, were conceived and born.
Earth is forgiveness school.
It begins with forgiving yourself, and then you might as well start at the dinner table.
That way, you can do this work in comfortable pants.
(Laughter) When William Blake said that we are here to learn to endure the beams of love, he knew that your family would be an intimate part of this, even as you want to run screaming for your cute little life.
But I promise you are up to it.
You can do it, Cinderella, you can do it, and you will be amazed.
Nine: food.
Try to do a little better.
I think you know what I mean.
(Laughter) Number 10 -- (Laughter) grace.
Grace is spiritual WD-40, or water wings.
The mystery of grace is that God loves Henry Kissinger and Vladimir Putin and me exactly as much as He or She loves your new grandchild.
Go figure.
(Laughter) The movement of grace is what changes us, heals us and heals our world.
To summon grace, say, "Help," and then buckle up.
Grace finds you exactly where you are, but it doesn't leave you where it found you.
And grace won't look like Casper the Friendly Ghost, regrettably.
But the phone will ring or the mail will come and then against all odds, you'll get your sense of humor about yourself back.
Laughter really is carbonated holiness.
It helps us breathe again and again and gives us back to ourselves, and this gives us faith in life and each other.
And remember -- grace always bats last.
Eleven: God just means goodness.
It's really not all that scary.
It means the divine or a loving, animating intelligence, or, as we learned from the great "Deteriorata," "the cosmic muffin."
A good name for God is: "Not me."
Emerson said that the happiest person on Earth is the one who learns from nature the lessons of worship.
So go outside a lot and look up.
My pastor said you can trap bees on the bottom of mason jars without lids because they don't look up, so they just walk around bitterly bumping into the glass walls.
Go outside. Look up.
Secret of life.
And finally: death.
Number 12.
Wow and yikes.
It's so hard to bear when the few people you cannot live without die.
You'll never get over these losses, and no matter what the culture says, you're not supposed to.
We Christians like to think of death as a major change of address, but in any case, the person will live again fully in your heart if you don't seal it off.
Like Leonard Cohen said, "There are cracks in everything, and that's how the light gets in."
And that's how we feel our people again fully alive.
Also, the people will make you laugh out loud at the most inconvenient times, and that's the great good news.
But their absence will also be a lifelong nightmare of homesickness for you.
Grief and friends, time and tears will heal you to some extent.
Tears will bathe and baptize and hydrate and moisturize you and the ground on which you walk.
Do you know the first thing that God says to Moses?
He says, "Take off your shoes."
Because this is holy ground, all evidence to the contrary.
It's hard to believe, but it's the truest thing I know.
When you're a little bit older, like my tiny personal self, you realize that death is as sacred as birth.
And don't worry -- get on with your life.
Almost every single death is easy and gentle with the very best people surrounding you for as long as you need.
You won't be alone.
They'll help you cross over to whatever awaits us.
As Ram Dass said, "When all is said and done, we're really just all walking each other home."
I think that's it, but if I think of anything else, I'll let you know.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) I was very surprised to be asked to come, because it is not my realm, technology or design or entertainment.
I mean, my realm is sort of faith and writing and kind of lurching along together.
And I was surprised, but they said I could give a talk, and I said I'd love to.
(Video) If you don't know where to start, remember that every single thing that happened to you is yours and you get to tell it.
Anne Lamott: People are very frightened and feel really doomed in America these days, and I just wanted to help people get their sense of humor about it and to realize how much isn't a problem.
If you take an action, take a really healthy or loving or friendly action, you'll have loving and friendly feelings.
I want you to imagine walking into a room, a control room with a bunch of people, a hundred people, hunched over a desk with little dials, and that that control room will shape the thoughts and feelings of a billion people.
This might sound like science fiction, but this actually exists right now, today.
I know because I used to be in one of those control rooms.
I was a design ethicist at Google, where I studied how do you ethically steer people's thoughts?
Because what we don't talk about is how the handful of people working at a handful of technology companies through their choices will steer what a billion people are thinking today.
Because when you pull out your phone and they design how this works or what's on the feed, it's scheduling little blocks of time in our minds.
If you see a notification, it schedules you to have thoughts that maybe you didn't intend to have.
If you swipe over that notification, it schedules you into spending a little bit of time getting sucked into something that maybe you didn't intend to get sucked into.
When we talk about technology, we tend to talk about it as this blue sky opportunity.
It could go any direction.
And I want to get serious for a moment and tell you why it's going in a very specific direction.
Because it's not evolving randomly.
There's a hidden goal driving the direction of all of the technology we make, and that goal is the race for our attention.
Because every news site, TED, elections, politicians, games, even meditation apps have to compete for one thing, which is our attention, and there's only so much of it.
And the best way to get people's attention is to know how someone's mind works.
And there's a whole bunch of persuasive techniques that I learned in college at a lab called the Persuasive Technology Lab to get people's attention.
A simple example is YouTube.
YouTube wants to maximize how much time you spend.
And so what do they do?
They autoplay the next video.
And let's say that works really well.
They're getting a little bit more of people's time.
Well, if you're Netflix, you look at that and say, well, that's shrinking my market share, so I'm going to autoplay the next episode.
But then if you're Facebook, you say, that's shrinking all of my market share, so now I have to autoplay all the videos in the newsfeed before waiting for you to click play.
So the internet is not evolving at random.
The reason it feels like it's sucking us in the way it is is because of this race for attention.
We know where this is going.
Technology is not neutral, and it becomes this race to the bottom of the brain stem of who can go lower to get it.
Let me give you an example of Snapchat.
If you didn't know, Snapchat is the number one way that teenagers in the United States communicate.
So if you're like me, and you use text messages to communicate, Snapchat is that for teenagers, and there's, like, a hundred million of them that use it.
And they invented a feature called Snapstreaks, which shows the number of days in a row that two people have communicated with each other.
In other words, what they just did is they gave two people something they don't want to lose.
Because if you're a teenager, and you have 150 days in a row, you don't want that to go away.
And so think of the little blocks of time that that schedules in kids' minds.
This isn't theoretical: when kids go on vacation, it's been shown they give their passwords to up to five other friends to keep their Snapstreaks going, even when they can't do it.
And they have, like, 30 of these things, and so they have to get through taking photos of just pictures or walls or ceilings just to get through their day.
So it's not even like they're having real conversations.
We have a temptation to think about this as, oh, they're just using Snapchat the way we used to gossip on the telephone.
It's probably OK.
Well, what this misses is that in the 1970s, when you were just gossiping on the telephone, there wasn't a hundred engineers on the other side of the screen who knew exactly how your psychology worked and orchestrated you into a double bind with each other.
Now, if this is making you feel a little bit of outrage, notice that that thought just comes over you.
Outrage is a really good way also of getting your attention, because we don't choose outrage.
It happens to us.
And if you're the Facebook newsfeed, whether you'd want to or not, you actually benefit when there's outrage.
Because outrage doesn't just schedule a reaction in emotional time, space, for you.
We want to share that outrage with other people.
So we want to hit share and say, "Can you believe the thing that they said?"
And so outrage works really well at getting attention, such that if Facebook had a choice between showing you the outrage feed and a calm newsfeed, they would want to show you the outrage feed, not because someone consciously chose that, but because that worked better at getting your attention.
And the newsfeed control room is not accountable to us.
It's only accountable to maximizing attention.
It's also accountable, because of the business model of advertising, for anybody who can pay the most to actually walk into the control room and say, "That group over there, I want to schedule these thoughts into their minds."
So you can target, you can precisely target a lie directly to the people who are most susceptible.
And because this is profitable, it's only going to get worse.
So I'm here today because the costs are so obvious.
I don't know a more urgent problem than this, because this problem is underneath all other problems.
It's not just taking away our agency to spend our attention and live the lives that we want, it's changing the way that we have our conversations, it's changing our democracy, and it's changing our ability to have the conversations and relationships we want with each other.
And it affects everyone, because a billion people have one of these in their pocket.
So how do we fix this?
We need to make three radical changes to technology and to our society.
The first is we need to acknowledge that we are persuadable.
Once you start understanding that your mind can be scheduled into having little thoughts or little blocks of time that you didn't choose, wouldn't we want to use that understanding and protect against the way that that happens?
I think we need to see ourselves fundamentally in a new way.
It's almost like a new period of human history, like the Enlightenment, but almost a kind of self-aware Enlightenment, that we can be persuaded, and there might be something we want to protect.
The second is we need new models and accountability systems so that as the world gets better and more and more persuasive over time -- because it's only going to get more persuasive -- that the people in those control rooms are accountable and transparent to what we want.
The only form of ethical persuasion that exists is when the goals of the persuader are aligned with the goals of the persuadee.
And that involves questioning big things, like the business model of advertising.
Lastly, we need a design renaissance, because once you have this view of human nature, that you can steer the timelines of a billion people -- just imagine, there's people who have some desire about what they want to do and what they want to be thinking and what they want to be feeling and how they want to be informed, and we're all just tugged into these other directions.
And you have a billion people just tugged into all these different directions.
Well, imagine an entire design renaissance that tried to orchestrate the exact and most empowering time-well-spent way for those timelines to happen.
And that would involve two things: one would be protecting against the timelines that we don't want to be experiencing, the thoughts that we wouldn't want to be happening, so that when that ding happens, not having the ding that sends us away; and the second would be empowering us to live out the timeline that we want.
So let me give you a concrete example.
Today, let's say your friend cancels dinner on you, and you are feeling a little bit lonely.
And so what do you do in that moment?
You open up Facebook.
And in that moment, the designers in the control room want to schedule exactly one thing, which is to maximize how much time you spend on the screen.
Now, instead, imagine if those designers created a different timeline that was the easiest way, using all of their data, to actually help you get out with the people that you care about?
Just think, alleviating all loneliness in society, if that was the timeline that Facebook wanted to make possible for people.
Or imagine a different conversation.
Let's say you wanted to post something supercontroversial on Facebook, which is a really important thing to be able to do, to talk about controversial topics.
And right now, when there's that big comment box, it's almost asking you, what key do you want to type?
In other words, it's scheduling a little timeline of things you're going to continue to do on the screen.
And imagine instead that there was another button there saying, what would be most time well spent for you?
And you click "host a dinner."
And right there underneath the item it said, "Who wants to RSVP for the dinner?"
And so you'd still have a conversation about something controversial, but you'd be having it in the most empowering place on your timeline, which would be at home that night with a bunch of a friends over to talk about it.
So imagine we're running, like, a find and replace on all of the timelines that are currently steering us towards more and more screen time persuasively and replacing all of those timelines with what do we want in our lives.
It doesn't have to be this way.
Instead of handicapping our attention, imagine if we used all of this data and all of this power and this new view of human nature to give us a superhuman ability to focus and a superhuman ability to put our attention to what we cared about and a superhuman ability to have the conversations that we need to have for democracy.
The most complex challenges in the world require not just us to use our attention individually.
They require us to use our attention and coordinate it together.
Climate change is going to require that a lot of people are being able to coordinate their attention in the most empowering way together.
And imagine creating a superhuman ability to do that.
Sometimes the world's most pressing and important problems are not these hypothetical future things that we could create in the future.
Sometimes the most pressing problems are the ones that are right underneath our noses, the things that are already directing a billion people's thoughts.
And maybe instead of getting excited about the new augmented reality and virtual reality and these cool things that could happen, which are going to be susceptible to the same race for attention, if we could fix the race for attention on the thing that's already in a billion people's pockets.
Maybe instead of getting excited about the most exciting new cool fancy education apps, we could fix the way kids' minds are getting manipulated into sending empty messages back and forth.
(Applause) Maybe instead of worrying about hypothetical future runaway artificial intelligences that are maximizing for one goal, we could solve the runaway artificial intelligence that already exists right now, which are these newsfeeds maximizing for one thing.
It's almost like instead of running away to colonize new planets, we could fix the one that we're already on.
(Applause) Solving this problem is critical infrastructure for solving every other problem.
There's nothing in your life or in our collective problems that does not require our ability to put our attention where we care about.
At the end of our lives, all we have is our attention and our time.
What will be time well spent for ours?
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Tristan, thank you. Hey, stay up here a sec.
First of all, thank you.
I know we asked you to do this talk on pretty short notice, and you've had quite a stressful week getting this thing together, so thank you.
Some people listening might say, what you complain about is addiction, and all these people doing this stuff, for them it's actually interesting.
All these design decisions have built user content that is fantastically interesting.
The world's more interesting than it ever has been.
What's wrong with that?
Tristan Harris: I think it's really interesting.
One way to see this is if you're just YouTube, for example, you want to always show the more interesting next video.
You want to get better and better at suggesting that next video, but even if you could propose the perfect next video that everyone would want to watch, it would just be better and better at keeping you hooked on the screen.
So what's missing in that equation is figuring out what our boundaries would be.
You would want YouTube to know something about, say, falling asleep.
The CEO of Netflix recently said, "our biggest competitors are Facebook, YouTube and sleep."
And so what we need to recognize is that the human architecture is limited and that we have certain boundaries or dimensions of our lives that we want to be honored and respected, and technology could help do that.
(Applause) CA: I mean, could you make the case that part of the problem here is that we've got a nave model of human nature?
So much of this is justified in terms of human preference, where we've got these algorithms that do an amazing job of optimizing for human preference, but which preference?
There's the preferences of things that we really care about when we think about them versus the preferences of what we just instinctively click on.
If we could implant that more nuanced view of human nature in every design, would that be a step forward?
TH: Absolutely. I mean, I think right now it's as if all of our technology is basically only asking our lizard brain what's the best way to just impulsively get you to do the next tiniest thing with your time, instead of asking you in your life what we would be most time well spent for you?
What would be the perfect timeline that might include something later, would be time well spent for you here at TED in your last day here?
CA: So if Facebook and Google and everyone said to us first up, "Hey, would you like us to optimize for your reflective brain or your lizard brain? You choose."
TH: Right. That would be one way. Yes.
CA: You said persuadability, that's an interesting word to me because to me there's two different types of persuadability.
There's the persuadability that we're trying right now of reason and thinking and making an argument, but I think you're almost talking about a different kind, a more visceral type of persuadability, of being persuaded without even knowing that you're thinking.
TH: Exactly. The reason I care about this problem so much is I studied at a lab called the Persuasive Technology Lab at Stanford that taught [students how to recognize] exactly these techniques.
There's conferences and workshops that teach people all these covert ways of getting people's attention and orchestrating people's lives.
And it's because most people don't know that that exists that this conversation is so important.
CA: Tristan, you and I, we both know so many people from all these companies.
There are actually many here in the room, and I don't know about you, but my experience of them is that there is no shortage of good intent.
People want a better world.
They are actually -- they really want it.
And I don't think anything you're saying is that these are evil people.
It's a system where there's these unintended consequences that have really got out of control -- TH: Of this race for attention.
It's the classic race to the bottom when you have to get attention, and it's so tense.
The only way to get more is to go lower on the brain stem, to go lower into outrage, to go lower into emotion, to go lower into the lizard brain.
CA: Well, thank you so much for helping us all get a little bit wiser about this.
Tristan Harris, thank you. TH: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I am from the South Side of Chicago, and in seventh grade, I had a best friend named Jenny who lived on the Southwest Side of Chicago.
Jenny was white, and if you know anything about the segregated demographics of Chicago, you know that there are not too many black people who live on the Southwest Side of Chicago.
But Jenny was my girl and so we would hang out every so often after school and on the weekends.
And so one day we were hanging out in her living room, talking about 13-year-old things, and Jenny's little sister Rosie was in the room with us, and she was sitting behind me just kind of playing in my hair, and I wasn't thinking too much about what she was doing.
But at a pause in the conversation, Rosie tapped me on the shoulder.
She said, "Can I ask you a question?"
I said, "Yeah, Rosie. Sure."
"Are you black?"
(Laughter) The room froze.
Silence.
Jenny and Rosie's mom was not too far away.
She was in the kitchen and she overheard the conversation, and she was mortified.
She said, "Rosie! You can't ask people questions like that."
And Jenny was my friend, and I know she was really embarrassed.
I felt kind of bad for her, but actually I was not offended.
I figured it wasn't Rosie's fault that in her 10 short years on this earth, living on the Southwest Side of Chicago, she wasn't 100 percent sure what a black person looked like.
That's fair.
But what was more surprising to me was, in all of this time I had spent with Jenny and Rosie's family -- hanging out with them, playing with them, even physically interacting with them -- it was not until Rosie put her hands in my hair that she thought to ask me if I was black.
That was the first time I would realize how big of a role the texture of my hair played in confirming my ethnicity, but also that it would play a key role in how I'm viewed by others in society.
Garrett A. Morgan and Madame CJ Walker were pioneers of the black hair-care and beauty industry in the early 1900s.
They're best known as the inventors of chemically-based hair creams and heat straightening tools designed to permanently, or semipermanently, alter the texture of black hair.
Oftentimes when we think about the history of blacks in America, we think about the heinous acts and numerous injustices that we experienced as people of color because of the color of our skin, when in fact, in post-Civil War America, it was the hair of an African-American male or female that was known as the most "telling feature" of Negro status, more so than the color of the skin.
And so before they were staples of the multibillion-dollar hair-care industry, our dependency on tools and products, like the hair relaxer and the pressing comb, were more about our survival and advancement as a race in postslavery America.
Over the years, we grew accustomed to this idea that straighter and longer hair meant better and more beautiful.
We became culturally obsessed with this idea of having what we like to call ...
"good hair."
This essentially means: the looser the curl pattern, the better the hair.
And we let these institutionalized ideas form a false sense of hierarchy that would determine what was considered a good grade of hair and what was not.
What's worse is that we let these false ideologies invade our perception of ourselves, and they still continue to infect our cultural identity as African-American women today.
So what did we do?
We went to the hair salon every six to eight weeks, without fail, to subject our scalps to harsh straightening chemicals beginning at a very young age -- sometimes eight, 10 -- that would result in hair loss, bald spots, sometimes even burns on the scalp.
We fry our hair at temperatures of 450 degrees Fahrenheit or higher almost daily, to maintain the straight look.
Or we simply cover our hair up with wigs and weaves, only to let our roots breathe in private where no one knows what's really going on under there.
We adopted these practices in our own communities, and so it's no wonder why today the typical ideal vision of a professional black woman, especially in corporate America, tends to look like this, rather than like this.
And she certainly doesn't look like this.
In September of this year, a federal court ruled it lawful for a company to discriminate against hiring an employee based on if she or he wears dreadlocks.
In the case, the hiring manager in Mobile, Alabama is on record as saying, "I'm not saying yours are messy, but ...
you know what I'm talking about."
Well, what was she talking about?
Did she think that they were ugly?
Or maybe they were just a little too Afrocentric and pro-black-looking for her taste.
Or maybe it's not about Afrocentricity, and it's more just about it being a little too "urban" for the professional setting.
Perhaps she had a genuine concern in that they looked "scary" and that they would intimidate the clients and their customer base.
All of these words are ones that are too often associated with the stigma attached to natural hairstyles.
And this ...
this has got to change.
In 2013, a white paper published by the Deloitte Leadership Center for Inclusion, studied 3,000 individuals in executive leadership roles on the concept of covering in the workplace based on appearance, advocacy, affiliation and association.
When thinking about appearance-based covering, the study showed that 67 percent of women of color cover in the workplace based on their appearance.
Of the total respondents who admitted to appearance-based covering, 82 percent said that it was somewhat to extremely important for them to do so for their professional advancement.
Now, this is Ursula Burns.
She is the first African-American female CEO of a Fortune 500 company -- of Xerox.
She's known by her signature look, the one that you see here.
A short, nicely trimmed, well-manicured Afro.
Ms. Burns is what we like to call a "natural girl."
And she is paving the way and showing what's possible for African-American women seeking to climb the corporate ladder, but still wishing to wear natural hairstyles.
But today the majority of African-American women who we still look to as leaders, icons and role models, still opt for a straight-hair look.
Now, maybe it's because they want to -- this is authentically how they feel best -- but maybe -- and I bet -- a part of them felt like they had to in order to reach the level of success that they have attained today.
There is a natural hair movement that is sweeping the country and also in some places in Europe.
Millions of women are exploring what it means to transition to natural hair, and they're cutting off years and years of dry, damaged ends in order to restore their natural curl pattern.
I know because I have been an advocate and an ambassador for this movement for roughly the last three years.
After 27 years of excessive heat and harsh chemicals, my hair was beginning to show extreme signs of wear and tear.
It was breaking off, it was thinning, looking just extremely dry and brittle.
All those years of chasing that conventional image of beauty that we saw earlier was finally beginning to take its toll.
I wanted to do something about it, and so I started what I called the "No Heat Challenge," where I would refrain from using heat styling tools on my hair for six months.
And like a good millennial, I documented it on social media.
(Laughter) I documented as I reluctantly cut off three to four inches of my beloved hair.
I documented as I struggled to master these natural hairstyles, and also as I struggled to embrace them and think that they actually looked good.
And I documented as my hair texture slowly began to change.
By sharing this journey openly, I learned that I was not the only woman going through this and that in fact there were thousands and thousands of other women who were longing to do the same.
So they would reach out to me and they would say, "Cheyenne, how did you do that natural hairstyle that I saw you with the other day?
What new products have you started using that might be a little better for my hair texture as it begins to change?"
Or, "What are some of the natural hair routines that I should begin to adopt to slowly restore the health of my hair?"
But I also found that there were a large number of women who were extremely hesitant to take that first step because they were paralyzed by fear.
Fear of the unknown -- what would they now look like?
How would they feel about themselves with these natural hairstyles?
And most importantly to them, how would others view them?
Over the last three years of having numerous conversations with friends of mine and also complete strangers from around the world, I learned some really important things about how African-American women identify with their hair.
And so when I think back to that hiring manager in Mobile, Alabama, I'd say, "Actually, no.
We don't know what you're talking about."
But here are some things that we do know.
We know that when black women embrace their love for their natural hair, it helps to undo generations of teaching that black in its natural state is not beautiful, or something to be hidden or covered up.
We know that black women express their individuality and experience feelings of empowerment by experimenting with different hairstyles regularly.
And we also know that when we're invited to wear our natural hair in the workplace, it reinforces that we are uniquely valued and thus helps us to flourish and advance professionally.
I leave you with this.
In a time of racial and social tension, embracing this movement and others like this help us to rise above the confines of the status quo.
So when you see a woman with braids or locks draping down her back, or you notice your colleague who has stopped straightening her hair to work, do not simply approach her and admire and ask her if you can touch it -- (Laughter) Really appreciate her.
Applaud her.
Heck, even high-five her if that's what you feel so inclined to do.
Because this -- this is more than about a hairstyle.
It's about self-love and self-worth.
It's about being brave enough not to fold under the pressure of others' expectations.
And about knowing that making the decision to stray from the norm does not define who we are, but it simply reveals who we are.
And finally, being brave is easier when we can count on the compassion of others.
So after today, I certainly hope that we can count on you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Michael Browning: engineer, innovator -- inventor, really -- and inspiring father.
He had a passion for flight, as you can kind of sense from that rather dubious 1970s office-leaving present.
And some 40 years after that was created, a small group of us got together to have a go, a run at the whole challenge of flight that inspired people for years, and do it in a very different kind of way.
And that's the journey I'd like to share with you now.
The starting hypothesis was one of the human mind and body, which, as you've seen for the last few days here, is an amazing construct.
What if you augmented that wonderful machine with just the right technology?
If you approach flight in that kind of real way, where could you get to?
So my training partner here back in London, Denton, is doing a much better job of that kind of stuff than me.
Guess what? It's London.
The idea was that you augment that.
And so, how do you augment that?
Well, we bought one of these.
This is a micro gas turbine.
This was ground zero, so that little piece of kit proved really quite impressive, so we got two in a field.
The real hero here, by the way, is, right in the background, there's a lady tending some vegetables, who does a brilliant job of trying to ignore us for a while -- (Laughter) I think the only thing less happy is the grass, that we did probably damage quite badly.
You get an idea of the thrust here, when I try to hold them horizontally and somewhat fail.
That's around 50 kilos of thrust there.
We were quite impressed with that.
We thought we were getting somewhere.
So there's only one sensible way to go from there: you get four.
(Laughter) I have to say, I still like watching these back.
So then we thought well, let's try and spread the load a bit.
The legs are designed to take the load, so why don't we spread it out a bit?
That bit was good.
The harness -- a nice idea but it didn't really work, as you'll see now.
This whole journey was very much about trying things -- (Laughter) Yeah, it really didn't work, did it?
Trying things and learning by failing at them most of the time.
And that included failing by falling over.
If you notice, we've got five engines here -- not to be put off by the fact one was in maintenance, still had a go.
(Laughter) And then I pinched a fuel line.
So again, good learning. We learned not to do that again.
This was a blind alley.
(Laughter) This was three on each arm -- that was ridiculous.
That was 70 kilos on each arm.
Again, struck that one off.
(Laughter) But we were starting to make some really quite convincing progress, just enough to make you believe that maybe -- maybe we could get there.
You can see, look -- tantalizing.
The model of one on each leg and two on each arm, on paper, that was enough thrust.
And then we did what I'm about to show you now, and I still love watching this one.
This was our first six-second, reasonably coherent flight.
(Applause) That was the point where this endeavor went from: "I'm really not sure this is going to work," to: "Oh my god, it does work!"
From there on we then refined it, but we carried on falling over a lot.
Falling over, like I say, is definitely the best way to learn.
After a while, we starting really refining the layout of all of this.
And you'll see, that's stability and control -- there's no wires there or anything -- that's a combination of us refining the technology, including with a Tupperware box on the back for the electronics and actually learning the balance and control.
I'm now going to save your ears for the next short piece and talk over it.
After a while, the jet engine noise is a bit annoying.
This is only a few weeks ago.
You can see the stability and control is really quite nice, and I'd like to think this somewhat validates that starting hypothesis, that the human mind and body, if properly augmented in that way, can achieve some pretty cool stuff.
I mean, like I said: I'm not thinking about where I'm moving my arms at that stage.
I'm looking at the objective of where I want to get to, and a bit like riding a bike, my arms are just doing their thing.
It's a very strange experience.
So where is all this headed?
I'll talk over this landing -- I think I land in this one.
Well, I don't think anybody's going to go down to Walmart or take the kids to school in any of this stuff for a while, but the team at Gravity are building some awesome technology that's going to make this look like child's play.
We're working on some things that will seek to bring this unusual experience of flight to a wider audience, beyond the events and displays we're doing.
We're even starting to look for pilots two and three, if there's any volunteers.
I've got this vision.
It sounds audacious, but let's just stick it out there, that one day maybe we can rise up above a beach, fly up and down the coastline of it, rise up a bit higher, with some of the safety kit we're working on to make this achievable.
Then over the horizon comes a Hercules with the ramp down.
As it comes past, you start picking up speed and see if we can intercept -- from the rear, not the front, that would be a mistake -- and then try and land in the back.
And as I say, that's a little way off at the moment.
But this is also, if I take a big step back from this, this is also a very personal journey for me.
Back to that lovely photo, or photo in a picture.
Sadly, my father took his own life when I was 15, and left an awful lot of unfulfilled ambition.
He was a wonderful inventor, a maverick creator.
And I'd just like to think, if it was possible, if he was looking down, he would be -- he'd certainly be smiling at some of the things we've done here, I think.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) (Voice-over) Richard Browning: I'm probably more nervous about doing the demo after this.
I've got a lot of things to get done today.
Worst-case scenario, we don't get a clean start.
Or we get an unplanned failure while I'm actually flying around.
This is why we keep it very low, so the worst is I just look like an idiot and fall on my rear, as I said.
So you can all enjoy that if that happens.
(Music) (Jet engine accelerates) (Cheers)
I'm going to speak to you about the global refugee crisis and my aim is to show you that this crisis is manageable, not unsolvable, but also show you that this is as much about us and who we are as it is a trial of the refugees on the front line.
For me, this is not just a professional obligation, because I run an NGO supporting refugees and displaced people around the world.
It's personal.
I love this picture.
That really handsome guy on the right, that's not me.
That's my dad, Ralph, in London, in 1940 with his father Samuel.
They were Jewish refugees from Belgium.
They fled the day the Nazis invaded.
And I love this picture, too.
It's a group of refugee children arriving in England in 1946 from Poland.
And in the middle is my mother, Marion.
She was sent to start a new life in a new country on her own at the age of 12.
I know this: if Britain had not admitted refugees in the 1940s, I certainly would not be here today.
Yet 70 years on, the wheel has come full circle.
The sound is of walls being built, vengeful political rhetoric, humanitarian values and principles on fire in the very countries that 70 years ago said never again to statelessness and hopelessness for the victims of war.
Last year, every minute, 24 more people were displaced from their homes by conflict, violence and persecution: another chemical weapon attack in Syria, the Taliban on the rampage in Afghanistan, girls driven from their school in northeast Nigeria by Boko Haram.
These are not people moving to another country to get a better life.
They're fleeing for their lives.
It's a real tragedy that the world's most famous refugee can't come to speak to you here today.
Many of you will know this picture.
It shows the lifeless body of five-year-old Alan Kurdi, a Syrian refugee who died in the Mediterranean in 2015.
He died alongside 3,700 others trying to get to Europe.
The next year, 2016, 5,000 people died.
It's too late for them, but it's not too late for millions of others.
It's not too late for people like Frederick.
I met him in the Nyarugusu refugee camp in Tanzania.
He's from Burundi.
He wanted to know where could he complete his studies.
He'd done 11 years of schooling. He wanted a 12th year.
He said to me, "I pray that my days do not end here in this refugee camp."
And it's not too late for Halud.
Her parents were Palestinian refugees living in the Yarmouk refugee camp outside Damascus.
She was born to refugee parents, and now she's a refugee herself in Lebanon.
She's working for the International Rescue Committee to help other refugees, but she has no certainty at all about her future, where it is or what it holds.
This talk is about Frederick, about Halud and about millions like them: why they're displaced, how they survive, what help they need and what our responsibilities are.
I truly believe this, that the biggest question in the 21st century concerns our duty to strangers.
The future "you" is about your duties to strangers.
You know better than anyone, the world is more connected than ever before, yet the great danger is that we're consumed by our divisions.
And there is no better test of that than how we treat refugees.
Here are the facts: 65 million people displaced from their homes by violence and persecution last year.
If it was a country, that would be the 21st largest country in the world.
Most of those people, about 40 million, stay within their own home country, but 25 million are refugees.
That means they cross a border into a neighboring state.
Most of them are living in poor countries, relatively poor or lower-middle-income countries, like Lebanon, where Halud is living.
In Lebanon, one in four people is a refugee, a quarter of the whole population.
And refugees stay for a long time.
The average length of displacement is 10 years.
I went to what was the world's largest refugee camp, in eastern Kenya.
It was built in 1991-92 as a "temporary camp" for Somalis fleeing the civil war.
I met Silo.
And navely I said to Silo, "Do you think you'll ever go home to Somalia?"
And she said, "What do you mean, go home?
And then when I asked the camp management how many of the 330,000 people in that camp were born there, they gave me the answer: 100,000.
That's what long-term displacement means.
Now, the causes of this are deep: weak states that can't support their own people, an international political system weaker than at any time since 1945 and differences over theology, governance, engagement with the outside world in significant parts of the Muslim world.
Now, those are long-term, generational challenges.
That's why I say that this refugee crisis is a trend and not a blip.
And it's complex, and when you have big, large, long-term, complex problems, people think nothing can be done.
When Pope Francis went to Lampedusa, off the coast of Italy, in 2014, he accused all of us and the global population of what he called "the globalization of indifference."
It's a haunting phrase.
It means that our hearts have turned to stone.
Now, I don't know, you tell me.
Are you allowed to argue with the Pope, even at a TED conference?
But I think it's not right.
I think people do want to make a difference, but they just don't know whether there are any solutions to this crisis.
And what I want to tell you today is that though the problems are real, the solutions are real, too.
Solution one: these refugees need to get into work in the countries where they're living, and the countries where they're living need massive economic support.
In Uganda in 2014, they did a study: 80 percent of refugees in the capital city Kampala needed no humanitarian aid because they were working.
They were supported into work.
Solution number two: education for kids is a lifeline, not a luxury, when you're displaced for so long.
Kids can bounce back when they're given the proper social, emotional support alongside literacy and numeracy.
I've seen it for myself.
But half of the world's refugee children of primary school age get no education at all, and three-quarters of secondary school age get no education at all.
That's crazy.
Solution number three: most refugees are in urban areas, in cities, not in camps.
What would you or I want if we were a refugee in a city?
We would want money to pay rent or buy clothes.
That is the future of the humanitarian system, or a significant part of it: give people cash so that you boost the power of refugees and you'll help the local economy.
And there's a fourth solution, too, that's controversial but needs to be talked about.
The most vulnerable refugees need to be given a new start and a new life in a new country, including in the West.
The numbers are relatively small, hundreds of thousands, not millions, but the symbolism is huge.
Now is not the time to be banning refugees, as the Trump administration proposes.
It's a time to be embracing people who are victims of terror.
And remember -- (Applause) Remember, anyone who asks you, "Are they properly vetted?"
that's a really sensible and good question to ask.
The truth is, refugees arriving for resettlement are more vetted than any other population arriving in our countries.
So while it's reasonable to ask the question, it's not reasonable to say that refugee is another word for terrorist.
Now, what happens -- (Applause) What happens when refugees can't get work, they can't get their kids into school, they can't get cash, they can't get a legal route to hope?
What happens is they take risky journeys.
I went to Lesbos, this beautiful Greek island, two years ago.
It's a home to 90,000 people.
In one year, 500,000 refugees went across the island.
And I want to show you what I saw when I drove across to the north of the island: a pile of life jackets of those who had made it to shore.
And when I looked closer, there were small life jackets for children, yellow ones.
And I took this picture.
You probably can't see the writing, but I want to read it for you.
"Warning: will not protect against drowning."
So in the 21st century, children are being given life jackets to reach safety in Europe even though those jackets will not save their lives if they fall out of the boat that is taking them there.
This is not just a crisis, it's a test.
It's a test that civilizations have faced down the ages.
It's a test of our humanity.
It's a test of us in the Western world of who we are and what we stand for.
It's a test of our character, not just our policies.
And refugees are a hard case.
They do come from faraway parts of the world.
They have been through trauma.
They're often of a different religion.
Those are precisely the reasons we should be helping refugees, not a reason not to help them.
And it's a reason to help them because of what it says about us.
It's revealing of our values.
Empathy and altruism are two of the foundations of civilization.
Turn that empathy and altruism into action and we live out a basic moral credo.
And in the modern world, we have no excuse.
We can't say we don't know what's happening in Juba, South Sudan, or Aleppo, Syria.
It's there, in our smartphone in our hand.
Ignorance is no excuse at all.
Fail to help, and we show we have no moral compass at all.
It's also revealing about whether we know our own history.
The reason that refugees have rights around the world is because of extraordinary Western leadership by statesmen and women after the Second World War that became universal rights.
Trash the protections of refugees, and we trash our own history.
This is -- (Applause) This is also revealing about the power of democracy as a refuge from dictatorship.
How many politicians have you heard say, "We believe in the power of our example, not the example of our power."
What they mean is what we stand for is more important than the bombs we drop.
Refugees seeking sanctuary have seen the West as a source of hope and a place of haven.
Russians, Iranians, Chinese, Eritreans, Cubans, they've come to the West for safety.
We throw that away at our peril.
And there's one other thing it reveals about us: whether we have any humility for our own mistakes.
I'm not one of these people who believes that all the problems in the world are caused by the West.
They're not.
But when we make mistakes, we should recognize it.
It's not an accident that the country which has taken more refugees than any other, the United States, has taken more refugees from Vietnam than any other country.
It speaks to the history.
But there's more recent history, in Iraq and Afghanistan.
You can't make up for foreign policy errors by humanitarian action, but when you break something, you have a duty to try to help repair it, and that's our duty now.
Do you remember at the beginning of the talk, I said I wanted to explain that the refugee crisis was manageable, not insoluble?
That's true. I want you to think in a new way, but I also want you to do things.
If you're an employer, hire refugees.
If you're persuaded by the arguments, take on the myths when family or friends or workmates repeat them.
If you've got money, give it to charities that make a difference for refugees around the world.
If you're a citizen, vote for politicians who will put into practice the solutions that I've talked about.
(Applause) The duty to strangers shows itself in small ways and big, prosaic and heroic.
In 1942, my aunt and my grandmother were living in Brussels under German occupation.
They received a summons from the Nazi authorities to go to Brussels Railway Station.
My grandmother immediately thought something was amiss.
She pleaded with her relatives not to go to Brussels Railway Station.
Her relatives said to her, "If we don't go, if we don't do what we're told, then we're going to be in trouble."
You can guess what happened to the relatives who went to Brussels Railway Station.
They were never seen again.
But my grandmother and my aunt, they went to a small village south of Brussels where they'd been on holiday in the decade before, and they presented themselves at the house of the local farmer, a Catholic farmer called Monsieur Maurice, and they asked him to take them in.
And he did, and by the end of the war, 17 Jews, I was told, were living in that village.
And when I was teenager, I asked my aunt, "Can you take me to meet Monsieur Maurice?"
And she said, "Yeah, I can. He's still alive. Let's go and see him."
And so, it must have been '83, '84, we went to see him.
And I suppose, like only a teenager could, when I met him, he was this white-haired gentleman, I said to him, "Why did you do it?
Why did you take that risk?"
And he looked at me and he shrugged, and he said, in French, "On doit."
"One must."
It was innate in him.
It was natural.
And my point to you is it should be natural and innate in us, too.
Tell yourself, this refugee crisis is manageable, not unsolvable, and each one of us has a personal responsibility to help make it so.
Because this is about the rescue of us and our values as well as the rescue of refugees and their lives.
Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: David, thank you. David Miliband: Thank you.
BG: Those are strong suggestions and your call for individual responsibility is very strong as well, but I'm troubled by one thought, and it's this: you mentioned, and these are your words, "extraordinary Western leadership" which led 60-something years ago to the whole discussion about human rights, to the conventions on refugees, etc. etc.
That leadership happened after a big trauma and happened in a consensual political space, and now we are in a divisive political space.
Actually, refugees have become one of the divisive issues.
So where will leadership come from today?
DM: Well, I think that you're right to say that the leadership forged in war has a different temper and a different tempo and a different outlook than leadership forged in peace.
And so my answer would be the leadership has got to come from below, not from above.
I mean, a recurring theme of the conference this week has been about the democratization of power.
And we've got to preserve our own democracies, but we've got to also activate our own democracies.
And when people say to me, "There's a backlash against refugees," what I say to them is, "No, there's a polarization, and at the moment, those who are fearful are making more noise than those who are proud."
And so my answer to your question is that we will sponsor and encourage and give confidence to leadership when we mobilize ourselves.
And I think that when you are in a position of looking for leadership, you have to look inside and mobilize in your own community to try to create conditions for a different kind of settlement.
BG: Thank you, David. Thanks for coming to TED.
(Applause)
I just want to share with you what I have been experiencing over the last five years in having the great privilege of traveling to many of the poorest countries in the world.
This scene is one I see all the time everywhere, and these young children are looking at a smartphone, and the smartphone is having a huge impact in even the poorest countries.
I said to my team, you know, what I see is a rise in aspirations all over the world.
In fact, it seems to me that there's a convergence of aspirations.
And I asked a team of economists to actually look into this.
Is this true?
Are aspirations converging all around the world?
So they looked at things like Gallup polls about satisfaction in life and what they learned was that if you have access to the internet, your satisfaction goes up.
But another thing happens that's very important: your reference income, the income to which you compare your own, also goes up.
Now, if the reference income of a nation, for example, goes up 10 percent by comparing themselves to the outside, then on average, people's own incomes have to go up at least five percent to maintain the same level of satisfaction.
But when you get down into the lower percentiles of income, your income has to go up much more if the reference income goes up 10 percent, something like 20 percent.
And so with this rise of aspirations, the fundamental question is: Are we going to have a situation where aspirations are linked to opportunity and you get dynamism and economic growth, like that which happened in the country I was born in, in Korea?
Or are aspirations going to meet frustration?
This is a real concern, because between 2012 and 2015, terrorism incidents increased by 74 percent.
The number of deaths from terrorism went up 150 percent.
Right now, two billion people live in conditions of fragility, conflict, violence, and by 2030, more than 60 percent of the world's poor will live in these situations of fragility, conflict and violence.
And so what do we do about meeting these aspirations?
Are there new ways of thinking about how we can rise to meet these aspirations?
Because if we don't, I'm extremely worried.
Aspirations are rising as never before because of access to the internet.
Everyone knows how everyone else lives.
Has our ability to meet those aspirations risen as well?
And just to get at the details of this, I want to share with you my own personal story.
This is not my mother, but during the Korean War, my mother literally took her own sister, her younger sister, on her back, and walked at least part of the way to escape Seoul during the Korean War.
Now, through a series of miracles, my mother and father both got scholarships to go to New York City.
They actually met in New York City and got married in New York City.
My father, too, was a refugee.
At the age of 19, he left his family in the northern part of the country, escaped through the border and never saw his family again.
Now, when they were married and living in New York, my father was a waiter at Patricia Murphy's restaurant.
Their aspirations went up.
They understood what it was like to live in a place like New York City in the 1950s.
Well, my brother was born and they came back to Korea, and we had what I remember as kind of an idyllic life, but what was happening in Korea at that time was the country was one of the poorest in the world and there was political upheaval.
There were demonstrations just down the street from our house all the time, students protesting against the military government.
And at the time, the aspirations of the World Bank Group, the organization I lead now, were extremely low for Korea.
Their idea was that Korea would find it difficult without foreign aid to provide its people with more than the bare necessities of life.
So the situation is Korea is in a tough position, my parents have seen what life is like in the United States.
They got married there. My brother was born there.
And they felt that in order to give us an opportunity to reach their aspirations for us, we had to go and come back to the United States.
Now, we came back.
First we went to Dallas.
My father did his dental degree all over again.
And then we ended up moving to Iowa, of all places.
We grew up in Iowa.
And in Iowa, we went through the whole course.
I went to high school, I went to college.
And then one day, something that I'll never forget, my father picked me up after my sophomore year in college, and he was driving me home, and he said, "Jim, what are your aspirations?
What do you want to study? What do you want to do?"
And I said, "Dad," -- My mother actually was a philosopher, and had filled us with ideas about protest and social justice, and I said, "Dad, I'm going to study political science and philosophy, and I'm going to become part of a political movement."
My father, the Korean dentist, slowly pulled the car over to the side of the road -- (Laughter) He looked back at me, and he said, "Jim, you finish your medical residency, you can study anything you want."
(Laughter) Now, I've told this story to a mostly Asian audience before.
Nobody laughs. They just shake their head.
Of course.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, tragically, my father died at a young age, 30 years ago at the age of 57, what happens to be how old I am right now, and when he died in the middle of my medical and graduate studies -- You see, I actually got around it by doing medicine and anthropology.
I studied both of them in graduate school.
But then right about that time, I met these two people, Ophelia Dahl and Paul Farmer.
And Paul and I were in the same program.
We were studying medicine and at the same time getting our PhD's in anthropology.
And we began to ask some pretty fundamental questions.
For people who have the great privilege of studying medicine and anthropology -- I had come from parents who were refugees.
Paul grew up literally in a bus in a swamp in Florida.
He liked to call himself "white trash."
And so we had this opportunity and we said, what is it that we need to do?
Given our ridiculously elaborate educations, what is the nature of our responsibility to the world?
And we decided that we needed to start an organization.
And by the way, there's a movie made about that.
(Applause) There's a movie that was just a brilliant movie they made about it called "Bending the Arc."
It launched at Sundance this past January.
Jeff Skoll is here.
And we began to think about what it would take for us to actually have our aspirations reach the level of some of the poorest communities in the world.
This is my very first visit to Haiti in 1988, and in 1988, we elaborated a sort of mission statement, which is we are going to make a preferential option for the poor in health.
Now, it took us a long time, and we were graduate students in anthropology.
We were reading up one side of Marx and down the other.
Habermas. Fernand Braudel.
We were reading everything and we had to come to a conclusion of how are we going to structure our work?
So "O for the P," we called it, a preferential option for the poor.
The most important thing about a preferential option for the poor is what it's not.
It's not a preferential option for your own sense of heroism.
It's not a preferential option for your own idea about how to lift the poor out of poverty.
It's not a preferential option for your own organization.
And the hardest of all, it's not a preferential option for your poor.
It's a preferential option for the poor.
So what do you do?
Well, Haiti, we started building -- Everyone told us, the cost-effective thing is just focus on vaccination and maybe a feeding program.
But what the Haitians wanted was a hospital.
They wanted schools.
They wanted to provide their children with the opportunities that they'd been hearing about from others, relatives, for example, who had gone to the United States.
They wanted the same kinds of opportunities as my parents did.
I recognized them.
And so that's what we did. We built hospitals.
We provided education.
And we did everything we could to try to give them opportunities.
Now, my experience really became intense at Partners in Health in this community, Carabayllo, in the northern slums of Lima, Peru.
And in this community, we started out by really just going to people's homes and talking to people, and we discovered an outbreak, an epidemic of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.
This is Melquiades.
Melquiades was a patient at that time, he was about 18 years old, and he had a very difficult form of drug-resistant tuberculosis.
All of the gurus in the world, the global health gurus, said it is not cost-effective to treat drug-resistant tuberculosis.
It's too complicated. It's too expensive.
You just can't do it. It can't be done.
And in addition, they were getting angry at us, because the implication was if it could be done, we would have done it.
Who do you think you are?
And the people that we fought with were the World Health Organization and probably the organization we fought with most was the World Bank Group.
Now, we did everything we could to convince Melquiades to take his medicines, because it's really hard, and not once during the time of treatment did Melquiades's family ever say, "Hey, you know, Melquiades is just not cost-effective.
Why don't you go on and treat somebody else?"
(Laughter) I hadn't seen Melquiades for about 10 years and when we had our annual meetings in Lima, Peru a couple of years ago, the filmmakers found him and here is us getting together.
(Applause) He has become a bit of a media star because he goes to the film openings, and he knows how to work an audience now.
(Laughter) But as soon as we won -- We did win. We won the argument.
You should treat multidrug-resistant tuberculosis -- we heard the same arguments in the early 2000s about HIV.
All of the leading global health people in the world said it is impossible to treat HIV in poor countries.
Too expensive, too complicated, you can't do it.
Compared to drug-resistant TB treatment, it's actually easier.
And we were seeing patients like this.
Joseph Jeune.
Joseph Jeune also never mentioned that he was not cost-effective.
A few months of medicines, and this is what he looked like.
(Applause) We call that the Lazarus Effect of HIV treatment.
Joseline came to us looking like this.
This is what she looked like a few months later.
(Applause) Now, our argument, our battle, we thought, was with the organizations that kept saying it's not cost-effective.
We were saying, no, preferential option for the poor requires us to raise our aspirations to meet those of the poor for themselves.
And they said, well, that's a nice thought but it's just not cost-effective.
So in the nerdy way that we have operated Partners in Health, we wrote a book against, basically, the World Bank.
It says that because the World Bank has focused so much on just economic growth and said that governments have to shrink their budgets and reduce expenditures in health, education and social welfare -- we thought that was fundamentally wrong.
And we argued with the World Bank.
And then a crazy thing happened.
President Obama nominated me to be President of the World Bank.
(Applause) Now, when I went to do the vetting process with President Obama's team, they had a copy of "Dying For Growth," and they had read every page.
And I said, "OK, that's it, right?
You guys are going to drop me?"
He goes, "Oh, no, no, it's OK."
And I was nominated, and I walked through the door of the World Bank Group in July of 2012, and that statement on the wall, "Our dream is a world free of poverty."
A few months after that, we actually turned it into a goal: end extreme poverty by 2030, boost shared prosperity.
That's what we do now at the World Bank Group.
I feel like I have brought the preferential option for the poor to the World Bank Group.
(Applause) But this is TED, and so I want to share with you some concerns, and then make a proposal.
The Fourth Industrial Revolution, now, you guys know so much better than I do, but here's the thing that concerns me.
Our own data suggest to us that two thirds of all jobs, currently existing jobs in developing countries, will be lost because of automation.
Now, you've got to make up for those jobs.
Now, one of the ways to make up for those jobs is to turn community health workers into a formal labor force.
That's what we want to do.
(Applause) We think the numbers will work out, that as health outcomes get better and as people have formal work, we're going to be able to train them with the soft-skills training that you add to it to become workers that will have a huge impact, and that may be the one area that grows the most.
But here's the other thing that bothers me: right now it seems pretty clear to me that the jobs of the future will be more digitally demanding, and there is a crisis in childhood stunting.
So these are photos from Charles Nelson, who shared these with us from Harvard Medical School.
And what these photos show on the one side, on the left side, is a three-month-old who has been stunted: not adequate nutrition, not adequate stimulation.
And on the other side, of course, is a normal child, and the normal child has all of these neuronal connections.
Now, the neuronal connections are important, because that is the definition of human capital.
Now, we know that we can reduce these rates.
We can reduce these rates of childhood stunting quickly, but if we don't, India, for example, with 38 percent childhood stunting, how are they going to compete in the economy of the future if 40 percent of their future workers cannot achieve educationally and certainly we worry about achieving economically in a way that will help the country as a whole grow.
Now, what are we going to do?
78 trillion dollars is the size of the global economy.
8.55 trillion dollars are sitting in negative interest rate bonds.
That means that you give the German central bank your money and then you pay them to keep your money.
That's a negative interest rate bond.
24.4 trillion dollars in very low-earning government bonds.
And 8 trillion literally sitting in the hands of rich people under their very large mattresses.
What we are trying to do is now use our own tools -- and just to get nerdy for a second, we're talking about first-loss risk debt instruments, we're talking about derisking, blended finance, we're talking about political risk insurance, credit enhancement -- all these things that I've now learned at the World Bank Group that rich people use every single day to make themselves richer, but we haven't used aggressively enough on behalf of the poor to bring this capital in.
(Applause) So does this work?
Can you actually bring private-sector players into a country and really make things work?
Well, we've done it a couple of times.
This is Zambia, Scaling Solar.
It's a box-set solution from the World Bank where we come in and we do all the things you need to attract private-sector investors.
And in this case, Zambia went from having a cost of electricity at 25 cents a kilowatt-hour, and by just doing simple things, doing the auction, changing some policies, we were able to bring the cost down.
Lowest bid, 25 cents a kilowatt-hour for Zambia?
The lowest bid was 4.7 cents a kilowatt-hour. It's possible.
(Applause) But here's my proposal for you.
This is from a group called Zipline, a cool company, and they literally are rocket scientists.
They figured out how to use drones in Rwanda.
This is me launching a drone in Rwanda that delivers blood anywhere in the country in less than an hour.
So we save lives, this program saved lives -- (Applause) This program made money for Zipline and this program saved huge amounts of money for Rwanda.
That's what we need, and we need that from all of you.
I'm asking you, carve out a little bit of time in your brains to think about the technology that you work on, the companies that you start, the design that you do.
Think a little bit and work with us to see if we can come up with these kinds of extraordinary win-win solutions.
I'm going to leave you with one final story.
I was in Tanzania, and I was in a classroom.
This is me with a classroom of 11-year-olds.
And I asked them, as I always do, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
Two raised their hands and said, "I want to be President of the World Bank."
(Laughter) And just like you, my own team and their teachers laughed.
But then I stopped them.
I said, "Look, I want to tell you a story.
When I was born in South Korea, this is what it looked like.
This is where I came from.
And when I was three years old, in preschool, I don't think that George David Woods, the President of the World Bank, if he had visited Korea on that day and come to my classroom, that he would have thought that the future President of the World Bank was sitting in that classroom.
Don't let anyone ever tell you that you cannot be President of the World Bank."
Now -- thank you.
(Applause) Let me leave you with one thought.
I came from a country that was the poorest in the world.
I'm President of the World Bank.
I cannot and I will not pull up the ladder behind me.
This is urgent.
Aspirations are going up.
Everywhere aspirations are going up.
You folks in this room, work with us.
We know that we can find those Zipline-type solutions and help the poor leapfrog into a better world, but it won't happen until we work together.
The future "you" -- and especially for your children -- the future you will depend on how much care and compassion we bring to ensuring that the future "us" provides equality of opportunity for every child in the world.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: You'd almost think people are surprised to hear a talk like this from the President of the World Bank.
It's kind of cool.
There's many investors, entrepreneurs in this room.
How will you partner with them? What's your proposal?
Jim Yong Kim: Can I get nerdy for just a second.
CA: Get nerdy. Absolutely. JYK: So here's what we did.
Insurance companies never invest in developing country infrastructure, for example, because they can't take the risk.
So what we did was a Swedish International Development Association gave us a little bit of money, we went out and raised a little bit more money, a hundred million, and we took first loss, meaning if this thing goes bad, 10 percent of the loss we'll just eat, and the rest of you will be safe.
And that created a 90-percent chunk, tranche that was triple B, investment-grade, so the insurance companies invested.
So for us, what we're doing is taking our public money and using it to derisk specific instruments to bring people in from the outside.
So all of you who are sitting on trillions of dollars of cash, come to us. Right?
(Laughter) CA: And what you're specifically looking for are investment proposals that create employment in the developing world.
JYK: Absolutely. Absolutely.
So these will be, for example, in infrastructure that brings energy, builds roads, bridges, ports.
These kinds of things are necessary to create jobs, but also what we're saying is you may think that the technology you're working on or the business that you're working on may not have applications in the developing world, but look at Zipline.
And that Zipline thing didn't happen just because of the quality of the technology.
It was because they engaged with the Rwandans early and used artificial intelligence -- one thing, Rwanda has great broadband -- but these things fly completely on their own.
So we will help you do that. We will make the introductions.
We will even provide financing. We will help you do that.
CA: How much capital is the World Bank willing to deploy to back those kinds of efforts?
JYK: Chris, you're always getting me to try to do something like this.
We have 25 billion a year that we're investing in poor countries, the poorest countries.
And as we invest over the next three years, 25 billion a year, we have got to think with you about how to use that money more effectively.
So I can't give you a specific number. It depends on the quality of the ideas.
So bring us your ideas, and I don't think that financing is going to be the problem.
CA: All right, you heard it from the man himself.
Jim, thanks so much. JYK: Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
I visit the future for a living.
Not just one future, but many possible futures, bringing back evidences from those futures for you to experience today.
Like an archaeologist of the future.
Over the years, my many journeys have brought back things like a new species of synthetically engineered bees; a book named, "Pets as Protein;" a machine that makes you rich by trading your genetic data; a lamp powered by sugar; a computer for growing food.
OK, so I don't actually travel to different futures -- yet.
But my husband Jon and I spend a lot of time thinking and creating visions of different futures in our studio.
We are constantly looking out for weak signals, those murmurs of future potential.
Then we trace those threads of potential out into the future, asking: What might it feel like to live in this future?
What might we see, hear and even breathe?
Then we run experiments, build prototypes, make objects, bringing aspects of these futures to life, making them concrete and tangible so you can really feel the impact of those future possibilities here and now.
But this work is not about predictions.
It's about creating tools -- tools that can help connect our present and our future selves so we become active participants in creating a future we want -- a future that works for all.
So how do we go about doing this?
For a recent project called Drone Aviary, we were interested in exploring what it would mean to live with drones in our cities.
Drones that have the power to see things we can't, to go places we can't and to do so with increasing autonomy.
But to understand the technology, getting our hands dirty was crucial.
So we built several different drones in our studio.
We gave them names, functions and then flew them -- but not without difficulty.
Things came loose, GPS signals glitched and drones crashed.
But it was through such experimentation that we could construct a very concrete and very experiential slice of one possible future.
So now, let's go to that future.
Let's imagine we are living in a city with drones like this one.
We call it The Nightwatchman.
It patrols the streets, often spotted in the evenings and at night.
Initially, many of us were annoyed by its low, dull hum.
But then, like everything else, we got used to it.
Now, what if you could see the world through its eyes?
See how it constantly logs every resident of our neighborhood; logging the kids who play football in the no-ballgame area and marking them as statutory nuisances.
(Laughter) And then see how it disperses this other group, who are teenagers, with the threat of an autonomously issued injunction.
And then there's this giant floating disc called Madison.
Its glaring presence is so overpowering, I can't help but stare at it.
But if feels like each time I look at it, it knows a little more about me -- like it keeps flashing all these Brianair adverts at me, as if it knows about the holiday I'm planning.
I'm not sure if I find this mildly entertaining or just entirely invasive.
Back to the present.
In creating this future, we learned a lot.
Not just about how these machines work, but what it would feel like to live alongside them.
Whilst drones like Madison and Nightwatchman, in these particular forms, are not real yet, most elements of a drone future are in fact very real today.
For instance, facial recognition systems are everywhere -- in our phones, even in our thermostats and in cameras around our cities -- keeping a record of everything we do, whether it's an advertisement we glanced at or a protest we attended.
These things are here, and we often don't understand how they work, and what their consequences could be.
And we see this all around us.
This difficulty in even imagining how the consequences of our actions today will affect our future.
Last year, where I live, in the UK, there was a referendum where the people could vote for the UK to leave the EU or stay in the EU, popularly known as "Brexit."
And soon after the results came out, a word began to surface called "Bregret" -- (Laughter) describing people who chose to vote for Brexit as a protest, but without thinking through its potential consequences.
And this disconnect is evident in some of the simplest things.
Say you go out for a quick drink.
Then you decide you wouldn't mind a few more.
You know you'll wake up in the morning feeling awful, but you justify it by saying, "The other me in the future will deal with that."
But as we find out in the morning, that future "you" is you.
When I was growing up in India in the late '70s and early '80s, there was a feeling that the future both needed to and could actually be planned.
I remember my parents had to plan for some of the simplest things.
When they wanted a telephone in our house, they needed to order it and then wait -- wait for nearly five years before it got installed in our house.
(Laughter) And then if they wanted to call my grandparents who lived in another city, they needed to book something called a "trunk call," and then wait again, for hours or even days.
And then abruptly, the phone would ring at two in the morning, and all of us would jump out of our beds and gather round the phone, shrieking into it, discussing general well-being at two in the morning.
Today it can feel like things are happening too fast -- so fast, that it can become really difficult for us to form an understanding of our place in history.
It creates an overwhelming sense of uncertainty and anxiety, and so, we let the future just happen to us.
We don't connect with that future "us."
We treat our future selves as a stranger, and the future as a foreign land.
It's not a foreign land; it's unfolding right in front of us, continually being shaped by our actions today.
We are that future, and so I believe fighting for a future we want is more urgent and necessary than ever before.
We have learned in our work that one of the most powerful means of effecting change is when people can directly, tangibly and emotionally experience some of the future consequences of their actions today.
Earlier this year, the government of the United Arab Emirates invited us to help them shape their country's energy strategy all the way up to 2050.
Based on the government's econometric data, we created this large city model, and visualized many possible futures on it.
As I was excitably taking a group of government officials and members of energy companies through one sustainable future on our model, one of the participants told me, "I cannot imagine that in the future people will stop driving cars and start using public transport."
And then he said, "There's no way I can tell my own son to stop driving his car."
But we were prepared for this reaction.
Working with scientists in a chemistry lab in my home city in India, we had created approximate samples of what the air would be like in 2030 if our behavior stays the same.
And so, I walked the group over to this object that emits vapor from those air samples.
Just one whiff of the noxious polluted air from 2030 brought home the point that no amount of data can.
This is not the future you would want your children to inherit.
The next day, the government made a big announcement.
They would be investing billions of dollars in renewables.
We don't know what part our future experiences played in this decision, but we know that they've changed their energy policy to mitigate such a scenario.
While something like air from the future is very effective and tangible, the trajectory from our present to a future consequence is not always so linear.
Even when a technology is developed with utopian ideals, the moment it leaves the laboratory and enters the world, it is subject to forces outside of the creators' control.
For one particular project, we investigated medical genomics: the technology of gathering and using people's genetic data to create personalized medicine.
We were asking: What are some of the unintended consequences of linking our genetics to health care?
To explore this question further, we created a fictional lawsuit, and brought it to life through 31 pieces of carefully crafted evidence.
So we built an illegal genetic clinic, a DIY carbon dioxide incubator, and even bought frozen mice on eBay.
So now let's go to that future where this lawsuit is unfolding, and meet the defendant, Arnold Mann.
Arnold is being prosecuted by this global giant biotech company called Dynamic Genetics, because they have evidence that Arnold has illegally inserted the company's patented genetic material into his body.
How on earth did Arnold manage to do that?
Well, it all started when Arnold was asked to submit a saliva sample in this spit kit to the NHI -- the UK's National Health Insurance service.
When Arnold received his health insurance bill, he was shocked and scared to see that his premiums had gone through the roof, beyond anything he or his family could ever afford.
The state's algorithm had scanned his genetic data and found the risk of a chronic health condition lurking in his DNA.
And so Arnold had to start paying toward the potential costs of that future disease -- potential future disease from today.
In that moment of fear and panic, Arnold slipped through the city into the dark shadows of this illegal clinic for treatment -- a treatment that would modify his DNA so that the state's algorithm would no longer see him as a risk, and his insurance premiums would become affordable again.
But Arnold was caught.
And the legal proceedings in the case Dynamic Genetics v. Mann began.
In bringing such a future to life, what was important to us was that people could actually touch, see and feel its potential, because such an immediate and close encounter provokes people to ask the right questions, questions like: What are the implications of living in a world where I'm judged on my genetics?
Or: Who might claim ownership to my genetic data, and what might they do with it?
If this feels even slightly out-there or farfetched, today there's a little-known bill being passed through the American congress known as HR 1313, Preserving Employee Wellness Programs Act.
This bill proposes to amend the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, popularly known as GINA, and would allow employers to ask about family medical history and genetic data to all employees for the first time.
Those who refuse would face large penalties.
In the work I've shown so far, whether it was drones or genetic crimes, these stories describe troubling futures with the intention of helping us avoid those futures.
But what about what we can't avoid?
Today, especially with climate change, it looks like we are heading for trouble.
And so what we want to do now is to prepare for that future by developing tools and attitudes that can help us find hope -- hope that can inspire action.
Currently, we are running an experiment in our studio.
It's a work in progress.
Based on climate data projections, we are exploring a future where the Western world has moved from abundance to scarcity.
We imagine living in a future city with repeated flooding, periods with almost no food in supermarkets, economic instabilities, broken supply chains.
What can we do to not just survive, but prosper in such a world?
What food can we eat?
To really step inside these questions, we are building this room in a flat in London from 2050.
It's like a little time capsule that we reclaimed from the future.
We stripped it down to the bare minimum.
Everything we lovingly put in our homes, like flat-panel TVs, internet-connected fridges and artisanal furnishings all had to go.
And in its place, we're building food computers from abandoned, salvaged and repurposed materials, turning today's waste into tomorrow's dinner.
For instance, we've just finished building our first fully automated fogponics machine.
It uses the technique of fogponics -- so just fog as a nutrient, not even water or soil -- to grow things quickly.
At the moment, we have successfully grown tomatoes.
But we'll need more food than what we can grow in this small room.
So what else could we forage from the city?
Insects? Pigeons? Foxes?
Earlier, we brought back air from the future.
This time we are bringing an entire room from the future, a room full of hope, tools and tactics to create positive action in hostile conditions.
Spending time in this room, a room that could be our own future home, makes the consequences of climate change and food insecurity much more immediate and tangible.
What we're learning through such experiments and our practice and the people we engage with is that creating concrete experiences can bridge the disconnect between today and tomorrow.
By putting ourselves into different possible futures, by becoming open and willing to embrace the uncertainty and discomfort that such an act can bring, we have the opportunity to imagine new possibilities.
We can find optimistic futures; we can find paths forward; we can move beyond hope into action.
It means we have the chance to change direction, a chance to have our voices heard, a chance to write ourselves into a future we want.
Other worlds are possible.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1987, tens of thousands of people gathered in Saudi Arabia for the annual Hajj pilgrimage.
But what started out as a celebration led to a health crisis: just a few days after the pilgrimage, more than 2,000 cases of meningitis broke out spreading across Saudi Arabia and the rest of the world.
The outbreak was so fierce that it was believed to have sparked a wave of deadly meningitis epidemics that ultimately infected tens of thousands of people worldwide.
Meningitis is the inflammation of the meninges, three tissue layers responsible for protecting the brain and spinal cord.
What makes meningitis so dangerous compared to other diseases is the sheer speed with which it invades a persons body.
In the worst cases, it causes death within a day.
Fortunately, thats rare for patients who receive early medical treatment.
The disease primarily comes in three forms: fungal, viral, and bacterial-- the last being the most deadly by far, and what well focus on.
People usually contract bacterial meningitis by breathing in tiny particles of mucus and saliva that spray into the air when an infected person sneezes or coughs.
It can also be transmitted through kissing, or sharing cigarettes, toothbrushes or utensils.
Some people can be infected and carry the disease without showing symptoms or getting sick, which helps the disease spread quickly to others.
Once the bacteria enter the nose, mouth, and throat, they cross the surrounding membranes and enter the bloodstream.
From there, bacteria have rapid access to the bodys tissues --including a membrane called the blood-brain barrier.
This is made of a tight mesh of cells which separate blood vessels from the brain, and block everything except for a specific set of particles, including water molecules and some gases.
But in ways that scientists are still trying to understand, meningitis bacteria can trick the barrier into letting them through.
Inside the brain, the bacteria swiftly infect the meninges.
This triggers inflammation as the bodys immune response kicks into overdrive, bringing on fever and intense headaches.
As swelling in the meninges worsens, the neck begins to stiffen.
Swelling in the brain disrupts its normal function-- causing symptoms like hearing loss and extreme light sensitivity.
As pressure increases in the cranium, it may also make the person confused-- one of the hallmarks of the disease.
A few hours in, the rapidly multiplying bacteria start to release toxins, leading to septicemia, also known as blood poisoning.
This breaks down blood vessels, letting blood seep out and form what starts out looking like a rash, and evolves into big discoloured blots beneath the skin.
At the same time, these toxins burn through oxygen in the blood, reducing the amount that gets to major organs like the lungs and kidneys.
That increases the chance of organ shut down --and alongside spreading septicemia, threatens death.
That all sounds scary, but doctors are so good at treating meningitis that a visit to the hospital can drastically reduce an adults risk of dying from it.
The longer its left untreated, though, the more likely it will lead to lasting damage.
If declining oxygen levels cause cell death in extreme parts of the body --like fingers, toes, arms and legs-- the risk of amputation goes up.
And if bacterial toxins accumulate in the brain and trigger cell death, meningitis could also cause long-term brain damage and memory loss.
So fast treatment, or better yet, prevention, is critical.
That's why most countries have vaccines that defend against the disease in its deadliest forms.
Those are usually given to the people who are most at risk--like young children, people with weak immune systems, or people who gather in large groups where an outbreak of meningitis could potentially happen.
In addition to those gatherings, meningitis is most common in a region called the meningitis belt that stretches across Africa, though cases do happen all over the world.
If youre concerned that you or someone you know may have meningitis, get to the doctor as soon as possible; quick action could save your life.
My name is Katrina Spade, and I grew up in a medical family where it was fairly normal to talk about death and dying at the dinner table.
But I didn't go into medicine like so many of my family members.
Instead, I went to architecture school to learn how to design.
And while I was there, I began to be curious about what would happen to my physical body after I died.
What would my nearest and dearest do with me?
So if the existence and the fact of your own mortality doesn't get you down, the state of our current funerary practices will.
Today, almost 50 percent of Americans choose conventional burial.
Conventional burial begins with embalming, where funeral staff drain bodily fluid and replace it with a mixture designed to preserve the corpse and give it a lifelike glow.
Then, as you know, bodies are buried in a casket in a concrete-lined grave in a cemetery.
All told, in US cemeteries, we bury enough metal to build a Golden Gate Bridge, enough wood to build 1,800 single family homes, and enough formaldehyde-laden embalming fluid to fill eight Olympic-size swimming pools.
In addition, cemeteries all over the world are reaching capacity.
Turns out, it doesn't really make good business sense to sell someone a piece of land for eternity.
(Laughter) Whose idea was that?
In some places, you can't buy a plot no matter how much money you have.
As a result, cremation rates have risen fast.
In 1950, if you suggested your grandmother be incinerated after she died, you'd probably be kicked from the family deathbed.
But today, almost half of Americans choose cremation, citing simpler, cheaper and more ecological as reasons.
I used to think that cremation was a sustainable form of disposition, but just think about it for a second.
Cremation destroys the potential we have to give back to the earth after we've died.
It uses an energy-intensive process to turn bodies into ash, polluting the air and contributing to climate change.
All told, cremations in the US emit a staggering 600 million pounds of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere annually.
The truly awful truth is that the very last thing that most of us will do on this earth is poison it.
It's like we've created, accepted and death-denied our way into a status quo that puts as much distance between ourselves and nature as is humanly possible.
Our modern funerary practices are designed to stave off the natural processes that happen to a body after death.
In other words, they're meant to prevent us from decomposing.
But the truth is that nature is really, really good at death.
We've all seen it.
When organic material dies in nature, microbes and bacteria break it down into nutrient-rich soil, completing the life cycle.
In nature, death creates life.
Back in architecture school, I was thinking about all this, and I set out on a plan to redesign death care.
Could I create a system that was beneficial to the earth and that used nature as a guide rather than something to be feared?
Something that was gentle to the planet?
That planet, after all, supports our living bodies our whole lives.
And while I was mulling this all over over the drawing board, the phone rang.
It was my friend Kate.
She was like, "Hey, have you heard about the farmers who are composting whole cows?"
And I was like, "Mmmm."
(Laughter) Turns out that farmers in agricultural institutions have been practicing something called livestock mortality composting for decades.
Mortality composting is where you take an animal high in nitrogen and cover it with co-composting materials that are high in carbon.
It's an aerobic process, so it requires oxygen, and it requires plenty of moisture as well.
In the most basic setup, a cow is covered with a few feet of wood chips, which are high in carbon, and left outside for nature, for breezes to provide oxygen and rain to provide moisture.
In about nine months, all that remains is a nutrient-rich compost.
The flesh has been decomposed entirely, as have the bones.
I know.
(Laughter) So I would definitely call myself a decomposition nerd, but I am far, far from a scientist, and one way you can tell this is true is that I have often called the process of composting "magic."
(Laughter) So basically, all we humans need to do is create the right environment for nature to do its job.
It's like the opposite of antibacterial soap.
Instead of fighting them, we welcome microbes and bacteria in with open arms.
These tiny, amazing creatures break down molecules into smaller molecules and atoms, which are then incorporated into new molecules.
In other words, that cow is transformed.
It's no longer a cow.
It's been cycled back into nature.
See? Magic.
You can probably imagine the light bulb that went off in my head after I received that phone call.
I began designing a system based on the principles of livestock mortality composting that would take human beings and transform them into soil.
Fast-forward five years and the project has grown in ways I truly never could have imagined.
We've created a scalable, replicable non-profit urban model based on the science of livestock mortality composting that turns human beings into soil.
We've partnered and collaborated with experts in soil science, decomposition, alternative death care, law and architecture.
We've raised funds from foundations and individuals in order to design a prototype of this system, and we've heard from tens of thousands of people all over the world who want this option to be available.
OK.
In the next few years, it's our goal to build the first full-scale human composting facility right in the city of Seattle.
(Applause) Imagine it, part public park, part funeral home, part memorial to the people we love, a place where we can reconnect with the cycles of nature and treat bodies with gentleness and respect.
The infrastructure is simple.
Inside a vertical core, bodies and wood chips undergo accelerated natural decomposition, or composting, and are transformed into soil.
When someone dies, their body is taken to a human composting facility.
After wrapping the deceased in a simple shroud, friends and family carry the body to the top of the core, which contains the natural decomposition system.
During a laying in ceremony, they gently place the body into the core and cover it with wood chips.
This begins the gentle transformation from human to soil.
Over the next few weeks, the body decomposes naturally.
Microbes and bacteria break down carbon, then protein, to create a new substance, a rich, earthy soil.
This soil can then be used to grow new life.
Eventually, you could be a lemon tree.
(Applause) Yeah, thank you.
(Applause) Who's thinking about lemon meringue pie right now?
(Laughter) A lemon drop?
Something stronger?
So in addition to housing the core, these buildings will function to support the grieving by providing space for memorial services and end-of-life planning.
The potential for repurposing is huge.
Old churches and industrial warehouses can be converted into places where we create soil and honor life.
We want to bring back the aspect of ritual that's been diluted over the past hundred years as cremation rates have risen and religious affiliation has declined.
Our Seattle facility will function as a model for these places all over the world.
We've heard from communities in South Africa, Australia, the UK, Canada and beyond.
We're creating a design toolkit that will help others design and build facilities that will contain technical specifications and regulatory best practices.
We want to help individuals, organizations, and down the road, municipalities design and build facilities in their own cities.
The idea is that every one of these places should look and feel completely different with the same system inside.
They're really meant to be designed for the neighborhood in which they reside and the community which they serve.
The other idea is for supportive staff to be on hand to help families with the care and preparation of loved ones' bodies.
We're banishing practices that bewilder and disempower and creating a system that is beautiful and meaningful and transparent.
We believe that access to ecological death care is a human right.
OK, so you know the old saying, if you can compost a cow, you can compost a human?
(Laughter) Turns out, it's true.
Since 2014, we've been running a pilot project in the hills of North Carolina with the Forensic Anthropology Department at Western Carolina University.
Six donor bodies have been covered in wood chips, oxygen provided by breezes, microbes and bacteria doing their jobs.
This pilot program has allowed us to demonstrate that it's possible to harness the incredible power of natural decomposition to turn human bodies into soil, and we're working with other universities as well.
Soil scientists at Washington State University, the grad students, anyway, are working to compost teeth with amalgam fillings so that we can understand what happens to the mercury therein.
Next up, we'll be beginning experiments to determine what happens to chemo drugs and pharmaceuticals during the composting process, and whether additional remediation will be needed.
By the way, composting creates a great deal of heat, especially this particular type of composting.
One week after we began composting our fifth donor body, the temperature inside that mound of wood chips reached 158 degrees Fahrenheit.
Imagine harnessing that heat to create energy or comfort the grieving on a cold day.
The death care revolution has begun.
It's an exciting time to be alive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I remember when I first found out I was going to speak at a TED conference.
I ran across the hall to one of my classrooms to inform my students.
"Guess what, guys?
I've been asked to give a TED Talk."
The reaction wasn't one I quite expected.
The whole room went silent.
"A TED Talk? You mean, like the one you made us watch on grit?
Or the one with the scientist that did this really awesome thing with robots?"
Muhammad asked.
"Yes, just like that."
"But Coach, those people are really important and smart."
(Laughter) "I know that."
"But Coach, why are you speaking? You hate public speaking."
"I do," I admitted, "But it's important that I speak about us, that I speak about your journeys, about my journey.
People need to know."
The students at the all-refugee school that I founded decided to end with some words of encouragement.
"Cool! It better be good, Coach."
(Laughter) There are 65.3 million people who have been forcibly displaced from their homes because of war or persecution.
The largest number, 11 million, are from Syria.
33,952 people flee their homes daily.
The vast majority remain in refugee camps, whose conditions cannot be defined as humane under anyone's definition.
We are participating in the degradation of humans.
Never have we had numbers this high.
This is the highest number of refugees since World War II.
Now, let me tell you why this issue is so important to me.
I am an Arab. I am an immigrant.
I am a Muslim.
I've also spent the last 12 years of my life working with refugees.
Oh -- and I'm also gay.
It makes me really popular these days.
(Laughter) But I am the daughter of a refugee.
My grandmother fled Syria in 1964 during the first Assad regime.
She was three months pregnant when she packed up a suitcase, piled in her five children and drove to neighboring Jordan, not knowing what the future held for her and her family.
My grandfather decided to stay, not believing it was that bad.
He followed her a month later, after his brothers were tortured and his factory was taken over by the government.
They rebuilt their lives starting from scratch and eventually became independently wealthy Jordanian citizens.
I was born in Jordan 11 years later.
It was really important to my grandmother for us to know our history and our journey.
I was eight years old when she took me to visit my first refugee camp.
I didn't understand why.
I didn't know why it was so important to her for us to go.
I remember walking into the camp holding her hand, and her saying, "Go play with the kids," while she visited with the women in the camp.
I didn't want to.
These kids weren't like me.
They were poor. They lived in a camp.
I refused.
She knelt down beside me and firmly said, "Go.
And don't come back until you've played.
Don't ever think people are beneath you or that you have nothing to learn from others."
I reluctantly went.
I never wanted to disappoint my grandmother.
I returned a few hours later, having spent some time playing soccer with the kids in the camp.
We walked out of the camp, and I was excitedly telling her what a great time I had and how fantastic the kids were.
"Haram!" I said in Arabic. "Poor them."
"Haram on us," she said, using the word's different meaning, that we were sinning.
"Don't feel sorry for them; believe in them."
It wasn't until I left my country of origin for the United States that I realized the impact of her words.
After my college graduation, I applied for and was granted political asylum, based on being a member of a social group.
Some people may not realize this, but you can still get the death penalty in some countries for being gay.
I had to give up my Jordanian citizenship.
That was the hardest decision I've ever had to make, but I had no other choice.
The point is, when you find yourself choosing between home and survival, the question "Where are you from?" becomes very loaded.
A Syrian woman who I recently met at a refugee camp in Greece articulated it best, when she recalled the exact moment she realized she had to flee Aleppo.
"I looked out the window and there was nothing.
It was all rubble.
There were no stores, no streets, no schools. Everything was gone.
I had been in my apartment for months, listening to bombs drop and watching people die.
But I always thought it would get better, that no one could force me to leave, no one could take my home away from me.
And I don't know why it was that morning, but when I looked outside, I realized if I didn't leave, my three young children would die.
And so we left.
We left because we had to, not because we wanted to.
There was no choice," she said.
It's kind of hard to believe that you belong when you don't have a home, when your country of origin rejects you because of fear or persecution, or the city that you grew up in is completely destroyed.
I didn't feel like I had a home.
I was no longer a Jordanian citizen, but I wasn't American, either.
I felt a kind of loneliness that is still hard to put into words today.
After college, I desperately needed to find a place to call home.
I bounced around from state to state and eventually ended up in North Carolina.
Kindhearted people who felt sorry for me offered to pay rent or buy me a meal or a suit for my new interview.
It just made me feel more isolated and incapable.
It wasn't until I met Miss Sarah, a Southern Baptist who took me in at my lowest and gave me a job, that I started to believe in myself.
Miss Sarah owned a diner in the mountains of North Carolina.
I assumed, because of my privileged upbringing and my Seven Sister education, that she would ask me to manage the restaurant.
I was wrong.
I started off washing dishes, cleaning toilets and working the grill.
I was humbled; I was shown the value of hard work.
But most importantly, I felt valued and embraced.
I celebrated Christmas with her family, and she attempted to observe Ramadan with me.
I remember being very nervous about coming out to her -- after all, she was a Southern Baptist.
I sat on the couch next to her and I said, "Miss Sarah, you know that I'm gay."
Her response is one that I will never forget.
"That's fine, honey. Just don't be a slut."
(Laughter) (Applause) I eventually moved to Atlanta, still trying to find my home.
My journey took a strange turn three years later, after I met a group of refugee kids playing soccer outside.
I'd made a wrong turn into this apartment complex, and I saw these kids outside playing soccer.
They were playing barefoot with a raggedy soccer ball and rocks set up as goals.
I watched them for about an hour, and after that I was smiling.
The boys reminded me of home.
They reminded me of the way I grew up playing soccer in the streets of Jordan, with my brothers and cousins.
I eventually joined their game.
They were a little skeptical about letting me join it, because according to them, girls don't know how to play.
But obviously I did.
I asked them if they had ever played on a team.
They said they hadn't, but that they would love to.
I gradually won them over, and we formed our first team.
This group of kids would give me a crash course in refugees, poverty and humanity.
Three brothers from Afghanistan -- Roohullah, Noorullah and Zabiullah -- played a major role in that.
I showed up late to practice one day to find the field completely deserted.
I was really worried.
My team loved to practice.
It wasn't like them to miss practice.
I got out of my car, and two kids ran out from behind a dumpster, waving their hands frantically.
"Coach, Rooh got beat up. He got jumped.
There was blood everywhere."
"What do you mean? What do you mean he got beat up?"
"These bad kids came and beat him up, Coach.
Everybody left. They were all scared."
We hopped into my car and drove over to Rooh's apartment.
I knocked on the door, and Noor opened it.
"Where's Rooh? I need to talk to him, see if he's OK."
"He's in his room, Coach. He's refusing to come out."
I knocked on the door.
"Rooh, come on out. I need to talk to you.
I need to see if you're OK or if we need to go to the hospital."
He came out.
He had a big gash on his head, a split lip, and he was physically shaken.
I was looking at him, and I asked the boys to call for their mom, because I needed to go to the hospital with him.
They called for their mom.
She came out.
I had my back turned to her, and she started screaming in Farsi.
The boys fell to the ground laughing.
I was very confused, because there was nothing funny about this.
They explained to me that she said, "You told me your coach was a Muslim and a woman."
From behind, I didn't appear to be either to her.
(Laughter) "I am Muslim," I said, turning to her.
"Ahadu an l ilha illa (A)llh," reciting the Muslim declaration of faith.
Confused, and perhaps maybe a little bit reassured, she realized that yes, I, this American-acting, shorts-wearing, non-veiled woman, was indeed a Muslim.
Their family had fled the Taliban.
Hundreds of people in their village were murdered.
Their father was taken in by the Taliban, only to return a few months later, a shell of the man he once was.
The family escaped to Pakistan, and the two older boys, age eight and 10 at the time, wove rugs for 10 hours a day to provide for their family.
They were so excited when they found out that they had been approved to resettle in the United States, making them the lucky 0.1 percent who get to do that.
They had hit the jackpot.
Their story is not unique.
Every refugee family I have worked with has had some version of this.
I work with kids who have seen their mothers raped, their fathers' fingers sliced off.
One kid saw a bullet put in his grandmother's head, because she refused to let the rebels take him to be a child soldier.
Their journeys are haunting.
But what I get to see every day is hope, resilience, determination, a love of life and appreciation for being able to rebuild their lives.
I was at the boys' apartment one night, when the mom came home after cleaning 18 hotel rooms in one day.
She sat down, and Noor rubbed her feet, saying that he was going to take care of her once he graduated.
She smiled from exhaustion.
"God is good. Life is good. We are lucky to be here."
In the last two years, we have seen an escalating anti-refugee sentiment.
It's global.
The numbers continue to grow because we do nothing to prevent it and nothing to stop it.
The issue shouldn't be stopping refugees from coming into our countries.
The issue should be not forcing them to leave their own.
(Applause) Sorry.
(Applause) How much more suffering, how much more suffering must we take?
How many more people need to be forced out of their homes before we say, "Enough!"?
A hundred million?
Not only do we shame, blame and reject them for atrocities that they had absolutely nothing to do with, we re-traumatize them, when we're supposed to be welcoming them into our countries.
We strip them of their dignity and treat them like criminals.
I had a student in my office a couple of weeks ago.
She's originally from Iraq.
She broke down crying.
"Why do they hate us?"
"Who hates you?"
"Everyone; everyone hates us because we are refugees, because we are Muslim."
In the past, I was able to reassure my students that the majority of the world does not hate refugees.
But this time I couldn't.
I couldn't explain to her why someone tried to rip off her mother's hijab when they were grocery shopping, or why a player on an opposing team called her a terrorist and told her to go back where she came from.
I couldn't reassure her that her father's ultimate life sacrifice by serving in the United States military as an interpreter would make her more valued as an American citizen.
We take in so few refugees worldwide.
We resettle less than 0.1 percent.
That 0.1 percent benefits us more than them.
It dumbfounds me how the word "refugee" is considered something to be dirty, something to be ashamed of.
They have nothing to be ashamed of.
We have seen advances in every aspect of our lives -- except our humanity.
There are 65.3 million people who have been forced out of their homes because of war -- the largest number in history.
We are the ones who should be ashamed.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to give you a new perspective.
That sounds grandiose, and it is.
I left Ireland yesterday morning.
I traveled from Dublin to New York independently.
But the design of an airport, plane and terminal offers little independence when you're 105 and a half centimeters tall.
For Americans, that's 3' 5".
I was whisked through the airport by airline assistants in a wheelchair.
Now, I don't need to use a wheelchair, but the design of an airport and its lack of accessibility means that it's my only way to get through.
With my carry-on bag between my feet, I was wheeled through security, preclearance and I arrived at my boarding gate.
I use the accessibility services in the airport because most of the terminal is just not designed with me in mind.
Take security, for example.
I'm not strong enough to lift my carry-on bag from the ground to the carousel.
I stand at eye level with it.
And those who work in that space for safety purposes cannot help me and cannot do it for me.
Design inhibits my autonomy and my independence.
But traveling at this size, it isn't all bad.
The leg room in economy is like business class.
(Laughter) I often forget that I'm a little person.
It's the physical environment and society that remind me.
Using a public bathroom is an excruciating experience.
I walk into the cubicle but I can't reach the lock on the door.
I'm creative and resilient.
I look around and see if there's a bin that I can turn upside down.
Is it safe?
Not really.
Is it hygienic and sanitary?
Definitely not.
But the alternative is much worse.
If that doesn't work, I use my phone.
It gives me an additional four- to six-inch reach, and I try to jam the lock closed with my iPhone.
Now, I imagine that's not what Jony Ive had in mind when he designed the iPhone, but it works.
The alternative is that I approach a stranger.
I apologize profusely and I ask them to stand guard outside my cubicle door.
They do and I emerge grateful but absolutely mortified, and hope that they didn't notice that I left the bathroom without washing my hands.
I carry hand sanitizer with me every single day because the sink, soap dispenser, hand dryer and mirror are all out of my reach.
Now, the accessible bathroom is somewhat of an option.
In this space, I can reach the lock on the door, the sink, the soap dispenser, the hand dryer and the mirror.
Yet, I cannot use the toilet.
It is deliberately designed higher so that wheelchair users can transfer across with ease.
This is a wonderful and necessary innovation, but in the design world, when we describe a new project or idea as accessible, what does that mean?
Who is it accessible to?
And whose needs are not being accommodated for?
Now, the bathroom is an example of where design impinges upon my dignity, but the physical environment impacts upon me in much more casual ways too, something as simple as ordering a cup of coffee.
Now, I'll admit it.
I drink far too much coffee.
My order is a skinny vanilla latte, but I'm trying to wean myself off the syrup.
But the coffee shop, it's not designed well, at least not for me.
Queuing, I'm standing beside the pastry cabinet and the barista calls for the next order.
"Next, please!" they shout.
They can't see me.
The person next to me in the queue points to my existence and everyone is embarrassed.
I order as quick as I can and I move along to collect my coffee.
Now, think just for a second.
Where do they put it?
Up high and without a lid.
Reaching up to collect a coffee that I have paid for is an incredibly dangerous experience.
But design also impinges on the clothes that I want to wear.
I want garments that reflect my personality.
It's difficult to find in the childrenswear department.
And often womenswear requires far too many alterations.
I want shoes that affect my maturity, professionalism and sophistication.
Instead, I'm offered sneakers with Velcro straps and light-up shoes.
Now, I'm not totally opposed to light-up shoes.
(Laughter) But design also impacts on such simple things, like sitting on a chair.
I cannot go from a standing to a seating position with grace.
Due to the standards of design heights of chairs, I have to crawl on my hands and knees just to get on top of it, whilst also being conscious that it might tip over at any stage.
But whilst design impacts on me whether it's a chair, a bathroom, a coffee shop, or clothes, I rely on and benefit from the kindness of strangers.
But not everybody is so nice.
I'm reminded that I'm a little person when a stranger points, stares, laughs, calls me a name, or takes a photograph of me.
This happens almost every day.
With the rise of social media, it has given me an opportunity and a platform to have a voice as a blogger and as an activist, but it has also made me nervous that I might become a meme or a viral sensation, all without my consent.
So let's take a moment right now to make something very clear.
The word "midget" is a slur.
It evolved from PT Barnum's era of circuses and freak shows.
Society has evolved.
So should our vocabulary.
Language is a powerful tool.
It does not just name our society.
It shapes it.
I am incredibly proud to be a little person, to have inherited the condition of achondroplasia.
But I am most proud to be Sinead.
Achondroplasia is the most common form of dwarfism.
Achondroplasia translates as "without cartilage formation."
I have short limbs and achondroplastic facial features, my forehead and my nose.
My arms do not straighten fully, but I can lick my elbow.
I'm not showing you that one.
Achondroplasia occurs in approximately one in every 20,000 births.
80 percent of little people are born to two average-height parents.
That means that anybody in this room could have a child with achondroplasia.
Yet, I inherited my condition from my dad.
I'd like to show you a photo of my family.
My mother is average height, my father is a little person and I am the eldest of five children.
I have three sisters and one brother.
They are all average height.
I am incredibly fortunate to have been born into a family that cultivated my curiosity and my tenacity, that protected me from the unkindness and ignorance of strangers and that armed me with the resilience, creativity and confidence that I needed to survive and manipulate the physical environment and society.
If I was to pinpoint any reason why I am successful, it is because I was and I am a loved child, now, a loved child with a lot of sass and sarcasm, but a loved child nonetheless.
In giving you an insight into who I am today I wanted to offer you a new perspective.
I wanted to challenge the idea that design is but a tool to create function and beauty.
Design greatly impacts upon people's lives, all lives.
Design is a way in which we can feel included in the world, but it is also a way in which we can uphold a person's dignity and their human rights.
Design can also inflict vulnerability on a group whose needs aren't considered.
So today, I want your perceptions challenged.
Who are we not designing for?
How can we amplify their voices and their experiences?
What is the next step?
Design is an enormous privilege, but it is a bigger responsibility.
I want you to open your eyes.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
It's story time.
Settle back, and I'll begin.
Once upon a time, a mother duck sat patiently on her nest of eggs, waiting for them to hatch.
And then one day, she felt something move beneath her.
Crack, crack!
Filled with happiness, she watched as her eggs hatched one by one.
I don't know about you, but when I was little, story time was always one of my favorite parts of the day.
And I loved reading to my two sons when they were small, too.
It's that special time when a parent and child can be totally absorbed together in mystical kingdoms, fantastical beasties or scruffy little ducks that turn out to be swans.
Well, that's how it is for some children, but for other children, there isn't a parent around to read to them.
I'd like to tell you about Sophie.
Sophie's five years old and lives with her parents.
One day, there's a bang at the door.
Sophie hears lots of shouting; her mum's crying.
She sees the police dragging her father away.
Sophie's afraid. She starts crying, too.
Weeks go by.
Sophie doesn't know what's happened to her dad.
When she asks her mum, her mum gets upset.
So she stops asking.
Sophie waits.
She really misses her dad.
Every day, she hurries home from school, in case he's come back.
On many nights, she cries herself to sleep.
Children at school start to tease her.
They call her names.
Somebody's mum has heard that Sophie's dad is in prison.
Sophie pretends to be ill so she doesn't have to go to school.
And her teacher can't understand why she's so far behind with her schoolwork.
After what seems a long, long time to Sophie, a letter arrives.
It's from her dad.
The writing is very messy.
The letter makes her mum cry, but she reads a little out to Sophie.
He says that he's OK and that he's missing them.
It's a short letter.
Sophie says she'd like to go and see her dad, wherever he is.
But her mum says it's too far away, and they can't afford the journey.
Then one day the phone rings.
"Sophie, come speak to daddy."
Dad sounds different, far away.
He says he can't talk for very long, and anyway, it's very noisy wherever he is.
And Sophie doesn't know what to say to him.
Well, as stories go, that's not a very nice one.
In the United Kingdom, 200,000 children experience the shame and isolation of a parent in prison.
Two hundred thousand.
That's more than the number of children each year who are affected by their parents divorcing.
And it can affect the children of prisoners very deeply.
There can be problems at school, and they're three times more likely to suffer from mental health issues.
In so many ways, children are the unintended victims of their parents' crimes.
In so many ways, children are the overlooked victims of their parents' crimes.
Until last November, I was a serving prisoner, imprisoned for fraud.
I was dishonest, and I paid the penalty.
Before that, I'd been a practicing solicitor for 30 years.
I'd had a happy and stable upbringing, a good education, a happy marriage, which, I'm pleased to say, continues.
I have two adult sons.
When they were growing up, I did my best to be around for them as much as I could.
And I took a careful interest in what they did.
I read to my boys every night, and ironically, our favorite story was "Burglar Bill."
(Laughter) But when I got to prison, it soon became apparent that my background was very different to that of most of the prisoners.
Few of the men that I met had had a decent education.
Indeed, many associated education with humiliation and failure.
I can tell you firsthand that prison is dehumanizing.
Prisoners harden up, they shut down, they close in ...
just to survive.
And this can be devastating for families.
In fact, maintaining contact with your family from prison can be very difficult indeed.
And if a child does get to see their parent in prison, they have to go through the same pat-down searches as the adults.
They walk through the same detector frames, they're sniffed by the same sniffer dogs, and all because some children have been the unwitting carriers of drugs and mobile phones.
And when they get through to see their parent, they may be tired from a long journey, shy, tongue-tied, even upset.
And it isn't easy for the parents, who may not be getting along.
For many reasons, not just these, over half of prisoners lose contact with their children and families.
How can we help prisoners to stay in contact with their families?
When I was a prisoner at Channings Wood Prison, I began working for a charity called Storybook Dads.
Storybook Dads began in 2003, when Sharon Berry, a civilian worker in a prison, realized just how much many prisoners wanted to stay in contact with their children.
And so, armed with a few storybooks, she began to help prisoners to read and record stories to send home to their children.
It wasn't a new idea. Few ideas like this are new.
They're great ideas.
But it was an instant success.
You may wonder: How does the recording of the stories work in prison?
Is it difficult for prisoners?
Can it be challenging?
Well, the process of choosing, reading and recording a story can be very challenging for prisoners.
Prison is tough, and prisoners can't afford to show any signs of weakness or vulnerability.
But this, this recording process, this can be uncomfortable, upsetting, sometimes all just a bit too much.
And prisoners often cry.
They cry because they regret missing out on their children's lives.
They cry because they're ashamed that they've let their families down.
They cry because they don't know how to go about reading to their children.
But because when they come to us we offer a private space, one-to-one, prisoners don't need to be tough anymore, and they can use their vulnerability as a strength when contacting with their children.
I remember one prisoner who came to record.
He was a big, hard man with a reputation for being tough.
He came along as implacable as ever.
But when the door of the recording room closed behind him, that facade began to crumble.
From his pocket, he took a screwed-up piece of paper and quietly began to read the words which he'd written as a message for his two little ones.
His hands were shaking.
And then, in a surprisingly quiet voice, he began to sing their favorite lullaby.
You see, there wasn't much that he could do from behind bars to show his children that he missed and loved them.
But he could do this.
Once the recording is made, it's sent to the Storybook Dads production unit at Channings Wood Prison in Devon.
And that's where I worked.
I was trained, along with other prisoners, to edit and produce recordings sent in from prisons all over the United Kingdom.
Using audio and video software, the recordings have the mistakes taken out and sound effects and music added in.
And the experience and skill which the prison editors gain helps them in their future employment.
Once the recording is finalized, it's transferred to a CD or a DVD and sent out to the families so that the children can watch them whenever they feel the need.
And they listen to these recordings and watch them a lot -- at bedtime, in the car ...
Some even take them to school to show their friends.
These recordings, they show the children that they're loved and missed.
And they show the prisoner that they can do something for their child, as a parent.
Do you remember Sophie?
Well, one day, just before Christmas, a parcel arrived, and this is what was in it.
Let's listen to a little of it together.
(Video) Santa: On, Comet! On, Cupid! On, Donner and Blitzen!
Charlie: That's his reindeer, isn't it?
Santa: It is his reindeer, yeah.
Up, up, higher and higher they flew, across land, across oceans they sped.
Through the magical northern lights they passed -- I'd love to see the northern lights, wouldn't you?
Charlie: I figure they'd probably look a bit like that snowman's belly.
Santa: They probably would, yeah.
That's a cool snowman, isn't it?
Charlie: It's very cool indeed, I love it.
Santa: They visited all the children in the world and left presents for each and every one.
In the blink of an eye, they were back in Frogsbottom Field.
(Charlie Laughs) Santa: You think that's well funny?
Charlie: I want to live in Frogsbottom Field!
Santa: Where do you live, in Frogsbottom Tree?
Charlie: I don't, I live in this tree.
I've made it all Christmasy-look.
Santa: It's nice, that.
You've done a good job, good job.
Charlie: Thank you very much!
(Laughter) Alan Crickmore: Sophie and her mum listened to that three times, and they haven't laughed so much in a long time.
They can see that he's all right, they can see that he loves them, and the next time he rings, Sophie's got plenty to talk about: "What does Charlie the Chimp eat?
Will daddy do another story very soon?"
Since it began in 2003, Storybook Dads has grown and grown.
It now operates as Storybook Dads and Storybook Mums in more than 100 prisons in the United Kingdom.
Ninety-eight percent of the prisoners who take part say that it's improved their relationship with their child.
And since 2003, over 60,000 DVDs and CDs have been sent out to the children of prisoners.
For Sophie's family and for thousands of families like them, Storybook Dads has been a lifeline.
Some prisoners say that it's the first time that they've begun to build a relationship with their child.
And some poor readers have been so inspired by what they've been able to achieve that they've gone to education classes to improve their own reading skills.
Let's go back to the story of "The Ugly Duckling."
But this time, I'd like to play you a recording made by a prisoner, because it encapsulates the power of what we do.
The prisoner was an Irish Traveller who couldn't read.
And he wanted to send a story home to his daughter for her birthday.
With the help of a mentor and some clever editing, something magical happened.
This is an extract from the raw recording, where the prisoner is reading the story by repeating it, phrase at a time.
(Audio) Mentor: He had nowhere to hide.
Owen: He had nowhere to hide.
Mentor: So one day, he ran away.
Owen: Then one day, he ran away.
Mentor: He ran until he came to the great marsh.
Owen: He run until he come to the great marsh.
Mentor: Where the wild ducks lived.
Owen: Where the wild ducks lived.
AC: And this is a recording -- an excerpt of the recording with the mentor's voice taken out and sound effects and music added in.
(Audio) Owen: He had nowhere to hide.
Then one day, he run away.
He run until he come to the great marsh where the wild ducks lived, and he laid in the rushes for two weeks.
(Music) (Ducks quack) Some wild ducks and geese come to look at him.
"You're very ugly," they said, and they laughed at him.
(Ducks quack) The ugly duckling ran away from the great marsh.
(Duck quacks) AC: And this is how he finished the story: (Audio) Owen: He wasn't an ugly duckling at all.
During the winter, he had grown into a beautiful white swan.
The other swans looked at him and thought how beautiful he was.
"Come with us," they said.
And he did.
(Bird sounds) Well, Tiara, I hope you have enjoyed this story as much as I enjoyed reading this story to you.
I cannot wait to be with you again and hold you in my arms.
All my love, your daddy, Owen.
Lots of love, I miss you with all my heart.
Goodbye for now, my love. Bye bye.
(Music) (Music ends) AC: When he listened to that recording in his cell before it was sent out to his daughter, he cried.
And that's a pretty common reaction from prisoners, as they realize for the first time they've been able to do something for their child which they never thought they could.
They've connected in the most fundamental way, through the medium of storytelling.
And as for Sophie, she wants "The Gruffalo" next time.
(Laughter) (Applause)
"These are the times," said Thomas Paine, "that try men's souls."
And they're trying ours now.
This is a fateful moment in the history of the West.
We've seen divisive elections and divided societies.
We've seen a growth of extremism in politics and religion, all of it fueled by anxiety, uncertainty and fear, of a world that's changing almost faster than we can bear, and the sure knowledge that it's going to change faster still.
I have a friend in Washington.
I asked him, what was it like being in America during the recent presidential election?
He said to me, "Well, it was like the man sitting on the deck of the Titanic with a glass of whiskey in his hand and he's saying, 'I know I asked for ice -- (Laughter) but this is ridiculous.'" So is there something we can do, each of us, to be able to face the future without fear?
I think there is.
And one way into it is to see that perhaps the most simple way into a culture and into an age is to ask: What do people worship?
People have worshipped so many different things -- the sun, the stars, the storm.
Some people worship many gods, some one, some none.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, people worshipped the nation, the Aryan race, the communist state.
What do we worship?
I think future anthropologists will take a look at the books we read on self-help, self-realization, self-esteem.
They'll look at the way we talk about morality as being true to oneself, the way we talk about politics as a matter of individual rights, and they'll look at this wonderful new religious ritual we have created.
You know the one?
Called the "selfie."
And I think they'll conclude that what we worship in our time is the self, the me, the I.
And this is great.
It's liberating. It's empowering. It's wonderful.
But don't forget that biologically, we're social animals.
We've spent most of our evolutionary history in small groups.
We need those face-to-face interactions where we learn the choreography of altruism and where we create those spiritual goods like friendship and trust and loyalty and love that redeem our solitude.
When we have too much of the "I" and too little of the "we," we can find ourselves vulnerable, fearful and alone.
It was no accident that Sherry Turkle of MIT called the book she wrote on the impact of social media "Alone Together."
So I think the simplest way of safeguarding the future "you" is to strengthen the future "us" in three dimensions: the us of relationship, the us of identity and the us of responsibility.
So let me first take the us of relationship.
And here, forgive me if I get personal.
Once upon a time, a very long time ago, I was a 20-year-old undergraduate studying philosophy.
I was into Nietzsche and Schopenhauer and Sartre and Camus.
I was full of ontological uncertainty and existential angst.
It was terrific.
(Laughter) I was self-obsessed and thoroughly unpleasant to know, until one day I saw across the courtyard a girl who was everything that I wasn't.
She radiated sunshine.
She emanated joy.
I found out her name was Elaine.
We met. We talked.
We married.
And 47 years, three children and eight grandchildren later, I can safely say it was the best decision I ever took in my life, because it's the people not like us that make us grow.
And that is why I think we have to do just that.
The trouble with Google filters, Facebook friends and reading the news by narrowcasting rather than broadcasting means that we're surrounded almost entirely by people like us whose views, whose opinions, whose prejudices, even, are just like ours.
And Cass Sunstein of Harvard has shown that if we surround ourselves with people with the same views as us, we get more extreme.
I think we need to renew those face-to-face encounters with the people not like us.
I think we need to do that in order to realize that we can disagree strongly and yet still stay friends.
It's in those face-to-face encounters that we discover that the people not like us are just people, like us.
And actually, every time we hold out the hand of friendship to somebody not like us, whose class or creed or color are different from ours, we heal one of the fractures of our wounded world.
That is the us of relationship.
Second is the us of identity.
Let me give you a thought experiment.
Have you been to Washington? Have you seen the memorials?
Absolutely fascinating.
There's the Lincoln Memorial: Gettysburg Address on one side, Second Inaugural on the other.
You go to the Jefferson Memorial, screeds of text.
Martin Luther King Memorial, more than a dozen quotes from his speeches.
I didn't realize, in America you read memorials.
Now go to the equivalent in London in Parliament Square and you will see that the monument to David Lloyd George contains three words: David Lloyd George.
(Laughter) Nelson Mandela gets two.
Churchill gets just one: Churchill.
(Laughter) Why the difference? I'll tell you why the difference.
Because America was from the outset a nation of wave after wave of immigrants, so it had to create an identity which it did by telling a story which you learned at school, you read on memorials and you heard repeated in presidential inaugural addresses.
Britain until recently wasn't a nation of immigrants, so it could take identity for granted.
The trouble is now that two things have happened which shouldn't have happened together.
The first thing is in the West we've stopped telling this story of who we are and why, even in America.
And at the same time, immigration is higher than it's ever been before.
So when you tell a story and your identity is strong, you can welcome the stranger, but when you stop telling the story, your identity gets weak and you feel threatened by the stranger.
And that's bad.
I tell you, Jews have been scattered and dispersed and exiled for 2,000 years.
We never lost our identity.
Why? Because at least once a year, on the festival of Passover, we told our story and we taught it to our children and we ate the unleavened bread of affliction and tasted the bitter herbs of slavery.
So we never lost our identity.
I think collectively we've got to get back to telling our story, who we are, where we came from, what ideals by which we live.
And if that happens, we will become strong enough to welcome the stranger and say, "Come and share our lives, share our stories, share our aspirations and dreams."
That is the us of identity.
And finally, the us of responsibility.
Do you know something?
My favorite phrase in all of politics, very American phrase, is: "We the people."
Why "we the people?"
Because it says that we all share collective responsibility for our collective future.
And that's how things really are and should be.
Have you noticed how magical thinking has taken over our politics?
So we say, all you've got to do is elect this strong leader and he or she will solve all our problems for us.
Believe me, that is magical thinking.
And then we get the extremes: the far right, the far left, the extreme religious and the extreme anti-religious, the far right dreaming of a golden age that never was, the far left dreaming of a utopia that never will be and the religious and anti-religious equally convinced that all it takes is God or the absence of God to save us from ourselves.
That, too, is magical thinking, because the only people who will save us from ourselves is we the people, all of us together.
And when we do that, and when we move from the politics of me to the politics of all of us together, we rediscover those beautiful, counterintuitive truths: that a nation is strong when it cares for the weak, that it becomes rich when it cares for the poor, it becomes invulnerable when it cares about the vulnerable.
That is what makes great nations.
(Applause) So here is my simple suggestion.
It might just change your life, and it might just help to begin to change the world.
Do a search and replace operation on the text of your mind, and wherever you encounter the word "self," substitute the word "other."
So instead of self-help, other-help; instead of self-esteem, other-esteem.
And if you do that, you will begin to feel the power of what for me is one of the most moving sentences in all of religious literature.
"Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for you are with me."
We can face any future without fear so long as we know we will not face it alone.
So for the sake of the future "you," together let us strengthen the future "us."
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I love making tools and sharing them with people.
I remember as a child, my first tool I built was actually a microscope that I built by stealing lenses from my brother's eyeglasses.
He wasn't that thrilled.
But, you know, maybe because of that moment, 30 years later, I'm still making microscopes.
And the reason I built these tools is for moments like this.
(Video) Girl: I have black things in my hair -- Manu Prakash: This is a school in the Bay Area.
(Video) MP: The living world far supersedes our imagination of how things actually work.
(Video) Boy: Oh my God!
MP: Right -- oh my God!
I hadn't realized this would be such a universal phrase.
Over the last two years, in my lab, we built 50,000 Foldscopes and shipped them to 130 countries in the world, at no cost to the kids we sent them to.
This year alone, with the support of our community, we are planning to ship a million microscopes to kids around the world.
What does that do?
It creates an inspiring community of people around the world, learning and teaching each other, from Kenya to Kampala to Kathmandu to Kansas.
And one of the phenomenal things that I love about this is the sense of community.
There's a kid in Nicaragua teaching others how to identify mosquito species that carry dengue by looking at the larva under a microscope.
There's a pharmacologist who came up with a new way to detect fake drugs anywhere.
There is a girl who wondered: "How does glitter actually work?"
and discovered the physics of crystalline formation in glitter.
There is an Argentinian doctor who's trying to do field cervical cancer screening with this tool.
And yours very truly found a species of flea that was dug inside my heel in my foot one centimeter deep.
Now, you might think of these as anomalies.
But there is a method to this madness.
I call this "frugal science" -- the idea of sharing the experience of science, and not just the information.
To remind you: there are a billion people on this planet who live with absolutely no infrastructure: no roads, no electricity and thus, no health care.
Also, there a billion kids on this planet that live in poverty.
How are we supposed to inspire them for the next generation of solution makers?
There are health care workers that we put on the line to fight infectious diseases, to protect us with absolutely bare-minimum tools and resources.
So as a lab at Stanford, I think of this from a context of frugal science and building solutions for these communities.
Often we think about being able to do diagnosis under a tree, off-grid.
I'll tell you two examples today of new tools.
One of them starts in Uganda.
In 2013, on a field trip to detect schistosomiasis with Foldscopes, I made a minor observation.
In a clinic, in a far, remote area, I saw a centrifuge being used as a doorstop.
I mean -- quite literally, the doorstop.
And I asked them and they said, "Oh, we don't actually have electricity, so this piece of junk is good as a doorstop."
Centrifuges, for some of you who don't know, are the pinnacle tool to be able to do sample processing.
You separate components of blood or body fluids to be able to detect and identify pathogens.
But centrifuges are bulky, expensive -- cost around 1,000 dollars -- and really hard to carry out in the field.
And of course, they don't work without power.
Sound familiar?
So we started thinking about solving this problem, and I came back -- kept thinking about toys.
Now ...
I have a few with me here.
I first started with yo-yos ...
and I'm a terrible yo-yo thrower.
Because these objects spin, we wondered, could we actually use the physics of these objects to be able to build centrifuges?
This was possibly the worst throw I could make.
But you might start realizing, if you start exploring the space of toys -- we tried these spinning tops, and then in the lab, we stumbled upon this wonder.
It's the whirligig, or a buzzer, or a rundle.
A couple of strings and a little disk, and if I push, it spins.
How many of you have played with this as a kid?
This is called a button-on-a-string.
OK, maybe 50 percent of you.
What you didn't realize -- that this little object is the oldest toy in the history of mankind ...
5,000 years ago.
We have found relics of this object hidden around on our planet.
Now the irony is, we actually don't understand how this little thing works.
That's when I get excited.
So we got back to work, wrote down a couple of equations.
If you take the input torque that you put in, you take the drag on this disc, and the twist drag on these strings, you should be able to mathematically solve this.
This is not the only equation in my talk.
Ten pages of math later, we could actually write down the complete analytical solution for this dynamic system.
And out comes what we call "Paperfuge."
That's my postdoc Saad Bhamla, who's the co-inventor of Paperfuge.
And to the left, you see all the centrifuges that we're trying to replace.
This little object that you see right here is a disc, a couple of strings and a handle.
And when I spin and I push, it starts to spin.
Now, when you realize, when you do the math, when we calculate the rpm for this object, mathematically, we should be able to go all the way to a million rpm.
Now, there is a little twist in human anatomy, because the resonant frequency of this object is about 10 hertz, and if you've ever played the piano, you can't go higher than two or three hertz.
The maximum speed we've been able to achieve with this object is not 10,000 rpm, not 50,000 rpm -- 120,000 rpm.
That's equal to 30,000 g-forces.
If I was to stick you right here and have it spin, you would think about the types of forces you would experience.
One of the factors of a tool like this is to be able to do diagnosis with this.
So, I'm going to do a quick demo here, where -- this is a moment where I'm going to make a little finger prick, and a tiny drop of blood is going to come out.
If you don't like blood, you don't have to look at it.
Here is a little lancet.
These lancets are available everywhere, completely passive.
And if I've had breakfast today ...
That didn't hurt at all.
OK, I take a little capillary with a drop of blood -- now this drop of blood has answers, that's why I'm interested in it.
It might actually tell me whether I have malaria right now or not.
I take a little capillary, and you see it starts wicking in.
I'm going to draw a little more blood.
And that's good enough for right now.
Now, I just seal this capillary by putting it in clay.
And now that's sealed the sample.
We're going to take the sample, mount it on Paperfuge.
A little piece of tape to make a sealed cavity.
So now the sample is completely enclosed.
And we are ready for a spin.
I'm pushing and pulling with this object.
I'm going to load this up ...
And you see the object starts spinning.
Unlike a regular centrifuge, this is a counter-rotating centrifuge.
It goes back and forth, back and forth ...
And now I'm charging it up, and you see it builds momentum.
And now -- I don't know if you can hear this -- 30 seconds of this, and I should be able to separate all the blood cells with the plasma.
And the ratio of those blood cells to plasma -- (Applause) Already, if you see right here, if you focus on this, you should be able to see a separated volume of blood and plasma.
And the ratio of that actually tells me whether I might be anemic.
One of the aspects of this is, we build many types of Paperfuges.
This one allows us to identify malaria parasites by running them for a little longer, and we can identify malaria parasites that are in the blood that we can separate out and detect with something like a centrifuge.
Another version of this allows me to separate nucleic acids to be able to do nucleic acid tests out in the field itself.
Here is another version that allows me to separate bulk samples, and then, finally, something new that we've been working on to be able to implement the entire multiplex test on an object like this.
So where you do the sample preparation and the chemistry in the same object.
Now ...
this is all good, but when you start thinking about this, you have to share these tools with people.
And one of the things we did is -- we just got back from Madagascar; this is what clinical trials for malaria look like -- (Laughter) You can do this while having coffee.
But most importantly, this is a village six hours from any road.
We are in a room with one of the senior members of the community and a health care worker.
It really is this portion of the work that excites me the most -- that smile, to be able to share simple but powerful tools with people around the world.
Now, I forgot to tell you this, that all of that cost me 20 cents to make.
OK, in the negative time I have left, I'll tell you about the most recent -- (Laughter) invention from our lab.
It's called Abuzz -- the idea that all of you could help us fight mosquitoes; you could all help us track our enemies.
These are enemies because they cause malaria, Zika, chikungunya, dengue.
But the challenge is that we actually don't know where our enemies are.
The world map for where mosquitoes are is missing.
So we started thinking about this.
There are 3,500 species of mosquitoes, and they're all very similar.
Some of them are so identical that even an entomologist cannot identify them under a microscope.
But they have an Achilles' heel.
This is what mosquitoes flirting with each other looks like.
That's a male chasing a female.
They're actually talking to each other with their wingbeat frequencies.
(Buzzing sound) And thus, they have a signature.
We realized that using a regular phone, a $5-10 flip phone -- how many remember what this object is?
(Laughter) We can record these acoustic signatures from mosquitoes.
I'll tell you exactly how to do this.
I caught some mosquitoes outside.
Unlike Bill [Gates], I'm not going to release them.
(Laughter) But I will tell you how to record from this.
All you do is tap them and they fly.
You can first test -- I can actually hear that.
And you bring your phone, which has microphones -- it turns out the mics are so damn good already, even on regular phones, that you can pick up this near-field signature.
And since I'm out of time, let me just play the recording that I made a day ago.
(Mosquitoes buzz) This is all the charming sound that you heard before that you all love.
One of the contexts of this is that being able to do this with a regular cell phone allows us to map mosquito species.
Using a flip phone, we mapped one of the largest acoustic databases with 25 to 20 species of mosquitoes that carry human pathogens.
And from this and machine learning, anybody who uploads this data, we can identify and tell the probability of what species of mosquitoes you're actually working with.
We call this Abuzz, and if any of you want to sign up, just go to the website.
Let me close with something that's very important and dear to my heart.
One of the challenges of today is we have terrible problems.
We have a billion people with absolutely no health care, climate change, biodiversity loss, on and on and on.
And we hope that science is going to provide the answer.
But before you leave this theatre today, I want you to promise one thing.
We're going to make science accessible -- not just to the people who can afford it, but a billion others who can't.
Let's make science and scientific literacy a human right.
The moment that you pass the tingling feeling of making a discovery to another child, you're enabling them to be the next group of people who will actually solve these problems.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a journalist, and I'm an immigrant.
And these two conditions define me.
I was born in Mexico, but I've spent more than half my life reporting in the United States, a country which was itself created by immigrants.
As a reporter and as a foreigner, I've learned that neutrality, silence and fear aren't the best options -- not in journalism, nor in life.
Neutrality is often an excuse that we journalists use to hide from our true responsibility.
What is that responsibility?
It is to question and to challenge those in positions of power.
That's what journalism is for.
That's the beauty of journalism: to question and challenge the powerful.
Of course, we have the obligation to report reality as it is, not how we would like it to be.
In that sense, I agree with the principle of objectivity: if a house is blue, I say that it's blue.
If there are a million unemployed people, I say there are a million.
But neutrality won't necessarily lead me to the truth.
Even if I'm unequivocally scrupulous, and I present both sides of a news item -- the Democratic and the Republican, the liberal and the conservative, the government's and the opposition's -- in the end, I have no guarantee, nor are any of us guaranteed that we'll know what's true and what's not true.
Life is much more complicated, and I believe journalism should reflect that very complexity.
To be clear: I refuse to be a tape recorder.
I didn't become a journalist to be a tape recorder.
I know what you're going to say: no one uses tape recorders nowadays.
(Laughter) In that case, I refuse to take out my cell phone and hit the record button and point it in front of me as if I were at a concert, like a fan at a concert.
That is not true journalism.
Contrary to what many people think, journalists are making value judgments all the time, ethical and moral judgments.
And we're always making decisions that are exceedingly personal and extraordinarily subjective.
For example: What happens if you're called to cover a dictatorship, like Augusto Pinochet's regime in Chile or Fidel Castro's in Cuba?
Are you going to report only what the general and commander want, or will you confront them?
What happens if you find out that in your country or in the country next door, students are disappearing and hidden graves are appearing, or that millions of dollars are disappearing from the budget and that ex-presidents are magically now multimillionaires?
Will you report only the official version?
Or what happens if you're assigned to cover the presidential elections of the primary superpower, and one of the candidates makes comments that are racist, sexist and xenophobic?
That happened to me.
And I want to tell you what I did, but first, let me explain where I'm coming from, so you can understand my reaction.
I grew up in Mexico City, the oldest of five brothers, and our family simply couldn't afford to pay for all of our college tuition.
So I studied in the morning, and worked in the afternoon.
Eventually, I got the job I had always wanted: television reporter.
It was a big opportunity.
But as I was working on my third story, I ended up criticizing the president, and questioning the lack of democracy in Mexico.
In Mexico, from 1929 to 2000, elections were always rigged; the incumbent president would hand-pick his successor.
That's not true democracy.
To me it seemed like a brilliant idea to expose the president, but to my boss -- (Laughter) My boss didn't think it was such a great idea.
At that time, the presidential office, Los Pinos, had issued a direct censor against the media.
My boss, who, aside from being in charge of the show I worked for, was also in charge of a soccer team.
I always suspected that he was more interested in goals than in the news.
He censored my report.
He asked me to change it, I said no, so he put another journalist on the story to write what I was supposed to say.
I did not want to be a censored journalist.
I don't know where I found the strength, but I wrote my letter of resignation.
And so at 24 years of age -- just 24 -- I made the most difficult and most transcendental decision of my life.
Not only did I resign from television, but I had also decided to leave my country.
I sold my car, a beat-up little red Volkswagen, came up with some money and said goodbye to my family, to my friends, to my streets, to my favorite haunts -- to my tacos -- (Laughter) and I bought a one-way ticket to Los Angeles, California.
And so I became one of the 250 million immigrants that exist in the world.
Ask any immigrant about the first day they arrived in their new country, and you'll find that they remember absolutely everything, like it was a movie with background music.
In my case, I arrived in Los Angeles, the sun was setting, and everything I owned -- a guitar, a suitcase and some documents -- I could carry all of it with my two hands.
That feeling of absolute freedom, I haven't experienced since.
And I survived with what little I had.
I obtained a student visa; I was studying.
I ate a lot of lettuce and bread, because that's all I had.
Finally, in 1984, I landed my first job as a TV reporter in the United States.
And the first thing I noticed was that in the US, my colleagues criticized -- and mercilessly -- then president Ronald Reagan, and absolutely nothing happened; no one censored them.
And I thought: I love this country.
(Laughter) (Applause) And that's how it's been for more than 30 years: reporting with total freedom, and being treated as an equal despite being an immigrant -- until, without warning, I was assigned to cover the recent US presidential election.
On June 16, 2015, a candidate who would eventually become the president of the United States said that Mexican immigrants were criminals, drug traffickers and rapists.
And I knew that he was lying.
I knew he was wrong for one very simple reason: I'm a Mexican immigrant.
And we're not like that.
So I did what any other reporter would have done: I wrote him a letter by hand requesting an interview, and I sent it to his Tower in New York.
The next day I was at work, and I suddenly began to receive hundreds of calls and texts on my cell phone, some more insulting than others.
I didn't know what was happening until my friend came into my office and said, "They published your cell number online."
They actually did that.
Here's the letter they sent where they gave out my number.
Don't bother writing it down, OK? I already changed it.
(Laughter) But I learned two things.
The first one is that you should never, never, ever give your cell number to Donald Trump.
(Laughter) (Applause) The second lesson was that I needed to stop being neutral at that point.
From then on, my mission as a journalist changed.
I would confront the candidate and show that he was wrong, that what he said about immigrants in the US was not true.
Let me give you some figures.
Ninety-seven percent of all undocumented people in the United States are good people.
Less than three percent have committed a serious crime, or "felony," as they say in English.
In comparison, six percent of US citizens have committed a serious crime.
The conclusion is that undocumented immigrants behave much better than US citizens.
Based on that data, I made a plan.
Eight weeks after they published my cell number, I obtained a press pass for a press conference for the candidate gaining momentum in the polls.
I decided to confront him in person.
But ...
things didn't turn out exactly as I had planned; watch: [Donald Trump Press Conference Dubuque, Iowa] (Video) Jorge Ramos: Mr. Trump, I have a question about immigration.
Donald Trump: Who's next? Yes, please.
DT: Excuse me, you weren't called. Sit down. Sit down!
JR: I'm a reporter; as an immigrant and as a US citizen, I have the right to ask a question.
DT: No you don't. JR: I have the right to ask -- DT: Go back to Univision.
JR: This is the question: You cannot deport 11 million people.
You cannot build a 1900-mile wall.
You cannot deny citizenship to children in this country.
DT: Sit down. JR: And with those ideas -- DT: You weren't called.
JR: I'm a reporter and I have -- Don't touch me, sir.
Guard 1: Please don't disrupt. You're being disruptive.
JR: I have the right to ask a question. G1: Yes, in order. In turn, sir.
Guard 2: Do you have your media credential?
JR: I have the right -- G2: Where? Let me see. JR: It's over there.
Man: Whoever's coming out, stay out.
G2: You've just got to wait your turn.
Man: You're very rude. It's not about you.
JR: It's not about you -- Man: Get out of my country!
Man: It's not about you.
Man: Well ...whatever. No, Univision. It's not about you.
JR: It's not about you. It's about the United States.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Whenever I see that video, the first thing I always think is that hate is contagious.
If you notice, after the candidate says, "Go back to Univision" -- that's code; what he's telling me is, "Get out of here."
One member of his entourage, as if he had been given permission, said, "Get out of my country," not knowing that I'm also a US citizen.
After watching this video many times, I also think that in order to break free from neutrality -- and for it to be a true break -- one has to lose their fear, and then learn how to say, "No; I'm not going to be quiet.
I'm not going to sit down.
And I'm not going to leave."
The word "no" -- (Applause) "no" is the most powerful word that exists in any language, and it always precedes any important change in our lives.
And I think there's enormous dignity and it generates a great deal of respect to be able to step back and to push back and say, "No."
Elie Wiesel -- Holocaust survivor, Nobel Peace Prize recipient and who, unfortunately, we lost very recently -- said some very wise words: "We must take a side.
Neutrality helps only the oppressor, never the victim."
And he's completely right.
We journalists are obligated to take sides in certain circumstances; in cases of racism, discrimination, corruption, lying to the public, dictatorships and human rights, we need to set aside neutrality and indifference.
Spanish has a great word to describe the stance that journalists should take.
The word is "contrapoder [anti-establishment]."
Basically, we journalists should be on the opposite side from those in power.
But if you're in bed with politicians, if you go to the baptism or wedding of the governor's son or if you want to be the president's buddy, how are you going to criticize them?
When I'm assigned to interview a powerful or influential person, I always keep two things in mind: if I don't ask this difficult and uncomfortable question, no one else is going to; and that I'm never going to see this person again.
So I'm not looking to make a good impression or to forge a connection.
In the end, if I have to choose between being the president's friend or enemy, I always prefer to be their enemy.
In closing: I know this is a difficult time to be an immigrant and a journalist, but now more than ever, we need journalists who are prepared, at any given moment, to set neutrality aside.
Personally, I feel like I've been preparing for this moment my whole life.
When they censored me when I was 24, I learned that neutrality, fear and silence often make you an accomplice in crime, abuse and injustice.
And being an accomplice to power is never good journalism.
Now, at 59 years old, I only hope to have a tiny bit of the courage and mental clarity I had at 24, and that way, never again remain quiet.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
All right, let's get up our picture of the earth.
The earth is pretty awesome.
I'm a geologist, so I get pretty psyched about this, but the earth is great.
It's powerful, it's dynamic, it's constantly changing.
It's a pretty exciting place to live.
But I want to share with you guys today my perspective as a geologist in how understanding earth's past can help inform and guide decisions that we make today about how to sustainably live on earth's surface.
So there's a lot of exciting things that go on on the surface of the earth.
If we zoom in here a little bit, I want to talk to you guys a little bit about one of the things that happens.
Material get shuffled around earth's surface all the time, and one of the big thing that happens is material from high mountains gets eroded and transported and deposited in the sea.
And this process is ongoing all the time, and it has huge effects on how the landscape works.
So this example here in south India -- we have some of the biggest mountains in the world, and you can see in this satellite photo rivers transporting material from those mountains out to the sea.
You can think of these rivers like bulldozers.
They're basically taking these mountains and pushing them down towards the sea.
We'll give you guys an example here.
So we zoom in a little bit.
I want to talk to you guys specifically about a river.
We can see these beautiful patterns that the rivers make as they're pushing material down to the sea, but these patterns aren't static.
These rivers are wiggling and jumping around quite a bit, and it can have big impacts on our lives.
So an example of this is this is the Kosi River.
So the Kosi River has this nice c-shaped pathway, and it exits the big mountains of Nepal carrying with it a ton of material, a lot of sediments that's being eroded from the high mountains, and it spreads out across India and moves this material.
So we're going to zoom in to this area and I'm going to tell you a little bit about what happened with the Kosi.
It's an example of how dynamic these systems can be.
So this is a satellite image from August of 2008, and this satellite image is colored so that vegetations or plants show up as green and water shows up as blue.
So here again you can see that c-shaped pathway that this river takes as it exits Nepal.
And now this is monsoon season.
August is monsoon season in this region of the world, and anyone that lives near a river is no stranger to flooding and the hazards and inconveniences at minimum that are associated with that.
But something interesting happened in 2008, and this river moved in a way that's very different.
It flooded in a way that's very different than it normally does.
So the Kosi River is flowing down here, but sometimes as these rivers are bulldozing sediment, they kind of get clogged, and these clogs can actually cause the rivers to shift their course dramatically.
So this satellite image is from just two weeks later.
Here's the previous pathway, that c-shaped pathway, and you notice it's not blue anymore.
But now what we have is this blue pathway that cuts down the middle of the field of view here.
What happened is the Kosi River jumped its banks, and for reference, the scale bar here is 40 miles.
This river moved over 30 miles very abruptly.
So this river got clogged and it jumped its banks.
Here's an image from about a week later, and you can see these are the previous pathways, and you can see this process of river-jumping continues as this river moves farther away from its major course.
So you can imagine in landscapes like this, where rivers move around frequently, it's really important to understand when, where and how they're going to jump.
But these kinds of processes also happen a lot closer to home as well.
So in the United States, we have the Mississippi River that drains most of the continental US.
It pushes material from the Rocky Mountains and from the Great Plains.
It drains it and moves it all the way across America and dumps it out in the Gulf of Mexico.
So this is the course of the Mississippi that we're familiar with today, but it didn't always flow in this direction.
If we use the geologic record, we can reconstruct where it went in the past.
So for example, this red area here is where we know the Mississippi River flowed and deposited material about 4,600 years ago.
Then about 3,500 years ago it moved to follow the course outlined here in orange.
And it kept moving and it keeps moving.
So here's about 2,000 years ago, a thousand years ago, 700 years ago.
And it was only as recently as 500 years ago that it occupied the pathway that we're familiar with today.
So these processes are really important, and especially here, this delta area, where these river-jumping events in the Mississippi are building land at the interface of the land and the sea.
This is really valuable real estate, and deltas like this are some of the most densely populated areas on our planet.
So understanding the dynamics of these landscapes, how they formed and how they will continue to change in the future is really important for the people that live there.
So rivers also wiggle.
These are sort of bigger jumps that we've been talking about.
I want to show you guys some river wiggles here.
So we're going to fly down to the Amazon River basin, and here again we have a big river system that is draining and moving and plowing material from the Andean Mountains, transporting it across South America and dumping it out into the Atlantic Ocean.
So if we zoom in here, you guys can see these nice, curvy river pathways.
Again, they're really beautiful, but again, they're not static.
These rivers wiggle around.
We can use satellite imagery over the last 30 or so years to actually monitor how these change.
So take a minute and just watch any bend or curve in this river, and you'll see it doesn't stay in the same place for very long.
It changes and evolves and warps its pattern.
If you look in this area in particular, I want you guys to notice there's a sort of a loop in the river that gets completely cut off.
It's almost like a whip cracking and snaps off the pathway of the river at a certain spot.
So just for reference, again, in this location, that river changed its course over four miles over the course of a season or two.
So the landscapes that we live in on earth, as this material is being eroded from the mountains and transported to the sea, are wiggling around all the time.
They're changing all the time, and we need to be able to understand these processes so we can manage and live sustainably on these landscapes.
But it's hard to do if the only information we have is what's going on today at earth's surface.
Right? We don't have a lot of observations.
We only have 30 years' worth of satellite photos, for example.
We need more observations to understand these processes more.
And additionally, we need to know how these landscapes are going to respond to changing climate and to changing land use as we continue to occupy and modify earth's surface.
So this is where the rocks come in.
So as rivers flow, as they're bulldozing material from the mountains to the sea, sometimes bits of sand and clay and rock get stuck in the ground.
And that stuff that gets stuck in the ground gets buried, and through time, we get big, thick accumulations of sediments that eventually turn into rocks.
What this means is that we can go to places like this, where we see big, thick stacks of sedimentary rocks, and go back in time and see what the landscapes looked like in the past.
We can do this to help reconstruct and understand how earth landscapes evolve.
This is pretty convenient, too, because the earth has had sort of an epic history. Right?
So this video here is a reconstruction of paleogeography for just the first 600 million years of earth's history.
So just a little bit of time here.
So as the plates move around, we know climate has changed, sea level has changed, we have a lot of different types of landscapes and different types of environments that we can go back -- if we have a time machine -- we can go back and look at, and we do indeed have a time machine because we can look at the rocks that were deposited at these times.
So I'm going to give you an example of this and take you to a special time in earth's past.
About 55 million years ago, there was a really abrupt warming event, and what happened was a whole bunch of carbon dioxide was released into earth's atmosphere, and it caused a rapid and pretty extreme global warming event.
And when I say warm, I mean pretty warm, that there were things like crocodiles and palm trees as far north as Canada and as far south as Patagonia.
So this was a pretty warm time and it happened really abruptly.
So what we can do is we can go back and find rocks that were deposited at this time and reconstruct how the landscape changed in response to this warming event.
So here, yay, rocks.
(Laughter) Here's a pile of rocks.
This yellow blob here, this is actually a fossil river, so just like this cartoon I showed, these are deposits that were laid down 55 million years ago.
As geologists, we can go and look at these up close and reconstruct the landscape.
So here's another example.
The yellow blob here is a fossil river.
Here's another one above it.
We can go and look in detail and make measurements and observations, and we can measure features.
For example, the features I just highlighted there tell us that this particular river was probably about three feet deep.
You could wade across this cute little stream if you were walking around 55 million years ago.
The reddish stuff that's above and below those channels, those are ancient soil deposits.
So we can look at those to tell us what lived and grew on the landscape and to understand how these rivers were interacting with their floodplains.
So we can look in detail and reconstruct with some specificity how these rivers flowed and what the landscapes looked like.
So when we do this for this particular place at this time, if we look what happened before this abrupt warming event, the rivers kind of carved their way down from the mountains to the sea, and they looked maybe similar to what I showed you in the Amazon River basin.
But right at the onset of this climate change event, the rivers change dramatically.
All of a sudden they got much broader, and they started to slide back and forth across the landscape more readily.
Eventually, the rivers reverted back to a state that was more similar to what they would have looked like before this climate event, but it took a long, long time.
So we can go back in earth's time and do these kinds of reconstructions and understand how earth's landscape has changed in response to a climate event like this or a land use event.
So some of the ways that rivers change or the reasons that rivers change their pattern and their movements is because of things like with extra water falling on the land's surface when climate is hotter, we can move more sediment and erode more sediment, and that changes how rivers behave.
So ultimately, as long as earth's surface is our home, we need to carefully manage the resources and risks associated with living in dynamic environments.
And I think the only way we can really do that sustainably is if we include information about how landscapes evolved and behaved in earth's past.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, a few years ago I heard an interesting rumor.
Apparently, the head of a large pet food company would go into the annual shareholder's meeting with can of dog food.
And he would eat the can of dog food.
And this was his way of convincing them that if it was good enough for him, it was good enough for their pets.
This strategy is now known as "dogfooding," and it's a common strategy in the business world.
It doesn't mean everyone goes in and eats dog food, but businesspeople will use their own products to demonstrate that they feel -- that they're confident in them.
Now, this is a widespread practice, but I think what's really interesting is when you find exceptions to this rule, when you find cases of businesses or people in businesses who don't use their own products.
Turns out there's one industry where this happens in a common way, in a pretty regular way, and that is the screen-based tech industry.
So, in 2010, Steve Jobs, when he was releasing the iPad, described the iPad as a device that was "extraordinary."
"The best browsing experience you've ever had; way better than a laptop, way better than a smartphone.
It's an incredible experience."
A couple of months later, he was approached by a journalist from the New York Times, and they had a long phone call.
At the end of the call, the journalist threw in a question that seemed like a sort of softball.
He said to him, "Your kids must love the iPad."
There's an obvious answer to this, but what Jobs said really staggered the journalist.
He was very surprised, because he said, "They haven't used it.
We limit how much technology our kids use at home."
This is a very common thing in the tech world.
In fact, there's a school quite near Silicon Valley called the Waldorf School of the Peninsula, and they don't introduce screens until the eighth grade.
What's really interesting about the school is that 75 percent of the kids who go there have parents who are high-level Silicon Valley tech execs.
So when I heard about this, I thought it was interesting and surprising, and it pushed me to consider what screens were doing to me and to my family and the people I loved, and to people at large.
So for the last five years, as a professor of business and psychology, I've been studying the effect of screens on our lives.
And I want to start by just focusing on how much time they take from us, and then we can talk about what that time looks like.
What I'm showing you here is the average 24-hour workday at three different points in history: 2007 -- 10 years ago -- 2015 and then data that I collected, actually, only last week.
And a lot of things haven't changed all that much.
We sleep roughly seven-and-a-half to eight hours a day; some people say that's declined slightly, but it hasn't changed much.
We work eight-and-a-half to nine hours a day.
We engage in survival activities -- these are things like eating and bathing and looking after kids -- about three hours a day.
That leaves this white space.
That's our personal time.
That space is incredibly important to us.
That's the space where we do things that make us individuals.
That's where hobbies happen, where we have close relationships, where we really think about our lives, where we get creative, where we zoom back and try to work out whether our lives have been meaningful.
We get some of that from work as well, but when people look back on their lives and wonder what their lives have been like at the end of their lives, you look at the last things they say -- they are talking about those moments that happen in that white personal space.
So it's sacred; it's important to us.
Now, what I'm going to do is show you how much of that space is taken up by screens across time.
In 2007, this much.
That was the year that Apple introduced the first iPhone.
Eight years later, this much.
Now, this much.
That's how much time we spend of that free time in front of our screens.
This yellow area, this thin sliver, is where the magic happens.
That's where your humanity lives.
And right now, it's in a very small box.
So what do we do about this?
Well, the first question is: What does that red space look like?
Now, of course, screens are miraculous in a lot of ways.
I live in New York, a lot of my family lives in Australia, and I have a one-year-old son.
The way I've been able to introduce them to him is with screens.
I couldn't have done that 15 or 20 years ago in quite the same way.
So there's a lot of good that comes from them.
One thing you can do is ask yourself: What goes on during that time?
How enriching are the apps that we're using?
And some are enriching.
If you stop people while they're using them and say, "Tell us how you feel right now," they say they feel pretty good about these apps -- those that focus on relaxation, exercise, weather, reading, education and health.
They spend an average of nine minutes a day on each of these.
These apps make them much less happy.
About half the people, when you interrupt them and say, "How do you feel?"
say they don't feel good about using them.
What's interesting about these -- dating, social networking, gaming, entertainment, news, web browsing -- people spend 27 minutes a day on each of these.
We're spending three times longer on the apps that don't make us happy.
That doesn't seem very wise.
One of the reasons we spend so much time on these apps that make us unhappy is they rob us of stopping cues.
Stopping cues were everywhere in the 20th century.
They were baked into everything we did.
A stopping cue is basically a signal that it's time to move on, to do something new, to do something different.
And -- think about newspapers; eventually you get to the end, you fold the newspaper away, you put it aside.
The same with magazines, books -- you get to the end of a chapter, prompts you to consider whether you want to continue.
You watched a show on TV, eventually the show would end, and then you'd have a week until the next one came.
There were stopping cues everywhere.
But the way we consume media today is such that there are no stopping cues.
The news feed just rolls on, and everything's bottomless: Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, email, text messaging, the news.
And when you do check all sorts of other sources, you can just keep going on and on and on.
So, we can get a cue about what to do from Western Europe, where they seem to have a number of pretty good ideas in the workplace.
Here's one example. This is a Dutch design firm.
And what they've done is rigged the desks to the ceiling.
And at 6pm every day, it doesn't matter who you're emailing or what you're doing, the desks rise to the ceiling.
(Laughter) (Applause) Four days a week, the space turns into a yoga studio, one day a week, into a dance club.
It's really up to you which ones you stick around for.
But this is a great stopping rule, because it means at the end of the day, everything stops, there's no way to work.
At Daimler, the German car company, they've got another great strategy.
When you go on vacation, instead of saying, "This person's on vacation, they'll get back to you eventually," they say, "This person's on vacation, so we've deleted your email.
This person will never see the email you just sent."
(Laughter) "You can email back in a couple of weeks, or you can email someone else."
(Laughter) And so -- (Applause) You can imagine what that's like.
You go on vacation, and you're actually on vacation.
The people who work at this company feel that they actually get a break from work.
But of course, that doesn't tell us much about what we should do at home in our own lives, so I want to make some suggestions.
It's easy to say, between 5 and 6pm, I'm going to not use my phone.
The problem is, 5 and 6pm looks different on different days.
I think a far better strategy is to say, I do certain things every day, there are certain occasions that happen every day, like eating dinner.
Sometimes I'll be alone, sometimes with other people, sometimes in a restaurant, sometimes at home, but the rule that I've adopted is: I will never use my phone at the table.
It's far away, as far away as possible.
Because we're really bad at resisting temptation.
But when you have a stopping cue that, every time dinner begins, my phone goes far away, you avoid temptation all together.
At first, it hurts.
I had massive FOMO.
(Laughter) I struggled.
But what happens is, you get used to it.
You overcome the withdrawal the same way you would from a drug, and what happens is, life becomes more colorful, richer, more interesting -- you have better conversations.
You really connect with the people who are there with you.
I think it's a fantastic strategy, and we know it works, because when people do this -- and I've tracked a lot of people who have tried this -- it expands.
They feel so good about it, they start doing it for the first hour of the day in the morning.
They start putting their phones on airplane mode on the weekend.
That way, your phone remains a camera, but it's no longer a phone.
It's a really powerful idea, and we know people feel much better about their lives when they do this.
So what's the take home here?
Screens are miraculous; I've already said that, and I feel that it's true.
But the way we use them is a lot like driving down a really fast, long road, and you're in a car where the accelerator is mashed to the floor, it's kind of hard to reach the brake pedal.
You've got a choice.
You can either glide by, past, say, the beautiful ocean scenes and take snaps out the window -- that's the easy thing to do -- or you can go out of your way to move the car to the side of the road, to push that brake pedal, to get out, take off your shoes and socks, take a couple of steps onto the sand, feel what the sand feels like under your feet, walk to the ocean, and let the ocean lap at your ankles.
Your life will be richer and more meaningful because you breathe in that experience, and because you've left your phone in the car.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a climate scientist, and I hate weather.
I have spent too much time in California, and I strongly feel that weather should be optional.
(Laughter) So I don't want to experience clouds, let alone study them.
But clouds seem to follow me wherever I go.
The thing is, clouds are a real challenge for climate science.
We don't know how they're going to react as the planet heats up, and hidden in that uncertainty might be hope.
Maybe, just maybe, clouds could slow down global warming, and buy us a little bit more time to get our act together, which would be very convenient right now.
I mean, even I could put up with a few more cloudy days if clouds saved the planet.
Now, we are sure about some things.
Carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas, we're emitting a lot of it, and the planet is heating up.
Case closed.
But I still go to work every day.
It turns out that there is a lot that we don't understand about climate change.
In particular, we haven't answered what seems to be a very fundamental question.
We know it's going to get hot, but we don't know exactly how hot it's going to get.
Now, this is a really easy question to answer if one of you would like to give me a time machine.
But I'm going to be honest with you: if I had a time machine, I would not be hanging out at this particular point in history.
So in order to see the future, we have to rely on the output of computer simulations -- climate models, like this one.
Now, in my line of work, I encounter many very charming people on the internet who like to tell me that climate models are all wrong.
And I would just like to say: no kidding!
Seriously? I get paid to complain about climate models.
But we don't want models to be perfect.
We want them to be useful.
I mean, think about it: a computer simulation that's able to exactly reproduce all of reality.
That's not a climate model; That's "The Matrix."
So, models are not crystal balls.
They're research tools, and the ways in which they're wrong can actually teach us a lot.
For example: different climate models are largely able to capture the warming that we've seen so far.
But fast-forward to the end of the century under a business-as-usual scenario, and climate models don't really agree anymore.
Yeah, they're all warming; that's just basic physics.
But some of them project catastrophe -- more than five times the warming we've seen already.
And others are literally more chill.
So why don't climate models agree on how warm it's going to get?
Well, to a large extent, it's because they don't agree on what clouds will do in the future.
And that is because, just like me, computers hate clouds.
Computers hate clouds because they're simultaneously very large and very small.
Clouds are formed when microscopic water droplets or ice crystals coalesce around tiny particles.
But at the same time, they cover two-thirds of the earth's surface.
In order to really accurately model clouds, we'd need to track the behavior of every water droplet and dust grain in the entire atmosphere, and there's no computer powerful enough to do that.
So instead, we have to make a trade-off: we can zoom in and get the details right, but have no idea what's going on worldwide; or, we could sacrifice realism at small scales in order to see the bigger picture.
Now, there's no one right answer, no perfect way to do this, and different climate models make different choices.
Now, it is unfortunate that computers struggle with clouds, because clouds are crucially important in regulating the temperature of the planet.
In fact, if all the clouds went away, we would experience profound climate changes.
But without clouds, would it be warmer or colder?
The answer is both.
So I'm going to be honest with you, I am not a cloud spotter.
My favorite type of cloud is none.
But even I know that clouds come in all shapes and sizes.
Low, thick clouds like these are really good at blocking out the sun and ruining your barbecue, and high, wispy clouds like these cirrus largely let that sunlight stream through.
Every sunny day is the same, but every cloudy day is cloudy in its own way.
And it's this diversity that can make the global impact of clouds very hard to understand.
So to see this global effect of clouds, it really helps to take a selfie.
It will never cease to blow my mind that we can see our planet from outer space, but we can't see all of it.
Clouds are blocking the view.
That's what they do.
These low, thick clouds are extremely effective sunshades.
They turn back about 20 percent of everything the sun sends us.
That is a lot of wasted solar power.
So, low clouds are powerful sunshades, making the planet cooler.
But that's not the only effect of clouds.
Our planet has a temperature, and like anything with a temperature, it's giving off heat.
We are radiating thermal energy away into space, and we can see this in the infrared.
Once again, clouds are blocking the view.
That's because high clouds live in the upper reaches of the atmosphere, where it's very cold.
And this means that they lose very little heat to space themselves.
But at the same time, they block the heat coming up from the planet below.
The earth is trying to cool itself off, and high clouds are getting in the way.
The result is a very powerful greenhouse effect.
So, clouds play this very large and dual role in the climate system.
We've got low clouds that act like a sunshade, cooling the planet, and high clouds which act like a greenhouse, warming the planet.
That sunshade -- it's a little bit more powerful.
So if we got rid of all the clouds tomorrow, which, for the record, I am not advocating, our planet would get warmer.
So clearly, all of the clouds are not going away.
But climate change is change.
So we can ask: How will global warming change clouds?
But remember, clouds are so important in regulating the earth's temperature, and they both warm and cool the planet.
So even small changes to cloud cover could have profound consequences.
So we might also ask: How will clouds change global warming?
And that is where there might be space for hope.
If global warming triggers cloud changes that make for a less powerful greenhouse or a more effective sunshade, then that would enhance the cooling power of clouds.
It would act in opposition to global warming, and that's what's happening in those climate models that project relatively muted warming.
But climate models struggle with clouds, and this uncertainty -- it goes both ways.
Clouds could help us out with global warming.
They could also make it worse.
Now, we know that climate change is happening because we can see it: rising temperatures, melting icecaps, shifts in rainfall patterns.
And you might think that we could also see it in the clouds.
But here's something else unfortunate: clouds are really hard to see.
I see everybody from the Pacific Northwest is like, "I have some suggestions for you."
(Laughter) And you guys, we have tried looking up.
(Laughter) But in order to do climate science, we need to see all of the clouds, everywhere, for a very long time.
And that's what makes it hard.
Now, nothing sees more clouds than a satellite -- not even a British person.
(Laughter) And fortunately, we do have satellite observations of clouds that, like me, date back to the 1980s.
But these satellites were designed for weather, not climate.
They weren't in it for the long haul.
So to get that long-term trend information, we need to do climate science.
We have to stitch together the output of multiple satellites with different viewing angles and orbits and carrying different camera equipment.
And as a result, there are gaps in our knowledge.
But even from this very cloudy picture, we're starting to get hints of a possible future.
When we looked at the observations, one thing jumped out at us: the clouds are moving.
As the planet's temperature increases, high clouds rise up.
They move to the colder upper reaches of the atmosphere, and this means that even as the planet heats up, high clouds don't.
They remain at roughly the same temperature.
So they are not losing more heat to space.
But at the same time, they're trapping more heat from the warming planet below.
This intensifies the greenhouse effect.
High clouds are making global warming worse.
Clouds are moving in other dimensions, too.
The atmospheric circulation, that large-scale motion of air and water in the atmosphere, is changing, and clouds are going with it.
On large scales, clouds seem to be moving from the tropics toward the poles.
It's kind of like your grandparents in reverse.
And this matters, because if your job is to block incoming sunlight, you are going to be much more effective in the tropics under that intense tropical sun than you are in higher latitudes.
So if this keeps up, this will also make global warming worse.
And what we have not found, despite years of looking, is any indication of the opposite.
There is no observational evidence that clouds will substantially slow down global warming.
The earth is not going to break its own fever.
Now, there are still uncertainties here.
We don't know for sure what the future holds.
But we are sending our kids there, and they are never coming back.
I want them to be prepared for what they'll face, and that is why it is so important to keep our earth-observing satellites up there and to hire diverse and smart and talented people who do not hate clouds to improve the climate models.
But uncertainty is not ignorance.
We don't know everything, but we don't know nothing, and we know what carbon dioxide does.
I started my career as an astrophysicist, so you can believe me when I say that this is the greatest place in the universe.
Other planets might have liquid water.
On earth, we have whiskey.
(Laughter) (Applause) We are so lucky to live here, but let's not push our luck.
I don't think that clouds will save the planet.
I think that's probably up to us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
At no point did I think superheroes would become such a huge part of my life.
As a kid, I looked at them, and I saw everything I wasn't.
They had big muscles, supermodel good looks, and phenomenal cosmic powers.
And me?
I kind of looked like this, except shorter and with frizzier hair, and I never felt powerful.
I was always just one big ball of nervous, soft energy, and superheroes, much like the bullies at school, didn't seem to have a lot of room for that, for me.
So I stayed away.
And besides, who needs superheroes when you're surrounded by Puerto Rican women from the Bronx?
(Laughter) My tas were cops and paramedics, my abuelas were seamstresses and sold jewelry up the street, and my mom got her master's degree in education and taught kindergarten in New York City public schools for over 30 years.
So my superheroes were sitting around the dinner table with me.
And I don't know how much time you've spent with Puerto Rican women from the Bronx, but we're also some of the world's greatest storytellers.
And I'd sit there at my grandmother's dining room table and I'd listen to the women in my family tell these wild, rambunctious tales about navigating their lives in the Bronx.
And I wanted to be them so bad.
But I wasn't tough like them either.
So mostly, I listened, and I soaked it in, and I found myself gravitating to the soft threads in their stories, and I wrote those down.
The funny, the goofy, the gentle -- those were my in to storytelling, so much so that I wrote a young-adult novel called "Juliet Takes a Breath," about a chubby, queer Puerto Rican girl from the Bronx navigating sexuality, family and identity.
And on the strength of "Juliet," Marvel Comics tapped me to write the solo series for their first-ever Latina lesbian superhero, America Chavez.
Yeah!
(Cheers) (Laughter) Listen, OK.
Created by Joe Casey and Nick Dragotta for the Marvel miniseries "Vengeance," America Chavez has been in the Marvel Universe for over seven years.
She's tough, Latina, and she's so strong that she can punch portals into other dimensions.
(Laughter) I know, right?
(Laughter) And people were so excited, because finally, someone who shared her identities -- queer and Latina -- would be writing her story.
And I saw that, right?
And also, when I looked at America, I saw a young Latina in survival mode.
See, because her moms had sacrificed themselves to the universe when she was a kid, and she'd been on her own ever since.
No wonder she had to be tough.
And that link, that link of having to be tough, that rested heavy with me.
Like I said, I'm from the Bronx, and the Bronx is tough, tough like walking past sidewalk memorials and dodging cop towers on your way to the train type of tough.
When stuff happens that's bad, people are like, "Yo, you gotta keep it moving. You gotta keep trucking.
Don't cry. Don't let it get to you."
And my mom and my tas and my abuelas, I never saw them take a moment to rest or to invest in self-care.
And their soft? It never left the house.
And so that was the first thing that I wanted to give to America, the thing that I wished I'd been able to give to my abuelas and my tas, the thing that I'm trying to give to my mom now: permission to be soft.
Like, it's OK to sit in silence and go on a journey just to discover yourself, and your pain will make you crumble and you will fall and you will need to ask people for help, and that's OK, and that being vulnerable is good for us.
But see, I didn't come to all this compassion and healing stuff like, you know, out of nowhere, and so when it came to America's story, I wanted to give her the space to be human, to mess up, and to find soft on her own.
So she kind of had to quit her day job. You know what I'm saying?
I had to give her a superhero sabbatical, (Laughter) and the first thing I did was enroll her in Justice Sonia Sotomayor University.
(Laughter) (Applause) Because where else would she feel safe and represented and liberated but a university dedicated to the first Puerto Rican woman nominated to the Supreme Court of the United States?
And her first class is "Intergalactic Revolutionaries and You," and America is so excited, she's ready to show off her strength, she's ready to show off her portal-punching skills, (Laughter) and I stripped that safety net from her right away.
And I limited her powers, and I changed up her location and shook up her world, because that is what college is like, (Laughter) especially if you're alone.
But I didn't want America to be alone for long, and so in a homework assignment gone totally wrong, she lands on a battlefield with the X-Men.
(Laughter) Because, when I was in college, the Reverend Kelly Brown Douglas was my mentor, and I knew that America Chavez needed one, too.
And who better to mentor America Chavez than Storm, the first black female superhero and one of the most powerful members of the X-Men?
Nobody, that's who.
(Laughter) And Storm teaches America how to quiet her mind inside of a star portal, and when America quiets her mind, she opens up the dimensions, and in that silence, she can listen for anything and anyone.
And no one has ever offered her silence and deep reflection as a way to be powerful.
And at first, she rejects it, but with Storm's encouragement, it clicks, and America quiets the world around her, and she leans into a deep vulnerability.
I mean, her and Storm even hug.
I know.
And that's because my mentors loved me enough to encourage me to investigate myself and my ancestors, and when you're 19, how do you even know what that means?
I didn't learn about the history of my people in college.
I learned about the history of my people sitting on my grandmother's lap when she pulled out the photo album and she named everyone that was here and everyone still left on the island.
So obviously, I had to crash-land a grandma on America Chavez, and not just any grandma -- a big, strong, luchador grandma, one that loved her enough to take her to the ancestral plain, where America Chavez could see the history of her people play out in the skies above.
And America gets to see Planeta Fuertona, the birth planet of her grandmother, and she sees it get invaded, and she sees her grandmother and her mom flee.
And she also sees the joy that they experience when their new homeland accepts them openly and offers them tremendous care.
She gets to see great pain met with even greater compassion, and that's right alongside the tremendous strength of her family.
And so everywhere that I could, right, I wrote her little love notes for her and for all the other queer kids of color trying to be magnificent.
Like, when you lose yourself, dig deep into your ancestry, because you will find the pieces there.
And also, reminders that soft is not a pass to duck, to hide, to be silent, to cower.
Soft is also a push to hold ourselves accountable.
Kind of like when America lands in World War II and comes face-to-face with Hitler, and she knocks him the hell out ...
(Laughter) just like Captain America did in 1941, and who knew we'd need America Chavez to punch Nazis in 2018.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) And even that, that justified act kind of wrecks her a little bit, so I made sure that she linked up with her best friend, and they talk feelings and they go on a road trip and they sing "Just a Girl" by No Doubt at the top of their lungs.
(Laughter) And when Midas, a sinister corporation, takes control of Sotomayor, threatens to ban portals and almost kills America ...
her ancestors reach for her ...
because they know that she needs to heal.
And it is that burst of care, that healing, that gives her the fuel to defeat Midas and reclaim herself.
See, because that myth of having to go it alone and having to be tough ...
doesn't serve us.
America Chavez is a whole superhero, and she still needed a team of support to help her find herself.
And she needed that gentleness, the type of gentleness that is rooted in compassion and still very much invested in justice and liberation.
Because it's in that space where softness and vulnerability meet strength that we transcend our everyday selves, that we become something greater, something majestic, maybe even something super.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Just over a year ago, for the third time in my life, I ceased to exist.
I was having a small operation, and my brain was filling with anesthetic.
I remember a sense of detachment and falling apart and a coldness.
And then I was back, drowsy and disoriented, but definitely there.
Now, when you wake from a deep sleep, you might feel confused about the time or anxious about oversleeping, but there's always a basic sense of time having passed, of a continuity between then and now.
Coming round from anesthesia is very different.
I could have been under for five minutes, five hours, five years or even 50 years.
I simply wasn't there.
It was total oblivion.
Anesthesia -- it's a modern kind of magic.
It turns people into objects, and then, we hope, back again into people.
And in this process is one of the greatest remaining mysteries in science and philosophy.
How does consciousness happen?
Somehow, within each of our brains, the combined activity of many billions of neurons, each one a tiny biological machine, is generating a conscious experience.
And not just any conscious experience -- your conscious experience right here and right now.
How does this happen?
Answering this question is so important because consciousness for each of us is all there is.
Without it there's no world, there's no self, there's nothing at all.
And when we suffer, we suffer consciously whether it's through mental illness or pain.
And if we can experience joy and suffering, what about other animals?
Might they be conscious, too?
Do they also have a sense of self?
And as computers get faster and smarter, maybe there will come a point, maybe not too far away, when my iPhone develops a sense of its own existence.
I actually think the prospects for a conscious AI are pretty remote.
And I think this because my research is telling me that consciousness has less to do with pure intelligence and more to do with our nature as living and breathing organisms.
Consciousness and intelligence are very different things.
You don't have to be smart to suffer, but you probably do have to be alive.
In the story I'm going to tell you, our conscious experiences of the world around us, and of ourselves within it, are kinds of controlled hallucinations that happen with, through and because of our living bodies.
Now, you might have heard that we know nothing about how the brain and body give rise to consciousness.
Some people even say it's beyond the reach of science altogether.
But in fact, the last 25 years have seen an explosion of scientific work in this area.
If you come to my lab at the University of Sussex, you'll find scientists from all different disciplines and sometimes even philosophers.
All of us together trying to understand how consciousness happens and what happens when it goes wrong.
And the strategy is very simple.
I'd like you to think about consciousness in the way that we've come to think about life.
At one time, people thought the property of being alive could not be explained by physics and chemistry -- that life had to be more than just mechanism.
But people no longer think that.
As biologists got on with the job of explaining the properties of living systems in terms of physics and chemistry -- things like metabolism, reproduction, homeostasis -- the basic mystery of what life is started to fade away, and people didn't propose any more magical solutions, like a force of life or an lan vital.
So as with life, so with consciousness.
Once we start explaining its properties in terms of things happening inside brains and bodies, the apparently insoluble mystery of what consciousness is should start to fade away.
At least that's the plan.
So let's get started.
What are the properties of consciousness?
What should a science of consciousness try to explain?
Well, for today I'd just like to think of consciousness in two different ways.
There are experiences of the world around us, full of sights, sounds and smells, there's multisensory, panoramic, 3D, fully immersive inner movie.
And then there's conscious self.
The specific experience of being you or being me.
The lead character in this inner movie, and probably the aspect of consciousness we all cling to most tightly.
Let's start with experiences of the world around us, and with the important idea of the brain as a prediction engine.
Imagine being a brain.
You're locked inside a bony skull, trying to figure what's out there in the world.
There's no lights inside the skull. There's no sound either.
All you've got to go on is streams of electrical impulses which are only indirectly related to things in the world, whatever they may be.
So perception -- figuring out what's there -- has to be a process of informed guesswork in which the brain combines these sensory signals with its prior expectations or beliefs about the way the world is to form its best guess of what caused those signals.
The brain doesn't hear sound or see light.
What we perceive is its best guess of what's out there in the world.
Let me give you a couple of examples of all this.
You might have seen this illusion before, but I'd like you to think about it in a new way.
If you look at those two patches, A and B, they should look to you to be very different shades of gray, right?
But they are in fact exactly the same shade.
And I can illustrate this.
If I put up a second version of the image here and join the two patches with a gray-colored bar, you can see there's no difference.
It's exactly the same shade of gray.
And if you still don't believe me, I'll bring the bar across and join them up.
It's a single colored block of gray, there's no difference at all.
This isn't any kind of magic trick.
It's the same shade of gray, but take it away again, and it looks different.
So what's happening here is that the brain is using its prior expectations built deeply into the circuits of the visual cortex that a cast shadow dims the appearance of a surface, so that we see B as lighter than it really is.
Here's one more example, which shows just how quickly the brain can use new predictions to change what we consciously experience.
Have a listen to this.
(Distorted voice) Sounded strange, right?
Have a listen again and see if you can get anything.
(Distorted voice) Still strange.
Now listen to this.
(Recording) Anil Seth: I think Brexit is a really terrible idea.
(Laughter) Which I do.
So you heard some words there, right?
Now listen to the first sound again. I'm just going to replay it.
(Distorted voice) Yeah? So you can now hear words there.
Once more for luck.
(Distorted voice) OK, so what's going on here?
The remarkable thing is the sensory information coming into the brain hasn't changed at all.
All that's changed is your brain's best guess of the causes of that sensory information.
And that changes what you consciously hear.
All this puts the brain basis of perception in a bit of a different light.
Instead of perception depending largely on signals coming into the brain from the outside world, it depends as much, if not more, on perceptual predictions flowing in the opposite direction.
We don't just passively perceive the world, we actively generate it.
The world we experience comes as much, if not more, from the inside out as from the outside in.
Let me give you one more example of perception as this active, constructive process.
Here we've combined immersive virtual reality with image processing to simulate the effects of overly strong perceptual predictions on experience.
In this panoramic video, we've transformed the world -- which is in this case Sussex campus -- into a psychedelic playground.
We've processed the footage using an algorithm based on Google's Deep Dream to simulate the effects of overly strong perceptual predictions.
In this case, to see dogs.
And you can see this is a very strange thing.
When perceptual predictions are too strong, as they are here, the result looks very much like the kinds of hallucinations people might report in altered states, or perhaps even in psychosis.
Now, think about this for a minute.
If hallucination is a kind of uncontrolled perception, then perception right here and right now is also a kind of hallucination, but a controlled hallucination in which the brain's predictions are being reined in by sensory information from the world.
In fact, we're all hallucinating all the time, including right now.
It's just that when we agree about our hallucinations, we call that reality.
(Laughter) Now I'm going to tell you that your experience of being a self, the specific experience of being you, is also a controlled hallucination generated by the brain.
This seems a very strange idea, right?
Yes, visual illusions might deceive my eyes, but how could I be deceived about what it means to be me?
For most of us, the experience of being a person is so familiar, so unified and so continuous that it's difficult not to take it for granted.
But we shouldn't take it for granted.
There are in fact many different ways we experience being a self.
There's the experience of having a body and of being a body.
There are experiences of perceiving the world from a first person point of view.
There are experiences of intending to do things and of being the cause of things that happen in the world.
And there are experiences of being a continuous and distinctive person over time, built from a rich set of memories and social interactions.
Many experiments show, and psychiatrists and neurologists know very well, that these different ways in which we experience being a self can all come apart.
What this means is the basic background experience of being a unified self is a rather fragile construction of the brain.
Another experience, which just like all others, requires explanation.
So let's return to the bodily self.
How does the brain generate the experience of being a body and of having a body?
Well, just the same principles apply.
The brain makes its best guess about what is and what is not part of its body.
And there's a beautiful experiment in neuroscience to illustrate this.
And unlike most neuroscience experiments, this is one you can do at home.
All you need is one of these.
(Laughter) And a couple of paintbrushes.
In the rubber hand illusion, a person's real hand is hidden from view, and that fake rubber hand is placed in front of them.
Then both hands are simultaneously stroked with a paintbrush while the person stares at the fake hand.
Now, for most people, after a while, this leads to the very uncanny sensation that the fake hand is in fact part of their body.
And the idea is that the congruence between seeing touch and feeling touch on an object that looks like hand and is roughly where a hand should be, is enough evidence for the brain to make its best guess that the fake hand is in fact part of the body.
(Laughter) So you can measure all kinds of clever things.
You can measure skin conductance and startle responses, but there's no need.
It's clear the guy in blue has assimilated the fake hand.
This means that even experiences of what our body is is a kind of best guessing -- a kind of controlled hallucination by the brain.
There's one more thing.
We don't just experience our bodies as objects in the world from the outside, we also experience them from within.
We all experience the sense of being a body from the inside.
And sensory signals coming from the inside of the body are continually telling the brain about the state of the internal organs, how the heart is doing, what the blood pressure is like, lots of things.
This kind of perception, which we call interoception, is rather overlooked.
But it's critically important because perception and regulation of the internal state of the body -- well, that's what keeps us alive.
Here's another version of the rubber hand illusion.
This is from our lab at Sussex.
And here, people see a virtual reality version of their hand, which flashes red and back either in time or out of time with their heartbeat.
And when it's flashing in time with their heartbeat, people have a stronger sense that it's in fact part of their body.
So experiences of having a body are deeply grounded in perceiving our bodies from within.
There's one last thing I want to draw your attention to, which is that experiences of the body from the inside are very different from experiences of the world around us.
When I look around me, the world seems full of objects -- tables, chairs, rubber hands, people, you lot -- even my own body in the world, I can perceive it as an object from the outside.
But my experiences of the body from within, they're not like that at all.
I don't perceive my kidneys here, my liver here, my spleen ...
I don't know where my spleen is, but it's somewhere.
I don't perceive my insides as objects.
In fact, I don't experience them much at all unless they go wrong.
And this is important, I think.
Perception of the internal state of the body isn't about figuring out what's there, it's about control and regulation -- keeping the physiological variables within the tight bounds that are compatible with survival.
When the brain uses predictions to figure out what's there, we perceive objects as the causes of sensations.
When the brain uses predictions to control and regulate things, we experience how well or how badly that control is going.
So our most basic experiences of being a self, of being an embodied organism, are deeply grounded in the biological mechanisms that keep us alive.
And when we follow this idea all the way through, we can start to see that all of our conscious experiences, since they all depend on the same mechanisms of predictive perception, all stem from this basic drive to stay alive.
We experience the world and ourselves with, through and because of our living bodies.
Let me bring things together step-by-step.
What we consciously see depends on the brain's best guess of what's out there.
Our experienced world comes from the inside out, not just the outside in.
The rubber hand illusion shows that this applies to our experiences of what is and what is not our body.
And these self-related predictions depend critically on sensory signals coming from deep inside the body.
And finally, experiences of being an embodied self are more about control and regulation than figuring out what's there.
So our experiences of the world around us and ourselves within it -- well, they're kinds of controlled hallucinations that have been shaped over millions of years of evolution to keep us alive in worlds full of danger and opportunity.
We predict ourselves into existence.
Now, I leave you with three implications of all this.
First, just as we can misperceive the world, we can misperceive ourselves when the mechanisms of prediction go wrong.
Understanding this opens many new opportunities in psychiatry and neurology, because we can finally get at the mechanisms rather than just treating the symptoms in conditions like depression and schizophrenia.
Second: what it means to be me cannot be reduced to or uploaded to a software program running on a robot, however smart or sophisticated.
We are biological, flesh-and-blood animals whose conscious experiences are shaped at all levels by the biological mechanisms that keep us alive.
Just making computers smarter is not going to make them sentient.
Finally, our own individual inner universe, our way of being conscious, is just one possible way of being conscious.
And even human consciousness generally -- it's just a tiny region in a vast space of possible consciousnesses.
Our individual self and worlds are unique to each of us, but they're all grounded in biological mechanisms shared with many other living creatures.
Now, these are fundamental changes in how we understand ourselves, but I think they should be celebrated, because as so often in science, from Copernicus -- we're not at the center of the universe -- to Darwin -- we're related to all other creatures -- to the present day.
With a greater sense of understanding comes a greater sense of wonder, and a greater realization that we are part of and not apart from the rest of nature.
And ...
when the end of consciousness comes, there's nothing to be afraid of.
Nothing at all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
About once every century, a massive star somewhere in our galaxy runs out of fuel.
This happens after millions of years of heat and pressure have fused the stars hydrogen into heavier elements like helium, carbon, and nitrogen all the way to iron.
No longer able to produce sufficient energy to maintain its structure, it collapses under its own gravitational pressure and explodes in a supernova.
The star shoots most of its innards into space, seeding the galaxy with heavy elements.
But what this cataclysmic eruption leaves behind might be even more remarkable: a ball of matter so dense that atomic electrons collapse from their quantum orbits into the depths of atomic nuclei.
The death of that star is the birth of a neutron star: one of the densest known objects in the universe, and a laboratory for the strange physics of supercondensed matter.
But what is a neutron star?
Think of a compact ball inside of which protons and electrons fuse into neutrons and form a frictionless liquid called a superfluid surrounded by a crust.
This material is incredibly dense  the equivalent of the mass of a fully-loaded container ship squeezed into a human hair, or the mass of Mount Everest in a space of a sugar cube.
Deeper in the crust, the neutron superfluid forms different phases that physicists call nuclear pasta, as its squeezed from lasagna to spaghetti-like shapes.
The massive precursors to neutron stars often spin.
When they collapse, stars that are typically millions of kilometers wide compress down to neutron stars that are only about 25 kilometers across.
But the original stars angular momentum is preserved.
So for the same reason that a figure skaters spin accelerates when they bring in their arms, the neutron star spins much more rapidly than its parent.
The fastest neutron star on record rotates over 700 times every second, which means that a point on its surface whirls through space at more than a fifth of the speed of light.
Neutron stars also have the strongest magnetic field of any known object.
This magnetic concentration forms vortexes that radiate beams from the magnetic poles.
Since the poles arent always aligned with the rotational axis of the star, the beams spin like lighthouse beacons, which appear to blink when viewed from Earth.
We call those pulsars.
The detection of one of these tantalizing flashing signals by astrophysicist Jocelyn Bell in 1967 was in fact the way we indirectly discovered neutron stars in the first place.
An aging neutron stars furious rotation slows over a period of billions of years as it radiates away its energy in the form of electromagnetic and gravity waves.
But not all neutron stars disappear so quietly.
For example, weve observed binary systems where a neutron star co-orbits another star.
A neutron star can feed on a lighter companion, gorging on its more loosely bound atmosphere before eventually collapsing cataclysmically into a black hole.
While many stars exist as binary systems, only a small percentage of those end up as neutron-star binaries, where two neutron stars circle each other in a waltz doomed to end as a merger.
When they finally collide, they send gravity waves through space-time like ripples from a stone thrown into a calm lake.
Einsteins theory of General Relativity predicted this phenomenon over 100 years ago, but it wasn't directly verified until 2017, when gravitational-wave observatories LIGO and VIRGO observed a neutron star collision.
Other telescopes picked up a burst of gamma rays and a flash of light, and, later, x-rays and radio signals, all from the same impact.
That became the most studied event in the history of astronomy.
It yielded a treasure trove of data thats helped pin down the speed of gravity, bolster important theories in astrophysics, and provide evidence for the origin of heavy elements like gold and platinum.
Neutron stars havent given up all their secrets yet.
LIGO and VIRGO are being upgraded to detect more collisions.
Thatll help us learn what else the spectacular demise of these dense, pulsating, spinning magnets can tell us about the universe.
In ancient Greece, when anyone from slaves to soldiers, poets and politicians, needed to make a big decision on life's most important questions, like, "Should I get married?"
or "Should we embark on this voyage?"
or "Should our army advance into this territory?"
they all consulted the oracle.
So this is how it worked: you would bring her a question and you would get on your knees, and then she would go into this trance.
It would take a couple of days, and then eventually she would come out of it, giving you her predictions as your answer.
From the oracle bones of ancient China to ancient Greece to Mayan calendars, people have craved for prophecy in order to find out what's going to happen next.
And that's because we all want to make the right decision.
We don't want to miss something.
The future is scary, so it's much nicer knowing that we can make a decision with some assurance of the outcome.
Well, we have a new oracle, and it's name is big data, or we call it "Watson" or "deep learning" or "neural net."
And these are the kinds of questions we ask of our oracle now, like, "What's the most efficient way to ship these phones from China to Sweden?"
Or, "What are the odds of my child being born with a genetic disorder?"
Or, "What are the sales volume we can predict for this product?"
I have a dog. Her name is Elle, and she hates the rain.
And I have tried everything to untrain her.
But because I have failed at this, I also have to consult an oracle, called Dark Sky, every time before we go on a walk, for very accurate weather predictions in the next 10 minutes.
She's so sweet.
So because of all of this, our oracle is a $122 billion industry.
Now, despite the size of this industry, the returns are surprisingly low.
Investing in big data is easy, but using it is hard.
Over 73 percent of big data projects aren't even profitable, and I have executives coming up to me saying, "We're experiencing the same thing.
We invested in some big data system, and our employees aren't making better decisions.
And they're certainly not coming up with more breakthrough ideas."
So this is all really interesting to me, because I'm a technology ethnographer.
I study and I advise companies on the patterns of how people use technology, and one of my interest areas is data.
So why is having more data not helping us make better decisions, especially for companies who have all these resources to invest in these big data systems?
Why isn't it getting any easier for them?
So, I've witnessed the struggle firsthand.
In 2009, I started a research position with Nokia.
And at the time, Nokia was one of the largest cell phone companies in the world, dominating emerging markets like China, Mexico and India -- all places where I had done a lot of research on how low-income people use technology.
And I spent a lot of extra time in China getting to know the informal economy.
So I did things like working as a street vendor selling dumplings to construction workers.
Or I did fieldwork, spending nights and days in internet cafs, hanging out with Chinese youth, so I could understand how they were using games and mobile phones and using it between moving from the rural areas to the cities.
Through all of this qualitative evidence that I was gathering, I was starting to see so clearly that a big change was about to happen among low-income Chinese people.
Even though they were surrounded by advertisements for luxury products like fancy toilets -- who wouldn't want one? -- and apartments and cars, through my conversations with them, I found out that the ads the actually enticed them the most were the ones for iPhones, promising them this entry into this high-tech life.
And even when I was living with them in urban slums like this one, I saw people investing over half of their monthly income into buying a phone, and increasingly, they were "shanzhai," which are affordable knock-offs of iPhones and other brands.
They're very usable.
Does the job.
And after years of living with migrants and working with them and just really doing everything that they were doing, I started piecing all these data points together -- from the things that seem random, like me selling dumplings, to the things that were more obvious, like tracking how much they were spending on their cell phone bills.
And I was able to create this much more holistic picture of what was happening.
And that's when I started to realize that even the poorest in China would want a smartphone, and that they would do almost anything to get their hands on one.
You have to keep in mind, iPhones had just come out, it was 2009, so this was, like, eight years ago, and Androids had just started looking like iPhones.
And a lot of very smart and realistic people said, "Those smartphones -- that's just a fad.
Who wants to carry around these heavy things where batteries drain quickly and they break every time you drop them?"
But I had a lot of data, and I was very confident about my insights, so I was very excited to share them with Nokia.
But Nokia was not convinced, because it wasn't big data.
They said, "We have millions of data points, and we don't see any indicators of anyone wanting to buy a smartphone, and your data set of 100, as diverse as it is, is too weak for us to even take seriously."
And I said, "Nokia, you're right.
Of course you wouldn't see this, because you're sending out surveys assuming that people don't know what a smartphone is, so of course you're not going to get any data back about people wanting to buy a smartphone in two years.
Your surveys, your methods have been designed to optimize an existing business model, and I'm looking at these emergent human dynamics that haven't happened yet.
We're looking outside of market dynamics so that we can get ahead of it."
Well, you know what happened to Nokia?
Their business fell off a cliff.
This -- this is the cost of missing something.
It was unfathomable.
But Nokia's not alone.
I see organizations throwing out data all the time because it didn't come from a quant model or it doesn't fit in one.
But it's not big data's fault.
It's the way we use big data; it's our responsibility.
Big data's reputation for success comes from quantifying very specific environments, like electricity power grids or delivery logistics or genetic code, when we're quantifying in systems that are more or less contained.
But not all systems are as neatly contained.
When you're quantifying and systems are more dynamic, especially systems that involve human beings, forces are complex and unpredictable, and these are things that we don't know how to model so well.
Once you predict something about human behavior, new factors emerge, because conditions are constantly changing.
That's why it's a never-ending cycle.
You think you know something, and then something unknown enters the picture.
And that's why just relying on big data alone increases the chance that we'll miss something, while giving us this illusion that we already know everything.
And what makes it really hard to see this paradox and even wrap our brains around it is that we have this thing that I call the quantification bias, which is the unconscious belief of valuing the measurable over the immeasurable.
And we often experience this at our work.
Maybe we work alongside colleagues who are like this, or even our whole entire company may be like this, where people become so fixated on that number, that they can't see anything outside of it, even when you present them evidence right in front of their face.
And this is a very appealing message, because there's nothing wrong with quantifying; it's actually very satisfying.
I get a great sense of comfort from looking at an Excel spreadsheet, even very simple ones.
(Laughter) It's just kind of like, "Yes! The formula worked. It's all OK. Everything is under control."
But the problem is that quantifying is addictive.
And when we forget that and when we don't have something to kind of keep that in check, it's very easy to just throw out data because it can't be expressed as a numerical value.
It's very easy just to slip into silver-bullet thinking, as if some simple solution existed.
Because this is a great moment of danger for any organization, because oftentimes, the future we need to predict -- it isn't in that haystack, but it's that tornado that's bearing down on us outside of the barn.
There is no greater risk than being blind to the unknown.
It can cause you to make the wrong decisions.
It can cause you to miss something big.
But we don't have to go down this path.
It turns out that the oracle of ancient Greece holds the secret key that shows us the path forward.
Now, recent geological research has shown that the Temple of Apollo, where the most famous oracle sat, was actually built over two earthquake faults.
And these faults would release these petrochemical fumes from underneath the Earth's crust, and the oracle literally sat right above these faults, inhaling enormous amounts of ethylene gas, these fissures.
(Laughter) It's true.
(Laughter) It's all true, and that's what made her babble and hallucinate and go into this trance-like state.
She was high as a kite!
(Laughter) So how did anyone -- How did anyone get any useful advice out of her in this state?
Well, you see those people surrounding the oracle?
You see those people holding her up, because she's, like, a little woozy?
And you see that guy on your left-hand side holding the orange notebook?
Well, those were the temple guides, and they worked hand in hand with the oracle.
When inquisitors would come and get on their knees, that's when the temple guides would get to work, because after they asked her questions, they would observe their emotional state, and then they would ask them follow-up questions, like, "Why do you want to know this prophecy? Who are you?
What are you going to do with this information?"
And then the temple guides would take this more ethnographic, this more qualitative information, and interpret the oracle's babblings.
So the oracle didn't stand alone, and neither should our big data systems.
Now to be clear, I'm not saying that big data systems are huffing ethylene gas, or that they're even giving invalid predictions.
The total opposite.
But what I am saying is that in the same way that the oracle needed her temple guides, our big data systems need them, too.
They need people like ethnographers and user researchers who can gather what I call thick data.
This is precious data from humans, like stories, emotions and interactions that cannot be quantified.
It's the kind of data that I collected for Nokia that comes in in the form of a very small sample size, but delivers incredible depth of meaning.
And what makes it so thick and meaty is the experience of understanding the human narrative.
And that's what helps to see what's missing in our models.
Thick data grounds our business questions in human questions, and that's why integrating big and thick data forms a more complete picture.
Big data is able to offer insights at scale and leverage the best of machine intelligence, whereas thick data can help us rescue the context loss that comes from making big data usable, and leverage the best of human intelligence.
And when you actually integrate the two, that's when things get really fun, because then you're no longer just working with data you've already collected.
You get to also work with data that hasn't been collected.
You get to ask questions about why: Why is this happening?
Now, when Netflix did this, they unlocked a whole new way to transform their business.
Netflix is known for their really great recommendation algorithm, and they had this $1 million prize for anyone who could improve it.
And there were winners.
But Netflix discovered the improvements were only incremental.
So to really find out what was going on, they hired an ethnographer, Grant McCracken, to gather thick data insights.
And what he discovered was something that they hadn't seen initially in the quantitative data.
He discovered that people loved to binge-watch.
In fact, people didn't even feel guilty about it.
They enjoyed it.
(Laughter) So Netflix was like, "Oh. This is a new insight."
So they went to their data science team, and they were able to scale this big data insight in with their quantitative data.
And once they verified it and validated it, Netflix decided to do something very simple but impactful.
They said, instead of offering the same show from different genres or more of the different shows from similar users, we'll just offer more of the same show.
We'll make it easier for you to binge-watch.
And they didn't stop there.
They did all these things to redesign their entire viewer experience, to really encourage binge-watching.
It's why people and friends disappear for whole weekends at a time, catching up on shows like "Master of None."
By integrating big data and thick data, they not only improved their business, but they transformed how we consume media.
And now their stocks are projected to double in the next few years.
But this isn't just about watching more videos or selling more smartphones.
For some, integrating thick data insights into the algorithm could mean life or death, especially for the marginalized.
All around the country, police departments are using big data for predictive policing, to set bond amounts and sentencing recommendations in ways that reinforce existing biases.
NSA's Skynet machine learning algorithm has possibly aided in the deaths of thousands of civilians in Pakistan from misreading cellular device metadata.
As all of our lives become more automated, from automobiles to health insurance or to employment, it is likely that all of us will be impacted by the quantification bias.
Now, the good news is that we've come a long way from huffing ethylene gas to make predictions.
We have better tools, so let's just use them better.
Let's integrate the big data with the thick data.
Let's bring our temple guides with the oracles, and whether this work happens in companies or nonprofits or government or even in the software, all of it matters, because that means we're collectively committed to making better data, better algorithms, better outputs and better decisions.
This is how we'll avoid missing that something.
(Applause)
If you've been thinking about US politics and trying to make sense of it for the last year or so, you might have hit on something like the following three propositions: one, US partisanship has never been so bad before; two, for the first time, it's geographically spatialized -- we're divided between the coasts, which want to look outwards, and the center of the country, which wants to look inwards; and third, there's nothing we can do about it.
I'm here to today to say that all three of these propositions, all of which sound reasonable, are not true.
In fact, our US partisanship goes all the way back to the very beginning of the republic.
It was geographically spatialized in almost eerily the same way that it is today, and it often has been throughout US history.
And last, and by far most importantly, we actually have an extraordinary mechanism that's designed to help us manage factional disagreement and partisanship.
That technology is the Constitution.
And this is an evolving, subtly, supplely designed entity that has the specific purpose of teaching us how to manage factional disagreement where it's possible to do that, and giving us techniques for overcoming that disagreement when that's possible.
Now, in order to tell you the story, I want to go back to a pivotal moment in US history, and that is the moment when factional disagreement and partisanship was born.
There actually was a birth moment -- a moment in US history when partisanship snapped into place.
The person who's at the core of that story is James Madison.
And at the moment that this began, James Madison was riding high.
He himself was the Einstein of not only the US Constitution, but of constitutional thought more globally, and, to give him his due, he knew it.
In a period of time of just three years, from 1785 to 1788, he had conceived, theorized, designed, passed and gotten ratified the US Constitution.
And just to give you some sense of the enormity of what that accomplishment actually was, although Madison couldn't have known it at the time, today that same constitutional technology that he invented is still in use not only in the US, but, 230 years later, in places like Canada, India, South Africa, Brazil.
So in an extraordinary range of contexts all over the world, this technology is still the dominant, most used, most effective technology to manage governance.
In that moment, Madison believed that, having solved this problem, the country would run smoothly, and that he had designed a technology that would minimize the results of factions so there would be no political parties.
Remarkably, he thought he had designed a constitution that was against political parties and would make them unnecessary.
He had gotten an enormous degree of help in the final marketing phase of his constitutional project from a man you may have heard of, called Alexander Hamilton.
Now, Hamilton was everything Madison was not.
He was passionate, where Madison was restrained.
He was pansexual, where Madison didn't speak to a woman except for once until he was 42 years old, and then married Dolley and lived happily ever after for 40 years.
(Laughter) To put it bluntly, Hamilton's the kind of person about whom you would write a hip-hop musical -- (Laughter) and Madison is the kind of person about whom you would not write a hip-hop musical.
(Laughter) Or indeed, a musical of any kind at all.
But together, they had become a rather unlikely pairing, and they had produced the Federalist Papers, which offered a justification and, as I mentioned, a marketing plan for the Constitution, which had been wildly effective and wildly successful.
Once the new government was in place, Hamilton became Secretary of the Treasury, and he had a very specific idea in mind.
And that was to do for financial institutions and infrastructure exactly what Madison had done for constitutions.
Again, his contemporaries all knew it.
One of them told Madison, who can't have liked it very much, that Hamilton was the Newton of infrastructure.
The idea was pretty straightforward.
Hamilton would give the United States a national bank, a permanent national debt -- he said it would be "immortal," his phrase -- and a manufacturing policy that would enable trade and manufacturing rather than agriculture, which was where the country's primary wealth had historically been.
Madison went utterly ballistic.
And in this pivotal, critical decision, instead of just telling the world that his old friend Hamilton was wrong and was adopting the wrong policies, he actually began to argue that Hamilton's ideas were unconstitutional -- that they violated the very nature of the Constitution that the two of them had drafted together.
Hamilton responded the way you would expect.
He declared Madison to be his "personal and political enemy" -- these are his words.
So these two founders who had been such close friends and such close allies and such partners, then began to produce enmity.
And they did it in the good, old-fashioned way.
First, they founded political parties.
Madison created a party originally called the Democratic Republican Party -- "Republican" for short -- and Hamilton created a party called the Federalist Party.
Those two parties adopted positions on national politics that were extreme and exaggerated.
To give you a clear example: Madison, who had always believed that the country would have some manufacturing and some trade and some agriculture, began attacking Hamilton as a kind of tool of the financial markets whom Hamilton himself intended to put in charge of the country.
That was an overstatement, but it was something Madison came to believe.
He also attacked city life, and he said that the coasts were corrupt, and what people needed to do was to look inwards to the center of the country, to farmers, who were the essence of Republican virtue, and they should go back to the values that had made American great, specifically the values of the Revolution, and those were the values of low taxes, agriculture and less trade.
Hamilton responded to this by saying that Madison was nave, that he was childish, and that his goal was to turn the United States into a primitive autarchy, self-reliant and completely ineffectual on the global scale.
(Laughter) They both meant it, and there was some truth to each of their claims, because each side was grossly exaggerating the views of the other in order to fight their war.
They founded newspapers, and so for the first time in US history, the news that people received came entirely through the lens of either the Republican or the Federalist party.
How does this end?
Well, as it turned out, the Constitution did its work.
But it did its work in surprising ways that Madison himself had not fully anticipated.
First, there was a series of elections.
And the first two times out of the box, the Federalists destroyed the Republicans.
Madison was astonished.
Of course, he blamed the press.
(Laughter) And in a rather innovative view -- Madison never failed to innovate when he thought about anything -- he said the reason that the press was so pro-Federalist is that the advertisers were all Federalists, because they were traders on the coasts who got their capital from Britain, which Federalism was in bed with.
That was his initial explanation.
But despite the fact that the Federalists, once in power, actually enacted laws that criminalized criticism of the government -- that happened in the United States -- nevertheless, the Republicans fought back, and Madison began to emphasize the freedom of speech, which he had built into the Bill of Rights, and the capacity of civil society to organize.
And sure enough, nationally, small local groups -- they were called Democratic-Republican Societies -- began to form and protest against Federalist-dominated hegemony.
Eventually, the Republicans managed to win a national election -- that was in 1800.
Madison became the Secretary of State, his friend and mentor Jefferson became president, and they actually, over time, managed to put the Federalists completely out of business.
That was their goal.
Now, why did that happen?
It happened because in the structure of the Constitution were several features that actually managed faction the way there were supposed to do in the first place.
What were those?
One -- most important of all -- the freedom of speech.
This was an innovative idea at the time.
Namely, that if you were out of power, you could still say that the government was terrible.
Two, civil society organization.
The capacity to put together private groups, individuals, political parties and others who would organize to try to bring about fundamental change.
Perhaps most significantly was the separation of powers -- an extraordinary component of the Constitution.
The thing about the separation of powers is that it did then and it does now, drive governance to the center.
You can get elected to office in the United States with help from the periphery, right or left.
It turns out, you actually can't govern unless you bring on board the center.
There are midterm elections that come incredibly fast after a presidency begins.
Those drive presidents towards the center.
There's a structure in which the president, in fact, does not rule or even govern, but can only propose laws which other people have to agree with -- another feature that tends to drive presidents who actually want to get things done to the center.
And a glance at the newspapers today will reveal to you that these principles are still completely in operation.
No matter how a president gets elected, the president cannot get anything done unless the president first of all follows the rules of the Constitution, because if not, the courts will stand up, as indeed has sometimes occurred, not only recently, but in the past, in US history.
And furthermore, the president needs people, elected officials who know they need to win election from centrist voters, also to back his or her policies in order to pass laws.
Without it, nothing much happens.
The takeaway of this brief excursus into the history of partisanship, then, is the following: partisanship is real; it's profound; it's extraordinarily powerful, and it's terribly upsetting.
But the design of the Constitution is greater than partisanship.
It enables us to manage partisanship when that's possible, and it enables us actually to overcome partisan division and produce compromise, when and only when that is possible.
A technology like that is a technology that worked for the founders, it worked for their grandchildren, it didn't work at the moment of the Civil War, but then it started working again.
And it worked for our grandparents, our parents, and it's going to work for us.
(Applause) So what you should do is really simple.
Stand up for what you believe in, support the organizations that you care about, speak out on the issues that matter to you, get involved, make change, express you opinion, and do it with respect and knowledge and confidence that it's only by working together that the constitutional technology can do the job that it is designed to do.
Stand up for what you believe, but take a deep breath while you do it.
It's going to be OK.
Thanks.
(Applause)
I had a fire nine days ago.
My archive: 175 films, my 16-millimeter negative, all my books, my dad's books, my photographs.
I'd collected -- I was a collector, major, big-time.
It's gone.
I just looked at it, and I didn't know what to do.
I mean, this was -- was I my things?
I always live in the present -- I love the present.
I cherish the future.
And I was taught some strange thing as a kid, like, you've got to make something good out of something bad.
You've got to make something good out of something bad.
This was bad! Man, I was -- I cough. I was sick.
That's my camera lens. The first one -- the one I shot my Bob Dylan film with 35 years ago.
That's my feature film. "King, Murray" won Cannes Film Festival 1970 -- the only print I had.
That's my papers.
That was in minutes -- 20 minutes.
Epiphany hit me. Something hit me.
"You've got to make something good out of something bad," I started to say to my friends, neighbors, my sister.
By the way, that's "Sputnik." I ran it last year.
"Sputnik" was downtown, the negative. It wasn't touched.
These are some pieces of things I used in my Sputnik feature film, which opens in New York in two weeks downtown.
I called my sister. I called my neighbors. I said, "Come dig."
That's me at my desk.
That was a desk took 40-some years to build.
You know -- all the stuff.
That's my daughter, Jean.
She came. She's a nurse in San Francisco.
"Dig it up," I said. "Pieces.
I want pieces. Bits and pieces."
I came up with this idea: a life of bits and pieces, which I'm just starting to work on -- my next project.
That's my sister. She took care of pictures, because I was a big collector of snapshot photography that I believed said a lot.
And those are some of the pictures that -- something was good about the burnt pictures.
I didn't know. I looked at that -- I said, "Wow, is that better than the --" That's my proposal on Jimmy Doolittle. I made that movie for television.
It's the only copy I had. Pieces of it.
Idea about women.
So I started to say, "Hey, man, you are too much!
You could cry about this." I really didn't.
I just instead said, "I'm going to make something out of it, and maybe next year ... " And I appreciate this moment to come up on this stage with so many people who've already given me so much solace, and just say to TEDsters: I'm proud of me. That I take something bad, I turn it, and I'm going to make something good out of this, all these pieces.
That's Arthur Leipzig's original photograph I loved.
I was a big record collector -- the records didn't make it. Boy, I tell you, film burns. Film burns.
I mean, this was 16-millimeter safety film.
The negatives are gone.
That's my father's letter to me, telling me to marry the woman I first married when I was 20.
That's my daughter and me.
She's still there. She's there this morning, actually.
That's my house.
My family's living in the Hilton Hotel in Scotts Valley.
That's my wife, Heidi, who didn't take it as well as I did.
My children, Davey and Henry.
My son, Davey, in the hotel two nights ago.
So, my message to you folks, from my three minutes, is that I appreciate the chance to share this with you. I will be back. I love being at TED.
I came to live it, and I am living it.
That's my view from my window outside of Santa Cruz, in Bonny Doon, just 35 miles from here.
Thank you everybody.
(Applause)
I'd like to introduce you to my mom.
(Laughter) I'm guessing that's not what you expected, and it's not what I expected either, and thank goodness I realized that an Asian man was not my mom before I hugged him, because that would have been so awkward.
Recognizing people isn't one of my strengths due to a genetic visual impairment that has no correction or cure.
As a result, I am legally blind, though I prefer "partially sighted" because it's more optimistic.
(Laughter) And I'm entitled to the label "disabled."
I hate the word disabled when it's used to describe people.
It detonates a mindset of less than that utterly disregards capacity, ability, potential, instead prioritizing brokenness and lack.
The perspective can be overt.
What can't he do for himself that I'm going to have to do for him?
She'll probably need some accommodation that no other employee at this business needs.
Sometimes, the hidden bias is so sweetly conveyed.
"Wow, Susan, look at everything you've done in your career and your life.
How did you do all of that and be visually impaired?"
(Laughter) I fail at being disabled.
(Laughter) So in the spirit of incentivizing the rampant failure of people all over the world and enticing the so-called normal to just give it a rest already, here are five tips to fail at being disabled.
Tip one: know your superpowers.
The best team I ever led in my career was based on superpowers, and we even gave ourselves fancy-pantsy titles like "the Pillar of Masterly Acumen."
"The Biscuit Butterer."
(Laughter) "The Voice of Reason."
Because we relied on our strengths, our best strengths, we achieved tremendous outcomes.
The trait that prevents me from recognizing my mom allows me to smoothly adapt, to quickly absorb and accurately process an exhausting volume of cues, tease out what's important, determine multiple processes or potentials for any situation that I'm in, and then select the one that makes the most sense, all in a matter of seconds.
I see what other people do not.
Some people think that's a superpower, but my real superpowers are ricocheting off of glass walls -- (Laughter) and letting my friends walk around with kale in their teeth.
(Laughter) It's true. Don't have lunch with me, or dinner.
Tip two: be supremely skilled, supremely skilled at getting it wrong.
It is important to be as equally confident in your superpowers as you are in you FUBARs.
That's "effed up beyond all recognition" for you millennials.
(Laughter) Here's a good example.
It is not a great idea to say, "Don't worry, everything in here is too small for me to see" when you accidentally walk into the men's room -- (Laughter) at one of the world's largest sporting arenas -- (Laughter) or anywhere.
I really wish that one wasn't true.
I'm serious. It is better to just walk out and let them think you're drunk.
(Laughter) Tip three: know that everyone is disabled in some way, like when you have a cold and you can't smell and you realize that the milk that you splashed in your coffee was sour only after you've tasted it.
Very recently, a woman walked up to me frantic.
She could not find the bakery she was looking for.
As I motioned in the direction I thought she should go, saying, "There are no stores on this side of the street so your best bet is to cross --" "Oh my goodness," she interrupted.
"There it is.
All I needed was another set of eyes."
(Laughter) I just let her have it.
I would have said that, you know, being logical and paying attention and staying calm would have done the trick, but who am I?
Tip four: point out the disability in others.
This one is best reserved -- very important note -- this one is best reserved for people you know well, because random strangers typically don't appreciate teachable moments.
A few years ago, my parents and I went to see the Rockettes, Radio City's high-kicking dancers.
I leaned over to my dad.
"The two Rockettes on the left aren't kicking in a straight line."
"Yes, they are."
"No, they're not."
"Yes, they are, and how do you know?
You can't see."
But I know what a straight line looks like.
I had snapped a picture during our back and forth and presented him the evidence that proved I was right.
He looked at the picture.
I leaned in further.
"Who's disabled now?"
Tip five: pursue audacious goals.
Flip expectation upside down and shove limitation off a cliff to meet its demise.
There is a college football linebacker who blitzes, tackles, recovers fumbles while having one hand.
There is a teacher who successfully transfers knowledge and inspires countless students while living with Down syndrome.
And for me, on my long list, to cycle from Kathmandu, Nepal, to Darjeeling, India on the backseat of a bicycle built for two.
It will be an exciting 620-mile adventure, and I'm sure I will have the blurry photos to show for it.
(Laughter) Oh, before we go on, I forgot to introduce you to my mom.
I need to do that.
And here she is, as she would appear to me if I were looking through a crowd of people looking for her.
Or is that an Asian man?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Cancer.
Many of us have lost family, friends or loved ones to this horrible disease.
I know there are some of you in the audience who are cancer survivors, or who are fighting cancer at this moment.
My heart goes out to you.
While this word often conjures up emotions of sadness and anger and fear, I bring you good news from the front lines of cancer research.
The fact is, we are starting to win the war on cancer.
In fact, we lie at the intersection of the three of the most exciting developments within cancer research.
The first is cancer genomics.
The genome is a composition of all the genetic information encoded by DNA in an organism.
In cancers, changes in the DNA called mutations are what drive these cancers to go out of control.
Around 10 years ago, I was part of the team at Johns Hopkins that first mapped the mutations of cancers.
We did this first for colorectal, breast, pancreatic and brain cancers.
And since then, there have been over 90 projects in 70 countries all over the world, working to understand the genetic basis of these diseases.
Today, tens of thousands of cancers are understood down to exquisite molecular detail.
The second revolution is precision medicine, also known as "personalized medicine."
Instead of one-size-fits-all methods to be able to treat cancers, there is a whole new class of drugs that are able to target cancers based on their unique genetic profile.
Today, there are a host of these tailor-made drugs, called targeted therapies, available to physicians even today to be able to personalize their therapy for their patients, and many others are in development.
The third exciting revolution is immunotherapy, and this is really exciting.
Scientists have been able to leverage the immune system in the fight against cancer.
For example, there have been ways where we find the off switches of cancer, and new drugs have been able to turn the immune system back on, to be able to fight cancer.
In addition, there are ways where you can take away immune cells from the body, train them, engineer them and put them back into the body to fight cancer.
Almost sounds like science fiction, doesn't it?
While I was a researcher at the National Cancer Institute, I had the privilege of working with some of the pioneers of this field and watched the development firsthand.
It's been pretty amazing.
Today, over 600 clinical trials are open, actively recruiting patients to explore all aspects in immunotherapy.
While these three exciting revolutions are ongoing, unfortunately, this is only the beginning, and there are still many, many challenges.
Let me illustrate with a patient.
Here is a patient with a skin cancer called melanoma.
It's horrible; the cancer has gone everywhere.
However, scientists were able to map the mutations of this cancer and give a specific treatment that targets one of the mutations.
And the result is almost miraculous.
Tumors almost seem to melt away.
Unfortunately, this is not the end of the story.
A few months later, this picture is taken.
The tumor has come back.
The question is: Why?
The answer is tumor heterogeneity.
Let me explain.
Even a cancer as small as one centimeter in diameter harbors over a hundred million different cells.
While genetically similar, there are small differences in these different cancers that make them differently prone to different drugs.
So even if you have a drug that's highly effective, that kills almost all the cells, there is a chance that there's a small population that's resistant to the drug.
This ultimately is the population that comes back, and takes over the patient.
So then the question is: What do we do with this information?
Well, the key, then, is to apply all these exciting advancements in cancer therapy earlier, as soon as we can, before these resistance clones emerge.
The key to cancer and curing cancer is early detection.
And we intuitively know this.
Finding cancer early results in better outcomes, and the numbers show this as well.
For example, in ovarian cancer, if you detect cancer in stage four, only 17 percent of the women survive at five years.
However, if you are able to detect this cancer as early as stage one, over 92 percent of women will survive.
But the sad fact is, only 15 percent of women are detected at stage one, whereas the vast majority, 70 percent, are detected in stages three and four.
We desperately need better detection mechanisms for cancers.
The current best ways to screen cancer fall into one of three categories.
First is medical procedures, which is like colonoscopy for colon cancer.
Second is protein biomarkers, like PSA for prostate cancer.
Or third, imaging techniques, such as mammography for breast cancer.
Medical procedures are the gold standard; however, they are highly invasive and require a large infrastructure to implement.
Protein markers, while effective in some populations, are not very specific in some circumstances, resulting in high numbers of false positives, which then results in unnecessary work-ups and unnecessary procedures.
Imaging methods, while useful in some populations, expose patients to harmful radiation.
In addition, it is not applicable to all patients.
For example, mammography has problems in women with dense breasts.
So what we need is a method that is noninvasive, that is light in infrastructure, that is highly specific, that also does not have false positives, does not use any radiation and is applicable to large populations.
Even more importantly, we need a method to be able to detect cancers before they're 100 million cells in size.
Does such a technology exist?
Well, I wouldn't be up here giving a talk if it didn't.
I'm excited to tell you about this latest technology we've developed.
Central to our technology is a simple blood test.
The blood circulatory system, while seemingly mundane, is essential for you to survive, providing oxygen and nutrients to your cells, and removing waste and carbon dioxide.
Here's a key biological insight: Cancer cells grow and die faster than normal cells, and when they die, DNA is shed into the blood system.
Since we know the signatures of these cancer cells from all the different cancer genome sequencing projects, we can look for those signals in the blood to be able to detect these cancers early.
So instead of waiting for cancers to be large enough to cause symptoms, or for them to be dense enough to show up on imaging, or for them to be prominent enough for you to be able to visualize on medical procedures, we can start looking for cancers while they are relatively pretty small, by looking for these small amounts of DNA in the blood.
So let me tell you how we do this.
First, like I said, we start off with a simple blood test -- no radiation, no complicated equipment -- a simple blood test.
Then the blood is shipped to us, and what we do is extract the DNA out of it.
While your body is mostly healthy cells, most of the DNA that's detected will be from healthy cells.
However, there will be a small amount, less than one percent, that comes from the cancer cells.
Then we use molecular biology methods to be able to enrich this DNA for areas of the genome which are known to be associated with cancer, based on the information from the cancer genomics projects.
We're able to then put this DNA into DNA-sequencing machines and are able to digitize the DNA into A's, C's, T's and G's and have this final readout.
Ultimately, we have information of billions of letters that output from this run.
We then apply statistical and computational methods to be able to find the small signal that's present, indicative of the small amount of cancer DNA in the blood.
So does this actually work in patients?
Well, because there's no way of really predicting right now which patients will get cancer, we use the next best population: cancers in remission; specifically, lung cancer.
The sad fact is, even with the best drugs that we have today, most lung cancers come back.
The key, then, is to see whether we're able to detect these recurrences of cancers earlier than with standard methods.
We just finished a major trial with Professor Charles Swanton at University College London, examining this.
Let me walk you through an example of one patient.
Here's an example of one patient who undergoes surgery at time point zero, and then undergoes chemotherapy.
Then the patient is under remission.
He is monitored using clinical exams and imaging methods.
Around day 450, unfortunately, the cancer comes back.
The question is: Are we able to catch this earlier?
During this whole time, we've been collecting blood serially to be able to measure the amount of ctDNA in the blood.
So at the initial time point, as expected, there's a high level of cancer DNA in the blood.
However, this goes away to zero in subsequent time points and remains negligible after subsequent points.
However, around day 340, we see the rise of cancer DNA in the blood, and eventually, it goes up higher for days 400 and 450.
Here's the key, if you've missed it: At day 340, we see the rise in the cancer DNA in the blood.
That means we are catching this cancer over a hundred days earlier than traditional methods.
This is a hundred days earlier where we can give therapies, a hundred days earlier where we can do surgical interventions, or even a hundred days less for the cancer to grow or a hundred days less for resistance to occur.
For some patients, this hundred days means the matter of life and death.
We're really excited about this information.
Because of this assignment, we've done additional studies now in other cancers, including breast cancer, lung cancer and ovarian cancer, and I can't wait to see how much earlier we can find these cancers.
Ultimately, I have a dream, a dream of two vials of blood, and that, in the future, as part of all of our standard physical exams, we'll have two vials of blood drawn.
And from these two vials of blood we will be able to compare the DNA from all known signatures of cancer, and hopefully then detect cancers months to even years earlier.
Even with the therapies we have currently, this could mean that millions of lives could be saved.
And if you add on to that recent advancements in immunotherapy and targeted therapies, the end of cancer is in sight.
The next time you hear the word "cancer," I want you to add to the emotions: hope.
Hold on.
Cancer researchers all around the world are working feverishly to beat this disease, and tremendous progress is being made.
This is the beginning of the end.
We will win the war on cancer.
And to me, this is amazing news.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Here's a question for you: how many different scents do you think you can smell, and maybe even identify with accuracy?
100?
300?
1,000?
One study estimates that humans can detect up to one trillion different odors.
A trillion.
It's hard to imagine, but your nose has the molecular machinery to make it happen.
Olfactory receptors -- tiny scent detectors -- are packed into your nose, each one patiently waiting to be activated by the odor, or ligand, that it's been assigned to detect.
It turns out we humans, like all vertebrates, have lots of olfactory receptors.
In fact, more of our DNA is devoted to genes for different olfactory receptors than for any other type of protein.
Why is that?
Could olfactory receptors be doing something else in addition to allowing us to smell?
In 1991, Linda Buck and Richard Axel uncovered the molecular identity of olfactory receptors -- work which ultimately led to a Nobel Prize.
At the time, we all assumed that these receptors were only found in the nose.
However, about a year or so later, a report emerged of an olfactory receptor expressed in a tissue other than the nose.
And then another such report emerged, and another.
We now know that these receptors are found all over the body, including in some pretty unexpected places -- in muscle, in kidneys, lungs and blood vessels.
But what are they doing there?
Well, we know that olfactory receptors act as sensitive chemical sensors in the nose -- that's how they mediate our sense of smell.
It turns out they also act as sensitive chemical sensors in many other parts of the body.
Now, I'm not saying that your liver can detect the aroma of your morning coffee as you walk into the kitchen.
Rather, after you drink your morning coffee, your liver might use an olfactory receptor to chemically detect the change in concentration of a chemical floating through your bloodstream.
Many cell types and tissues in the body use chemical sensors, or chemosensors, to keep track of the concentration of hormones, metabolites and other molecules, and some of these chemosensors are olfactory receptors.
If you are a pancreas or a kidney and you need a specialized chemical sensor that will allow you to keep track of a specific molecule, why reinvent the wheel?
One of the first examples of an olfactory receptor found outside the nose showed that human sperm express an olfactory receptor, and that sperm with this receptor will seek out the chemical that the receptor responds to -- the receptor's ligand.
That is, the sperm will swim toward the ligand.
This has intriguing implications.
Are sperm aided in finding the egg by sniffing out the area with the highest ligand concentration?
I like this example because it clearly demonstrates that an olfactory receptor's primary job is to be a chemical sensor, but depending on the context, it can influence how you perceive a smell, or in which direction sperm will swim, and as it turns out, a huge variety of other processes.
Olfactory receptors have been implicated in muscle cell migration, in helping the lung to sense and respond to inhaled chemicals, and in wound healing.
Similarly, taste receptors once thought to be found only in the tongue, are now known to be expressed in cells and tissues throughout the body.
Even more surprisingly, a recent study found that the light receptors in our eyes also play a role in our blood vessels.
In my lab, we work on trying to understand the roles of olfactory receptors and taste receptors in the context of the kidney.
The kidney is a central control center for homeostasis.
And to us, it makes sense that a homeostatic control center would be a logical place to employ chemical sensors.
We've identified a number of different olfactory and taste receptors in the kidney, one of which, olfactory receptor 78, is known to be expressed in cells and tissues that are important in the regulation of blood pressure.
When this receptor is deleted in mice, their blood pressure is low.
Surprisingly, this receptor was found to respond to chemicals called short-chain fatty acids that are produced by the bacteria that reside in your gut -- your gut microbiota.
After being produced by your gut microbiota, these chemicals are absorbed into your bloodstream where they can then interact with receptors like olfactory receptor 78, meaning that the changes in metabolism of your gut microbiota may influence your blood pressure.
Although we've identified a number of different olfactory and taste receptors in the kidney, we've only just begun to tease out their different functions and to figure out which chemicals each of them responds to.
Similar investigations lie ahead for many other organs and tissues -- only a small minority of receptors has been studied to date.
This is exciting stuff.
It's revolutionizing our understanding of the scope of influence for one of the five senses.
And it has the potential to change our understanding of some aspects of human physiology.
It's still early, but I think we've picked up on the scent of something we're following.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
The first time I cried underwater was in 2008, the island of Curaao, way down in the southern Caribbean.
It's beautiful there.
I was studying these corals for my PhD, and after days and days of diving on the same reef, I had gotten to know them as individuals.
I had made friends with coral colonies -- totally a normal thing to do.
Then, Hurricane Omar smashed them apart and ripped off their skin, leaving little bits of wounded tissue that would have a hard time healing, and big patches of dead skeleton that would get overgrown by algae.
When I saw this damage for the first time, stretching all the way down the reef, I sunk onto the sand in my scuba gear and I cried.
If a coral could die that fast, how could a reef ever survive?
And why was I making it my job to try to fight for them?
I never heard another scientist tell that kind of story until last year.
A scientist in Guam wrote, "I cried right into my mask," seeing the damage on the reefs.
Then a scientist in Australia wrote, "I showed my students the results of our coral surveys, and we wept."
Crying about corals is having a moment, guys.
(Laughter) And that's because reefs in the Pacific are losing corals faster than we've ever seen before.
Because of climate change, the water is so hot for so long in the summers, that these animals can't function normally.
They're spitting out the colored algae that lives in their skin, and the clear bleached tissue that's left usually starves to death and then rots away.
Then the skeletons are overgrown by algae.
This is happening over an unbelievable scale.
The Northern Great Barrier Reef lost two-thirds of its corals last year over a distance of hundreds of miles, then bleached again this year, and the bleaching stretched further south.
Reefs in the Pacific are in a nosedive right now, and no one knows how bad it's going to get, except ...
over in the Caribbean where I work, we've already been through the nosedive.
Reefs there have suffered through centuries of intense human abuse.
We kind of already know how the story goes.
And we might be able to help predict what happens next.
Let's consult a graph.
Since the invention of scuba, scientists have measured the amount of coral on the seafloor, and how it's changed through time.
And after centuries of ratcheting human pressure, Caribbean reefs met one of three fates.
Some reefs lost their corals very quickly.
Some reefs lost their corals more slowly, but kind of ended up in the same place.
OK, so far this is not going very well.
But some reefs in the Caribbean -- the ones best protected and the ones a little further from humans -- they managed to hold onto their corals.
Give us a challenge.
And, we almost never saw a reef hit zero.
The second time I cried underwater was on the north shore of Curaao, 2011.
It was the calmest day of the year, but it's always pretty sketchy diving there.
My boyfriend and I swam against the waves.
I watched my compass so we could find our way back out, and he watched for sharks, and after 20 minutes of swimming that felt like an hour, we finally dropped down to the reef, and I was so shocked, and I was so happy that my eyes filled with tears.
There were corals 1,000 years old lined up one after another.
They had survived the entire history of European colonialism in the Caribbean, and for centuries before that.
I never knew what a coral could do when it was given a chance to thrive.
The truth is that even as we lose so many corals, even as we go through this massive coral die-off, some reefs will survive.
Some will be ragged on the edge, some will be beautiful.
And by protecting shorelines and giving us food to eat and supporting tourism, they will still be worth billions and billions of dollars a year.
The best time to protect a reef was 50 years ago, but the second-best time is right now.
Even as we go through bleaching events, more frequent and in more places, some corals will be able to recover.
We had a bleaching event in 2010 in the Caribbean that took off big patches of skin on boulder corals like these.
This coral lost half of its skin.
But if you look at the side of this coral a few years later, this coral is actually healthy again.
It's doing what a healthy coral does.
It's making copies of its polyps, it's fighting back the algae and it's reclaiming its territory.
If a few polyps survive, a coral can regrow; it just needs time and protection and a reasonable temperature.
Some corals can regrow in 10 years -- others take a lot longer.
But the more stresses we take off them locally -- things like overfishing, sewage pollution, fertilizer pollution, dredging, coastal construction -- the better they can hang on as we stabilize the climate, and the faster they can regrow.
And as we go through the long, tough and necessary process of stabilizing the climate of planet Earth, some new corals will still be born.
This is what I study in my research.
We try to understand how corals make babies, and how those babies find their way to the reef, and we invent new methods to help them survive those early, fragile life stages.
One of my favorite coral babies of all time showed up right after Hurricane Omar.
It's the same species I was studying before the storm, but you almost never see babies of this species -- it's really rare.
This is actually an endangered species.
In this photo, this little baby coral, this little circle of polyps, is a few years old.
Like its cousins that bleach, it's fighting back the algae.
And like its cousins on the north shore, it's aiming to live for 1,000 years.
What's happening in the world and in the ocean has changed our time horizon.
We can be incredibly pessimistic on the short term, and mourn what we lost and what we really took for granted.
But we can still be optimistic on the long term, and we can still be ambitious about what we fight for and what we expect from our governments, from our planet.
Corals have been living on planet Earth for hundreds of millions of years.
They survived the extinction of the dinosaurs.
They're badasses.
(Laughter) An individual coral can go through tremendous trauma and fully recover if it's given a chance and it's given protection.
Corals have always been playing the long game, and now so are we.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
Today I'm going to talk about technology and society.
The Department of Transport estimated that last year 35,000 people died from traffic crashes in the US alone.
Worldwide, 1.2 million people die every year in traffic accidents.
If there was a way we could eliminate 90 percent of those accidents, would you support it?
Of course you would.
This is what driverless car technology promises to achieve by eliminating the main source of accidents -- human error.
Now picture yourself in a driverless car in the year 2030, sitting back and watching this vintage TEDxCambridge video.
(Laughter) All of a sudden, the car experiences mechanical failure and is unable to stop.
If the car continues, it will crash into a bunch of pedestrians crossing the street, but the car may swerve, hitting one bystander, killing them to save the pedestrians.
What should the car do, and who should decide?
What if instead the car could swerve into a wall, crashing and killing you, the passenger, in order to save those pedestrians?
This scenario is inspired by the trolley problem, which was invented by philosophers a few decades ago to think about ethics.
Now, the way we think about this problem matters.
We may for example not think about it at all.
We may say this scenario is unrealistic, incredibly unlikely, or just silly.
But I think this criticism misses the point because it takes the scenario too literally.
Of course no accident is going to look like this; no accident has two or three options where everybody dies somehow.
Instead, the car is going to calculate something like the probability of hitting a certain group of people, if you swerve one direction versus another direction, you might slightly increase the risk to passengers or other drivers versus pedestrians.
It's going to be a more complex calculation, but it's still going to involve trade-offs, and trade-offs often require ethics.
We might say then, "Well, let's not worry about this.
Let's wait until technology is fully ready and 100 percent safe."
Suppose that we can indeed eliminate 90 percent of those accidents, or even 99 percent in the next 10 years.
What if eliminating the last one percent of accidents requires 50 more years of research?
Should we not adopt the technology?
That's 60 million people dead in car accidents if we maintain the current rate.
So the point is, waiting for full safety is also a choice, and it also involves trade-offs.
People online on social media have been coming up with all sorts of ways to not think about this problem.
One person suggested the car should just swerve somehow in between the passengers -- (Laughter) and the bystander.
Of course if that's what the car can do, that's what the car should do.
We're interested in scenarios in which this is not possible.
And my personal favorite was a suggestion by a blogger to have an eject button in the car that you press -- (Laughter) just before the car self-destructs.
(Laughter) So if we acknowledge that cars will have to make trade-offs on the road, how do we think about those trade-offs, and how do we decide?
Well, maybe we should run a survey to find out what society wants, because ultimately, regulations and the law are a reflection of societal values.
So this is what we did.
With my collaborators, Jean-Franois Bonnefon and Azim Shariff, we ran a survey in which we presented people with these types of scenarios.
We gave them two options inspired by two philosophers: Jeremy Bentham and Immanuel Kant.
Bentham says the car should follow utilitarian ethics: it should take the action that will minimize total harm -- even if that action will kill a bystander and even if that action will kill the passenger.
Immanuel Kant says the car should follow duty-bound principles, like "Thou shalt not kill."
So you should not take an action that explicitly harms a human being, and you should let the car take its course even if that's going to harm more people.
What do you think?
Bentham or Kant?
Here's what we found.
Most people sided with Bentham.
So it seems that people want cars to be utilitarian, minimize total harm, and that's what we should all do.
Problem solved.
But there is a little catch.
When we asked people whether they would purchase such cars, they said, "Absolutely not."
(Laughter) They would like to buy cars that protect them at all costs, but they want everybody else to buy cars that minimize harm.
(Laughter) We've seen this problem before.
It's called a social dilemma.
And to understand the social dilemma, we have to go a little bit back in history.
In the 1800s, English economist William Forster Lloyd published a pamphlet which describes the following scenario.
You have a group of farmers -- English farmers -- who are sharing a common land for their sheep to graze.
Now, if each farmer brings a certain number of sheep -- let's say three sheep -- the land will be rejuvenated, the farmers are happy, the sheep are happy, everything is good.
Now, if one farmer brings one extra sheep, that farmer will do slightly better, and no one else will be harmed.
But if every farmer made that individually rational decision, the land will be overrun, and it will be depleted to the detriment of all the farmers, and of course, to the detriment of the sheep.
We see this problem in many places: in the difficulty of managing overfishing, or in reducing carbon emissions to mitigate climate change.
When it comes to the regulation of driverless cars, the common land now is basically public safety -- that's the common good -- and the farmers are the passengers or the car owners who are choosing to ride in those cars.
And by making the individually rational choice of prioritizing their own safety, they may collectively be diminishing the common good, which is minimizing total harm.
It's called the tragedy of the commons, traditionally, but I think in the case of driverless cars, the problem may be a little bit more insidious because there is not necessarily an individual human being making those decisions.
So car manufacturers may simply program cars that will maximize safety for their clients, and those cars may learn automatically on their own that doing so requires slightly increasing risk for pedestrians.
So to use the sheep metaphor, it's like we now have electric sheep that have a mind of their own.
(Laughter) And they may go and graze even if the farmer doesn't know it.
So this is what we may call the tragedy of the algorithmic commons, and if offers new types of challenges.
Typically, traditionally, we solve these types of social dilemmas using regulation, so either governments or communities get together, and they decide collectively what kind of outcome they want and what sort of constraints on individual behavior they need to implement.
And then using monitoring and enforcement, they can make sure that the public good is preserved.
So why don't we just, as regulators, require that all cars minimize harm?
After all, this is what people say they want.
And more importantly, I can be sure that as an individual, if I buy a car that may sacrifice me in a very rare case, I'm not the only sucker doing that while everybody else enjoys unconditional protection.
In our survey, we did ask people whether they would support regulation and here's what we found.
First of all, people said no to regulation; and second, they said, "Well if you regulate cars to do this and to minimize total harm, I will not buy those cars."
So ironically, by regulating cars to minimize harm, we may actually end up with more harm because people may not opt into the safer technology even if it's much safer than human drivers.
I don't have the final answer to this riddle, but I think as a starting point, we need society to come together to decide what trade-offs we are comfortable with and to come up with ways in which we can enforce those trade-offs.
As a starting point, my brilliant students, Edmond Awad and Sohan Dsouza, built the Moral Machine website, which generates random scenarios at you -- basically a bunch of random dilemmas in a sequence where you have to choose what the car should do in a given scenario.
And we vary the ages and even the species of the different victims.
So far we've collected over five million decisions by over one million people worldwide from the website.
And this is helping us form an early picture of what trade-offs people are comfortable with and what matters to them -- even across cultures.
But more importantly, doing this exercise is helping people recognize the difficulty of making those choices and that the regulators are tasked with impossible choices.
And maybe this will help us as a society understand the kinds of trade-offs that will be implemented ultimately in regulation.
And indeed, I was very happy to hear that the first set of regulations that came from the Department of Transport -- announced last week -- included a 15-point checklist for all carmakers to provide, and number 14 was ethical consideration -- how are you going to deal with that.
We also have people reflect on their own decisions by giving them summaries of what they chose.
I'll give you one example -- I'm just going to warn you that this is not your typical example, your typical user.
This is the most sacrificed and the most saved character for this person.
(Laughter) Some of you may agree with him, or her, we don't know.
But this person also seems to slightly prefer passengers over pedestrians in their choices and is very happy to punish jaywalking.
(Laughter) So let's wrap up.
We started with the question -- let's call it the ethical dilemma -- of what the car should do in a specific scenario: swerve or stay?
But then we realized that the problem was a different one.
It was the problem of how to get society to agree on and enforce the trade-offs they're comfortable with.
It's a social dilemma.
In the 1940s, Isaac Asimov wrote his famous laws of robotics -- the three laws of robotics.
A robot may not harm a human being, a robot may not disobey a human being, and a robot may not allow itself to come to harm -- in this order of importance.
But after 40 years or so and after so many stories pushing these laws to the limit, Asimov introduced the zeroth law which takes precedence above all, and it's that a robot may not harm humanity as a whole.
I don't know what this means in the context of driverless cars or any specific situation, and I don't know how we can implement it, but I think that by recognizing that the regulation of driverless cars is not only a technological problem but also a societal cooperation problem, I hope that we can at least begin to ask the right questions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Laughter) (Laughter) That's SpotMini.
He'll be back in a little while.
I -- (Applause) I love building robots.
And my long-term goal is to build robots that can do what people and animals do.
And there's three things in particular that we're interested in.
One is balance and dynamic mobility, the second one is mobile manipulation, and the third one is mobile perception.
So, dynamic mobility and balance -- I'm going to do a demo for you.
I'm standing here, balancing.
I can see you're not very impressed. OK, how about now?
(Laughter) How about now?
(Applause) Those simple capabilities mean that people can go almost anywhere on earth, on any kind of terrain.
We want to capture that for robots.
What about manipulation?
I'm holding this clicker in my hand; I'm not even looking at it, and I can manipulate it without any problem.
But even more important, I can move my body while I hold the manipulator, the clicker, and stabilize and coordinate my body, and I can even walk around.
And that means I can move around in the world and expand the range of my arms and my hands and really be able to handle almost anything.
So that's mobile manipulation.
And all of you can do this.
Third is perception.
I'm looking at a room with over 1,000 people in it, and my amazing visual system can see every one of you -- you're all stable in space, even when I move my head, even when I move around.
That kind of mobile perception is really important for robots that are going to move and act out in the world.
I'm going to give you a little status report on where we are in developing robots toward these ends.
The first three robots are all dynamically stabilized robots.
This one goes back a little over 10 years ago -- "BigDog."
It's got a gyroscope that helps stabilize it.
It's got sensors and a control computer.
Here's a Cheetah robot that's running with a galloping gait, where it recycles its energy, it bounces on the ground, and it's computing all the time in order to keep itself stabilized and propelled.
And here's a bigger robot that's got such good locomotion using its legs, that it can go in deep snow.
This is about 10 inches deep, and it doesn't really have any trouble.
This is Spot, a new generation of robot -- just slightly older than the one that came out onstage.
And we've been asking the question -- you've all heard about drone delivery: Can we deliver packages to your houses with drones?
Well, what about plain old legged-robot delivery?
(Laughter) So we've been taking our robot to our employees' homes to see whether we could get in -- (Laughter) the various access ways.
And believe me, in the Boston area, there's every manner of stairway twists and turns.
So it's a real challenge.
But we're doing very well, about 70 percent of the way.
And here's mobile manipulation, where we've put an arm on the robot, and it's finding its way through the door.
Now, one of the important things about making autonomous robots is to make them not do just exactly what you say, but make them deal with the uncertainty of what happens in the real world.
So we have Steve there, one of the engineers, giving the robot a hard time.
(Laughter) And the fact that the programming still tolerates all that disturbance -- it does what it's supposed to.
Here's another example, where Eric is tugging on the robot as it goes up the stairs.
And believe me, getting it to do what it's supposed to do in those circumstances is a real challenge, but the result is something that's going to generalize and make robots much more autonomous than they would be otherwise.
This is Atlas, a humanoid robot.
It's a third-generation humanoid that we've been building.
I'll tell you a little bit about the hardware design later.
And we've been saying: How close to human levels of performance and speed could we get in an ordinary task, like moving boxes around on a conveyor?
We're getting up to about two-thirds of the speed that a human operates on average.
And this robot is using both hands, it's using its body, it's stepping, so it's really an example of dynamic stability, mobile manipulation and mobile perception.
Here -- (Laughter) We actually have two Atlases.
(Laughter) Now, everything doesn't go exactly the way it's supposed to.
(Laughter) (Laughter) (Laughter) And here's our latest robot, called "Handle."
Handle is interesting, because it's sort of half like an animal, and it's half something else with these leg-like things and wheels.
It's got its arms on in kind of a funny way, but it really does some remarkable things.
It can carry 100 pounds.
It's probably going to lift more than that, but so far we've done 100.
It's got some pretty good rough-terrain capability, even though it has wheels.
And Handle loves to put on a show.
(Laughter) (Applause) I'm going to give you a little bit of robot religion.
A lot of people think that a robot is a machine where there's a computer that's telling it what to do, and the computer is listening through its sensors.
But that's really only half of the story.
The real story is that the computer is on one side, making suggestions to the robot, and on the other side are the physics of the world.
And that physics involves gravity, friction, bouncing into things.
In order to have a successful robot, my religion is that you have to do a holistic design, where you're designing the software, the hardware and the behavior all at one time, and all these parts really intermesh and cooperate with each other.
And when you get the perfect design, you get a real harmony between all those parts interacting with each other.
So it's half software and half hardware, plus the behavior.
We've done some work lately on the hardware, where we tried to go -- the picture on the left is a conventional design, where you have parts that are all bolted together, conductors, tubes, connectors.
And on the right is a more integrated thing; it's supposed to look like an anatomy drawing.
Using the miracle of 3-D printing, we're starting to build parts of robots that look a lot more like the anatomy of an animal.
So that's an upper-leg part that has hydraulic pathways -- actuators, filters -- all embedded, all printed as one piece, and the whole structure is developed with a knowledge of what the loads and behavior are going to be, which is available from data recorded from robots and simulations and things like that.
So it's a data-driven hardware design.
And using processes like that, not only the upper leg but some other things, we've gotten our robots to go from big, behemoth, bulky, slow, bad robots -- that one on the right, weighing almost 400 pounds -- down to the one in the middle which was just in the video, weighs about 190 pounds, just a little bit more than me, and we have a new one, which is working but I'm not going to show it to you yet, on the left, which weighs just 165 pounds, with all the same strength and capabilities.
So these things are really getting better very quickly.
So it's time for Spot to come back out, and we're going to demonstrate a little bit of mobility, dexterity and perception.
This is Seth Davis, who's my robot wrangler today, and he's giving Spot some general direction by steering it around, but all the coordination of the legs and the sensors is done by the robot's computers on board.
The robot can walk with a number of different gaits; it's got a gyro, or a solid-state gyro, an IMU on board.
Obviously, it's got a battery, and things like that.
One of the cool things about a legged robot is, it's omnidirectional.
In addition to going forward, it can go sideways, it can turn in place.
And this robot is a little bit of a show-off.
It loves to use its dynamic gaits, like running -- (Laughter) And it's got one more.
(Laughter) Now if it were really a show-off, it would be hopping on one foot, but, you know.
Now, Spot has a set of cameras here, stereo cameras, and we have a feed up in the center.
It's kind of dark out in the audience, but it's going to use those cameras in order to look at the terrain right in front of it, while it goes over these obstacles back here.
For this demo, Seth is steering, but the robot's doing all its own terrain planning.
This is a terrain map, where the data from the cameras is being developed in real time, showing the red spots, which are where it doesn't want to step, and the green spots are the good places.
And here it's treating them like stepping-stones.
So it's trying to stay up on the blocks, and it adjusts its stride, and there's a ton of planning that has to go into an operation like that, and it does all that planning in real time, where it adjusts the steps a little bit longer or a little bit shorter.
Now we're going to change it into a different mode, where it's just going to treat the blocks like terrain and decide whether to step up or down as it goes.
So this is using dynamic balance and mobile perception, because it has to coordinate what it sees along with how it's moving.
The other thing Spot has is a robot arm.
Some of you may see that as a head and a neck, but believe me, it's an arm.
Seth is driving it around.
He's actually driving the hand and the body is following.
So the two are coordinated in the way I was talking about before -- in the way people can do that.
In fact, one of the cool things Spot can do we call, "chicken-head mode," and it keeps its head in one place in space, and it moves its body all around.
There's a variation of this that's called "twerking" -- (Laughter) but we're not going to use that today.
(Laughter) So, Spot: I'm feeling a little thirsty. Could you get me a soda?
For this demo, Seth is not doing any driving.
We have a LIDAR on the back of the robot, and it's using these props we've put on the stage to localize itself.
It's gone over to that location.
Now it's using a camera that's in its hand to find the cup, picks it up -- and again, Seth's not driving.
We've planned out a path for it to go -- it looked like it was going off the path -- and now Seth's going to take over control again, because I'm a little bit chicken about having it do this by itself.
Thank you, Spot.
(Applause) So, Spot: How do you feel about having just finished your TED performance?
(Laughter) Me, too!
(Laughter) Thank you all, and thanks to the team at Boston Dynamics, who did all the hard work behind this.
(Applause) Helen Walters: Marc, come back in the middle.
Come over here, I have questions.
So, you mentioned the UPS and the package delivery.
What are the other applications that you see for your robots?
Marc Raibert: You know, I think that robots that have the capabilities I've been talking about are going to be incredibly useful.
About a year ago, I went to Fukushima to see what the situation was there, and there's just a huge need for machines that can go into some of the dirty places and help remediate that.
I think it won't be too long until we have robots like this in our homes, and one of the big needs is to take care of the aging and invalids.
I think that it won't be too long till we're using robots to help take care of our parents, or probably more likely, have our children help take care of us.
And there's a bunch of other things.
I think the sky's the limit.
Many of the ideas we haven't thought of yet, and people like you will help us think of new applications.
HW: So what about the dark side?
What about the military?
Are they interested?
MR: Sure, the military has been a big funder of robotics.
I don't think the military is the dark side myself, but I think, as with all advanced technology, it can be used for all kinds of things.
HW: Awesome. Thank you so much.
MR: OK, you're welcome.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I love museums.
Have you guys ever been to the Natural History Museum?
In New York City?
(Applause) So one of the things that I do is I take my kids to the museum.
Recently I took them to the Natural History Museum.
I had my two sons with me, Sabian and Dabith.
And we go into the front entrance of the museum, and there's that amazing sculpture of Teddy Roosevelt out there.
You guys know which one I'm talking about.
Teddy Roosevelt is sitting there with one hand on the horse, bold, strong, sleeves rolled up.
I don't know if he's bare-chested, but it kind of feels like it.
(Laughter) And on the left-hand side of him is a Native American walking.
And on the right-hand side of him is an African-American walking.
And as we're moving up the stairs, getting closer to the sculpture, my oldest son, who's nine, says, "Dad, how come he gets to ride, and they have to walk?"
It stopped me in my tracks.
It stopped me in my tracks.
There was so much history that we would have to go through to try to explain that, and that's something I try to do with them anyways.
It's a question that I probably would have never really asked.
But fundamentally what he was saying was, "That doesn't look fair.
Dad, that doesn't look fair.
And why is this thing that's so not fair sitting outside of such an amazing institution."
And his question got me wondering, is there a way for us to amend our public sculptures, our national monuments?
Not erase them, but is there a way to amend them?
Now, I didn't grow up going to museums.
That's not my history.
My mother was 15 years old when I was born.
She is amazing.
My father was struggling with his own things for most of my life.
If you really want to know the truth, the only reason I got into art is because of a woman.
There was this amazing, amazing, fantastic, beautiful, smart woman, four years older than me, and I wanted to go out with her.
But she said, "You're too young and you're not thinking about your future."
So I ran on down to the junior college, registered for some classes, ran on back, and basically was like, "I'm thinking about my future now."
(Laughter) "Can we go out?"
For the record, she's even more amazing.
I married her.
(Applause) So when I randomly ran down to the junior college and registered for classes, I really wasn't paying attention to what I was registering to.
(Laughter) So I ended up with an art history class, and I didn't know a thing about art history.
But something amazing happened when I went into that class.
For the first time in my academic career, my visual intelligence was required of me.
For the first time.
The professor would put up an image, bold strokes of blues and yellows, and say, "Who's that?"
And I'd go, "That's Van Gogh. Clearly that is Van Gogh.
I got this."
(Laughter) I got a B in that class.
For me, that was amazing.
In high school, let's just say I wasn't a great student. OK?
In high school, my GPA was .65.
(Laughter) Decimal point first, six five.
So me getting a B was huge, huge, absolutely huge.
And because of the fact that I realized that I was able to learn things visually that I couldn't learn in other ways, this became my strategy, this became my tactic for understanding everything else.
I wanted to stay in this relationship. Things were going well.
I decided, let me keep taking these art history classes.
One of the last art history classes, I will not forget, I will never forget.
It was one of those survey art history classes.
Anybody ever have one of those survey art history classes, where they try to teach you the entire history of art in a single semester?
I'm talking about cave paintings and Jackson Pollock just crunched together all in the same -- It doesn't really work, but they try anyway.
Well, at the beginning of the semester, I looked at the book, and in this 400-page book was about a 14-page section that was on black people in painting.
Now, this was a crammed in section that had representations of black people in painting and black people who painted.
It was poorly curated, let's just put it that way.
(Laughter) Nonetheless I was really excited about it, because in all the other classes that I had, we didn't even have that conversation.
We didn't talk about it at all.
So imagine my surprise when I get to class and on the day that we're supposed to go over that particular chapter, my professor announces, "We're going to skip this chapter today because we do not have time to go through it."
"Whoa, I'm sorry, hold on, professor, professor.
I'm sorry. This is a really important chapter to me.
Are we going to go over it at any point?"
"Titus, we don't have time for this."
"I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, please, I really need to understand.
Clearly the author thinks that this is significant.
Why are we skipping over this?"
"Titus, I do not have time for this."
"OK, last question, I'm really sorry here.
When can we talk, because we need to talk."
(Laughter) I went to her office hours.
I ended up getting kicked out of her office.
I went to the dean.
The dean finally told me, "I can't force her to teach anything."
And I knew in that moment if I wanted to understand this history, if I wanted to understand the roles of those folks who had to walk, I was probably going to have to figure that out myself.
So ...
above you right here on the slide is a painting by Frans Hals.
This is one of the kinds of images that was in that chapter.
I taught myself how to paint by going to museums and looking at images like this.
I want to show you something.
I made this.
I -- (Applause) I made some alterations.
You'll see there are some slight differences in the painting.
All this art history that I had been absorbing helped me to realize that painting is a language.
There is a reason why he is the highest in the composition here.
There is a reason why the painter is showing us this gold necklace here.
He's trying to tell us something about the economic status of these people in these paintings.
Painting is a visual language where everything in the painting is meaningful, is important.
It's coded.
But sometimes, because of the compositional structure, because of compositional hierarchy, it's hard to see other things.
This silk is supposed to tell us also that they have quite a bit of money.
There's more written about dogs in art history than there are about this other character here.
Historically speaking, in research on these kinds of paintings, I can find out more about the lace that the woman is wearing in this painting -- the manufacturer of the lace -- than I can about this character here, about his dreams, about his hopes, about what he wanted out of life.
I want to show you something.
I don't want you to think that this is about eradication.
It's not.
The oil that you saw me just put inside of this paint is linseed oil.
It becomes transparent over time, so eventually what's going to happen is these faces will emerge a little bit.
What I'm trying to do, what I'm trying to show you, is how to shift your gaze just slightly, just momentarily, just momentarily, to ask yourself the question, why do some have to walk?
What is the impact of these kinds of sculptures at museums?
What is the impact of these kinds of paintings on some of our most vulnerable in society, seeing these kinds of depictions of themselves all the time?
I'm not saying erase it.
We can't erase this history.
It's real. We have to know it.
I think of it in the same way we think of -- Let me step back a second.
You remember old-school cameras, where when you took a picture, you actually had to focus. Right?
You'd put the camera up, and if I wanted you in focus, I would move the lens a little to the left and you would come forward.
I could move the lens a little to the right, and you would go back and the folks in the background would come out.
I'm just trying to do that here.
I'm trying to give you that opportunity.
I'm trying to answer that question that my son had.
I want to make paintings, I want to make sculptures that are honest, that wrestle with the struggles of our past but speak to the diversity and the advances of our present.
And we can't do that by taking an eraser and getting rid of stuff.
That's just not going to work.
I think that we should do it in the same way the American Constitution works.
When we have a situation where we want to change a law in the American Constitution, we don't erase the other one.
Alongside that is an amendment, something that says, "This is where we were, but this is where we are right now."
I figure if we can do that, then that will help us understand a little bit about where we're going.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Loneliness.
All of us in this room will experience loneliness at some point in our lives.
Loneliness is not a function of being alone, but rather, a function of how socially connected you are to those around you.
There could be somebody in this room right now surrounded by a thousand people experiencing loneliness.
And while loneliness can be attributed to many things, as an architect, I'm going to tell you today how loneliness can be the result of our built environments -- the very homes we choose to live in.
Let's take a look at this house.
It's a nice house.
There's a big yard, picket fence, two-car garage.
And the home might be in a neighborhood like this.
And for many people around the globe, this home, this neighborhood -- it's a dream.
And yet the danger of achieving this dream is a false sense of connection and an increase in social isolation.
I know, I can hear you now, there's somebody in the room screaming at me inside their head, "That's my house, and that's my neighborhood, and I know everyone on my block!"
To which I would answer, "Terrific!"
And I wish there were more people like you, because I'd wager to guess there's more people in the room living in a similar situation that might not know their neighbors.
They might recognize them and say hello, but under their breath, they're asking their spouse, "What was their name again?"
so they can ask a question by name to signify they know them.
Social media also contributes to this false sense of connection.
This image is probably all too familiar.
You're standing in the elevator, sitting in a cafe, and you look around, and everyone's on their phone.
You're not texting or checking Facebook, but everyone else is, and maybe, like me, you've been in a situation where you've made eye contact, smiled and said hello, and have that person yank out their earbuds and say, "I'm sorry, what did you say?"
I find this incredibly isolating.
The concept I'd like to share with you today is an antidote to isolation.
It's not a new concept.
In fact, it's an age-old way of living, and it still exists in many non-European cultures around the world.
And about 50 years ago, the Danes decided to make up a new name, and since then, tens of thousands of Danish people have been living in this connected way.
And it's being pursued more widely around the globe as people are seeking community.
This concept is cohousing.
Cohousing is an intentional neighborhood where people know each other and look after one another.
In cohousing, you have your own home, but you also share significant spaces, both indoors and out.
Before I show you some pictures of cohousing, I'd like to first introduce you to my friends Sheila and Spencer.
When I first met Sheila and Spencer, they were just entering their 60s, and Spencer was looking ahead at the end of a long career in elementary education.
And he really disliked the idea that he might not have children in his life upon retirement.
They're now my neighbors.
We live in a cohousing community that I not only designed, but developed and have my architecture practice in.
This community is very intentional about our social interactions.
So let me take you on a tour.
From the outside, we look like any other small apartment building.
In fact, we look identical to the one next door, except that we're bright yellow.
Inside, the homes are fairly conventional.
We all have living rooms and kitchens, bedrooms and baths, and there are nine of these homes around a central courtyard.
This one's mine, and this one is Spencer and Sheila's.
The thing that makes this building uniquely cohousing are not the homes, but rather, what happens here -- the social interactions that happen in and around that central courtyard.
When I look across the courtyard, I look forward to see Spencer and Sheila.
In fact, every morning, this is what I see, Spencer waving at me furiously as we're making our breakfasts.
From our homes, we look down into the courtyard, and depending on the time of year, we see this: kids and grownups in various combinations playing and hanging out with each other.
There's a lot of giggling and chatter.
There's a lot of hula-hooping.
And every now and then, "Hey, quit hitting me!"
or a cry from one of the kids.
These are the sounds of our daily lives, and the sounds of social connectedness.
At the bottom of the courtyard, there are a set of double doors, and those lead into the common house.
I consider the common house the secret sauce of cohousing.
It's the secret sauce because it's the place where the social interactions and community life begin, and from there, it radiates out through the rest of the community.
Inside our common house, we have a large dining room to seat all 28 of us and our guests, and we dine together three times a week.
In support of those meals, we have a large kitchen so that we can take turns cooking for each other in teams of three.
So that means, with 17 adults, I lead cook once every six weeks.
Two other times, I show up and help my team with the preparation and cleanup.
And all those other nights, I just show up.
I have dinner, talk with my neighbors, and I go home, having been fed a delicious meal by someone who cares about my vegetarian preferences.
Our nine families have intentionally chosen an alternative way of living.
Instead of pursuing the American dream, where we might have been isolated in our single-family homes, we instead chose cohousing, so that we can increase our social connections.
And that's how cohousing starts: with a shared intention to live collaboratively.
And intention is the single most important characteristic that differentiates cohousing from any other housing model.
And while intention is difficult to see or even show, I'm an architect, and I can't help but show you more pictures.
So here are a few examples to illustrate how intention has been expressed in some of the communities I've visited.
Through the careful selection of furniture, lighting and acoustic materials to support eating together; in the careful visual location and visual access to kids' play areas around and inside the common house; in the consideration of scale and distribution of social gathering nodes in and around the community to support our daily lives, all of these spaces help contribute to and elevate the sense of communitas in each community.
What was that word? "Communitas."
Communitas is a fancy social science way of saying "spirit of community."
And in visiting over 80 different communities, my measure of communitas became: How frequently did residents eat together?
While it's completely up to each group how frequently they have common meals, I know some that have eaten together every single night for the past 40 years.
I know others that have an occasional potluck once or twice a month.
And from my observations, I can tell you, those that eat together more frequently, exhibit higher levels of communitas.
It turns out, when you eat together, you start planning more activities together.
When you eat together, you share more things.
You start to watch each other's kids.
You lend our your power tools. You borrow each other's cars.
And despite all this, as my daughter loves to say, everything is not rainbows and unicorns in cohousing, and I'm not best friends with every single person in my community.
We even have differences and conflicts.
But living in cohousing, we're intentional about our relationships.
We're motivated to resolve our differences.
We follow up, we check in, we speak our personal truths and, when appropriate, we apologize.
Skeptics will say that cohousing is only interesting or attractive to a very small group of people.
And I'll agree with that.
If you look at Western cultures around the globe, those living in cohousing are just a fractional percent.
But that needs to change, because our very lives depend upon it.
In 2015, Brigham Young University completed a study that showed a significant increase risk of premature death in those who were living in isolation.
The US Surgeon General has declared isolation to be a public health epidemic.
And this epidemic is not restricted to the US alone.
So when I said earlier that cohousing is an antidote to isolation, what I should have said is that cohousing can save your life.
If I was a doctor, I would tell you to take two aspirin, and call me in the morning.
But as an architect, I'm going to suggest that you take a walk with your neighbor, share a meal together, and call me in 20 years.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So 24 years ago, I was brought to The New Yorker as art editor to rejuvenate what had by then become a somewhat staid institution and to bring in new artists and to try to bring the magazine from its ivory tower into engaging with its time.
And it was just the right thing for me to do because I've always been captivated by how an image can -- a simple drawing -- can cut through the torrent of images that we see every single day.
How it can capture a moment, how it can crystallize a social trend or a complex event in a way that a lot of words wouldn't be able to do -- and reduce it to its essence and turn it into a cartoon.
So I went to the library and I looked at the first cover drawn by Rea Irvin in 1925 -- a dandy looking at a butterfly through his monocle, and we call it Eustace Tilley.
And I realized that as the magazine had become known for its in-depth research and long reports, some of the humor had gotten lost along the way, because now often Eustace Tilley was seen as a haughty dandy, but in fact, in 1925, when Rea Irvin first drew this image, he did it as part of a humor magazine to amuse the youth of the era, which was the flappers of the roaring twenties.
And in the library, I found the images that really captured the zeitgeist of the Great Depression.
And it showed us not just how people dressed or what their cars looked like, but also what made them laugh, what their prejudices were.
And you really got a sense of what it felt like to be alive in the '30s.
So I called on contemporary artists, such as Adrian Tomine here.
I often call on narrative artists -- cartoonists, children's book authors -- and I give them themes such as, you know, what it's like to be in the subway, or Valentine's Day, and they send me sketches.
And once the sketches are approved by the editor, David Remnick, it's a go.
And I love the way those images are actually not telling you what to think.
But they do make you think, because the artist is actually -- it's almost a puzzle; the artist is drawing the dots, and you, the reader, have to complete the picture.
So to get this image on the left by Anita Kunz, or the one on right by Tomer Hanuka, you have to play spot the differences.
And it is something that ...
It's really exciting to see how the engagement with the reader ...
how those images really capture -- play with the stereotypes.
But when you get it, it rearranges the stereotypes that are in your head.
But the images don't just have to show people, sometimes it can be a feeling.
Right after September 11, I was at a point, like everybody else, where I really didn't know how to deal with what we were going through, and I felt that no image could capture this moment, and I wanted to just do a black cover, like no cover.
And I talked to my husband, cartoonist Art Spiegelman, and mentioned to him that I was going to propose that, and he said, "Oh, if you're going to do a black cover, then why don't you do the silhouette of the Twin Towers, black on black?"
And I sat down to draw this, and as soon as I saw it, a shiver ran down my spine and I realized that in this refusal to make an image, we had found a way to capture loss and mourning and absence.
And it's been a profound thing that I learned in the process -- that sometimes some of the images that say the most do it with the most spare means.
And a simple image can speak volumes.
So this is the image that we published by Bob Staake right after the election of Barack Obama, and captured a historic moment.
But we can't really plan for this, because in order to do this, we have to let the artist experience the emotions that we all feel when that is happening.
So back in November 2016, during the election last year, the only image that we could publish was this, which was on the stand on the week that everybody voted.
(Laughter) Because we knew somebody would feel this -- (Laughter) when the result of the election was announced.
And when we found out the result, we really were at a loss, and this is the image that was sent by Bob Staake again, and that really hit a chord.
And again, we can't really figure out what's going to come next, but here it felt like we didn't know how to move forward, but we did move forward, and this is the image that we published after Donald Trump's election and at the time of the Women's March all over the US.
So over those 24 years, I have seen over 1,000 images come to life week after week, and I'm often asked which one is my favorite, but I can't pick one because what I'm most proud of is how different every image is, one from the other.
And that's due to the talent and the diversity of all of the artists that contribute.
And now, well, now, we're owned by Russia, so -- (Laughter) In a rendering by Barry Blitt here, Eustace has become Eustace Vladimirovich Tilley.
And the butterfly is none other than a flabbergasted Donald Trump flapping his wings, trying to figure out how to control the butterfly effect, and the famed logo that was drawn by Rae Irvin in 1925 is now in Cyrillic.
So, what makes me really excited about this moment is the way that ...
You know, free press is essential to our democracy.
And we can see from the sublime to the ridiculous that artists can capture what is going on in a way that an artist armed with just India ink and watercolor can capture and enter into the cultural dialogue.
It puts those artists at the center of that culture, and that's exactly where I think they should be.
Because the main thing we need right now is a good cartoon.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Ten years ago, computer vision researchers thought that getting a computer to tell the difference between a cat and a dog would be almost impossible, even with the significant advance in the state of artificial intelligence.
Now we can do it at a level greater than 99 percent accuracy.
This is called image classification -- give it an image, put a label to that image -- and computers know thousands of other categories as well.
I'm a graduate student at the University of Washington, and I work on a project called Darknet, which is a neural network framework for training and testing computer vision models.
So let's just see what Darknet thinks of this image that we have.
When we run our classifier on this image, we see we don't just get a prediction of dog or cat, we actually get specific breed predictions.
That's the level of granularity we have now.
And it's correct.
My dog is in fact a malamute.
So we've made amazing strides in image classification, but what happens when we run our classifier on an image that looks like this?
Well ...
We see that the classifier comes back with a pretty similar prediction.
And it's correct, there is a malamute in the image, but just given this label, we don't actually know that much about what's going on in the image.
We need something more powerful.
I work on a problem called object detection, where we look at an image and try to find all of the objects, put bounding boxes around them and say what those objects are.
So here's what happens when we run a detector on this image.
Now, with this kind of result, we can do a lot more with our computer vision algorithms.
We see that it knows that there's a cat and a dog.
It knows their relative locations, their size.
It may even know some extra information.
There's a book sitting in the background.
And if you want to build a system on top of computer vision, say a self-driving vehicle or a robotic system, this is the kind of information that you want.
You want something so that you can interact with the physical world.
Now, when I started working on object detection, it took 20 seconds to process a single image.
And to get a feel for why speed is so important in this domain, here's an example of an object detector that takes two seconds to process an image.
So this is 10 times faster than the 20-seconds-per-image detector, and you can see that by the time it makes predictions, the entire state of the world has changed, and this wouldn't be very useful for an application.
If we speed this up by another factor of 10, this is a detector running at five frames per second.
This is a lot better, but for example, if there's any significant movement, I wouldn't want a system like this driving my car.
This is our detection system running in real time on my laptop.
So it smoothly tracks me as I move around the frame, and it's robust to a wide variety of changes in size, pose, forward, backward.
This is great.
This is what we really need if we're going to build systems on top of computer vision.
(Applause) So in just a few years, we've gone from 20 seconds per image to 20 milliseconds per image, a thousand times faster.
How did we get there?
Well, in the past, object detection systems would take an image like this and split it into a bunch of regions and then run a classifier on each of these regions, and high scores for that classifier would be considered detections in the image.
But this involved running a classifier thousands of times over an image, thousands of neural network evaluations to produce detection.
Instead, we trained a single network to do all of detection for us.
It produces all of the bounding boxes and class probabilities simultaneously.
With our system, instead of looking at an image thousands of times to produce detection, you only look once, and that's why we call it the YOLO method of object detection.
So with this speed, we're not just limited to images; we can process video in real time.
And now, instead of just seeing that cat and dog, we can see them move around and interact with each other.
This is a detector that we trained on 80 different classes in Microsoft's COCO dataset.
It has all sorts of things like spoon and fork, bowl, common objects like that.
It has a variety of more exotic things: animals, cars, zebras, giraffes.
And now we're going to do something fun.
We're just going to go out into the audience and see what kind of things we can detect.
Does anyone want a stuffed animal?
There are some teddy bears out there.
And we can turn down our threshold for detection a little bit, so we can find more of you guys out in the audience.
Let's see if we can get these stop signs.
We find some backpacks.
Let's just zoom in a little bit.
And this is great.
And all of the processing is happening in real time on the laptop.
And it's important to remember that this is a general purpose object detection system, so we can train this for any image domain.
The same code that we use to find stop signs or pedestrians, bicycles in a self-driving vehicle, can be used to find cancer cells in a tissue biopsy.
And there are researchers around the globe already using this technology for advances in things like medicine, robotics.
This morning, I read a paper where they were taking a census of animals in Nairobi National Park with YOLO as part of this detection system.
And that's because Darknet is open source and in the public domain, free for anyone to use.
(Applause) But we wanted to make detection even more accessible and usable, so through a combination of model optimization, network binarization and approximation, we actually have object detection running on a phone.
(Applause) And I'm really excited because now we have a pretty powerful solution to this low-level computer vision problem, and anyone can take it and build something with it.
So now the rest is up to all of you and people around the world with access to this software, and I can't wait to see what people will build with this technology.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The first time I felt fear I was 41 years old.
People have always said I was brave.
When I was little, I'd climb the highest tree, and I'd approach any animal fearlessly.
I liked challenges.
My father used to say, "Good steel can withstand any temperature."
And when I entered into Colombian politics, I thought I'd be able to withstand any temperature.
I wanted to end corruption; I wanted to cut ties between politicians and drug traffickers.
The first time I was elected, it was because I called out, by name, corrupt and untouchable politicians.
I also called out the president for his ties to the cartels.
That's when the threats started.
I had to send my very young children out of the country one morning, hidden, all the way to the airport, in the French ambassador's armored car.
Days later, I was the victim of an attack, but emerged unharmed.
The following year, the Colombian people elected me with the highest number of votes.
I thought people applauded me because I was brave.
I, too, thought I was brave.
But I wasn't.
I had simply never before experienced true fear.
That changed on February 23, 2002.
At the time, I was a presidential candidate in Colombia promoting my campaign agenda, when I was detained by a group of armed men.
They were wearing uniforms with military garments.
I looked at their boots; they were rubber.
And I knew that the Colombian army wore leather boots.
I knew that these were FARC guerrillas.
From that point on, everything happened very quickly.
The commando leader ordered us to stop the vehicle.
Meanwhile, one of his men stepped on an antipersonnel mine and flew through the air.
He landed, sitting upright, right in front of me.
We made eye contact and it was then that the young man understood: his rubber boot with his leg still in it had landed far away.
(Sighs) He started screaming like crazy.
And the truth is, I felt -- as I feel right now, because I'm reliving these emotions -- I felt at that moment that something inside of me was breaking and that I was being infected with his fear.
My mind went blank and couldn't think; it was paralyzed.
When I finally reacted, I said to myself, "They're going to kill me, and I didn't say goodbye to my children."
As they took me into the deepest depths of the jungle, the FARC soldiers announced that if the government didn't negotiate, they'd kill me.
And I knew that the government wouldn't negotiate.
From that point on, I went to sleep in fear every night -- cold sweats, shaking, stomach ache, insomnia.
But worse than that was what was happening to my mind, because my memory was being erased: all the phone numbers, addresses, names of very dear people, even significant life events.
And so, I began to doubt myself, to doubt my mental health.
And with doubt came desperation, and with desperation came depression.
I was suffering notorious behavioral changes and it wasn't just paranoia in moments of panic.
It was distrust, it was hatred, and it was also the urge to kill.
This, I realized when they had me chained by the neck to a tree.
They kept me outside that day, during a tropical downpour.
I remember feeling an urgent need to use the bathroom.
"Whatever you have to do, you'll do in front of me, bitch," the guard screamed at me.
And I decided at that moment to kill him.
And for days, I was planning, trying to find the right moment, the right way to do it, filled with hatred, filled with fear.
Then suddenly, I rose up, snapped out of it and thought: "I'm not going to become one of them.
I'm not going to become an assassin.
I still have enough freedom to decide who I want to be."
That's when I learned that fear brought me face to face with myself.
It forced me to align my energies, to align my meridians.
I learned that facing fear could become a pathway to growth.
A lot of emotions arise when I talk about all of this, but when I think back, I'm able to identify the steps I took to do it.
I want to share three of them with you.
The first was to be guided by principles.
Because I realized that in the midst of panic and mental block, if I followed my principles, I acted correctly.
I remember the first night in a concentration camp that the guerrillas had built in the middle of the jungle, with 12-foot-high bars, barbed wire, lookouts in the four corners and armed men pointing guns at us 24 hours a day.
That morning, the first morning, some men arrived, yelling: "Count off! Count off!"
My fellow hostages woke up, startled, and began to identify themselves in numbered sequence.
But when it was my turn, I said, "Ingrid Betancourt.
If you want to know if I'm here, call me by my name."
The guards' fury was nothing compared to that of the other hostages, because, obviously they were scared -- we were all scared -- and they were afraid that, because of me, they would be punished.
But for me, beyond fear was the need to defend my identity, to not let them turn me into a thing or a number.
That was one of the principles: to defend what I considered to be human dignity.
But make no mistake: the guerrillas had it all very well analyzed -- they had been kidnapping for years, and they had developed a technique to break us, to defeat us, to divide us.
And so, the second step was to learn how to build supportive trust, to learn how to unite.
The jungle is like a different planet.
It's a world of shadows, of rain, with the hum of millions of bugs -- majia ants, bullet ants.
I didn't stop scratching a single day while I was in the jungle.
And of course, there were tarantulas, scorpions, anacondas ...
I once came face to face with a 24-foot long anaconda that could have swallowed me in one bite.
Jaguars ...
But I want to tell you that none of these animals did us as much harm as the human beings.
The guerrillas terrorized us.
They spread rumors.
Among the hostages, they sparked betrayals, jealousy, resentment, mistrust.
The first time I escaped for a long time was with Lucho.
Lucho had been a hostage for two years longer than I had.
We decided to tie ourselves up with ropes to have the strength to lower ourselves into that dark water full of piranhas and alligators.
What we did was, during the day, we would hide in the mangroves.
And at night, we would leave, get in the water, and we would swim and let the current carry us.
That went on for several days.
But Lucho became sick.
He was diabetic, and he fell into a diabetic coma.
So the guerrillas captured us.
But after having lived through that with Lucho, after having faced fear together, united, not punishment, not violence -- nothing -- could ever again divide us.
What's certain is, all the guerrillas' manipulation was so damaging to us that even today, among some of the hostages from back then, tensions linger, passed down from all that poison that the guerrillas created.
The third step is very important to me, and it's a gift that I want to give to you.
The third step is to learn how to develop faith.
I want to explain it like this: Jhon Frank Pinchao was a police officer who had been a hostage for more than eight years.
He was famous for being the biggest scaredy-cat of us all.
But Pincho -- I called him "Pincho" -- Pincho decided that he wanted to escape.
And he asked me to help him.
By that point, I basically had a master's degree in escape attempts.
(Laughter) So we got started but we had a delay, because first, Pincho had to learn how to swim.
And we had to carry out all these preparations in total secrecy.
Anyway, when we finally had everything ready, Pincho came up to me one afternoon and said, "Ingrid, suppose I'm in the jungle, and I go around and around in circles, and I can't find the way out.
What do I do?"
"Pincho, you grab a phone, and you call the man upstairs."
"Ingrid, you know I don't believe in God."
"God doesn't care. He'll still help you."
(Applause) It rained all night that night.
The following morning, the camp woke up to a big commotion, because Pincho had fled.
They made us dismantle the camp, and we started marching.
During the march, the head guerrillas told us that Pincho had died, and that they had found his remains eaten by an anaconda.
Seventeen days passed -- and believe me, I counted them, because they were torture for me.
But on the seventeenth day, the news exploded from the radio: Pincho was free and obviously alive.
And this was the first thing he said: "I know my fellow hostages are listening.
Ingrid, I did what you told me.
I called the man upstairs, and he sent me the patrol that rescued me from the jungle."
That was an extraordinary moment, because ...
obviously fear is contagious.
But faith is, too.
Faith isn't rational or emotional.
Faith is an exercise of the will.
It's the discipline of the will.
It's what allows us to transform everything that we are -- our weaknesses, our frailties, into strength, into power.
It's truly a transformation.
It's what gives us the strength to stand up in the face of fear look above it, and see beyond it.
I hope you remember that, because I know we all need to connect with that strength we have inside of us for the times when there's a storm raging around our boat.
Many, many, many, many years passed before I could return to my house.
But when they took us, handcuffed, into the helicopter that finally took us out of the jungle, everything happened as quickly as when they kidnapped me.
In an instant, I saw the guerrilla commander at my feet, gagged, and the rescue leader, yelling: "We're the Colombian army!
You are free!"
The shriek that came out of all of us when we regained our freedom, continues to vibrate in me to this day.
Now, I know they can divide all of us, they can manipulate us all with fear.
The "No" vote on the peace referendum in Colombia; Brexit; the idea of a wall between Mexico and the United States; Islamic terrorism -- they're all examples of using fear politically to divide and recruit us.
We all feel fear.
But we can all avoid being recruited using the resources we have -- our principles, unity, faith.
Yes, fear is part of the human condition, as well as being necessary for survival.
But above all, it's the guide by which each of us builds our identity, our personality.
It's true, I was 41 years old the first time I felt fear, and feeling fear was not my decision.
But it was my decision what to do with that fear.
You can survive crawling along, fearful.
But you can also rise above the fear, rise up, spread your wings, and soar, fly high, high, high, high, until you reach the stars, where all of us want to go.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, imagine that you take a 19-hour, very long drive to Disney World, with two kids in the back seat.
And 15 minutes into this 19-hour trip, the immutable laws of nature dictate that you get the question: "Are we there yet?"
(Laughter) So you answer this question a hundred more times, easily, in the negative, but you finally arrive.
You have a wonderful, wonderful, wonderful trip.
You drive 19 long hours back home.
And when you get there, the police are waiting on you.
They accuse you of committing a crime that occurred while you were away in Florida.
You tell anybody and everybody who will listen, "I didn't do it!
I couldn't have done it!
I was hanging out with Mickey and Minnie and my kids!"
But no one believes you.
Ultimately, you're arrested, you're tried, you're convicted and you are sentenced.
And you spend 25 years in jail, until someone comes along and proves -- has the evidence to prove -- that you actually were in Florida when this crime was committed.
So.
So, I'm a Harvard Law professor, and the last several years, I have worked on winning the release of innocent people who've been wrongfully convicted -- people like Jonathan Fleming, who spent 24 years, eight months in jail for a murder that was committed in Brooklyn, New York, while he was in Disney World with his kids.
How do we know this?
Because when he was arrested, among his property in his back pocket was a receipt -- time-stamped receipt that showed that he was in Disney World.
That receipt was put in the police file, a copy of it was put in the prosecutor's file, and they never gave it to his public defender.
In fact, nobody even knew it was there.
It just sat there for 20-some-odd years.
My team looked through the file, and we found it, did the rest of the investigation, and figured out someone else committed the crime.
Mr. Fleming was in Disney World, and he is now released.
Let me give you a little bit of context.
So about three years ago, I got a call from the Brooklyn District Attorney.
He asked whether I'd be interested in designing a program called a "conviction review unit."
So I said yes.
A conviction review unit is essentially a unit in a prosecutor's office where prosecutors look at their past cases to determine whether or not they made mistakes.
Over the course of the first year, we found about 13 wrongful convictions, people having been in jail for decades, and we released all of them.
It was the most in New York history.
The program is still going on, and they're up to 21 releases now -- 21 people who spent significant time behind bars.
So let me tell you about a couple other of the men and women that I interacted with in the course of this program.
One name is Roger Logan.
Mr. Logan had been in jail 17 years and wrote me a letter.
It was a simple letter; it basically said, "Professor Sullivan, I'm innocent. I've been framed.
Can you look at my case?"
At first blush, the case seemed like it was open and shut, but my research had shown that single-witness identification cases are prone to error.
It doesn't mean he was innocent, it just means we ought to look a little bit closer at those cases.
So we did.
And the facts were relatively simple.
The eyewitness said she heard a shot, and she ran to the next building and turned around and looked, and there was Mr. Logan.
And he was tried and convicted and in jail for 17-some-odd years.
But it was a single-witness case, so we took a look at it.
I sent some people to the scene, and there was an inconsistency.
And to put it politely: Usain Bolt couldn't have run from where she said she was to the other spot.
Right?
So we knew that wasn't true.
So it still didn't mean that he didn't do it, but we knew something was maybe fishy about this witness.
So we looked through the file, a piece of paper in the file had a number on it.
The number indicated that this witness had a record.
We went back through 20 years of non-digitized papers to figure out what this record was about, and it turned out -- it turned out -- the eyewitness was in jail when she said she saw what she saw.
The man spent 17 years behind bars.
The last one is a case about two boys, Willie Stuckey, David McCallum.
They were arrested at 15, and their conviction was vacated 29 years later.
Now this was a case, once again -- first blush, it looked open and shut.
They had confessed.
But my research showed that juvenile confessions without a parent present are prone to error.
The DNA cases proved this several times.
So we took a close look.
We looked at the confession, and it turned out, there was something in the confession that those boys could not have known.
The only people who knew it were police and prosecutors.
We knew what really happened; someone told them to say this.
We don't exactly know who, which person did, but any rate, the confession was coerced, we determined.
We then went back and did forensics and did a fulsome investigation and found that two other, much older, different heights, different hairstyle, two other people committed the crime, not these two boys.
I actually went to court that day, for what's called a "vacatur hearing," where the conviction is thrown out.
I went to court; I wanted to see Mr. McCallum walk out of there.
So I went to court, and the judge said something that judges say all the time, but this took on a really special meaning.
He looked up after the arguments and said, "Mr. McCallum," he said five beautiful words: "You are free to go."
Can you imagine?
After just about 30 years: "You are free to go."
And he walked out of that courtroom.
Unfortunately, his codefendant, Mr. Stuckey, didn't get the benefit of that.
You see, Mr. Stuckey died in prison at 34 years old, and his mother sat at counsel table in his place.
I'll never forget this the rest of my life.
She just rocked at the table, saying, "I knew my baby didn't do this.
I knew my baby didn't do this."
And her baby didn't do this.
Two other guys did it.
If there's anything that we've learned, anything that I've learned, with this conviction integrity work, it's that justice doesn't happen.
People make justice happen.
Justice is not a thing that just descends from above and makes everything right.
If it did, Mr. Stuckey wouldn't have died in prison.
Justice is something that people of goodwill make happen.
Justice is a decision.
Justice is a decision.
We make justice happen.
You know, the scary thing is, in each of these three cases I described, it would have only taken just an extra minute -- an extra minute -- for someone to look through the file and find this receipt.
Just one -- to look through the file, find the receipt, give it to the public defender.
It would have taken someone just a minute to look at the video confession and say, "That cannot be."
Just a minute.
And perhaps Mr. Stuckey would be alive today.
It reminds me of one of my favorite poems.
It's a poem that Benjamin Elijah Mays would always recite, and he called it "God's Minute."
And it goes something like this: "I have only just a minute, only 60 seconds in it, forced upon me, can't refuse it, didn't seek it, didn't choose it.
But it's up to me to use it.
I must suffer if I lose it, give account if I abuse it.
Just a tiny little minute, but eternity is in it."
If I were to charge each and every one of us, I would want to say something like, "Every day, every day, take just one extra minute and do some justice.
You don't have to -- I mean, some people spend their careers and their lives, like public defenders, doing justice every day.
But in your professional lives, whatever you do, take time out to just do some justice.
Make a colleague feel better.
If you hear something that's sexist, don't laugh, speak up.
If someone is down, lift them up, one extra minute each day, and it'll be a great, great place.
I want to show you something.
Now, above me is a picture of David McCallum.
This is the day he was released from prison.
After 30 years, he got to hug a niece he had never been able to touch before.
And I asked him then, I said, "What's the first thing you want to do?"
And he said, "I just want to walk on the sidewalk without anybody telling me where to go."
Wasn't bitter, just wanted to walk on the sidewalk.
I spoke to Mr. McCallum about two weeks ago.
I went to New York.
It was on the two-year anniversary of his release.
And we talked, we laughed, we hugged, we cried.
And he's doing quite well.
And one of the things he said when we met with him is that he now has dedicated his life and his career to ensuring that nobody else is locked up unjustly.
Justice, my friends, is a decision.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want you to touch your face.
Go on.
What do you feel?
Soft? Squishy?
It's you, right? You're feeling you?
Well, it's not quite true.
You're actually feeling thousands of microscopic creatures that live on our face and fingers.
You're feeling some of the fungi that drifted down from the air ducts today.
They set off our allergies and smell of mildew.
You're feeling some of the 100 billion bacterial cells that live on our skin.
They've been munching away at your skin oils and replicating, producing the smells of body odor.
You're likely even touching the fecal bacteria that sprayed onto you the last time you flushed a toilet, or those bacteria that live in our water pipes and sprayed onto you with your last shower.
Sorry.
(Laughter) You're probably even giving a microscopic high five to the two species of mites that live on our faces, on all of our faces.
They've spent the night squirming across your face and having sex on the bridge of your nose.
(Laughter) Many of them are now leaking their gut contents onto your pores.
(Laughter) Now look at your finger.
How's it feel? Gross?
In desperate need of soap or bleach?
That's how you feel now, but it's not going to be how you feel in the future.
For the last 100 years, we've had an adversarial relationship with the microscopic life nearest us.
If I told you there was a bug in your house or bacteria in your sink, there was a human-devised solution for that, a product to eradicate, exterminate, disinfect.
We strive to remove most of the microscopic life in our world now.
But in doing so, we're ignoring the best source of new technology on this planet.
The last 100 years have featured human solutions to microbial problems, but the next 100 years will feature microbial solutions to human problems.
I'm a scientist, and I work with researchers at North Carolina State University and the University of Colorado to uncover the microscopic life that is nearest us, and that's often in our most intimate and boring environments, be it under our couches, in our backyards, or in our belly buttons.
I do this work because it turns out that we know very little about the microscopic life that's nearest us.
As of a few years ago, no scientist could tell you what bugs or microorganisms live in your home -- your home, the place you know better than anywhere else.
And so I and teams of others are armed with Q-tips and tweezers and advanced DNA techniques to uncover the microscopic life nearest us.
In doing so, we found over 600 species of bugs that live in USA homes, everything from spiders and cockroaches to tiny mites that cling to feathers.
And we found over 100,000 species of bacteria and fungi that live in our dust bunnies, thousands more that live on our clothes or in our showers.
We've gone further still, and we looked at the microorganisms that live inside the bodies of each of those bugs in our home.
In each bug, for example, a wasp, we see a microscopic jungle unfold in a petri plate, a world of hundreds of vibrant species.
Behold the biological cosmos!
So many of the species you're looking at right now don't yet have names.
Most of the life around us remains unknown.
I remember the first time I discovered and got to name a new species.
It was a fungus that lives in the nest of a paper wasp.
It's white and fluffy, and I named it "mucor nidicola," meaning in Latin that it lives in the nest of another.
This is a picture of it growing on a dinosaur, because everyone thinks dinosaurs are cool.
At the time, I was in graduate school, and I was so excited that I had found this new life form.
I called up my dad, and I go, "Dad! I just discovered a new microorganism species."
And he laughed and he goes, "That's great. I hope you also discovered a cure for it."
(Laughter) "Cure it."
Now, my dad is my biggest fan, so in that crushing moment where he wanted to kill my new little life form, I realized that actually I had failed him, both as a daughter and a scientist.
In my years toiling away in labs and in people's backyards, investigating and cataloging the microscopic life around us, I'd never made clear my true mission to him.
My goal is not to find technology to kill the new microscopic life around us.
My goal is to find new technology from this life, that will help save us.
The diversity of life in our homes is more than a list of 100,000 new species.
It is 100,000 new sources of solutions to human problems.
I know it's hard to believe that anything that's so small or only has one cell can do anything powerful, but they can.
These creatures are microscopic alchemists, with the ability to transform their environment with an arsenal of chemical tools.
This means that they can live anywhere on this planet, and they can eat whatever food is around them.
This means they can eat everything from toxic waste to plastic, and they can produce waste products like oil and battery power and even tiny nuggets of real gold.
They can transform the inedible into nutritive.
They can make sugar into alcohol.
They give chocolate its flavor, and soil the power to grow.
I'm here to tell you that the next 100 years will feature these microscopic creatures solving more of our problems.
And we have a lot of problems to choose from.
We've got the mundane: bad-smelling clothes or bland food.
And we've got the monumental: disease, pollution, war.
And so this is my mission: to not just catalog the microscopic life around us, but to find out what it's uniquely well-suited to help us with.
Here's an example.
We started with a pest, a wasp that lives on many of our homes.
Inside that wasp, we plucked out a little-known microorganism species with a unique ability: it could make beer.
This is a trait that only a few species on this planet have.
In fact, all commercially produced beer you've ever had likely came from one of only three microorganism species.
Yet our species, it could make a beer that tasted like honey, and it could also make a delightfully tart beer.
In fact, this microorganism species that lives in the belly of a wasp, it could make a valuable sour beer better than any other species on this planet.
There are now four species that produce commercial beer.
Where you used to see a pest, now think of tasting your future favorite beer.
As a second example, I worked with researchers to dig in the dirt in people's backyards.
There, we uncovered a microorganism that could make novel antibiotics, antibiotics that can kill the world's worst superbugs.
This was an awesome thing to find, but here's the secret: for the last 60 years, most of the antibiotics on the market have come from similar soil bacteria.
Every day, you and I and everyone in this room and on this planet, are saved by similar soil bacteria that produce most of our antibiotics.
Where you used to see dirt, now think of medication.
Perhaps my favorite example comes from colleagues who are studying a pond scum microorganism, which is tragically named after the cow dung it was first found in.
It's pretty unremarkable and would be unworthy of discussion, except that the researchers found that if you feed it to mice, it vaccinates against PTSD.
It vaccinates against fear.
Where you used to see pond scum, now think of hope.
There are so many more microbial examples that I don't have time to talk about today.
I gave you examples of solutions that came from just three species, but imagine what those other 100,000 species in your dust bunnies might be able to do.
In the future, they might be able to make you sexier or smarter or perhaps live longer.
So I want you to look at your finger again.
Think about all those microscopic creatures that are unknown.
Think about in the future what they might be able to do or make or whose life they might be able to save.
How does your finger feel right now?
A little bit powerful?
That's because you're feeling the future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My son and the iPhone were born three weeks apart in June 2007.
So while those early adopters were lined up outside, waiting to get their hands on this amazing new gadget, I was stuck at home with my hands full of something else that was sending out constant notifications -- (Laughter) a miserable, colicky baby who would only sleep in a moving stroller with complete silence.
I literally was walking 10 to 15 miles a day, and the baby weight came off.
That part was great.
But man, was I bored.
Before motherhood, I had been a journalist who rushed off when the Concorde crashed.
I was one of the first people into Belgrade when there was a revolution in Serbia.
Now, I was exhausted.
This walking went on for weeks.
It was only until about three months in that something shifted, though.
As I pounded the pavement, my mind started to wander, too.
I began imagining what I would do when I finally did sleep again.
So the colic did fade, and I finally got an iPhone and I put all those hours of wandering into action.
I created my dream job hosting a public radio show.
So there was no more rushing off to war zones, but thanks to my new smartphone, I could be a mother and a journalist.
I could be on the playground and on Twitter at the same time.
Yeah, well, when I thought that, when the technology came in and took over, that is when I hit a wall.
So, I want you to picture this: you host a podcast, and you have to prove that the investment of precious public radio dollars in you is worth it.
My goal was to increase my audience size tenfold.
So one day, I sat down to brainstorm, as you do, and I came up barren.
This was different than writer's block, right?
It wasn't like there was something there waiting to be unearthed.
There was just nothing.
And so I started to think back: When was the last time I actually had a good idea?
Yeah, it was when I was pushing that damn stroller.
Now all the cracks in my day were filled with phone time.
I checked the headlines while I waited for my latte.
I updated my calendar while I was sitting on the couch.
Texting turned every spare moment into a chance to show to my coworkers and my dear husband what a responsive person I was, or at least it was a chance to find another perfect couch for my page on Pinterest.
I realized that I was never bored.
And anyway, don't only boring people get bored?
But then I started to wonder: What actually happens to us when we get bored?
Or, more importantly: What happens to us if we never get bored?
And what could happen if we got rid of this human emotion entirely?
I started talking to neuroscientists and cognitive psychologists, and what they told me was fascinating.
It turns out that when you get bored, you ignite a network in your brain called the "default mode."
So our body, it goes on autopilot while we're folding the laundry or we're walking to work, but actually that is when our brain gets really busy.
Here's boredom researcher Dr. Sandi Mann.
(Audio) Dr. Sandi Mann: Once you start daydreaming and allow your mind to really wander, you start thinking a little bit beyond the conscious, a little bit into the subconscious, which allows sort of different connections to take place.
It's really awesome, actually.
Manoush Zomorodi: Totally awesome, right?
So this is my brain in an fMRI, and I learned that in the default mode is when we connect disparate ideas, we solve some of our most nagging problems, and we do something called "autobiographical planning."
This is when we look back at our lives, we take note of the big moments, we create a personal narrative, and then we set goals and we figure out what steps we need to take to reach them.
But now we chill out on the couch also while updating a Google Doc or replying to email.
We call it "getting shit done," but here's what neuroscientist Dr. Daniel Levitin says we're actually doing.
(Audio) Dr. Daniel Levitin: Every time you shift your attention from one thing to another, the brain has to engage a neurochemical switch that uses up nutrients in the brain to accomplish that.
So if you're attempting to multitask, you know, doing four or five things at once, you're not actually doing four or five things at once, because the brain doesn't work that way.
Instead, you're rapidly shifting from one thing to the next, depleting neural resources as you go.
(Audio) MZ: So switch, switch, switch, you're using glucose, glucose, glucose.
(Audio) DL: Exactly right, and we have a limited supply of that stuff.
MZ: A decade ago, we shifted our attention at work every three minutes.
Now we do it every 45 seconds, and we do it all day long.
The average person checks email 74 times a day, and switches tasks on their computer 566 times a day.
I discovered all this talking to professor of informatics, Dr. Gloria Mark.
(Audio) Dr. Gloria Mark: So we find that when people are stressed, they tend to shift their attention more rapidly.
We also found, strangely enough, that the shorter the amount of sleep that a person gets, the more likely they are to check Facebook.
So we're in this vicious, habitual cycle.
MZ: But could this cycle be broken?
What would happen if we broke this vicious cycle?
Maybe my listeners could help me find out.
What if we reclaimed those cracks in our day?
Could it help us jump-start our creativity?
We called the project "Bored and Brilliant."
And I expected, you know, a couple hundred people to play along, but thousands of people started signing up.
And they told me the reason they were doing it was because they were worried that their relationship with their phone had grown kind of ... "codependent," shall we say.
(Audio) Man: The relationship between a baby and its teddy bear or a baby and its binky or a baby that wants its mother's cradle when it's done with being held by a stranger -- (Laughs) that's the relationship between me and my phone.
(Audio) Woman: I think of my phone like a power tool: extremely useful, but dangerous if I'm not handling it properly.
(Audio) Woman 2: If I don't pay close attention, I'll suddenly realize that I've lost an hour of time doing something totally mindless.
MZ: OK, but to really measure any improvement, we needed data, right?
Because that's what we do these days.
So we partnered with some apps that would measure how much time we were spending every day on our phone.
If you're thinking it's ironic that I asked people to download another app so that they would spend less time on their phones: yeah, but you gotta meet people where they are.
(Laughter) So before challenge week, we were averaging two hours a day on our phones and 60 pickups, you know, like, a quick check, did I get a new email?
Here's what Tina, a student at Bard College, discovered about herself.
(Audio) Tina: So far, I've been spending between 150 and 200 minutes on my phone per day, and I've been picking up my phone 70 to 100 times per day.
And it's really concerning, because that's so much time that I could have spent doing something more productive, more creative, more towards myself, because when I'm on my phone, I'm not doing anything important.
MZ: Like Tina, people were starting to observe their own behavior.
They were getting ready for challenge week.
And that Monday, they started to wake up to instructions in their inbox, an experiment to try.
Day one: "Put it in your pocket."
Take that phone out of your hand.
See if you can eliminate the reflex to check it all day long, just for a day.
And if this sounds easy, you haven't tried it.
Here's listener Amanda Itzko.
(Audio) Amanda Itzko: I am absolutely itching.
I feel a little bit crazy, because I have noticed that I pick up my phone when I'm just walking from one room to another, getting on the elevator, and even -- and this is the part that I am really embarrassed to actually say out loud -- in the car.
MZ: Yikes.
Yeah, well, but as Amanda learned, this itching feeling is not actually her fault.
That is exactly the behavior that the technology is built to trigger.
(Laughter) I mean, right?
Here's former Google designer, Tristan Harris.
(Audio) Tristan Harris: If I'm Facebook or I'm Netflix or I'm Snapchat, I have literally a thousand engineers whose job is to get more attention from you.
I'm very good at this, and I don't want you to ever stop.
And you know, the CEO of Netflix recently said, "Our biggest competitors are Facebook, YouTube and sleep."
I mean, so there's a million places to spend your attention, but there's a war going on to get it.
MZ: I mean, you know the feeling: that amazing episode of "Transparent" ends, and then the next one starts playing so you're like, eh, OK fine, I'll just stay up and watch it.
Or the LinkedIn progress bar says you are this close to having the perfect profile, so you add a little more personal information.
As one UX designer told me, the only people who refer to their customers as "users" are drug dealers and technologists.
(Laughter) (Applause) And users, as we know, are worth a lot of money.
Here's former Facebook product manager and author, Antonio Garca Martnez.
(Audio) Antonio Garca Martnez: The saying is, if any product is free then you're the product; your attention is the product.
But what is your attention worth?
That's why literally every time you load a page, not just on Facebook or any app, there's an auction being held instantly, billions of times a day, for exactly how much that one ad impression cost.
MZ: By the way, the average person will spend two years of their life on Facebook.
So, back to challenge week.
Immediately, we saw some creativity kick in.
Here's New Yorker Lisa Alpert.
(Audio) Lisa Alpert: I was bored, I guess.
So I suddenly looked at the stairway that went up to the top of the station, and I thought, you know, I had just come down that stairway, but I could go back up and then come back down and get a little cardio.
So I did, and then I had a little more time, so I did it again and I did it again, and I did it 10 times.
And I had a complete cardio workout.
I got on that R train feeling kind of exhausted, but, like, wow, that had never occurred to me.
How is that possible?
(Laughter) MZ: So creativity, I learned, means different things to different people.
(Laughter) But everyone found day three's challenge the hardest.
It was called "Delete that app."
Take that app -- you know the one; that one that always gets you, it sucks you in -- take it off your phone, even if just for the day.
I deleted the game Two Dots and nearly cried.
(Laughter) Yeah, Two Dots players know what I'm talking about.
But my misery had good company.
(Audio) Man 2: This is Liam in Los Angeles, and I deleted Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Tumblr, Snapchat and Vine from my phone in one fell swoop.
And it was kind of an embarrassingly emotional experience at first.
It felt weirdly lonely to look at that lock screen with no new notifications on it.
But I really liked deciding for myself when to think about or access my social networks, not giving my phone the power to decide that for me.
So thank you.
(Audio) Woman 3: Deleting the Twitter app was very sad, and I feel I maybe, over the last year when I've been on Twitter, have developed an addiction to it, and this "Bored and Brilliant" challenge has really made me realize it.
After a brief period of really horrible withdrawal feeling, like lack-of-caffeine headache, I now feel lovely.
I had a lovely dinner with my family, and I hope to continue this structured use of these powerful tools.
(Audio) Woman 4: I don't have that guilty gut feeling I have when I know I'm wasting time on my phone.
Maybe I'll have to start giving myself challenges and reminders like this every morning.
MZ: I mean, yes, this was progress.
I could not wait to see what the numbers said at the end of that week.
But when the data came in, it turned out that we had cut down, on average, just six minutes -- from 120 minutes a day on our phones to 114.
Yeah. Whoop-de-do.
So I went back to the scientists feeling kind of low, and they just laughed at me, and they said, you know, changing people's behavior in such a short time period was ridiculously ambitious, and actually what you've achieved is far beyond what we thought possible.
Because more important than the numbers, were the people's stories.
They felt empowered.
Their phones had been transformed from taskmasters back into tools.
And actually, I found what the young people said most intriguing.
Some of them told me that they didn't recognize some of the emotions that they felt during challenge week, because, if you think about it, if you have never known life without connectivity, you may never have experienced boredom.
And there could be consequences.
Researchers at USC have found -- they're studying teenagers who are on social media while they're talking to their friends or they're doing homework, and two years down the road, they are less creative and imaginative about their own personal futures and about solving societal problems, like violence in their neighborhoods.
And we really need this next generation to be able to focus on some big problems: climate change, economic disparity, massive cultural differences.
No wonder CEOs in an IBM survey identified creativity as the number one leadership competency.
OK, here's the good news, though: In the end, 20,000 people did "Bored and Brilliant" that week.
Ninety percent cut down on their minutes.
Seventy percent got more time to think.
People told me that they slept better.
They felt happier.
My favorite note was from a guy who said he felt like he was waking up from a mental hibernation.
Some personal data and some neuroscience gave us permission to be offline a little bit more, and a little bit of boredom gave us some clarity and helped some of us set some goals.
I mean, maybe constant connectivity won't be cool in a couple of years.
But meanwhile, teaching people, especially kids, how to use technology to improve their lives and to self-regulate needs to be part of digital literacy.
So the next time you go to check your phone, remember that if you don't decide how you're going to use the technology, the platforms will decide for you.
And ask yourself: What am I really looking for?
Because if it's to check email, that's fine -- do it and be done.
But if it's to distract yourself from doing the hard work that comes with deeper thinking, take a break, stare out the window and know that by doing nothing you are actually being your most productive and creative self.
It might feel weird and uncomfortable at first, but boredom truly can lead to brilliance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How many companies have you interacted with today?
Well, you got up in the morning, took a shower, washed your hair, used a hair dryer, ate breakfast -- ate cereals, fruit, yogurt, whatever -- had coffee -- tea.
You took public transport to come here, or maybe used your private car.
You interacted with the company that you work for or that you own.
You interacted with your clients, your customers, and so on and so forth.
I'm pretty sure there are at least seven companies you've interacted with today.
Let me tell you a stunning statistic.
One out of seven large, public corporations commit fraud every year.
This is a US academic study that looks at US companies -- I have no reason to believe that it's different in Europe.
This is a study that looks at both detected and undetected fraud using statistical methods.
This is not petty fraud.
These frauds cost the shareholders of these companies, and therefore society, on the order of 380 billion dollars per year.
We can all think of some examples, right?
The car industry's secrets aren't quite so secret anymore.
Fraud has become a feature, not a bug, of the financial services industry.
That's not me who's claiming that, that's the president of the American Finance Association who stated that in his presidential address.
That's a huge problem if you think about, especially, an economy like Switzerland, which relies so much on the trust put into its financial industry.
On the other hand, there are six out of seven companies who actually remain honest despite all temptations to start engaging in fraud.
There are whistle-blowers like Michael Woodford, who blew the whistle on Olympus.
These whistle-blowers risk their careers, their friendships, to bring out the truth about their companies.
There are journalists like Anna Politkovskaya who risk even their lives to report human rights violations.
She got killed -- every year, around 100 journalists get killed because of their conviction to bring out the truth.
So in my talk today, I want to share with you some insights I've obtained and learned in the last 10 years of conducting research in this.
I'm a researcher, a scientist working with economists, financial economists, ethicists, neuroscientists, lawyers and others trying to understand what makes humans tick, and how can we address this issue of fraud in corporations and therefore contribute to the improvement of the world.
I want to start by sharing with you two very distinct visions of how people behave.
First, meet Adam Smith, founding father of modern economics.
His basic idea was that if everybody behaves in their own self-interests, that's good for everybody in the end.
Self-interest isn't a narrowly defined concept just for your immediate utility.
It has a long-run implication.
Let's think about that.
Think about this dog here.
That might be us.
There's this temptation -- I apologize to all vegetarians, but -- (Laughter) Dogs do like the bratwurst.
(Laughter) Now, the straight-up, self-interested move here is to go for that.
So my friend Adam here might jump up, get the sausage and thereby ruin all this beautiful tableware.
But that's not what Adam Smith meant.
He didn't mean disregard all consequences -- to the contrary.
He would have thought, well, there may be negative consequences, for example, the owner might be angry with the dog and the dog, anticipating that, might not behave in this way.
That might be us, weighing the benefits and costs of our actions.
How does that play out?
Well, many of you, I'm sure, have in your companies, especially if it's a large company, a code of conduct.
And then if you behave according to that code of conduct, that improves your chances of getting a bonus payment.
And on the other hand, if you disregard it, then there are higher chances of not getting your bonus or its being diminished.
In other words, this is a very economic motivation of trying to get people to be more honest, or more aligned with the corporation's principles.
Similarly, reputation is a very powerful economic force, right?
We try to build a reputation, maybe for being honest, because then people trust us more in the future.
Right?
Adam Smith talked about the baker who's not producing good bread out of his benevolence for those people who consume the bread, but because he wants to sell more future bread.
In my research, we find, for example, at the University of Zurich, that Swiss banks who get caught up in media, and in the context, for example, of tax evasion, of tax fraud, have bad media coverage.
They lose net new money in the future and therefore make lower profits.
That's a very powerful reputational force.
Benefits and costs.
Here's another viewpoint of the world.
Meet Immanuel Kant, 18th-century German philosopher superstar.
He developed this notion that independent of the consequences, some actions are just right and some are just wrong.
It's just wrong to lie, for example.
So, meet my friend Immanuel here.
He knows that the sausage is very tasty, but he's going to turn away because he's a good dog.
He knows it's wrong to jump up and risk ruining all this beautiful tableware.
If you believe that people are motivated like that, then all the stuff about incentives, all the stuff about code of conduct and bonus systems and so on, doesn't make a whole lot of sense.
People are motivated by different values perhaps.
So, what are people actually motivated by?
These two gentlemen here have perfect hairdos, but they give us very different views of the world.
What do we do with this?
Well, I'm an economist and we conduct so-called experiments to address this issue.
We strip away facts which are confusing in reality.
Reality is so rich, there is so much going on, it's almost impossible to know what drives people's behavior really.
So let's do a little experiment together.
Imagine the following situation.
You're in a room alone, not like here.
There's a five-franc coin like the one I'm holding up right now in front of you.
Here are your instructions: toss the coin four times, and then on a computer terminal in front of you, enter the number of times tails came up.
This is the situation.
Here's the rub.
For every time that you announce that you had a tails throw, you get paid five francs.
So if you say I had two tails throws, you get paid 10 francs.
If you say you had zero, you get paid zero francs.
If you say, "I had four tails throws," then you get paid 20 francs.
It's anonymous, nobody's watching what you're doing, and you get paid that money anonymously.
I've got two questions for you.
(Laughter) You know what's coming now, right?
First, how would you behave in that situation?
The second, look to your left and look to your right -- (Laughter) and think about how the person sitting next to you might behave in that situation.
We did this experiment for real.
We did it at the Manifesta art exhibition that took place here in Zurich recently, not with students in the lab at the university but with the real population, like you guys.
First, a quick reminder of stats.
If I throw the coin four times and it's a fair coin, then the probability that it comes up four times tails is 6.25 percent.
And I hope you can intuitively see that the probability that all four of them are tails is much lower than if two of them are tails, right?
Here are the specific numbers.
Here's what happened.
People did this experiment for real.
Around 30 to 35 percent of people said, "Well, I had four tails throws."
That's extremely unlikely.
(Laughter) But the really amazing thing here, perhaps to an economist, is there are around 65 percent of people who did not say I had four tails throws, even though in that situation, nobody's watching you, the only consequence that's in place is you get more money if you say four than less.
You leave 20 francs on the table by announcing zero.
I don't know whether the other people all were honest or whether they also said a little bit higher or lower than what they did because it's anonymous.
We only observed the distribution.
But what I can tell you -- and here's another coin toss.
There you go, it's tails.
(Laughter) Don't check, OK?
(Laughter) What I can tell you is that not everybody behaved like Adam Smith would have predicted.
So what does that leave us with?
Well, it seems people are motivated by certain intrinsic values and in our research, we look at this.
We look at the idea that people have so-called protected values.
A protected value isn't just any value.
A protected value is a value where you're willing to pay a price to uphold that value.
You're willing to pay a price to withstand the temptation to give in.
And the consequence is you feel better if you earn money in a way that's consistent with your values.
Let me show you this again in the metaphor of our beloved dog here.
If we succeed in getting the sausage without violating our values, then the sausage tastes better.
That's what our research shows.
If, on the other hand, we do so -- if we get the sausage and in doing so we actually violate values, we value the sausage less.
Quantitatively, that's quite powerful.
We can measure these protected values, for example, by a survey measure.
Simple, nine-item survey that's quite predictive in these experiments.
If you think about the average of the population and then there's a distribution around it -- people are different, we all are different.
People who have a set of protected values that's one standard deviation above the average, they discount money they receive by lying by about 25 percent.
That means a dollar received when lying is worth to them only 75 cents without any incentives you put in place for them to behave honestly.
It's their intrinsic motivation.
By the way, I'm not a moral authority.
I'm not saying I have all these beautiful values, right?
But I'm interested in how people behave and how we can leverage that richness in human nature to actually improve the workings of our organizations.
So there are two very, very different visions here.
On the one hand, you can appeal to benefits and costs and try to get people to behave according to them.
On the other hand, you can select people who have the values and the desirable characteristics, of course -- competencies that go in line with your organization.
I do not yet know where these protected values really come from.
Is it nurture or is it nature?
What I can tell you is that the distribution looks pretty similar for men and women.
It looks pretty similar for those who had studied economics or those who had studied psychology.
It looks even pretty similar around different age categories among adults.
But I don't know yet how this develops over a lifetime.
That will be the subject of future research.
The idea I want to leave you with is it's all right to appeal to incentives.
I'm an economist; I certainly believe in the fact that incentives work.
But do think about selecting the right people rather than having people and then putting incentives in place.
Selecting the right people with the right values may go a long way to saving a lot of trouble and a lot of money in your organizations.
In other words, it will pay off to put people first.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's 1878.
Sir Francis Galton gives a remarkable talk.
He's speaking to the anthropologic institute of Great Britain and Ireland.
Known for his pioneering work in human intelligence, Galton is a brilliant polymath.
He's an explorer, an anthropologist, a sociologist, a psychologist and a statistician.
He's also a eugenist.
In this talk, he presents a new technique by which he can combine photographs and produce composite portraits.
This technique could be used to characterize different types of people.
Galton thinks that if he combines photographs of violent criminals, he will discover the face of criminality.
But to his surprise, the composite portrait that he produces is beautiful.
Galton's surprising finding raises deep questions: What is beauty?
Why do certain configurations of line and color and form excite us so?
For most of human history, these questions have been approached using logic and speculation.
But in the last few decades, scientists have addressed the question of beauty using ideas from evolutionary psychology and tools of neuroscience.
We're beginning to glimpse the why and the how of beauty, at least in terms of what it means for the human face and form.
And in the process, we're stumbling upon some surprises.
When it comes to seeing beauty in each other, while this decision is certainly subjective for the individual, it's sculpted by factors that contribute to the survival of the group.
Many experiments have shown that a few basic parameters contribute to what makes a face attractive.
These include averaging, symmetry and the effects of hormones.
Let's take each one of these in turn.
Galton's finding that composite or average faces are typically more attractive than each individual face that contributes to the average has been replicated many times.
This laboratory finding fits with many people's intuitions.
Average faces represent the central tendencies of a group.
People with mixed features represent different populations, and presumably harbor greater genetic diversity and adaptability to the environment.
Many people find mixed-race individuals attractive and inbred families less so.
The second factor that contributes to beauty is symmetry.
People generally find symmetric faces more attractive than asymmetric ones.
Developmental abnormalities are often associated with asymmetries.
And in plants, animals and humans, asymmetries often arise from parasitic infections.
Symmetry, it turns out, is also an indicator of health.
In the 1930s, a man named Maksymilian Faktorowicz recognized the importance of symmetry for beauty when he designed the beauty micrometer.
With this device, he could measure minor asymmetric flaws which he could then make up for with products he sold from his company, named brilliantly after himself, Max Factor, which, as you know, is one of the world's most famous brands for "make up."
The third factor that contributes to facial attractiveness is the effect of hormones.
And here, I need to apologize for confining my comments to heterosexual norms.
But estrogen and testosterone play important roles in shaping features that we find attractive.
Estrogen produces features that signal fertility.
Men typically find women attractive who have elements of both youth and maturity.
A face that's too baby-like might mean that the girl is not yet fertile, so men find women attractive who have large eyes, full lips and narrow chins as indicators of youth, and high cheekbones as an indicator of maturity.
Testosterone produces features that we regard as typically masculine.
These include heavier brows, thinner cheeks and bigger, squared-off jaws.
But here's a fascinating irony.
In many species, if anything, testosterone suppresses the immune system.
So the idea that testosterone-infused features are a fitness indicator doesn't really make a whole lot of sense.
Here, the logic is turned on its head.
Instead of a fitness indicator, scientists invoke a handicap principle.
The most commonly cited example of a handicap is the peacock's tail.
This beautiful but cumbersome tail doesn't exactly help the peacock avoid predators and approach peahens.
Why should such an extravagant appendage evolve?
Even Charles Darwin, in an 1860 letter to Asa Gray wrote that the sight of the peacock's tail made him physically ill.
He couldn't explain it with his theory of natural selection, and out of this frustration, he developed the theory of sexual selection.
On this account, the display of the peacock's tail is about sexual enticement, and this enticement means it's more likely the peacock will mate and have offspring.
Now, the modern twist on this display argument is that the peacock is also advertising its health to the peahen.
Only especially fit organisms can afford to divert resources to maintaining such an extravagant appendage.
Only especially fit men can afford the price that testosterone levies on their immune system.
And by analogy, think of the fact that only very rich men can afford to pay more than $10,000 for a watch as a display of their financial fitness.
Now, many people hear these kinds of evolutionary claims and think they mean that we somehow are unconsciously seeking mates who are healthy.
And I think this idea is probably not right.
Teenagers and young adults are not exactly known for making decisions that are predicated on health concerns.
But they don't have to be, and let me explain why.
Imagine a population in which people have three different kinds of preferences: for green, for orange and for red.
From their point of view, these preferences have nothing to do with health; they just like what they like.
But if it were also the case that these preferences are associated with the different likelihood of producing offspring -- let's say in a ratio of 3:2:1 -- then in the first generation, there would be 3 greens to 2 oranges to 1 red, and in each subsequent generation, the proportion of greens increase, so that in 10 generations, 98 percent of this population has a green preference.
Now, a scientist coming in and sampling this population discovers that green preferences are universal.
So the point about this little abstract example is that while preferences for specific physical features can be arbitrary for the individual, if those features are heritable and they are associated with a reproductive advantage, over time, they become universal for the group.
So what happens in the brain when we see beautiful people?
Attractive faces activate parts of our visual cortex in the back of the brain, an area called the fusiform gyrus, that is especially tuned to processing faces, and an adjacent area called the lateral occipital complex, that is especially attuned to processing objects.
In addition, attractive faces activate parts of our reward and pleasure centers in the front and deep in the brain, and these include areas that have complicated names, like the ventral striatum, the orbitofrontal cortex and the ventromedial prefrontal cortex.
Our visual brain that is tuned to processing faces interacts with our pleasure centers to underpin the experience of beauty.
Amazingly, while we all engage with beauty, without our knowledge, beauty also engages us.
Our brains respond to attractive faces even when we're not thinking about beauty.
We conducted an experiment in which people saw a series of faces, and in one condition, they had to decide if a pair of faces were the same or a different person.
Even in this condition, attractive faces drove neural activity robustly in their visual cortex, despite the fact that they were thinking about a person's identity and not their beauty.
Another group similarly found automatic responses to beauty within our pleasure centers.
Taken together, these studies suggest that our brain automatically responds to beauty by linking vision and pleasure.
These beauty detectors, it seems, ping every time we see beauty, regardless of whatever else we might be thinking.
We also have a "beauty is good" stereotype embedded in the brain.
Within the orbitofrontal cortex, there's overlapping neural activity in response to beauty and to goodness, and this happens even when people aren't explicitly thinking about beauty or goodness.
Our brains seem to reflexively associate beauty and good.
And this reflexive association may be the biologic trigger for the many social effects of beauty.
Attractive people receive all kinds of advantages in life.
They're regarded as more intelligent, more trustworthy, they're given higher pay and lesser punishments, even when such judgments are not warranted.
These kinds of observations reveal beauty's ugly side.
In my lab, we recently found that people with minor facial anomalies and disfigurements are regarded as less good, less kind, less intelligent, less competent and less hardworking.
Unfortunately, we also have a "disfigured is bad" stereotype.
This stereotype is probably exploited and magnified by images in popular media, in which facial disfigurement is often used as a shorthand to depict someone of villainous character.
We need to understand these kinds of implicit biases if we are to overcome them and aim for a society in which we treat people fairly, based on their behavior and not on the happenstance of their looks.
Let me leave you with one final thought.
Beauty is a work in progress.
The so-called universal attributes of beauty were selected for during the almost two million years of the Pleistocene.
Life was nasty, brutish and a very long time ago.
The selection criteria for reproductive success from that time doesn't really apply today.
For example, death by parasite is not one of the top ways that people die, at least not in the technologically developed world.
From antibiotics to surgery, birth control to in vitro fertilization, the filters for reproductive success are being relaxed.
And under these relaxed conditions, preference and trait combinations are free to drift and become more variable.
Even as we are profoundly affecting our environment, modern medicine and technological innovation is profoundly affecting the very essence of what it means to look beautiful.
The universal nature of beauty is changing even as we're changing the universe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I'm afraid.
Right now, on this stage, I feel fear.
In my life, I ain't met many people that will readily admit when they are afraid.
And I think that's because deep down, they know how easy it spreads.
See, fear is like a disease.
When it moves, it moves like wildfire.
But what happens when, even in the face of that fear, you do what you've got to do?
That's called courage.
And just like fear, courage is contagious.
See, I'm from East St. Louis, Illinois.
That's a small city across the Mississippi River from St. Louis, Missouri.
I have lived in and around St. Louis my entire life.
When Michael Brown, Jr., an ordinary teenager, was gunned down by police in 2014 in Ferguson, Missouri -- another suburb, but north of St. Louis -- I remember thinking, he ain't the first, and he won't be the last young kid to lose his life to law enforcement.
But see, his death was different.
When Mike was killed, I remember the powers that be trying to use fear as a weapon.
The police response to a community in mourning was to use force to impose fear: fear of militarized police, imprisonment, fines.
The media even tried to make us afraid of each other by the way they spun the story.
And all of these things have worked in the past.
But like I said, this time it was different.
Michael Brown's death and the subsequent treatment of the community led to a string of protests in and around Ferguson and St. Louis.
When I got out to those protests about the fourth or fifth day, it was not out of courage; it was out of guilt.
See, I'm black.
I don't know if y'all noticed that.
(Laughter) But I couldn't sit in St. Louis, minutes away from Ferguson, and not go see.
So I got off my ass to go check it out.
When I got out there, I found something surprising.
I found anger; there was a lot of that.
But what I found more of was love.
People with love for themselves.
Love for their community.
And it was beautiful -- until the police showed up.
Then a new emotion was interjected into the conversation: fear.
Now, I'm not going to lie; when I saw those armored vehicles, and all that gear and all those guns and all those police I was terrified -- personally.
And when I looked around that crowd, I saw a lot of people that had the same thing going on.
But I also saw people with something else inside of them.
That was courage.
See, those people yelled, and they screamed, and they were not about to back down from the police.
They were past that point.
And then I could feel something in me changing, so I yelled and I screamed, and I noticed that everybody around me was doing the same thing.
And there was nothing like that feeling.
So I decided I wanted to do something more.
I went home, I thought: I'm an artist. I make shit.
So I started making things specific to the protest, things that would be weapons in a spiritual war, things that would give people voice and things that would fortify them for the road ahead.
I did a project where I took pictures of the hands of protesters and put them up and down the boarded-up buildings and community shops.
My goal was to raise awareness and to raise the morale.
And I think, for a minute at least, it did just that.
Then I thought, I want to uplift the stories of these people I was watching being courageous in the moment.
And myself and my friend, and filmmaker and partner Sabaah Folayan did just that with our documentary, "Whose Streets?"
I kind of became a conduit for all of this courage that was given to me.
And I think that's part of our job as artists.
I think we should be conveyors of courage in the work that we do.
And I think that we are the wall between the normal folks and the people that use their power to spread fear and hate, especially in times like these.
So I'm going to ask you.
Y'all the movers and the shakers, you know, the thought leaders: What are you gonna do with the gifts that you've been given to break us from the fear the binds us every day?
Because, see, I'm afraid every day.
I can't remember a time when I wasn't.
But once I figured out that fear was not put in me to cripple me, it was there to protect me, and once I figured out how to use that fear, I found my power.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi everyone.
So, I'm going to take us back to 2007.
I'd just spent about six months working on album that I'd poured my heart and my soul into, and it was getting about three plays per day on Myspace at the time, and I was getting more and more depressed when I started noticing these other people who were playing guitar and singing and putting videos on this new site called YouTube, and they were getting 300,000 views.
So I decided I'm going to start making some Youtube videos.
And one day they featured a video of my band on the homepage, which was amazing -- we got a bunch of new fans.
We also got a bunch of people who, I guess, just didn't really like the music or something -- (Laughter) It's OK because people started coming to our shows, and we started touring, and we came out with a record.
And when I checked our bank account balance after our first monthly iTunes payout, we had 22,000 bucks in it, which was amazing because at the time I was living at my dad's house, trying to make a living as a musician by uploading videos to the internet which literally zero people respected in 2009 -- even the people who were uploading videos to the internet.
And so for the next four years, I uploaded more and more videos to the Internet, and they got better and better, and we made enough money through brand deals and commercials and iTunes sales to buy a house.
And we built a recording studio.
But there was one big problem: making money as a creative person in 2013 was super weird.
First of all, the business models were changing all the time.
So our 58,000 dollars of annual iTunes download income was about to be replaced by about 6,000 dollars of streaming income.
Steams paid less than downloads.
And then as more and more creators started popping up online, there was just more competition for these five-figure brand deals that had kept the band afloat for years.
And to top it all off, our videos themselves -- the creative stuff that we made that our fans loved and appreciated -- that were actually contributing value to the world, those videos were generating almost zero dollars of income for us.
This is an actual snapshot of my YouTube dashboard from a 28-day period that shows one million views and 166 dollars of ad earnings for those views.
The whole machine in 2013 that took art online and outputted money was totally nonfunctional.
It doesn't matter if you're a newspaper, or an institution, or an independent creator.
A monthly web comic with 20,000 monthly readers -- 20,000 monthly readers -- gets paid a couple hundred bucks in ad revenue.
This is 20,000 people.
Like, in what world is this not enough?
I don't understand.
What systems have we built where this is insufficient for a person to make a living?
So, I actually have a theory about this.
I think it's been a weird 100 years.
(Laughter) (Applause) About 100 years ago, humans figured out how to record sound onto a wax cylinder.
That was the beginning of the phonograph.
Right around the same time, we figured out how to record light onto a piece of photographic paper, celluloid -- the beginning of film and television.
For the first time, you could store art on a thing, which was amazing.
Art used to be completely ephemeral, so if you missed the symphony, you just didn't get to hear the orchestra.
But now, for the first time, you could store the orchestra's performance on a physical object, and like, listen to it later, which was amazing.
It was so amazing in fact, that for the next 100 years, between 1900 and 2000, humans built just billions and billions of dollars of infrastructure to essentially help artists do two things.
First, put their art on a thing, and second, get that thing around the world to the people who wanted the art.
So, so much industry is devoted to these two problems.
Oh my gosh, there are trucking companies, and brick-and-mortar and marketing firms, and CD jewel case manufacturers, all devoted to these two problems.
And then we all know what happened.
10 years ago, the internet matures and we get Spotify and Facebook and YouTube and iTunes and Google search, and a hundred years of infrastructure and supply chains and distribution systems and monetization schemes are completely bypassed -- in a decade.
After 100 years of designing these things, it's no wonder that it's just totally broken for creative people right now.
It's no wonder that the monetization part of the chain doesn't work given this new context.
But what gets me super excited to be a creator right now, to be alive today and be a creative person right now, is realizing that we're only 10 years into figuring out this new machine -- to figuring out the next 100 years of infrastructure for our creators.
And you can tell we're only 10 years in.
There's a lot of trial and error, some really good ideas forming, a lot of experimentation.
Like Twitch streamers. Who's heard of Twitch?
Twitch streamers are making three to five thousand bucks a month streaming gaming content.
The big ones are making over 100,000 dollars a year.
There's a site called YouNow, it's an app.
It allows musicians and vloggers to get paid in digital goods from fans.
So, I'm also working on the problem.
Four years ago I started a company called Patreon with a friend of mine.
We're 80 people now working on this problem.
It's basically a membership platform that makes it really easy for creators to get paid -- every month from their fans to earn a living.
For a creator, it's like having a salary for being a creative person.
And this is one of our creators.
They're called "Kinda Funny."
They have about 220,000 subscribers on YouTube.
And when they upload a video, it gets somewhere around 15,000 views to 100,000 views.
I want you to check yourselves right now.
I think when we hear numbers like that, when we hear "15,000 views," and we see content like this, we just snap categorize it as being not as legitimate as a morning show that you'd hear on the radio or a talk show that you'd see on NBC or something But when "Kinda Funny" launched on Patreon, within a few weeks, they were making 31,000 dollars per month for this show.
It took off so fast that they decided to expand their programming and add new shows, and now they launched a second Patreon page -- they're making an additional 21,000 dollars per month.
And they're scaling what's essentially becoming a media company, financing the whole thing through membership.
OK, here's another example.
This is Derek Bodner, a sports journalist who used to write for Philadelphia Magazine until a few months ago when the magazine cut out all sports coverage.
Now he writes articles and publishes them on his own website -- he's still covering sports, but for himself.
And he's making 4,800 bucks a month from 1,700 patrons, financing it through membership.
This is Crash Course -- free educational content for the world.
This show is actually on the PBS digital network -- 29,000 dollars per month.
This is a duo sailing around the world, getting paid every month for documenting their travels from 1,400 patrons.
This is a podcast, "Chapo Trap House", making -- actually, since I screenshotted this, they're making an additional 2,000 dollars per month, so they're now making 56,000 dollars per month for their podcast.
And Patreon's not the only one working on the problem.
Even Google's starting to work on this.
A couple years ago, they launched Fan Funding; more recently, they launched Super Chat as a way for creators to monetize live streaming.
Newspapers are starting to experiment with membership.
New York Times has a membership program; The Guardian has over 200,000 paying subscribers to its membership program.
There's this bubbling soup of ideas and experiments and progress right now, and it's pointing in the direction of getting creators paid.
And it's working.
It's not, like, perfect yet, but it's really working.
So, Patreon has over 50,000 creators on the platform making salaries -- getting paid every month for putting art online, for being a creative person.
The next hundred years of infrastructure is on the way and it's going to be different this time because of this -- because of the direct connection between the person who makes the thing and the person who likes the thing.
About seven or eight years ago, I went to a cocktail party.
This is when the band had hit our first machine, so things were really cranking.
We had just made about 400,000 dollars in one year through iTunes sales and brand deals and stuff like that.
And this guy comes up to me and says, "Hey, Jack, what do you do?"
I said, "I'm a musician."
And he just sobered up immediately, and he stuck out his hand, put a hand on my shoulder, and in a real earnest, very nice voice he was like, "I hope you make it someday."
(Laughter) And ...
I have so many moments like that logged in my memory.
I just cringe thinking of that.
It's so embarrassing to just not feel valued as a creative person.
But as a species, we are leaving that cocktail party behind.
We're leaving that culture, we're out of there.
We're going to get so good at paying creators, within 10 years, kids graduating high school and college are going to think of being a creator as just being an option -- I could be a doctor, I could be a lawyer, I could be a podcaster, I could have a web comic.
It's just going to be something you can do.
We're figuring it out.
It's going to be a viable and sustainable and respected profession.
Creators are going to come out the other end of this weird 100 years, this century-long journey, with an awesome new machine.
And they're going to be paid, and they're going to be valued.
Thanks, everybody.
(Applause) I think it went pretty well.
I want artists who saw that to not give up -- to know that we're getting there.
It's not there yet, but in a couple years, there will be so many systems and tools for them to just make a living online, and if they've got a podcast that's starting to take off, but they're not able to make money on it yet, that's happening and they're going to be paid.
It's happening.
So, let me add to the complexity of the situation we find ourselves in.
At the same time that we're solving for climate change, we're going to be building cities for three billion people.
That's a doubling of the urban environment.
If we don't get that right, I'm not sure all the climate solutions in the world will save mankind, because so much depends on how we shape our cities: not just environmental impacts, but our social well-being, our economic vitality, our sense of community and connectedness.
Fundamentally, the way we shape cities is a manifestation of the kind of humanity we bring to bear.
And so getting it right is, I think, the order of the day.
And to a certain degree, getting it right can help us solve climate change, because in the end, it's our behavior that seems to be driving the problem.
The problem isn't free-floating, and it isn't just ExxonMobil and oil companies.
It's us; how we live.
How we live.
There's a villain in this story.
It's called sprawl, and I'll be upfront about that.
But it's not just the kind of sprawl you think of, or many people think of, as low-density development out at the periphery of the metropolitan area.
Actually, I think sprawl can happen anywhere, at any density.
The key attribute is that it isolates people.
It segregates people into economic enclaves and land-use enclaves.
It separates them from nature.
It doesn't allow the cross-fertilization, the interaction, that make cities great places and that make society thrive.
So the antidote to sprawl is really what we all need to be thinking about, especially when we're taking on this massive construction project.
So let me take you through one exercise.
We developed the model for the state of California so they could get on with reducing carbon emissions.
We did a whole series of scenarios for how the state could grow, and this is just one overly simplified one.
We mixed different development prototypes and said they're going to carry us through the year 2050, 10 million new crew in our state of California.
And one was sprawl.
It's just more of the same: shopping malls, subdivisions, office parks.
The other one was dominated by, not everybody moving to the city, but just compact development, what we used to think of as streetcar suburbs, walkable neighborhoods, low-rise, but integrated, mixed-used environments.
And the results are astounding.
They're astounding not just for the scale of the difference of this one shift in our city-making habit but also because each one represents a special interest group, a special interest group that used to advocate for their concerns one at a time.
They did not see the, what I call, "co-benefits" of urban form that allows them to join with others.
So, land consumption: environmentalists are really concerned about this, so are farmers; there's a whole range of people, and, of course, neighborhood groups that want open space nearby.
The sprawl version of California almost doubles the urban physical footprint.
Greenhouse gas: tremendous savings, because in California, our biggest carbon emission comes from cars, and cities that don't depend on cars as much obviously create huge savings.
Vehicle miles traveled: that's what I was just talking about.
Just reducing the average 10,000 miles per household per year, from somewhere in the mid-26,000 per household, has a huge impact not just on air quality and carbon but also on the household pocketbook.
It's very expensive to drive that much, and as we've seen, the middle class is struggling to hold on.
Health care: we were talking about how do you fix it once we broke it -- clean the air.
Why not just stop polluting?
Why not just use our feet and bikes more?
And that's a function of the kinds of cities that we shape.
Household costs: 2008 was a mark in time, not of just the financial industry running amok.
It was that we were trying to sell too many of the wrong kind of housing: large lot, single family, distant, too expensive for the average middle-class family to afford and, quite frankly, not a good fit to their lifestyle anymore.
But in order to move inventory, you can discount the financing and get it sold.
I think that's a lot of what happened.
Reducing cost by 10,000 dollars -- remember, in California the median is 50,000 -- this is a big element.
That's just cars and utility costs.
So the affordable housing advocates, who often sit off in their silos separate from the environmentalists, separate from the politicians, everybody fighting with everyone, now begin to see common cause, and I think the common cause is what really brings about the change.
Los Angeles, as a result of these efforts, has now decided to transform itself into a more transit-oriented environment.
As a matter of fact, since '08, they've voted in 400 billion dollars of bonds for transit and zero dollars for new highways.
What a transformation: LA becomes a city of walkers and transit, not a city of cars.
(Applause) How does it happen?
You take the least desirable land, the strip, you add where there's space, transit and then you infill mixed-use development, you satisfy new housing demands and you make the existing neighborhoods all around it more complex, more interesting, more walkable.
Here's another kind of sprawl: China, high-density sprawl, what you think of as an oxymoron, but the same problems, everything isolated in superblocks, and of course this amazing smog that was just spoken to.
Twelve percent of GDP in China now is spent on the health impacts of that.
The history, of course, of Chinese cities is robust.
It's like any other place.
Community was all about small, local shops and local services and walking, interacting with your neighbors.
It may sound utopian, but it's not.
It's actually what people really want.
The new superblocks -- these are blocks that would have 5,000 units in them, and they're gated as well, because nobody knows anybody else.
And of course, there isn't even a sidewalk, no ground floor shops -- a very sterile environment.
I found this one case here in one of the superblocks where people had illicitly set up shops in their garages so that they could have that kind of local service economy.
The desire of people to get it right is there.
We just have to get the planners on board and the politicians.
All right. Some technical planning stuff.
Chongqing is a city of 30 million people.
It's almost as big as California.
This is a small growth area.
They wanted us to test the alternative to sprawl in several cities across China.
This is for four-and-a-half million people.
What the takeaway from this image is, every one of those circles is a walking radius around a transit station -- massive investment in metro and BRT, and a distribution that allows everybody to work within walking distance of that.
The red area, this is a blow-up.
All of a sudden, our principles called for green space preserving the important ecological features.
And then those other streets in there are auto-free streets.
So instead of bulldozing, leveling the site and building right up to the river, this green edge was something that really wasn't normative in China until these set of practices began experimentation there.
The urban fabric, small blocks, maybe 500 families per block.
They know each other.
The street perimeter has shops so there's local destinations.
And the streets themselves become smaller, because there are more of them.
Very simple, straightforward urban design.
Now, here you have something I dearly love.
Think of the logic.
If only a third of the people have cars, why do we give 100 percent of our streets to cars?
What if we gave 70 percent of the streets to car-free, to everybody else, so that the transit could move well for them, so that they could walk, so they could bike?
Why not have -- (Applause) geographic equity in our circulation system?
And quite frankly, cities would function better.
No matter what they do, no matter how many ring roads they build in Beijing, they just can't overcome complete gridlock.
So this is an auto-free street, mixed use along the edge.
It has transit running down the middle.
I'm happy to make that transit autonomous vehicles, but maybe I'll have a chance to talk about that later.
So there are seven principles that have now been adopted by the highest levels in the Chinese government, and they're moving to implement them.
And they're simple, and they are globally, I think, universal principles.
One is to preserve the natural environment, the history and the critical agriculture.
Second is mix.
Mixed use is popular, but when I say mixed, I mean mixed incomes, mixed age groups as well as mixed-land use.
Walk.
There's no great city that you don't enjoy walking in.
You don't go there.
The places you go on vacation are places you can walk.
Why not make it everywhere?
Bike is the most efficient means of transportation we know.
China has now adopted policies that put six meters of bike lane on every street.
They're serious about getting back to their biking history.
(Applause) Complicated planner-ese here: connect.
It's a street network that allows many routes instead of singular routes and provides many kinds of streets instead of just one.
Ride.
We have to invest more in transit.
There's no silver bullet.
Autonomous vehicles are not going to solve this for us.
As a matter of fact, they're going to generate more traffic, more VMT, than the alternative.
And focus.
We have a hierarchy of the city based on transit rather than the old armature of freeways.
It's a big paradigm shift, but those two things have to get reconnected in ways that really shape the structure of the city.
So I'm very hopeful.
In California, the United States, China -- these changes are well accepted.
I'm hopeful for two reasons.
One is, most people get it.
They understand intrinsically what a great city can and should be.
The second is that the kind of analysis we can bring to bear now allows people to connect the dots, allows people to shape political coalitions that didn't exist in the past.
That allows them to bring into being the kinds of communities we all need.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, OK: autonomous driving, self-driving cars.
A lot of people here are very excited about them.
What are your concerns or issues about them?
Peter Calthorpe: Well, I think there's almost too much hype here.
First is, everybody says we're going to get rid of a lot of cars.
What they don't say is you're going to get a lot more vehicle miles.
You're going to get a lot more cars moving on streets.
There will be more congestion.
CA: Because they're so appealing -- you can drive while reading or sleeping.
PC: Well, a couple of reasons.
One is, if they're privately owned, people will travel greater distances.
It'll be a new lease on life to sprawl.
If you can work on your way to work, you can live in more remote locations.
It'll revitalize sprawl in a way that I'm deeply frightened.
Taxis: about 50 percent of the surveys say that people won't share them.
If they don't share them, you can end up with a 90 percent increase in vehicle miles traveled.
If you share them, you're still at around a 30 percent increase in VMT.
CA: Sharing them, meaning having multiple people riding at once in some sort of intelligent ride-sharing?
PC: Yeah, so the Uber share without a steering wheel.
The reality is, the efficiency of vehicles -- you can do it with or without a steering wheel, it doesn't matter.
They claim they're the only ones that are going to be efficient electric, but that's not true.
But the real bottom line is that walking, biking and transit are the way cities and communities thrive.
And putting people in their private bubbles, whether they have a steering wheel or not, is the wrong direction.
And quite frankly, the image of an AV on its way to McDonald's to pick up a pack without its owner, just being sent off on these kind of random errands is really frightening to me.
CA: Well, thank you for that, and I have to say, the images you showed of those mixed-use streets were really inspiring, really beautiful.
PC: Thank you. CA: Thank you for your work.
(Applause)
So, raise your hand if you've seen somebody in your city standing on a corner, holding a sign like this.
I think we all have.
If you're being honest, at least one time, have you wondered if they mean it?
If we offered them a job, would they really take it?
And what would that job mean to them in their lives?
Well, this is a story about what happened in my city when we decided to find out, when we decided to think differently about panhandling, and lift people up through the dignity of work.
We call it, "There's a Better Way."
We call it There's a Better Way because I believe there's a better way to get the money you need than panhandling on the corner.
I believe there's a better way to help your brothers and sisters in need than handing a few dollars out the car window.
We know there's dignity in work.
We also know that people are much more likely to invest in themselves if they believe that their community is willing to invest in them first.
And because we're all wired to be kind and compassionate, it always feels good to hand a couple of dollars to someone that is in need.
But if you talk to panhandlers, many of them will tell you that your few dollars don't necessarily go towards feeding the body, they go towards feeding an addiction.
There's a better way.
My name is Richard Berry, and I have one of the best jobs in the world.
I get to be the mayor of a great American city, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
I was at lunch on July 17, 2015, in my great American city, and on my way back to city hall, I saw this gentleman standing on a corner.
As you can see, he's holding a sign, and his sign says he wants a job.
But if you look closer at the picture, you'll see he's standing underneath a blue sign, and that sign says, if you need help, if you need food or shelter or you'd like to donate, please call 311, our community service number.
So why is this guy standing underneath my sign with his sign?
Well, we wondered if anybody would call that 311 sign, and as it turns out, they did -- 11,000 times people called.
I put those up in about 30 intersections.
And we did connect them with food and shelter and services.
But yet he's still standing under my sign with a sign that says he wants a job.
It's simple: he wants a job.
So I decided to do something rare in government.
I decided to make the solution simpler rather than more complicated.
I went back to my office, I gathered my staff around and I said, "We're going to take this man at his word, and others like him.
The man says he wants a job, we're going to give him a job, and we're going to make our city an even better place in the meantime."
You see, Albuquerque is a beautiful place.
We're a mile high, the Sandia Mountains on the east, the Rio Grande runs through the center of the city; we're the home of the Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta.
On a day like today, you could literally ski this morning and golf this afternoon.
But there's always something to do -- always weeds to pull, litter to pick up.
If you're going to have an initiative like this in your city, you have to ask yourself two questions.
First one is: Is there anything left to do in your city?
And if the answer is no, would you please give me your mayor's phone number, because I need some advice.
(Laughter) But the second question you have to ask is this: Are your solutions to panhandling working?
If you're like Albuquerque, and you're taking the punitive approach like we used to, handing out tickets to panhandlers or those who give them money, I'm going to suggest that your solutions aren't working, and I know you're not getting to the root of your problem in your city.
So if you have something to do and you need people that need something to do, there's a better way.
And the good news is, it's not that complicated.
This a 2006 Dodge van.
It was in my motor pool not doing anything.
We put some new tires on it, wrapped it with a logo.
This van now goes out to street corners where our panhandlers are -- we go to them.
We stop the van, we get out, we ask them if they would like a day's work rather than panhandling for the day.
And if you wondered if they really mean it -- it takes us about an hour to fill this van up in the morning, because almost everybody we ask takes a job for the day.
But you need more than just a van.
You need a super-fantastic human being to drive that van.
And my super-fantastic human being, his name is Will.
This is him in the yellow vest.
Will works at our local nonprofit partner.
He works with the homeless every day.
The panhandlers trust him, he believes in them, he hustles.
I like to say, "Where there's a Will, there's a way."
So if you're going to do the Better Way campaign in your city, you need to find yourself a Will, because he's really one of the keys to making this successful in the city of Albuquerque.
You also need a great nonprofit partner.
Ours is St. Martin's Hospitality Center.
They've been in our community for over 30 years.
They provide counseling, food, shelter, and if they don't provide it, they know somebody in our city that does.
But they do something much more for me as the mayor.
They provide agility.
You see, it takes me two weeks, maybe two months sometimes, to onboard an employee with the city of Albuquerque.
So you could imagine -- my old Dodge van, my super-fantastic human being, Will, a great local nonprofit partner -- they drive to the corner, there's a panhandler, they say, "Would you like to work for the day?"
The panhandler says, "Yes," and Will says, "Great! I'll be back in six weeks to pick you up."
(Laughter) It wouldn't work.
It's really important that we have that agility in our program.
And they do the paperwork, they do the insurance, they do all of the other forms that I can't do quickly.
We pay our panhandlers nine dollars an hour.
We feed them once at the jobsite.
At the end of the day, our old Dodge van takes them right back to St. Martin's, and they get connected with counseling services.
So far, with the pilot program and a couple days a week, and a fantastic human being and a Dodge van, we've cleaned up 400 city blocks in the city of Albuquerque.
We've picked up over 117,000 pounds of trash, weeds and litter.
I don't know if you've ever weighed a tumbleweed, but they don't weigh much, so you can imagine the volume of material that we've picked up.
My city has 6,000 employees, and none better than my solid waste department.
We send our trucks out at the end of the day, they help the panhandlers put into the truck the material they've picked up during the day, and we take it to the landfill.
I'm lucky that I have city employees that are willing to work side by side with our panhandlers.
They're lifting up our city while lifting up their lives.
And like anything else -- listen, it takes resources.
But the good news is it doesn't take much.
We started with an old van, a super-fantastic human being, a great local nonprofit and $50,000.
But we also had to have community trust.
And fortunately, we had built that up in years prior to Better Way.
We have a program called "Albuquerque Heading Home," a Housing First model where we house the chronically homeless, and when I told my community we wanted to do that differently, I said there's a smart way to do the right thing.
We have now housed 650 chronically homeless, medically vulnerable -- frankly, most likely to die on the streets in our city.
We commissioned our university, they studied it.
We could tell the taxpayers, we can save you 31.6 percent over the cost of leaving someone to struggle for survival on the streets.
We've now saved over five million dollars while housing 650 people.
So we had that community trust, but we had to have a little bit more of an honest conversation also as a community, because we had to get people to understand that when they hand those five dollars out the window, they might actually be minimizing their opportunity to help the person in need, and here's why: that five dollars might go to buying some fast food today -- a lot of times it goes to buying drugs and alcohol.
That same five dollars, if you gave it to one of our shelters, could feed seven people today.
And if you gave it to one of our local food banks or food pantries, we could actually feed 20 people with that money.
People ask,"Well, Albuquerque is 600,000 people -- million, metro -- this wouldn't work in our city, we're too big, we're too small."
I disagree; if you have one panhandler on one city block, you can do this.
If you live in a city of eight-and-half million people, you can do this.
It doesn't matter what you do.
It's not the work that you do, it's the dignity of the work.
You could do anything.
So I think any city could do this.
And people say to me, "Mayor, that's just a little too simple.
It can't work that way."
But I tell you what, friends: when you go to a street corner and you engage with a panhandler with dignity and respect, maybe for the first time in years, maybe in their life, and you tell them that you believe in them and that this is their city as much as it's your city, and that you actually need their help to make our place better, and you understand that this isn't the answer to all their problems, but at least it's a start, an amazing thing happens.
When they get out on the jobsite and they start working together, you start seeing amazing things happen.
They see teamwork; they see the fact that they can make a difference.
And at the end of the day, when they get back to St. Martin's in that old Dodge van, they're much more likely to sign up for whatever services they need -- substance abuse, mental health counseling, you name it.
So far with our pilot program, we've offered about 1,700 days of day work.
We've connected 216 people to permanent employment opportunities.
Twenty people actually qualified for our Housing First model, Heading Home, and they've been housed.
And over 150 people have been connected to mental health substance abuse services through There's a Better Way.
This is me just two weeks ago, at St. Martin's, doing our point-in-time survey that we do every two years.
I'm interviewing a gentleman who's homeless, like we do, getting his information, figuring out where he's from, how he got there, what we can do to help him.
And you notice he's holding the same sign that the guy was holding in 2015, same sign I walked out with here today.
So you have to ask yourself: Is it really making a difference?
Absolutely it's making a difference.
Albuquerque is now one of the national leaders in combating some of the most stubborn and persistent social issues that we have.
Combined with Albuquerque Heading Home, the Better Way program, Albuquerque has reduced unsheltered homelessness in our city by 80 percent last year.
Since I took over as mayor, we've been able to reduce the chronic homeless population in our city by 40 percent.
And by HUD's definition, we've gotten to functional zero, which means we've literally ended veteran homelessness in the city of Albuquerque, by being intentional.
(Applause) So I'm happy to report that other cities are hearing about this, other mayors are calling us -- Chicago, Seattle, Denver, Dallas -- and are now starting to implement programs where they bring the dignity of work to the equation.
And I can't wait to learn from them.
I can't wait to see what their experiment looks like, what their pilot project looks like, so we can start taking a collective approach nationally through the dignity of work.
And I want to commend them -- the mayors, their communities, their nonprofits -- for the work that they're doing.
So who's next?
Are you and your city ready to step up?
Are you ready to think differently about these persistent social issues?
Are you ready to lift people up in your community through the dignity of work, and make your city profoundly better in many ways?
Well, if you are, my friends, I promise you there is a better way.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here to offer you a new way to think about my field, artificial intelligence.
I think the purpose of AI is to empower humans with machine intelligence.
And as machines get smarter, we get smarter.
I call this "humanistic AI" -- artificial intelligence designed to meet human needs by collaborating and augmenting people.
Now, today I'm happy to see that the idea of an intelligent assistant is mainstream.
It's the well-accepted metaphor for the interface between humans and AI.
And the one I helped create is called Siri.
