And this is highly professional female interviewers who sit down for one hour with a woman and ask her about [her] birth history.
How many children did you have?
Are they alive?
If they died, at what age and what year?
And then this is done in a representative sample of thousands of women in the country and put together in what used to be called a demographic health survey report.
But these surveys are costly, so they can only be done [in] three- to five-year intervals.
But they have good quality.
So this is a limitation.
And all these colored lines here are results; each color is one survey.
But that's too complicated for today, so I'll simplify it for you, and I give you one average point for each survey.
This was 1977, 1988, 1992, '97 and 2002.
And when the experts in the U.N.
have got these surveys in place in their database, then they use advanced mathematical formulas to produce a trend line, and the trend line looks like this.
See here -- it's the best fit they can get of this point.
But watch out -- they continue the line beyond the last point out into nothing.
And they estimated that in 2008, Kenya had per child mortality of 128.
And I was sad, because we could see this reversal in Kenya with an increased child mortality in the 90s.
It was so tragic.
But in June, I got a mail in my inbox from Demographic Health Surveys, and it showed good news from Kenya.
I was so happy.
This was the estimate of the new survey.
Then it just took another three months for [the] U.N. to get it into their server, and on Friday we got the new trend line -- it was down here.
Isn't it nice -- isn't it nice, yeah?
I was actually, on Friday, sitting in front of my computer, and I saw the death rate fall from 128 to 84 just that morning.
So we celebrated.
But now, when you have this trend line, how do we measure progress?
I'm going into some details here, because [the] U.N. do it like this.
They start [in] 1990 -- they measure to 2009.
They say, "0.9 percent, no progress."
That's unfair.
As a professor, I think I have the right to propose something differently.
I would say, at least do this -- 10 years is enough to follow the trend.
It's two surveys, and you can see what's happening now.
They have 2.4 percent.
Had I been in the Ministry of Health in Kenya, I may have joined these two points.
So what I'm telling you is that we know the child mortality.
We have a decent trend.
It's coming into some tricky things then when we are measuring MDGs.
And the reason here for Africa is especially important, because '90s was a bad decade, not only in Kenya, but across Africa.
The HIV epidemic peaked.
There was resistance for the old malaria drugs, until we got the new drugs.
We got, later, the mosquito netting.
And there was socio-economic problems, which are now being solved at a much better scale.
So look at the average here -- this is the average for all of sub-Saharan Africa.
And [the] U.N. says it's a reduction with 1.8 percent.
Now this sounds a little theoretical, but it's not so theoretical.
You know, these economists, they love money, they want more and more of it, they want it to grow.
So they calculate the percent annual growth rate of [the] economy.
We in public health, we hate child death, so we want less and less and less of child deaths.
So we calculate the percent reduction per year, but it's sort of the same percentage.
If your economy grows with four percent, you ought to reduce child mortality four percent; if it's used well and people are really involved and can get the use of the resources in the way they want it.
So is this fair now to measure this over 19 years?
An economist would never do that.
I have just divided it into two periods.
In the 90s, only 1.2 percent, only 1.2 percent.
Whereas now, second gear -- it's like Africa had first gear, now they go into second gear.
But even this is not a fair representation of Africa, because it's an average, it's an average speed of reduction in Africa.
And look here when I take you into my bubble graphs.
Still here, child death per 1,000 on that axis.
Here we have [the] year.
And I'm now giving you a wider picture than the MDG.
I start 50 years ago when Africa celebrated independence in most countries.
I give you Congo, which was high, Ghana -- lower. And Kenya -- even lower.
And what has happened over the years since then? Here we go.
You can see, with independence, literacy improved and vaccinations started, smallpox was eradicated, hygiene was improved, and things got better.
But then, in the '80s, watch out here.
Congo got into civil war, and they leveled off here.
Ghana got very ahead, fast.
This was the backlash in Kenya, and Ghana bypassed, but then Kenya and Ghana go down together -- still a standstill in Congo.
That's where we are today.
You can see it doesn't make sense to make an average of this zero improvement and this very fast improvement.
Time has come to stop thinking about sub-Saharan Africa as one place.
Their countries are so different, and they merit to be recognized in the same way, as we don't talk about Europe as one place.
I can tell you that the economy in Greece and Sweden are very different -- everyone knows that.
And they are judged, each country, on how they are doing.
So let me show the wider picture.
My country, Sweden: 1800, we were up there.
What a strange personality disorder we must have, counting the children so meticulously in spite of a high child death rate.
It's very strange. It's sort of embarrassing.
But we had that habit in Sweden, you know, that we counted all the child deaths, even if we didn't do anything about it.
And then, you see, these were famine years.
These were bad years, and people got fed up with Sweden.
My ancestors moved to the United States.
And eventually, soon they started to get better and better here.
And here we got better education, and we got health service, and child mortality came down.
We never had a war; Sweden was in peace all this time.
But look, the rate of lowering in Sweden was not fast.
Sweden achieved a low child mortality because we started early.
We had primary school actually started in 1842.
And then you get that wonderful effect when we got female literacy one generation later.
You have to realize that the investments we do in progress are long-term investments.
It's not about just five years -- it's long-term investments.
And Sweden never reached [the] Millennium Development Goal rate, 3.1 percent when I calculated.
So we are off track -- that's what Sweden is.
But you don't talk about it so much.
We want others to be better than we were, and indeed, others have been better.
Let me show you Thailand, see what a success story, Thailand from the 1960s -- how they went down here and reached almost the same child mortality levels as Sweden.
And I'll give you another story -- Egypt, the most hidden, glorious success in public health.
Egypt was up here in 1960, higher than Congo.
The Nile Delta was a misery for children with diarrheal disease and malaria and a lot of problems.
And then they got the Aswan Dam. They got electricity in their homes, they increased education and they got primary health care.
And down they went, you know.
And they got safer water, they eradicated malaria.
And isn't it a success story.
Millennium Development Goal rates for child mortality is fully possible.
And the good thing is that Ghana today is going with the same rate as Egypt did at its fastest.
Kenya is now speeding up.
Here we have a problem.
We have a severe problem in countries which are at a standstill.
Now, let me now bring you to a wider picture, a wider picture of child mortality.
I'm going to show you the relationship between child mortality on this axis here -- this axis here is child mortality -- and here I have the family size.
The relationship between child mortality and family size.
One, two, three, four children per woman: six, seven, eight children per woman.
This is, once again, 1960 -- 50 years ago.
Each bubble is a country -- the color, you can see, a continent.
The dark blue here is sub-Saharan Africa.
And the size of the bubble is the population.
And these are the so-called "developing" countries.
They had high, or very high, child mortality and family size, six to eight.
And the ones over there, they were so-called Western countries.
They had low child mortality and small families.
What has happened?
What I want you [to do] now is to see with your own eyes the relation between fall in child mortality and decrease in family size.
I just want not to have any room for doubt -- you have to see that for yourself.
This is what happened. Now I start the world.
Here we come down with the eradication of smallpox, better education, health service.
It got down there -- China comes into the Western box here.
And here Brazil is in the Western Box.
India is approaching. The first African countries coming into the Western box, and we get a lot a new neighbors.
Welcome to a decent life.
Come on. We want everyone down there.
This is the vision we have, isn't it.
And look now, the first African countries here are coming in.
There we are today.
There is no such thing as a "Western world" and "developing world."
This is the report from [the] U.N., which came out on Friday.
It's very good -- "Levels and Trends in Child Mortality" -- except this page.
This page is very bad; it's a categorization of countries.
It labels "developing countries," -- I can read from the list here -- developing countries: Republic of Korea -- South Korea.
Huh?
They get Samsung, how can they be [a] developing country?
They have here Singapore.
They have the lowest child mortality in the world, Singapore.
They bypassed Sweden five years ago, and they are labeled a developing country.
They have here Qatar.
It's the richest country in the world with Al Jazeera.
How the heck could they be [a] developing country?
This is crap.
(Applause) The rest here is good -- the rest is good.
We have to have a modern concept, which fits to the data.
And we have to realize that we are all going to into this, down to here.
What is the importance now with the relations here.
Look -- even if we look in Africa -- these are the African countries.
You can clearly see the relation with falling child mortality and decreasing family size, even within Africa.
It's very clear that this is what happens.
And a very important piece of research came out on Friday from the Institute of Health Metrics and Evaluation in Seattle showing that almost 50 percent of the fall in child mortality can be attributed to female education.
That is, when we get girls in school, we'll get an impact 15 to 20 years later, which is a secular trend which is very strong.
That's why we must have that long-term perspective, but we must measure the impact over 10-year periods.
It's fully possible to get child mortality down in all of these countries and to get them down in the corner where we all would like to live together.
And of course, lowering child mortality is a matter of utmost importance from humanitarian aspects.
It's a decent life for children, we are talking about.
But it is also a strategic investment in the future of all mankind, because it's about the environment.
We will not be able to manage the environment and avoid the terrible climate crisis if we don't stabilize the world population.
Let's be clear about that.
And the way to do that, that is to get child mortality down, get access to family planning and behind that drive female education.
And that is fully possible. Let's do it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Imagine, if you will -- a gift.
I'd like for you to picture it in your mind.
It's not too big -- about the size of a golf ball.
So envision what it looks like all wrapped up.
But before I show you what's inside, I will tell you, it's going to do incredible things for you.
It will bring all of your family together.
You will feel loved and appreciated like never before and reconnect with friends and acquaintances you haven't heard from in years.
Adoration and admiration will overwhelm you.
It will recalibrate what's most important in your life.
It will redefine your sense of spirituality and faith.
You'll have a new understanding and trust in your body.
You'll have unsurpassed vitality and energy.
You'll expand your vocabulary, meet new people, and you'll have a healthier lifestyle.
And get this -- you'll have an eight-week vacation of doing absolutely nothing.
You'll eat countless gourmet meals.
Flowers will arrive by the truckload.
People will say to you, "You look great. Have you had any work done?"
And you'll have a lifetime supply of good drugs.
You'll be challenged, inspired, motivated and humbled.
Your life will have new meaning.
Peace, health, serenity, happiness, nirvana.
The price?
$55,000, and that's an incredible deal.
By now I know you're dying to know what it is and where you can get one.
Does Amazon carry it?
Does it have the Apple logo on it?
Is there a waiting list?
Not likely.
This gift came to me about five months ago.
It looked more like this when it was all wrapped up -- not quite so pretty.
And this, and then this.
It was a rare gem -- a brain tumor, hemangioblastoma -- the gift that keeps on giving.
And while I'm okay now, I wouldn't wish this gift for you.
I'm not sure you'd want it.
But I wouldn't change my experience.
It profoundly altered my life in ways I didn't expect in all the ways I just shared with you.
So the next time you're faced with something that's unexpected, unwanted and uncertain, consider that it just may be a gift.
(Applause)
Sometimes I go browsing [through] a very old magazine.
I found this observation test about the story of the ark.
And the artist that drew this observation test did some errors, had some mistakes -- there are more or less 12 mistakes.
Some of them are very easy.
There is a funnel, an aerial part, a lamp and clockwork key on the ark.
Some of them are about the animals, the number.
But there is a much more fundamental mistake in the overall story of the ark that's not reported here.
And this problem is: where are the plants?
So now we have God that is going to submerge Earth permanently or at least for a very long period, and no one is taking care of plants.
Noah needed to take two of every kind of bird, of every kind of animal, of every kind of creature that moves, but no mention about plants.
Why?
In another part of the same story, all the living creatures are just the living creatures that came out from the ark, so birds, livestock and wild animals.
Plants are not living creatures -- this is the point.
That is a point that is not coming out from the Bible, but it's something that really accompanied humanity.
Let's have a look at this nice code that is coming from a Renaissance book.
Here we have the description of the order of nature.
It's a nice description because it's starting from left -- you have the stones -- immediately after the stones, the plants that are just able to live.
We have the animals that are able to live and to sense, and on the top of the pyramid, there is the man.
This is not the common man.
The "Homo studiosus" -- the studying man.
This is quite comforting for people like me -- I'm a professor -- this to be over there on the top of creation.
But it's something completely wrong.
You know very well about professors.
But it's also wrong about plants, because plants are not just able to live; they are able to sense.
They are much more sophisticated in sensing than animals.
Just to give you an example, every single root apex is able to detect and to monitor concurrently and continuously at least 15 different chemical and physical parameters.
And they also are able to show and to exhibit such a wonderful and complex behavior that can be described just with the term of intelligence.
Well, but this is something -- this underestimation of plants is something that is always with us.
Let's have a look at this short movie now.
We have David Attenborough.
Now David Attenborough is really a plant lover; he did some of the most beautiful movies about plant behavior.
Now, when he speaks about plants, everything is correct.
When he speaks about animals, [he] tends to remove the fact that plants exist.
The blue whale, the biggest creature that exists on the planet -- that is wrong, completely wrong.
The blue whale, it's a dwarf if compared with the real biggest creature that exists on the planet -- that is, this wonderful, magnificent Sequoiadendron giganteum.
(Applause) And this is a living organism that has a mass of at least 2,000 tons.
Now, the story that plants are some low-level organisms has been formalized many times ago by Aristotle, that in "De Anima" -- that is a very influential book for the Western civilization -- wrote that the plants are on the edge between living and not living.
They have just a kind of very low-level soul.
It's called the vegetative soul, because they lack movement, and so they don't need to sense.
Let's see.
Okay, some of the movements of the plants are very well-known.
This is a very fast movement.
This is a Dionaea, a Venus fly trap hunting snails -- sorry for the snail.
This has been something that has been refused for centuries, despite the evidence.
No one can say that the plants were able to eat an animal, because it was against the order of nature.
But plants are also able to show a lot of movement.
Some of them are very well known, like the flowering.
It's just a question to use some techniques like the time lapse.
Some of them are much more sophisticated.
Look at this young bean that is moving to catch the light every time.
And it's really so graceful; it's like a dancing angel.
They are also able to play -- they are really playing.
These are young sunflowers, and what they are doing cannot be described with any other terms than playing.
They are training themselves, as many young animals do, to the adult life where they will be called to track the sun all the day.
They are able to respond to gravity, of course, so the shoots are growing against the vector of gravity and the roots toward the vector of gravity.
But they are also able to sleep.
This is one, Mimosa pudica.
So during the night, they curl the leaves and reduce the movement, and during the day, you have the opening of the leaves -- there is much more movement.
This is interesting because this sleeping machinery, it's perfectly conserved.
It's the same in plants, in insects and in animals.
And so if you need to study this sleeping problem, it's easy to study on plants, for example, than in animals and it's much more easy even ethically.
It's a kind of vegetarian experimentation.
Plants are even able to communicate -- they are extraordinary communicators.
They communicate with other plants.
They are able to distinguish kin and non-kin.
They communicate with plants of other species and they communicate with animals by producing chemical volatiles, for example, during the pollination.
Now with the pollination, it's a very serious issue for plants, because they move the pollen from one flower to the other, yet they cannot move from one flower to the other.
So they need a vector -- and this vector, it's normally an animal.
Many insects have been used by plants as vectors for the transport of the pollination, but not just insects; even birds, reptiles, and mammals like bats rats are normally used for the transportation of the pollen.
This is a serious business.
We have the plants that are giving to the animals a kind of sweet substance -- very energizing -- having in change this transportation of the pollen.
But some plants are manipulating animals, like in the case of orchids that promise sex and nectar and give in change nothing for the transportation of the pollen.
Now, there is a big problem behind all this behavior that we have seen.
How is it possible to do this without a brain?
We need to wait until 1880, when this big man, Charles Darwin, publishes a wonderful, astonishing book that starts a revolution.
The title is "The Power of Movement in Plants."
No one was allowed to speak about movement in plants before Charles Darwin.
In his book, assisted by his son, Francis -- who was the first professor of plant physiology in the world, in Cambridge -- they took into consideration every single movement for 500 pages.
And in the last paragraph of the book, it's a kind of stylistic mark, because normally Charles Darwin stored, in the last paragraph of a book, the most important message.
He wrote that, "It's hardly an exaggeration to say that the tip of the radical acts like the brain of one of the lower animals."
This is not a metaphor.
He wrote some very interesting letters to one of his friends who was J.D. Hooker, or at that time, president of the Royal Society, so the maximum scientific authority in Britain speaking about the brain in the plants.
Now, this is a root apex growing against a slope.
So you can recognize this kind of movement, the same movement that worms, snakes and every animal that are moving on the ground without legs is able to display.
And it's not an easy movement because, to have this kind of movement, you need to move different regions of the root and to synchronize these different regions without having a brain.
So we studied the root apex and we found that there is a specific region that is here, depicted in blue -- that is called the "transition zone."
And this region, it's a very small region -- it's less than one millimeter.
And in this small region you have the highest consumption of oxygen in the plants and more important, you have these kinds of signals here.
The signals that you are seeing here are action potential, are the same signals that the neurons of my brain, of our brain, use to exchange information.
Now we know that a root apex has just a few hundred cells that show this kind of feature, but we know how big the root apparatus of a small plant, like a plant of rye.
We have almost 14 million roots.
We have 11 and a half million root apex and a total length of 600 or more kilometers and a very high surface area.
Now let's imagine that each single root apex is working in network with all the others.
Here were have on the left, the Internet and on the right, the root apparatus.
They work in the same way.
They are a network of small computing machines, working in networks.
And why are they so similar?
Because they evolved for the same reason: to survive predation.
They work in the same way.
So you can remove 90 percent of the root apparatus and the plants [continue] to work.
You can remove 90 percent of the Internet and it is [continuing] to work.
So, a suggestion for the people working with networks: plants are able to give you good suggestions about how to evolve networks.
And another possibility is a technological possibility.
Let's imagine that we can build robots and robots that are inspired by plants.
Until now, the man was inspired just by man or the animals in producing a robot.
We have the animaloid -- and the normal robots inspired by animals, insectoid, so on.
We have the androids that are inspired by man.
But why have we not any plantoid?
Well, if you want to fly, it's good that you look at birds -- to be inspired by birds.
But if you want to explore soils, or if you want to colonize new territory, to best thing that you can do is to be inspired by plants that are masters in doing this.
We have another possibility we are working [on] in our lab, [which] is to build hybrids.
It's much more easy to build hybrids.
Hybrid means it's something that's half living and half machine.
It's much more easy to work with plants than with animals.
They have computing power, they have electrical signals.
The connection with the machine is much more easy, much more even ethically possible.
And these are three possibilities that we are working on to build hybrids, driven by algae or by the leaves at the end, by the most, most powerful parts of the plants, by the roots.
Well, thank you for your attention.
And before I finish, I would like to reassure that no snails were harmed in making this presentation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One of my favorite parts of my job at the Gates Foundation is that I get to travel to the developing world, and I do that quite regularly.
And when I meet the mothers in so many of these remote places, I'm really struck by the things that we have in common.
They want what we want for our children and that is for their children to grow up successful, to be healthy, and to have a successful life.
But I also see lots of poverty, and it's quite jarring, both in the scale and the scope of it.
My first trip in India, I was in a person's home where they had dirt floors, no running water, no electricity, and that's really what I see all over the world.
So in short, I'm startled by all the things that they don't have.
But I am surprised by one thing that they do have: Coca-Cola.
Coke is everywhere.
In fact, when I travel to the developing world, Coke feels ubiquitous.
And so when I come back from these trips, and I'm thinking about development, and I'm flying home and I'm thinking, "We're trying to deliver condoms to people or vaccinations," you know, Coke's success kind of stops and makes you wonder: how is it that they can get Coke to these far-flung places?
If they can do that, why can't governments and NGOs do the same thing?
And I'm not the first person to ask this question.
But I think, as a community, we still have a lot to learn.
It's staggering, if you think about Coca-Cola.
They sell 1.5 billion servings every single day.
That's like every man, woman and child on the planet having a serving of Coke every week.
So why does this matter?
Well, if we're going to speed up the progress and go even faster on the set of Millennium Development Goals that we're set as a world, we need to learn from the innovators, and those innovators come from every single sector.
I feel that, if we can understand what makes something like Coca-Cola ubiquitous, we can apply those lessons then for the public good.
Coke's success is relevant, because if we can analyze it, learn from it, then we can save lives.
So that's why I took a bit of time to study Coke.
And I think there are really three things we can take away from Coca-Cola.
They take real-time data and immediately feed it back into the product.
They tap into local entrepreneurial talent, and they do incredible marketing.
So let's start with the data.
Now Coke has a very clear bottom line -- they report to a set of shareholders, they have to turn a profit.
So they take the data, and they use it to measure progress.
They have this very continuous feedback loop.
They learn something, they put it back into the product, they put it back into the market.
They have a whole team called "Knowledge and Insight."
It's a lot like other consumer companies.
So if you're running Namibia for Coca-Cola, and you have a 107 constituencies, you know where every can versus bottle of Sprite, Fanta or Coke was sold, whether it was a corner store, a supermarket or a pushcart.
So if sales start to drop, then the person can identify the problem and address the issue.
Let's contrast that for a minute to development.
In development, the evaluation comes at the very end of the project.
I've sat in a lot of those meetings, and by then, it is way too late to use the data.
I had somebody from an NGO once describe it to me as bowling in the dark.
They said, "You roll the ball, you hear some pins go down.
It's dark, you can't see which one goes down until the lights come on, and then you an see your impact."
Real-time data turns on the lights.
So what's the second thing that Coke's good at?
They're good at tapping into that local entrepreneurial talent.
Coke's been in Africa since 1928, but most of the time they couldn't reach the distant markets, because they had a system that was a lot like in the developed world, which was a large truck rolling down the street.
And in Africa, the remote places, it's hard to find a good road.
But Coke noticed something -- they noticed that local people were taking the product, buying it in bulk and then reselling it in these hard-to-reach places.
And so they took a bit of time to learn about that.
And they decided in 1990 that they wanted to start training the local entrepreneurs, giving them small loans.
They set them up as what they called micro-distribution centers, and those local entrepreneurs then hire sales people, who go out with bicycles and pushcarts and wheelbarrows to sell the product.
There are now some 3,000 of these centers employing about 15,000 people in Africa.
In Tanzania and Uganda, they represent 90 percent of Coke's sales.
Let's look at the development side.
What is it that governments and NGOs can learn from Coke?
Governments and NGOs need to tap into that local entrepreneurial talent as well, because the locals know how to reach the very hard-to-serve places, their neighbors, and they know what motivates them to make change.
I think a great example of this is Ethiopia's new health extension program.
The government noticed in Ethiopia that many of the people were so far away from a health clinic, they were over a day's travel away from a health clinic.
So if you're in an emergency situation -- or if you're a mom about to deliver a baby -- forget it, to get to the health care center.
They decided that wasn't good enough, so they went to India and studied the Indian state of Kerala that also had a system like this, and they adapted it for Ethiopia.
And in 2003, the government of Ethiopia started this new system in their own country.
They trained 35,000 health extension workers to deliver care directly to the people.
In just five years, their ratio went from one worker for every 30,000 people to one worker for every 2,500 people.
Now, think about how this can change people's lives.
Health extension workers can help with so many things, whether it's family planning, prenatal care, immunizations for the children, or advising the woman to get to the facility on time for an on-time delivery.
That is having real impact in a country like Ethiopia, and it's why you see their child mortality numbers coming down 25 percent from 2000 to 2008.
In Ethiopia, there are hundreds of thousands of children living because of this health extension worker program.
So what's the next step for Ethiopia?
Well, they're already starting talk about this.
They're starting to talk about, "How do you have the health community workers generate their own ideas?
How do you incent them based on the impact that they're getting out in those remote villages?"
That's how you tap into local entrepreneurial talent and you unlock people's potential.
The third component of Coke's success is marketing.
Ultimately, Coke's success depends on one crucial fact and that is that people want a Coca-Cola.
Now the reason these micro-entrepreneurs can sell or make a profit is they have to sell every single bottle in their pushcart or their wheelbarrow.
So, they rely on Coca-Cola in terms of its marketing, and what's the secret to their marketing?
Well, it's aspirational.
It is associated that product with a kind of life that people want to live.
So even though it's a global company, they take a very local approach.
Coke's global campaign slogan is "Open Happiness."
But they localize it.
And they don't just guess what makes people happy; they go to places like Latin America and they realize that happiness there is associated with family life.
And in South Africa, they associate happiness with seriti or community respect.
Now, that played itself out in the World Cup campaign.
Let's listen to this song that Coke created for it, "Wavin' Flag" by a Somali hip hop artist.
(Video) K'Naan: ♫ Oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫ ♫ Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh ♫ ♫ Oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫ ♫ Oh oh oh oh oh oh oh oh o-oh ♫ ♫Give you freedom, give you fire♫ ♫ Give you reason, take you higher ♫ ♫ See the champions take the field now ♫ ♫ You define us, make us feel proud ♫ ♫ In the streets our heads are lifted ♫ ♫ As we lose our inhibition ♫ ♫ Celebration, it's around us ♫ ♫ Every nation, all around us ♫ Melinda French Gates: It feels pretty good, right?
Well, they didn't stop there -- they localized it into 18 different languages.
And it went number one on the pop chart in 17 countries.
It reminds me of a song that I remember from my childhood, "I'd Like to Teach the World to Sing," that also went number one on the pop charts.
Both songs have something in common: that same appeal of celebration and unity.
So how does health and development market?
Well, it's based on avoidance, not aspirations.
I'm sure you've heard some of these messages.
"Use a condom, don't get AIDS."
"Wash you hands, you might not get diarrhea."
It doesn't sound anything like "Wavin' Flag" to me.
And I think we make a fundamental mistake -- we make an assumption, that we think that, if people need something, we don't have to make them want that.
And I think that's a mistake.
And there's some indications around the world that this is starting to change.
One example is sanitation.
We know that a million and a half children die a year from diarrhea and a lot of it is because of open defecation.
But there's a solution: you build a toilet.
But what we're finding around the world, over and over again, is, if you build a toilet and you leave it there, it doesn't get used.
People reuse it for a slab for their home.
They sometimes store grain in it.
I've even seen it used for a chicken coop.
(Laughter) But what does marketing really entail that would make a sanitation solution get a result in diarrhea?
Well, you work with the community.
You start to talk to them about why open defecation is something that shouldn't be done in the village, and they agree to that.
But then you take the toilet and you position it as a modern, trendy convenience.
One state in Northern India has gone so far as to link toilets to courtship.
And it works -- look at these headlines.
(Laughter) I'm not kidding.
Women are refusing to marry men without toilets.
No loo, no "I do."
(Laughter) Now, it's not just a funny headline -- it's innovative. It's an innovative marketing campaign.
But more importantly, it saves lives.
Take a look at this -- this is a room full of young men and my husband, Bill.
And can you guess what the young men are waiting for?
They're waiting to be circumcised.
Can you you believe that?
We know that circumcision reduces HIV infection by 60 percent in men.
And when we first heard this result inside the Foundation, I have to admit, Bill and I were scratching our heads a little bit and we were saying, "But who's going to volunteer for this procedure?"
But it turns out the men do, because they're hearing from their girlfriends that they prefer it, and the men also believe it improves their sex life.
So if we can start to understand what people really want in health and development, we can change communities and we can change whole nations.
Well, why is all of this so important?
So let's talk about what happens when this all comes together, when you tie the three things together.
And polio, I think, is one of the most powerful examples.
We've seen a 99 percent reduction in polio in 20 years.
So if you look back to 1988, there are about 350,000 cases of polio on the planet that year.
In 2009, we're down to 1,600 cases.
Well how did that happen?
Let's look at a country like India.
They have over a billion people in this country, but they have 35,000 local doctors who report paralysis, and clinicians, a huge reporting system in chemists.
They have two and a half million vaccinators.
But let me make the story a little bit more concrete for you.
Let me tell you the story of Shriram, an 18 month boy in Bihar, a northern state in India.
This year on August 8th, he felt paralysis and on the 13th, his parents took him to the doctor.
On August 14th and 15th, they took a stool sample, and by the 25th of August, it was confirmed he had Type 1 polio.
By August 30th, a genetic test was done, and we knew what strain of polio Shriram had.
Now it could have come from one of two places.
It could have come from Nepal, just to the north, across the border, or from Jharkhand, a state just to the south.
Luckily, the genetic testing proved that, in fact, this strand came north, because, had it come from the south, it would have had a much wider impact in terms of transmission.
So many more people would have been affected.
So what's the endgame?
Well on September 4th, there was a huge mop-up campaign, which is what you do in polio.
They went out and where Shriram lives, they vaccinated two million people.
So in less than a month, we went from one case of paralysis to a targeted vaccination program.
And I'm happy to say only one other person in that area got polio.
That's how you keep a huge outbreak from spreading, and it shows what can happen when local people have the data in their hands; they can save lives.
Now one of the challenges in polio, still, is marketing, but it might not be what you think.
It's not the marketing on the ground.
It's not telling the parents, "If you see paralysis, take your child to the doctor or get your child vaccinated."
We have a problem with marketing in the donor community.
The G8 nations have been incredibly generous on polio over the last 20 years, but we're starting to have something called polio fatigue and that is that the donor nations aren't willing to fund polio any longer.
So by next summer, we're sighted to run out of money on polio.
So we are 99 percent of the way there on this goal and we're about to run short of money.
And I think that if the marketing were more aspirational, if we could focus as a community on how far we've come and how amazing it would be to eradicate this disease, we could put polio fatigue and polio behind us.
And if we could do that, we could stop vaccinating everybody, worldwide, in all of our countries for polio.
And it would only be the second disease ever wiped off the face of the planet.
And we are so close.
And this victory is so possible.
So if Coke's marketers came to me and asked me to define happiness, I'd say my vision of happiness is a mother holding healthy baby in her arms.
To me, that is deep happiness.
And so if we can learn lessons from the innovators in every sector, then in the future we make together, that happiness can be just as ubiquitous as Coca-Cola.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I learned about the Haiti earthquake by Skype.
My wife sent me a message, "Whoa, earthquake," and then disappeared for 25 minutes.
It was 25 minutes of absolute terror that thousands of people across the U.S. felt.
I was afraid of a tsunami; what I didn't realize was there was a greater terror in Haiti, and that was building collapse.
We've all seen the photos of the collapsed buildings in Haiti.
These are shots my wife took a couple days after the quake, while I was making my way through the D.R. into the country.
This is the national palace -- the equivalent of the White House.
This is the largest supermarket in the Caribbean at peak shopping time.
This is a nurses' college -- there are 300 nurses studying.
The general hospital right next door emerged largely unscathed.
This is the Ministry of Economics and Finance.
We have all heard about the tremendous human loss in the earthquake in Haiti, but we haven't heard enough about why all those lives were lost.
We haven't heard about why the buildings failed.
After all, it was the buildings, not the earthquake, that killed 220,000 people, that injured 330,000, that displaced 1.3 million people, that cut off food and water and supplies for an entire nation.
This is the largest metropolitan-area disaster in decades, and it was not a natural disaster -- it was a disaster of engineering.
AIDG has worked in Haiti since 2007, providing engineering and business support to small businesses.
And after the quake, we started bringing in earthquake engineers to figure out why the buildings collapsed, to examine what was safe and what wasn't.
Working with MINUSTAH, which is the U.N. mission in Haiti, with the Ministry of Public Works, with different NGOs, we inspected over 1,500 buildings.
We inspected schools and private residencies.
We inspected medical centers and food warehouses.
We inspected government buildings.
This is the Ministry of Justice.
Behind that door is the National Judicial Archives.
The fellow in the door, Andre Filitrault -- who's the director of the Center for Interdisciplinary Earthquake Engineering Research at the University of Buffalo -- was examining it to see if it was safe to recover the archives.
Andre told me, after seeing these buildings fail again and again in the same way, that there is no new research here.
There is nothing here that we don't know.
The failure points were the same: walls and slabs not tied properly into columns -- that's a roof slab hanging off the building -- cantilevered structures, or structures that were asymmetric, that shook violently and came down, poor building materials, not enough concrete, not enough compression in the blocks, rebar that was smooth, rebar that was exposed to the weather and had rusted away.
Now there's a solution to all these problems.
And we know how to build properly.
The proof of this came in Chile, almost a month later, when 8.8 magnitude earthquake hit Chile.
That is 500 times the power of the 7.0 that hit Port-au-Prince -- 500 times the power, yet only under a thousand casualties.
Adjusted for population density, that is less than one percent of the impact of the Haitian quake.
What was the difference between Chile and Haiti?
Seismic standards and confined masonry, where the building acts as a whole -- walls and columns and roofs and slabs tied together to support each other -- instead of breaking off into separate members and failing.
If you look at this building in Chile, it's ripped in half, but it's not a pile of rubble.
Chileans have been building with confined masonry for decades.
Right now, AIDG is working with KPFF Consulting Engineers, Architecture for Humanity, to bring more confined masonry training into Haiti.
This is Xantus Daniel; he's a mason, just a general construction worker, not a foreman, who took one of our trainings.
On his last job he was working with his boss, and they started pouring the columns wrong.
He took his boss aside, and he showed him the materials on confined masonry.
He showed him, "You know, we don't have to do this wrong.
It won't cost us any more to do it the right way."
And they redid that building.
They tied the rebar right, they poured the columns right, and that building will be safe.
And every building that they build going forward will be safe.
To make sure these buildings are safe, it's not going to take policy -- it's going to take reaching out to the masons on the ground and helping them learn the proper techniques.
Now there are many groups doing this.
And the fellow in the vest there, Craig Toten, he has pushed forward to get documentation out to all the groups that are doing this.
Through Haiti Rewired, through Build Change, Architecture for Humanity, AIDG, there is the possibility to reach out to 30,000 -- 40,000 masons across the country and create a movement of proper building.
If you reach out to the people on the ground in this collaborative way it's extremely affordable.
For the billions spent on reconstruction, you can train masons for dollars on every house that they end up building over their lifetime.
Ultimately, there are two ways that you can rebuild Haiti; the way at the top is the way that Haiti's been building for decades.
The way at the top is a poorly constructed building that will fail.
The way at the bottom is a confined masonry building, where the walls are tied together, the building is symmetric, and it will stand up to an earthquake.
For all the disaster, there is an opportunity here to build better houses for the next generation, so that when the next earthquake hits, it is a disaster -- but not a tragedy.
(Applause)
My title: "Queerer than we can suppose: the strangeness of science."
"Queerer than we can suppose" comes from J.B.S. Haldane, the famous biologist, who said, "Now, my own suspicion is that the universe is not only queerer than we suppose, but queerer than we can suppose.
I suspect that there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamed of, or can be dreamed of, in any philosophy."
Richard Feynman compared the accuracy of quantum theories -- experimental predictions -- to specifying the width of North America to within one hair's breadth of accuracy.
This means that quantum theory has got to be, in some sense, true.
Yet the assumptions that quantum theory needs to make in order to deliver those predictions are so mysterious that even Feynman himself was moved to remark, "If you think you understand quantum theory, you don't understand quantum theory."
It's so queer that physicists resort to one or another paradoxical interpretation of it.
David Deutsch, who's talking here, in "The Fabric of Reality," embraces the many-worlds interpretation of quantum theory, because the worst that you can say about it is that it's preposterously wasteful.
It postulates a vast and rapidly growing number of universes existing in parallel, mutually undetectable, except through the narrow porthole of quantum mechanical experiments.
And that's Richard Feynman.
The biologist Lewis Wolpert believes that the queerness of modern physics is just an extreme example.
Science, as opposed to technology, does violence to common sense.
Every time you drink a glass of water, he points out, the odds are that you will imbibe at least one molecule that passed through the bladder of Oliver Cromwell.
(Laughter) It's just elementary probability theory.
(Laughter) The number of molecules per glassful is hugely greater than the number of glassfuls, or bladdersful, in the world.
And of course, there's nothing special about Cromwell or bladders -- you have just breathed in a nitrogen atom that passed through the right lung of the third iguanodon to the left of the tall cycad tree.
"Queerer than we can suppose."
What is it that makes us capable of supposing anything, and does this tell us anything about what we can suppose?
Are there things about the universe that will be forever beyond our grasp, but not beyond the grasp of some superior intelligence?
Are there things about the universe that are, in principle, ungraspable by any mind, however superior?
The history of science has been one long series of violent brainstorms, as successive generations have come to terms with increasing levels of queerness in the universe.
We're now so used to the idea that the Earth spins, rather than the Sun moves across the sky, it's hard for us to realize what a shattering mental revolution that must have been.
After all, it seems obvious that the Earth is large and motionless, the Sun, small and mobile.
But it's worth recalling Wittgenstein's remark on the subject: "Tell me," he asked a friend, "why do people always say it was natural for man to assume that the Sun went 'round the Earth, rather than that the Earth was rotating?"
And his friend replied, "Well, obviously, because it just looks as though the Sun is going round the Earth."
Wittgenstein replied, "Well, what would it have looked like if it had looked as though the Earth was rotating?"
(Laughter) Science has taught us, against all intuition, that apparently solid things, like crystals and rocks, are really almost entirely composed of empty space.
And the familiar illustration is the nucleus of an atom is a fly in the middle of a sports stadium, and the next atom is in the next sports stadium.
So it would seem the hardest, solidest, densest rock is really almost entirely empty space, broken only by tiny particles so widely spaced they shouldn't count.
Why, then, do rocks look and feel solid and hard and impenetrable?
As an evolutionary biologist, I'd say this: our brains have evolved to help us survive within the orders of magnitude, of size and speed which our bodies operate at.
If we had, our brains probably would perceive rocks as full of empty space.
Rocks feel hard and impenetrable to our hands, precisely because objects like rocks and hands cannot penetrate each other.
It's therefore useful for our brains to construct notions like "solidity" and "impenetrability," because such notions help us to navigate our bodies through the middle-sized world in which we have to navigate.
Moving to the other end of the scale, our ancestors never had to navigate through the cosmos at speeds close to the speed of light.
If they had, our brains would be much better at understanding Einstein.
I want to give the name "Middle World" to the medium-scaled environment in which we've evolved the ability to take act -- nothing to do with "Middle Earth" -- Middle World.
(Laughter) We are evolved denizens of Middle World, and that limits what we are capable of imagining.
We find it intuitively easy to grasp ideas like, when a rabbit moves at the sort of medium velocity at which rabbits and other Middle World objects move, and hits another Middle World object like a rock, it knocks itself out.
May I introduce Major General Albert Stubblebine III, commander of military intelligence in 1983.
"...[He] stared at his wall in Arlington, Virginia, and decided to do it.
As frightening as the prospect was, he was going into the next office.
He stood up and moved out from behind his desk.
'What is the atom mostly made of?' he thought, 'Space.' He started walking. 'What am I mostly made of? Atoms.' He quickened his pace, almost to a jog now.
'What is the wall mostly made of?' (Laughter) 'Atoms!' All I have to do is merge the spaces.
Then, General Stubblebine banged his nose hard on the wall of his office.
Stubblebine, who commanded 16,000 soldiers, was confounded by his continual failure to walk through the wall.
He has no doubt that this ability will one day be a common tool in the military arsenal.
Who would screw around with an army that could do that?"
That's from an article in Playboy, which I was reading the other day.
(Laughter) I have every reason to think it's true; I was reading Playboy because I, myself, had an article in it.
(Laughter) Unaided human intuition, schooled in Middle World, finds it hard to believe Galileo when he tells us a heavy object and a light object, air friction aside, would hit the ground at the same instant.
If we'd evolved in a vacuum, we would expect them to hit the ground simultaneously.
If we were bacteria, constantly buffeted by thermal movements of molecules, it would be different.
But we Middle-Worlders are too big to notice Brownian motion.
In the same way, our lives are dominated by gravity, but are almost oblivious to the force of surface tension.
A small insect would reverse these priorities.
Steve Grand -- he's the one on the left, Douglas Adams is on the right.
Steve Grand, in his book, "Creation: Life and How to Make It," is positively scathing about our preoccupation with matter itself.
We have this tendency to think that only solid, material things are really things at all.
Waves of electromagnetic fluctuation in a vacuum seem unreal.
Victorians thought the waves had to be waves in some material medium: the ether.
But we find real matter comforting only because we've evolved to survive in Middle World, where matter is a useful fiction.
A whirlpool, for Steve Grand, is a thing with just as much reality as a rock.
In a desert plain in Tanzania, in the shadow of the volcano Ol Doinyo Lengai, there's a dune made of volcanic ash.
The beautiful thing is that it moves bodily.
It's what's technically known as a "barchan," and the entire dune walks across the desert in a westerly direction at a speed of about 17 meters per year.
It retains its crescent shape and moves in the direction of the horns.
What happens is that the wind blows the sand up the shallow slope on the other side, and then, as each sand grain hits the top of the ridge, it cascades down on the inside of the crescent, and so the whole horn-shaped dune moves.
Steve Grand points out that you and I are, ourselves, more like a wave than a permanent thing.
He invites us, the reader, to think of an experience from your childhood, something you remember clearly, something you can see, feel, maybe even smell, as if you were really there.
After all, you really were there at the time, weren't you?
How else would you remember it?
But here is the bombshell: You weren't there.
Not a single atom that is in your body today was there when that event took place.
Matter flows from place to place and momentarily comes together to be you.
Whatever you are, therefore, you are not the stuff of which you are made.
If that doesn't make the hair stand up on the back of your neck, read it again until it does, because it is important.
So "really" isn't a word that we should use with simple confidence.
If a neutrino had a brain, which it evolved in neutrino-sized ancestors, it would say that rocks really do consist of empty space.
We have brains that evolved in medium-sized ancestors which couldn't walk through rocks.
"Really," for an animal, is whatever its brain needs it to be in order to assist its survival.
And because different species live in different worlds, there will be a discomforting variety of "reallys."
What we see of the real world is not the unvarnished world, but a model of the world, regulated and adjusted by sense data, but constructed so it's useful for dealing with the real world.
The nature of the model depends on the kind of animal we are.
A flying animal needs a different kind of model from a walking, climbing or swimming animal.
A monkey's brain must have software capable of simulating a three-dimensional world of branches and trunks.
A mole's software for constructing models of its world will be customized for underground use.
A water strider's brain doesn't need 3D software at all, since it lives on the surface of the pond, in an Edwin Abbott flatland.
I've speculated that bats may see color with their ears.
The world model that a bat needs in order to navigate through three dimensions catching insects must be pretty similar to the world model that any flying bird -- a day-flying bird like a swallow -- needs to perform the same kind of tasks.
The fact that the bat uses echoes in pitch darkness to input the current variables to its model, while the swallow uses light, is incidental.
Bats, I've even suggested, use perceived hues, such as red and blue, as labels, internal labels, for some useful aspect of echoes -- perhaps the acoustic texture of surfaces, furry or smooth and so on -- in the same way as swallows or indeed, we, use those perceived hues -- redness and blueness, etc. -- to label long and short wavelengths of light.
There's nothing inherent about red that makes it long wavelength.
The point is that the nature of the model is governed by how it is to be used, rather than by the sensory modality involved.
J.B.S. Haldane himself had something to say about animals whose world is dominated by smell.
Dogs can distinguish two very similar fatty acids, extremely diluted: caprylic acid and caproic acid.
The only difference, you see, is that one has an extra pair of carbon atoms in the chain.
Haldane guesses that a dog would probably be able to place the acids in the order of their molecular weights by their smells, just as a man could place a number of piano wires in the order of their lengths by means of their notes.
Now, there's another fatty acid, capric acid, which is just like the other two, except that it has two more carbon atoms.
A dog that had never met capric acid would, perhaps, have no more trouble imagining its smell than we would have trouble imagining a trumpet, say, playing one note higher than we've heard a trumpet play before.
Perhaps dogs and rhinos and other smell-oriented animals smell in color.
And the argument would be exactly the same as for the bats.
Middle World -- the range of sizes and speeds which we have evolved to feel intuitively comfortable with -- is a bit like the narrow range of the electromagnetic spectrum that we see as light of various colors.
We're blind to all frequencies outside that, unless we use instruments to help us.
Middle World is the narrow range of reality which we judge to be normal, as opposed to the queerness of the very small, the very large and the very fast.
We could make a similar scale of improbabilities; nothing is totally impossible.
Miracles are just events that are extremely improbable.
A marble statue could wave its hand at us; the atoms that make up its crystalline structure are all vibrating back and forth anyway.
Because there are so many of them, and because there's no agreement among them in their preferred direction of movement, the marble, as we see it in Middle World, stays rock steady.
But the atoms in the hand could all just happen to move the same way at the same time, and again and again.
In this case, the hand would move, and we'd see it waving at us in Middle World.
The odds against it, of course, are so great that if you set out writing zeros at the time of the origin of the universe, you still would not have written enough zeros to this day.
Evolution in Middle World has not equipped us to handle very improbable events; we don't live long enough.
In the vastness of astronomical space and geological time, that which seems impossible in Middle World might turn out to be inevitable.
One way to think about that is by counting planets.
We don't know how many planets there are in the universe, but a good estimate is about 10 to the 20, or 100 billion billion.
And that gives us a nice way to express our estimate of life's improbability.
We could make some sort of landmark points along a spectrum of improbability, which might look like the electromagnetic spectrum we just looked at.
If life has arisen only once on any -- life could originate once per planet, could be extremely common or it could originate once per star or once per galaxy or maybe only once in the entire universe, in which case it would have to be here.
And somewhere up there would be the chance that a frog would turn into a prince, and similar magical things like that.
If life has arisen on only one planet in the entire universe, that planet has to be our planet, because here we are talking about it.
And that means that if we want to avail ourselves of it, we're allowed to postulate chemical events in the origin of life which have a probability as low as one in 100 billion billion.
I don't think we shall have to avail ourselves of that, because I suspect that life is quite common in the universe.
And when I say quite common, it could still be so rare that no one island of life ever encounters another, which is a sad thought.
How shall we interpret "queerer than we can suppose?"
Queerer than can in principle be supposed, or just queerer than we can suppose, given the limitations of our brain's evolutionary apprenticeship in Middle World?
Could we, by training and practice, emancipate ourselves from Middle World and achieve some sort of intuitive as well as mathematical understanding of the very small and the very large?
I wonder whether we might help ourselves to understand, say, quantum theory, if we brought up children to play computer games beginning in early childhood, which had a make-believe world of balls going through two slits on a screen, a world in which the strange goings-on of quantum mechanics were enlarged by the computer's make-believe, so that they became familiar on the Middle-World scale of the stream.
And similarly, a relativistic computer game, in which objects on the screen manifest the Lorentz contraction, and so on, to try to get ourselves -- to get children into the way of thinking about it.
I want to end by applying the idea of Middle World to our perceptions of each other.
Most scientists today subscribe to a mechanistic view of the mind: we're the way we are because our brains are wired up as they are, our hormones are the way they are.
We'd be different, our characters would be different, if our neuro-anatomy and our physiological chemistry were different.
But we scientists are inconsistent.
If we were consistent, our response to a misbehaving person, like a child-murderer, should be something like: this unit has a faulty component; it needs repairing.
What we say -- and I include the most austerely mechanistic among us, which is probably me -- what we say is, "Vile monster, prison is too good for you."
Or worse, we seek revenge, in all probability thereby triggering the next phase in an escalating cycle of counter-revenge, which we see, of course, all over the world today.
In short, when we're thinking like academics, we regard people as elaborate and complicated machines, like computers or cars.
But when we revert to being human, we behave more like Basil Fawlty, who, we remember, thrashed his car to teach it a lesson, when it wouldn't start on "Gourmet Night."
(Laughter) The reason we personify things like cars and computers is that just as monkeys live in an arboreal world and moles live in an underground world and water striders live in a surface tension-dominated flatland, we live in a social world.
We swim through a sea of people -- a social version of Middle World.
We are evolved to second-guess the behavior of others by becoming brilliant, intuitive psychologists.
Treating people as machines may be scientifically and philosophically accurate, but it's a cumbersome waste of time if you want to guess what this person is going to do next.
The economically useful way to model a person is to treat him as a purposeful, goal-seeking agent with pleasures and pains, desires and intentions, guilt, blame-worthiness.
Personification and the imputing of intentional purpose is such a brilliantly successful way to model humans, it's hardly surprising the same modeling software often seizes control when we're trying to think about entities for which it's not appropriate, like Basil Fawlty with his car or like millions of deluded people, with the universe as a whole.
(Laughter) If the universe is queerer than we can suppose, is it just because we've been naturally selected to suppose only what we needed to suppose in order to survive in the Pleistocene of Africa?
Or are our brains so versatile and expandable that we can train ourselves to break out of the box of our evolution?
Or finally, are there some things in the universe so queer that no philosophy of beings, however godlike, could dream them?
Thank you very much.
I was informed by this kind of unoriginal and trite idea that new technologies were an opportunity for social transformation, which is what drove me then, and still, it's a delusion that drives me now.
I wanted to update what I've been doing since then -- but it's still the same theme song -- and introduce you to my lab and current work, which is the Environmental Health Clinic that I run at NYU.
And what it is -- it's a twist on health.
Because, really, what I'm trying to do now is redefine what counts as health.
It's a clinic like a health clinic at any other university, except people come to the clinic with environmental health concerns, and they walk out with prescriptions for things they can do to improve environmental health, as opposed to coming to a clinic with medical concerns and walking out with prescriptions for pharmaceuticals.
It's a handy-dandy quote from Hippocrates of the Hippocratic oath that says, "The greater part of the soul lays outside the body, treatment of the inner requires treatment of the outer."
But that suggests the issue that I'm trying to get at here, that we have an opportunity to redefine what is health.
Because this idea that health is internal and atomized and individual and pharmaceutical is largely an error.
And I would use this study, a recent study by Philip Landrigan, to motivate a different view of health, where he went to most of the pediatricians in Manhattan and the New York area and logged what they spent their patient hours on.
80 to 90 percent of their time was spent on five things.
Number one was asthma, number two was developmental delays, number three was 400-fold increases in rare childhood cancers in the last eight to 10, 15 years.
Number four and five were childhood obesity and diabetes-related issues.
So all of those -- what's common about all of those?
The environment is implicated, radically implicated, right.
This is not the germs that medicos were trained to deal with; this is a different definition of health, health that has a great advantage because it's external, it's shared, we can do something about it, as opposed to internal, genetically predetermined or individualized.
People who come to the clinic are called, not patients, but impatients, because they're too impatient to wait for legislative change to address local and environmental health issues.
And I meet them at the University, I also have a few field offices that I set up in various places that provide an immersion in some of the environmental challenges we face.
I like this one from the Belgian field office, where we met in a roundabout, precisely because the roundabout iconified the headless social movement that informs much social transformation, as opposed to the top-down control of red light traffic intersections.
In this case, of course, the roundabout with that micro-decisions being made in situ by people not being told what to do.
But, of course, affords greater throughput, fewer accidents, and an interesting model of social movement.
Some of the things that the monitoring protocols have developed: this is the tadpole bureaucrat protocol, or keeping tabs, if you will.
What they are is an addition of tadpoles that are named after a local bureaucrat whose decisions affect your water quality.
So an impatient concerned for water quality would raise a tadpole bureaucrat in a sample of water in which they're interested.
And we give them a couple of things to do that, to help them do companion animal devices while they're blogging and doing their email.
This is a tadpole walker to take your tadpole walking in the evening.
And the interesting thing that happens -- because we're using tadpoles, of course, because they have the most exquisite biosenses that we have, several orders of magnitude more sensitive than some of our senses for sensing, responding in a biologically meaningful way, to that whole class of industrial contaminants we call endocrine disruptors or hormone emulators.
But by taking your tadpole out for a walk in the evening -- there's a few action shots -- your neighbors are likely to say, "What are you doing?"
And then you have to introduce your tadpole and who it's named after.
You have to explain what you're doing and how the developmental events of a tadpole are, of course, very observable and they use the same T3-mediated hormones that we do.
And so next time your neighbor sees you they'll say, "How is that tadpole doing?"
And you can let them social network with your tadpole, because the Environmental Health Clinic has a social networking site for, not only impatients, humans, but non-humans, social networking for humans and non-humans.
And of course, these endocrine disruptors are things that are implicated in the breast cancer epidemic, the obesity epidemic, the two and a half year drop in the average age of onset of puberty in young girls and other related things.
The culmination of this is if you've successfully raised your tadpole, observing the behavioral and developmental events, you will then go and introduce your tadpole to its namesake and discuss the evidence that you've seen.
Another quick protocol -- and I'm going to go through these quickly, but just to give you the material sense of what we're doing here -- instead of asking you for urine samples, I'll ask you for a mouse sample.
Anyone here lucky enough to share, to cohabit with a mouse -- a domestic partnership with mice?
Very lucky.
Mice, of course, are the quintessential model organism.
They're even better models of environmental health, because not only the same mammalian biology, but they share your diet, largely.
They share your environmental stressors, the asbestos levels and lead levels, whatever you're exposed to.
And they're geographically more limited than you are, because we don't know if you've been exposed to persistent organic pollutants in your home, or occupationally or as a child.
Mice are a very good representation.
So it starts by building a better mousetrap, of course.
This is one of them.
Coping with environmental stressors is tricky.
Is anybody here on antidepressants?
(Laughter) There's a lot of people in Manhattan are.
And we were testing if the mice would also self-administer SSRIs.
So this was Prozac, this was Zoloft, this was a black jellybean and this was muscle relaxant, all of which were the medications that the impatient was taking.
So do you think the mice self-administered antidepressants?
What's the -- (Audience: Sure. Yes.) How did you know that? They did.
This was vodka and solution, gin and solution.
This guy also liked plain water and the muscle relaxant.
Where's our expert?
Vodka, gin -- (Audience: [unclear]) Yes. Yes. You know your mice well.
They did, yes.
So they drank as much vodka as they did plain water, which was interesting.
Then of course, it goes into the entrapment device.
There's an old cellphone in there -- a good use for old cellphones -- which dials the clinic, we go and pick up the mouse.
We take the blood sample and do the blood work and hair work on the mice.
And I want to sort of point out the big advantage of framing health in this external way.
But we do have a few prescription products through this.
It's very different from the medical model.
Anything you do to improve your water quality or air quality, or to understand it or to change it, the benefits are enjoyed by anyone you share that water quality or air quality with.
And that aggregating effect, that collective action effect, is actually something we can use to our advantage.
So I want to show you one prescription product in the clinic called the No Park.
This is a prescription to improve water quality.
Many impatients are very concerned for water quality and air quality.
What we do is we take a fire hydrant, a "no parking" space associated with a fire hydrant, and we prescribe the removal of the asphalt to create an engineered micro landscape, to create an infiltration opportunity.
Because, many of you will know, that the biggest pollution burden that we have on the New York, New Jersey harbor right now is no longer the point sources, no longer the big polluters, no longer the GEs, but that massive network of roads, [those] impervious surfaces, that collect all that cadmium neurotoxin that comes from your brake liners or the oily hydrocarbon waste in every single storm event and medieval infrastructure washes it straight into the estuary system.
That doesn't do a lot of good.
These are little opportunities to intercept those pollutants before they enter the harbor, and they're produced by impatients on various city blocks in some very interesting ways.
I just want to say it was sort of a rule of thumb though, there's about two or three fire hydrants on every city block.
By creating engineered micro landscapes to infiltrate in them, we don't prevent them from being used as emergency vehicle parking spaces, because, of course, a firetruck can come and park there.
They flatten a few plants. No big deal, they'll regenerate.
But if we did this in every single -- every fire hydrant we could redefine the emergency.
That 99 percent of the time when a firetruck is not parking there, it's infiltrating pollutants.
It's also increasing fixing CO2s, sequestering some of the airborne pollutants.
And aggregated, these smaller interceptions could actually infiltrate all the roadborne pollution that now runs into the estuary system, up to a seven inch rain event, up to a hundred-year storm.
So these are small actions that can amount to a significant effect to improve local environmental health.
This is one of the more ambitious ones.
What the climate crisis has revealed to us is a secondary, more insidious and more pervasive crisis, which is the crisis of agency, which is what to do.
Somehow buying a local lettuce, changing a light bulb, driving the speed limit, changing your tires regularly, doesn't seem sufficient in the face of climate crisis.
And this is an interesting icon that happened -- you remember these: fallout shelters.
What is the fallout shelter for the climate crisis?
This was civic mobilization.
Churches, school groups, hospitals, private residents -- everyone built one of these in a matter of months.
And they still remain as icons of civic response in the face of shared, uncertain, collective threat.
Fallout shelter for the climate crisis, I would say, looks something like this, or this, which is an intensive urban agriculture facility that's due to go on my lab building at NYU.
What it does is a very simple idea of taking -- 80 to 90 percent of the CO2 produced in Manhattan is building related -- we take, just like a commercial greenhouse, we take the CO2 from the building -- CO2-enriched air -- we force it through the urban agriculture facility, and then we resupply oxygen-enriched air.
You can't actually build much on a roof, they're not designed for that.
So it's on legs, so it focuses all the load on the masonry walls and the columns.
It's built as a barn raising, using open source hardware.
This is the quarter-scale prototype that was functioning in Spain.
This is what it will look like, fingers crossed, NYU willing.
And what I want to show you is -- actually this is one of the components of it that we've just recently been testing -- which is a solar chimney -- we have got 17 of them now put around New York at the moment -- that passively draws air up.
You understand a solar chimney.
Hot air rises.
You put a bit of black plastic on the side of a building, it'll heat up, and you'll get passive airflow.
What we do is actually put a standard HVAC filter on the top of that.
That actually removes about 95 percent of the carbon black, that stuff that, with ozone, is responsible for about half of global warming's effects, because it changes, it settles on the snow, it changes the reflectors, it changes the transmission qualities of the atmosphere.
Carbon black is that grime that otherwise lodges in your pretty pink lungs, and it's associated with.
It's not good stuff, and it's from inefficient combustion, not from combustion itself.
When we put it through our solar chimney, we remove actually about 95 percent of that.
And then I swap it out with the students and actually re-release that carbon black.
And we make pencils the length of which measures the grime that we've pulled out of the air.
Here's one of them that we have up now.
Here's who put them up and who are avid pencil users.
Okay, so I want to show you just two more interfaces, because I think one of our big challenges is re-imagining our relationship to natural systems, not only through this model of twisted personalized health, but through the animals with whom we cohabit.
We are not alone; the animals are moving in.
In fact, urban migration now describes the movement of animals formerly known as wild into urban centers.
You know, coyote in Central Park, a whale in the Gowanus Canal, elk in Westchester County.
It's happening all over the Developed World, probably for loss of habitat, but also because our cities are a little bit more livable than they have been.
And every green space we create is an invitation for non-humans to cohabit with us.
But we've kind of lacked imagination in how we could do that well or interestingly.
And I want to show you a few of the technological interfaces that have been developed under the moniker of OOZ -- which is zoo backwards and without cages -- to try and reform that relationship.
This is communication technology for birds. It looks like this.
When a bird lands on it, they trigger a sound file.
This is actually in the Whitney Museum, where there were six of them, each of which had a different argument on it, different sound file.
They said things like this.
(Whistling) Recorded Voice: Here's what you need to do.
Go down there and buy some of those health food bars, the ones you call bird food, and bring it here and scatter it around.
There's a good person.
Natalie Jeremijenko: Okay. (Laugher) So there was several of these.
The birds were able to jump from one to the other.
These are just your average urban pigeon.
And an early test which argument elicited cooperative behavior from the people below -- about a hundred to one decided that this was the argument that worked best on us.
Recorded Voice: Tick, tick, tick.
That's the sound of genetic mutations of the avian flu becoming a deadly human flu.
Do you know what slows it down?
Healthy sub-populations of birds, increasing biodiversity generally.
It is in your interests that I'm healthy, happy, well-fed.
Hence, you could share some of your nutritional resources instead of monopolizing them.
That is, share your lunch.
(Laughter) NJ: It worked, and it's true.
The final project I'd like to show you is a new interface for fish that has just been launched -- it's actually officially launched next week -- with a wonderful commission from the Architectural League.
You may not have known that you need to communicate with fish, but there is now a device for you to do so.
It looks like this: buoys that float on the water, project three foot up, three foot down.
When a fish swims underneath, a light goes on.
This is what it looks like.
So there's another function on here.
This top light is -- I'm sorry if I'm making you seasick -- this top light is actually a water quality display that shifts from red, when the dissolved oxygen is low, to a blue/green, when its dissolved oxygen is high.
And then you can also text the fish.
So there's business cards down there that'll give you contact details.
And they text back.
When the buoys get your text, they wink at you twice to say, we've got your message.
But perhaps the most popular has been that we've got another array of these boys in the Bronx River, where the first beaver -- crazy as he is -- to have moved in and built a lodge in New York in 250 years, hangs out.
So updates from a beaver.
You can subscribe to updates from him. You can talk to him.
And what I like to think of is this is an interface that re-scripts how we interact with natural systems, specifically by changing who has information, where they have it, who can make sense of that information, and what you can do about it.
In this case, instead of throwing chewing gum, or Doritos or whatever you have in your pocket at the fish -- There's a body of water in Iceland that I've been dealing with that's in the middle of the city, and the largest pollution burden on it is not the roadborne pollution, it's actually white bread from people feeding the fish and the birds.
Instead of doing that actually, we've developed some fish sticks that you can feed the fish.
They're delicious.
They're cross-species delicious that is, delicious for humans and non-humans.
But they also have a chelating agent in them.
They're nutritionally appropriate, not like Doritos.
And so every time that desire to interact with the animals, which is at least as ubiquitous as that sign: "Do not feed the animals."
And there's about three of them on every New York City park.
And Yellowstone National Park, there's more "do not feed the animals" signs than there are animals you might wish to feed.
But in that action, that interaction, by re-scripting that, by changing it into an opportunity to offer food that is nutritionally appropriate, that could augment the nutritional resources that we ourselves have depleted for augmenting the fish population and also adding chelating agent, which, like any chelating agent that we use medicinally, binds to the bioaccumulated heavy metals and PCBs that are in the fish living in this particular habitat and allows them to pass it out as a harmless salt where it's complexed by a reactive, effectively removing it from bioavailability.
But I wanted to say that interaction, re-scripting that interaction, into collective action, collective remediative action, very different from the approach that's being used on the other side on the Hudson River, where we're dredging the PCBs -- after 30 years of legislative and legal struggle, GE's paying for the dredging of the largest Superfund site in the world -- we're dredging it, and it'll probably get shipped off to Pennsylvania or the nearest Third World country, where it will continue to be toxic sludge.
Displacement is not the way to deal with environmental issues.
And that's typically the paradigm under which we've operated.
By actually taking the opportunity that new technologies, new interactive technologies, present to re-script our interactions, to script them, not just as isolated, individuated interactions, but as collective aggregating actions that can amount to something, we can really begin to address some of our important environmental challenges.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Every presentation needs this slide in it.
(Laughter) It's beautiful, isn't it?
Do you see?
All the points, all the lines -- it's incredible.
It is the network; and in my case, the network has been important in media, because I get to connect to people.
Isn't it amazing?
Through that, I connect to people.
And the way that I've been doing it has been multifaceted.
For example, I get people to dress up their vacuum cleaners.
(Laughter) I put together projects like Earth Sandwich, where I ask people to try and simultaneously place two pieces of bread perfectly opposite each other on the Earth.
And people started laying bread in tribute, and eventually a team was able to do it between New Zealand and Spain.
It's pretty incredible -- the video's online.
Connecting to people in projects like YoungmeNowme for example.
In YoungmeNowme, the audience was asked to find a childhood photograph of themselves and restage it as an adult.
(Laughter) This is the same person -- top photo, James, bottom photo, [Jennifer].
Poignant.
This was a Mother's Day gift.
(Laughter) Particularly creepy.
(Applause) (Laughter) My favorite of these photos, which I couldn't find, is there's a picture of a 30 year-old woman or so with a little baby on her lap, and the next photo is a 220-lb man with a tiny, little old lady peaking over his shoulder.
But this project changed the way that I thought about connecting to people.
This is project called Ray.
And what happened was I was sent this piece of audio and had no idea who generated the audio.
Somebody said, "You have to listen to this."
And this is what came to me.
Recording: Hi, my name is Ray, and on yesterday my daughter called me because she was stressed out because of things that were going on on her job that she felt was quite unfair.
Being quite disturbed, she called for comfort, and I didn't really know what to tell her, because we have to deal with so much mess in our society.
So I was led to write this song just for her, just to give her some encouragement while dealing with stress and pressures on her job.
And I figured I'd put it on the Internet for all employees under stress to help you better deal with what you're going through on your job.
Here's how the song goes.
♫ I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ ♫ Oh, I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ ♫ Oh, if you don't leave me alone, ♫ ♫ you gonna have to send me home ♫ ♫ 'Cause I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ Now you might not be able to sing that out loud, but you can hum it to yourself, and you know what the words are.
And let it give you some strength to get the next few moments on your job.
All right. Stay strong. Peace.
Ze Frank: So -- yeah.
No, no, no, shush. We've got to go quickly.
So I was so moved by this -- this is incredible. This was connecting, right.
This was, at a distance, realizing that someone was feeling something, wanting to affect them in a particular way, using media to do it, putting it online and realizing that there was a greater impact.
This was incredible; this is what I wanted to do.
So the first thing I thought of is we have to thank him.
And I asked my audience, I said, "Listen to this piece of audio.
We have to remix it. He's got a great voice.
It's actually in the key of B flat.
And have to do something with it."
Hundreds of remixes came back -- lots of different attempts.
One stood out in particular.
It was done by a guy named Goose.
Remix: ♫ I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ ♫ Oh, I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ ♫ Oh, if you don't leave me alone, ♫ ♫ You gonna have to send me home ♫ ♫ Cuz I'm about to whip somebody's ass ♫ ♫ I'm about to whip some ♫ -- ZF: Great, so it was incredible.
That song -- (Applause) Thank you.
So that song, somebody told me that it was at a baseball game in Kansas City.
In the end, it was one of the top downloads on a whole bunch of music streaming services.
And so I said, "Let's put this together in an album."
And the audience came together, and they designed an album cover.
And I said, "If you put it all on this, I'm going to deliver it to him, if you can figure out who this person is," because all I had was his name -- Ray -- and this little piece of audio and the fact that his daughter was upset.
In two weeks, they found him.
I received and email and it said, "Hi, I'm Ray.
I heard you were looking for me."
(Laughter) And I was like, "Yeah, Ray.
It's been an interesting two weeks."
And so I flew to St. Louis and met Ray, and he's a preacher -- (Laughter) among other things.
So but anyways, here's the thing -- is it reminds me of this, which is a sign that you see in Amsterdam on every street corner.
And it's sort of a metaphor for me for the virtual world.
I look at this photo, and he seems really interested in what's going on with that button, but it doesn't seem like he is really that interested in crossing the street.
(Laughter) And it makes me think of this.
On street corners everywhere, people are looking at their cell phones, and it's easy to dismiss this as some sort of bad trend in human culture.
But the truth is life is being lived there.
When they smile -- right, you've seen people stop -- all of a sudden, life is being lived there, somewhere up in that weird, dense network.
And this is it, right, to feel and be felt.
It's the fundamental force that we're all after.
We can build all sorts of environments to make it a little bit easier, but ultimately, what we're trying to do is really connect with one other person.
And that's not always going to happen in physical spaces.
It's also going to now happen in virtual spaces, and we have to get better at figuring that out.
I think, of the people that build all this technology in the network, a lot of them aren't very good at connecting with people.
This is kind of like something I used to do in third grade.
(Laughter) So here's a series of projects over the last few years where I've been inspired by trying to figure out how to really facilitate close connection.
Sometimes they're very, very simple things.
A Childhood Walk, which is a project where I ask people to remember a walk that they used to take as a child over and over again that was sort of meaningless -- like on the route to the bus stop, to a neighbor's house, and take it inside of Google Streetview.
And I promise you, if you take that walk inside Google Streetview, you come to a moment where something comes back and hits you in the face.
And I collected those moments -- the photos inside Google Streetview and the memories, specifically.
"Our conversation started with me saying, 'I'm bored,' and her replying, 'When I'm bored I eat pretzels.' I remember this distinctly because it came up a lot."
"Right after he told me and my brother he was going to be separating from my mom, I remember walking to a convenience store and getting a cherry cola."
"They used some of the morbidly artist footage, a close-up of Chad's shoes in the middle of the highway.
I guess the shoes came off when he was hit.
He slept over at my house once, and he left his pillow.
It had 'Chad' written in magic marker on it.
He died long after he left the pillow at my house, but we never got around to returning it."
Sometimes they're a little bit more abstract.
This is Pain Pack.
Right after September 11th, last year, I was thinking about pain and the way that we disperse it, the way that we excise it from our bodies.
So what I did is I opened up a hotline -- a hotline where people could leave voicemails of their pain, not necessarily related to that event.
And people called in and left messages like this.
Recording: Okay, here's something.
I'm not alone, and I am loved.
I'm really fortunate.
But sometimes I feel really lonely.
And when I feel that way even the smallest act of kindness can make me cry.
Like even people in convenience stores saying, "Have a nice day," when they're accidentally looking me in the eye.
ZF: So what I did was I took those voicemails, and with their permission, converted them to MP3s and distributed them to sound editors who created short sounds using just those voicemails.
And those were then distributed to DJs who have made hundreds of songs using that source material.
(Music) We don't have time to play much of it.
You can look at it online.
"From 52 to 48 with love" was a project around the time of the last election cycle, where McCain and Obama both, in their speeches after the election, talked about reconciliation, and I was like, "What the hell does that look like?"
So I thought, "Well let's just give it a try.
Let's have people hold up signs about reconciliation."
And so some really nice things came together.
"I voted blue. I voted red.
Together, for our future."
These are very, very cute little things right.
Some came from the winning party.
"Dear 48, I promise to listen to you, to fight for you, to respect you always."
Some came from the party who had just lost.
"From a 48 to a 52, may your party's leadership be as classy as you, but I doubt it."
But the truth was that as this start becoming popular, a couple rightwing blogs and some message boards apparently found it to be a little patronizing, which I could also see.
And so I started getting amazing amounts of hate mail, death threats even.
And one guy in particular kept on writing me these pretty awful messages, and he was dressed as Batman.
And he said, "I'm dressed as Batman to hide my identity."
Just in case I thought the real Batman was coming after me; which actually made me feel a little better -- like, "Phew, it's not him."
So what I did -- unfortunately, I was harboring all this kind of awful experience and this pain inside of me, and it started to eat away at my psyche.
And I was protecting the project from it, I realized. I was protecting it -- I didn't want this special, little group of photographs to get sullied in some way.
So what I did, I took all those emails, and I put them together into something called Angrigami, which was an origami template made out of this sort of vile stuff.
And I asked people to send me beautiful things made out of the Angrigami.
(Laughter) But this was the emotional moment.
One of my viewer's uncles died on a particular day and he chose to commemorate it with a piece of hate.
It's amazing.
The last thing I'm going to tell you about is a series of projects called Songs You Already Know, where the idea was, I was trying to figure out to address particular kinds of emotions with group projects.
So one of them was fairly straightforward.
A guy said that his daughter got scared at night and could I write a song for her, his daughter.
And I said, "Oh yeah, I'll try to write a mantra that she can sing to herself to help herself go to sleep."
And this was "Scared."
(Video) ♫ This is a song that I sing when I'm scared of something ♫ ♫ I don't know why but it helps me get over it ♫ ♫ The words of the song just move me along ♫ ♫ And somehow I get over it ♫ ♫ At least I don't suck at life ♫ ♫ I keep on trying despite ♫ ♫ At least I don't suck at life ♫ ♫ I keep on trying despite ♫ ♫ This is a song that I sing when I'm scared of something ♫ Okay, so I wrote that song, right. Thank you.
So the nice thing was is he walked by his daughter's room at some point, and she actually was singing that song to herself.
So I was like, "Awesome. This is great."
And then I got this email. And there's a little bit of a back story to this.
And I don't have much time.
But the idea was that at one point I did a project called Facebook Me Equals You, where I wanted to experience what it was like to live as another person.
So I asked for people's usernames and passwords to be sent to me.
And I got a lot, like 30 in a half an hour.
And I shut that part down.
And I chose two people to be, and I asked them to send me descriptions of how to act as them on Facebook.
One person sent me a very detailed description; the other person didn't.
And the person who didn't, it turned out, had just moved to a new city and taken on a new job.
So, you know, people were writing me and saying, "How's your new job?"
I was like, "I don't know.
Didn't know I had one."
But anyway, this same person, Laura, ended up emailing me a little bit after that project.
And I felt badly for not having done a good job.
And she said, "I'm really anxious, I just moved to a new town, I have this new job, and I've just had this incredible amount of anxiety."
So she had seen the "Scared" song and wondered if I could do something.
So I asked her, "What does it feel like when you feel this way?"
And she wrote a sort of descriptive set of what it felt like to have had this anxiety.
And so what I decided to do.
I said, "Okay, I'll think about it."
And so quietly in the background, I started sending people this.
(Audio) ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ So I asked people whether they had basic audio capabilities, just so they could sing along to the song with headphones on, so I could just get their voices back.
And this is the kind of thing that I got back.
Recording: ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ZF: So that's one of the better ones, really.
But what's awesome is, as I started getting more and more and more of them, all of a sudden I had 30, 40 voices from around the world.
And when you put them together, something magical happens, something absolutely incredible happens, and all of a sudden I get a chorus from around the world.
And what was really great is, I'm putting all this work together in the background, and Laura sent me a follow-up email because a good month had passed by.
And she said, "I know you've forgotten about me.
I just want to say thanks for even considering it."
And then a few days later I sent her this.
(Audio) ♫ Right now, it feels like I forgot to turn the light on ♫ ♫ And things that looked so good yesterday ♫ ♫ are now shades of gray ♫ ♫ And it seems like the world is spinning ♫ ♫ while I'm standing still ♫ ♫ Or maybe I am spinning I can't tell ♫ ♫ And then you say ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ♫ Just breathe ♫ ♫ And now the words sing ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ♫ Just breathe ♫ ♫ Now everybody sings ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ♫ Just breathe ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ♫ Just breathe ♫ ♫ Hey ♫ ♫ You're okay ♫ ♫ You'll be fine ♫ ♫ Just breathe ♫ Thank you.
(Applause)
The stories we tell about each other matter very much.
The stories we tell ourselves about our own lives matter.
And most of all, I think the way that we participate in each other's stories is of deep importance.
I was six years old when I first heard stories about the poor.
Now I didn't hear those stories from the poor themselves, I heard them from my Sunday school teacher and Jesus, kind of via my Sunday school teacher.
I remember learning that people who were poor needed something material -- food, clothing, shelter -- that they didn't have.
And I also was taught, coupled with that, that it was my job -- this classroom full of five and six year-old children -- it was our job, apparently, to help.
This is what Jesus asked of us.
And then he said, "What you do for the least of these, you do for me."
Now I was pretty psyched.
I was very eager to be useful in the world -- I think we all have that feeling.
And also, it was kind of interesting that God needed help.
That was news to me, and it felt like it was a very important thing to get to participate in.
But I also learned very soon thereafter that Jesus also said, and I'm paraphrasing, the poor would always be with us.
This frustrated and confused me; I felt like I had been just given a homework assignment that I had to do, and I was excited to do, but no matter what I would do, I would fail.
So I felt confused, a little bit frustrated and angry, like maybe I'd misunderstood something here.
And I felt overwhelmed.
And for the first time, I began to fear this group of people and to feel negative emotion towards a whole group of people.
I imagined in my head, a kind of long line of individuals that were never going away, that would always be with us.
They were always going to ask me to help them and give them things, which I was excited to do, but I didn't know how it was going to work.
And I didn't know what would happen when I ran out of things to give, especially if the problem was never going away.
In the years following, the other stories I heard about the poor growing up were no more positive.
For example, I saw pictures and images frequently of sadness and suffering.
I heard about things that were going wrong in the lives of the poor.
I heard about disease, I heard about war -- they always seemed to be kind of related.
And in general, I got this sort of idea that the poor in the world lived lives that were wrought with suffering and sadness, devastation, hopelessness.
And after a while, I developed what I think many of us do, is this predictable response, where I started to feel bad every time I heard about them.
I started to feel guilty for my own relative wealth, because I wasn't doing more, apparently, to make things better.
And I even felt a sense of shame because of that.
And so naturally, I started to distance myself.
I stopped listening to their stories quite as closely as I had before.
And I stopped expecting things to really change.
Now I still gave -- on the outside it looked like I was still quite involved.
I gave of my time and my money, I gave when solutions were on sale.
The cost of a cup of coffee can save a child's life, right.
I mean who can argue with that?
I gave when I was cornered, when it was difficult to avoid and I gave, in general, when the negative emotions built up enough that I gave to relieve my own suffering, not someone else's.
The truth be told, I was giving out of that place, not out of a genuine place of hope and excitement to help and of generosity.
It became a transaction for me, became sort of a trade.
I was purchasing something -- I was buying my right to go on with my day and not necessarily be bothered by this bad news.
And I think the way that we go through that sometimes can, first of all, disembody a group of people, individuals out there in the world.
And it can also turn into a commodity, which is a very scary thing.
So as I did this, and as I think many of us do this, we kind of buy our distance, we kind of buy our right to go on with our day.
I think that exchange can actually get in the way of the very thing that we want most.
It can get in the way of our desire to really be meaningful and useful in another person's life and, in short to love.
Thankfully, a few years ago, things shifted for me because I heard this gentleman speak, Dr. Muhammad Yunus.
I know many in the room probably know exactly who he is, but to give the shorthand version for any who have not heard him speak, Dr. Yunus won the Nobel Peace Prize a few years ago for his work pioneering modern microfinance.
When I heard him speak, it was three years before that.
But basically, microfinance -- if this is new to you as well -- think of that as financial services for the poor.
Think of all the things you get at your bank and imagine those products and services tailored to the needs of someone living on a few dollars a day.
Dr. Yunus shared his story, explaining what that was, and what he had done with his Grameen Bank.
He also talked about, in particular, microlending, which is a tiny loan that could help someone start or grow a business.
Now, when I heard him speak, it was exciting for a number of reasons.
First and foremost, I learned about this new method of change in the world that, for once, showed me, maybe, a way to interact with someone and to give, to share of a resource in a way that wasn't weird and didn't make me feel bad -- that was exciting.
But more importantly, he told stories about the poor that were different than any stories I had heard before.
In fact, those individuals he talked about who were poor was sort of a side note.
He was talking about strong, smart, hardworking entrepreneurs who woke up every day and were doing things to make their lives and their family's lives better.
All they needed to do that more quickly and to do it better was a little bit of capital.
It was an amazing sort of insight for me.
And I, in fact, was so deeply moved by this -- it's hard to express now how much that affected me -- but I was so moved that I actually quit my job a few weeks later, and I moved to East Africa to try to see for myself what this was about.
For the first time, actually, in a long time I wanted to meet those individuals, I wanted to meet these entrepreneurs, and see for myself what their lives were actually about.
So I spent three months in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania interviewing entrepreneurs that had received 100 dollars to start or grow a business.
And in fact, through those interactions, for the first time, I was starting to get to be friends with some of those people in that big amorphous group out there that was supposed to be far away.
I was starting to be friends and get to know their personal stories.
And over and over again, as I interviewed them and spent my days with them, I did hear stories of life change and amazing little details of change.
So I would hear from goat herders who had used that money that they had received to buy a few more goats.
Their business trajectory would change.
They would make a little bit more money; their standard of living would shift and would get better.
And they would make really interesting little adjustments in their lives, like they would start to send their children to school.
They might be able to buy mosquito nets.
Maybe they could afford a lock for the door and feel secure.
Maybe it was just that they could put sugar in their tea and offer that to me when I came as their guest and that made them feel proud.
But there were these beautiful details, even if I talked to 20 goat herders in a row, and some days that's what happened -- these beautiful details of life change that were meaningful to them.
That was another thing that really touched me.
It was really humbling to see for the first time, to really understand that even if I could have taken a magic wand and fixed everything, I probably would have gotten a lot wrong.
Because the best way for people to change their lives is for them to have control and to do that in a way that they believe is best for them.
So I saw that and it was very humbling.
Anyway, another interesting thing happened while I was there.
I never once was asked for a donation, which had kind of been my mode, right.
There's poverty, you give money to help -- no one asked me for a donation.
In fact, no one wanted me to feel bad for them at all.
If anything, they just wanted to be able to do more of what they were doing already and to build on their own capabilities.
So what I did hear, once in a while, was that people wanted a loan -- I thought that sounded very reasonable and really exciting.
And by the way, I was a philosophy and poetry major in school, so I didn't know the difference between profit and revenue when I went to East Africa.
I just got this impression that the money would work.
And my introduction to business was in these $100 little infuses of capital.
And I learned about profit and revenue, about leverage, all sorts of things, from farmers, from seamstresses, from goat herders.
So this idea that these new stories of business and hope might be shared with my friends and family, and through that, maybe we could get some of the money that they needed to be able to continue their businesses as loans, that's this little idea that turned into Kiva.
A few months later, I went back to Uganda with a digital camera and a basic website that my partner, Matthew, and I had kind of built, and took pictures of seven of my new friends, posted their stories, these stories of entrepreneurship, up on the website, spammed friends and family and said, "We think this is legal.
Haven't heard back yet from SEC on all the details, but do you say, do you want to help participate in this, provide the money that they need?"
The money came in basically overnight.
We sent it over to Uganda.
And over the next six months, a beautiful thing happened; the entrepreneurs received the money, they were paid, and their businesses, in fact, grew, and they were able to support themselves and change the trajectory of their lives.
In October of '05, after those first seven loans were paid, Matt and I took the word beta off of the site.
We said, "Our little experiment has been a success.
Let's start for real." That was our official launch.
And then that first year, October '05 through '06, Kiva facilitated $500,000 in loans.
The second year, it was a total of 15 million.
The third year, the total was up to around 40.
The fourth year, we were just short of 100.
And today, less than five years in, Kiva's facilitated more than 150 million dollars, in little 25-dollar bits, from lenders and entrepreneurs -- more than a million of those, collectively in 200 countries.
So that's where Kiva is today, just to bring you right up to the present.
And while those numbers and those statistics are really fun to talk about and they're interesting, to me, Kiva's really about stories.
It's about retelling the story of the poor, and it's about giving ourselves an opportunity to engage that validates their dignity, validates a partnership relationship, not a relationship that's based on the traditional sort of donor beneficiary weirdness that can happen.
But instead a relationship that can promote respect and hope and this optimism that together we can move forward.
So what I hope is that, not only can the money keep flowing forth through Kiva -- that's a very positive and meaningful thing -- but I hope Kiva can blur those lines, like I said, between the traditional rich and poor categories that we're taught to see in the world, this false dichotomy of us and them, have and have not.
I hope that Kiva can blur those lines.
Because as that happens, I think we can feel free to interact in a way that's more open, more just and more creative, to engage with each other and to help each other.
Imagine how you feel when you see somebody on street who is begging and you're about to approach them.
Imagine how you feel; and then imagine the difference when you might see somebody who has a story of entrepreneurship and hard work who wants to tell you about their business.
Maybe they're smiling, and they want to talk to you about what they've done.
Imagine if you're speaking with somebody who's growing things and making them flourish, somebody who's using their talents to do something productive, somebody who's built their own business from scratch, someone who is surrounded by abundance, not scarcity, who's in fact creating abundance, somebody with full hands with something to offer, not empty hands asking for you to give them something.
Imagine if you could hear a story you didn't expect of somebody who wakes up every day and works very, very hard to make their life better.
These stories can really change the way that we think about each other.
And if we can catalyze a supportive community to come around these individuals and to participate in their story by lending a little bit of money, I think that can change the way we believe in each other and each other's potential.
Now for me, Kiva is just the beginning.
And as I look forward to what is next, it's been helpful to reflect on the things I've learned so far.
The first one is, as I mentioned, entrepreneurship was a new idea to me.
Kiva borrowers, as I interviewed them and got to know them over the last few years, have taught me what entrepreneurship is.
And I think, at its core, it's deciding that you want your life to be better.
You see an opportunity and you decide what you're going to do to try to seize that.
In short, it's deciding that tomorrow can better than today and going after that.
Second thing that I've learned is that loans are a very interesting tool for connectivity.
So they're not a donation.
Yeah, maybe it doesn't sound that much different.
But in fact, when you give something to someone and they say, "Thanks," and let you know how things go, that's one thing.
When you lend them money, and they slowly pay you back over time, you have this excuse to have an ongoing dialogue.
This continued attention -- this ongoing attention -- is a really big deal to build different kinds of relationships among us.
And then third, from what I've heard from the entrepreneurs I've gotten to know, when all else is equal, given the option to have just money to do what you need to do, or money plus the support and encouragement of a global community, people choose the community plus the money.
That's a much more meaningful combination, a more powerful combination.
So with that in mind, this particular incident has led to the things that I'm working on now.
I see entrepreneurs everywhere now, now that I'm tuned into this.
And one thing that I've seen is there are a lot of supportive communities that already exist in the world.
With social networks, it's an amazing way, growing the number of people that we all have around us in our own supportive communities, rapidly.
And so, as I have been thinking about this, I've been wondering: how can we engage these supportive communities to catalyze even more entrepreneurial ideas and to catalyze all of us to make tomorrow better than today?
As I've researched what's going on in the United States, a few interesting little insights have come up.
So one is that, of course, as we all might expect, many small businesses in the U.S. and all over the world still need money to grow and to do more of what they want to do or they might need money during a hard month.
But there's always a need for resources close by.
Another thing is, it turns out, those resources don't usually come from the places you might expect -- banks, venture capitalists, other organizations and support structures -- they come from friends and family.
Some statistics say 85 percent or more of funding for small businesses comes from friends and family.
That's around 130 billion dollars a year -- it's a lot.
And third, so as people are doing this friends and family fundraising process, it's very awkward, people don't know exactly what to ask for, how to ask, what to promise in return, even though they have the best of intentions and want to thank those people that are supporting them.
So to harness the power of these supportive communities in a new way and to allow entrepreneurs to decide for themselves exactly what that financial exchange should look like, exactly what fits them and the people around them, this week actually, we're quietly doing a launch of Profounder, which is a crowd funding platform for small businesses to raise what they need through investments from their friends and family.
And it's investments, not donations, not loans, but investments that have a dynamic return.
So the mapping of participating in the story, it actually flows with the up and down.
So in short, it's a do-it-yourself tool for small businesses to raise these funds.
And what you can do is go onto the site, create a profile, create investment terms in a really easy way.
We make it really, really simple for me as well as anyone else who wants to use the site.
And we allow entrepreneurs to share a percentage of their revenues.
They can raise up to a million dollars from an unlimited number of unaccredited, unsophisticated investors -- everyday people, heaven forbid -- and they can share those returns over time -- again, whatever terms they set.
As investors choose to become involved based on those terms, they can either take their rewards back as cash, or they can decide in advance to give those returns away to a non-profit.
So they can be a cash, or a cause, investor.
It's my hope that this kind of tool can show anybody who has an idea a path to go do what they want to do in the world and to gather the people around them that they already have, the people that know them best and that love them and want to support them, to gather them to make this happen.
So that's what I'm working on now.
And to close, I just want to say, look these are tools.
Right now, Profounder's right at the very beginning, and it's very palpable; it's very clear to me, that it's just a vessel, it's just a tool.
What we need are for people to care, to actually go use it, just like they've cared enough to use Kiva to make those connections.
But the good news is I don't think I need to stand here and convince you to care -- I'm not even going to try.
I don't think, even though we often hear, you know, hear the ethical and moral reasons, the religious reasons, "Here's why caring and giving will make you happier."
I don't think we need to be convinced of that. I think we know; in fact, I think we know so much, and it's such a reality that we care so deeply, that in fact, what usually stops us is that we're afraid to try and to mess up, because we care so very much about helping each other and being meaningful in each other's lives.
So what I think I can do today, that best thing I can give you -- I've given you my story, which is the best I can do.
And I think I can remind us that we do care.
I think we all already know that.
And I think we know that love is resilient enough for us to get out there and try.
Just a sec.
(Applause) Thanks.
(Applause) Thanks.
(Applause) For me, the best way to be inspired to try is to stop and to listen to someone else's story.
And I'm grateful that I've gotten to do that here at TED.
And I'm grateful that whenever I do that, guaranteed, I am inspired -- I am inspired by the person I am listening to.
And I believe more and more every time I listen in that that person's potential to do great things in the world and in my own potential to maybe help.
And that -- forget the tools, forget the moving around of resources -- that stuff's easy.
Believing in each other, really being sure when push comes to shove that each one of us can do amazing things in the world, that is what can make our stories into love stories and our collective story into one that continually perpetuates hope and good things for all of us.
So that, this belief in each other, knowing that without a doubt and practicing that every day in whatever you do, that's what I believe will change the world and make tomorrow better than today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This technology made a very important impact on us.
It changed the way our history developed.
But it's a technology so pervasive, so invisible, that we, for a long time, forgot to take it into account when we talked about human evolution.
But we see the results of this technology, still.
So let's make a little test.
So everyone of you turns to their neighbor please.
Turn and face your neighbors.
Please, also on the balcony.
Smile. Smile. Open the mouths.
Smile, friendly.
(Laughter) Do you -- Do you see any Canine teeth?
(Laughter) Count Dracula teeth in the mouths of your neighbors?
Of course not.
Because our dental anatomy is actually made, not for tearing down raw meat from bones or chewing fibrous leaves for hours.
It is made for a diet which is soft, mushy, which is reduced in fibers, which is very easily chewable and digestible.
Sounds like fast food, doesn't it.
(Laughter) It's for cooked food.
We carry in our face the proof that cooking, food transformation, made us what we are.
So I would suggest that we change how we classify ourselves.
We talk about ourselves as omnivores.
I would say, we should call ourselves coctivors -- (Laughter) from coquere, to cook.
We are the animals who eat cooked food.
No, no, no, no. Better -- to live of cooked food.
So cooking is a very important technology.
It's technology.
I don't know how you feel, but I like to cook for entertainment.
And you need some design to be successful.
So, cooking is a very important technology, because it allowed us to acquire what brought you all here: the big brain, this wonderful cerebral cortex we have.
Because brains are expensive.
Those have to pay tuition fees know.
(Laughter) But it's also, metabolically speaking, expensive.
You now, our brain is two to three percent of the body mass, but actually it uses 25 percent of the total energy we use.
It's very expensive.
Where does the energy come from. Of course, from food.
If we eat raw food, we cannot release really the energy.
So this ingenuity of our ancestors, to invent this most marvelous technology.
Invisible -- everyone of us does it every day, so to speak.
Cooking made it possible that mutations, natural selections, our environment, could develop us.
So if we think about this unleashing human potential, which was possible by cooking and food, why do we talk so badly about food?
Why is it always do and don'ts and it's good for you, it's not good for you?
I think the good news for me would be if we could go back and talk about the unleashing, the continuation of the unleashing of human potential.
Now, cooking allowed also that we became a migrant species.
We walked out of Africa two times.
We populated all the ecologies.
If you can cook, nothing can happen to you, because whatever you find, you will try to transform it.
It keeps also your brain working.
Now the very easy and simple technology which was developed actually runs after this formula.
Take something which looks like food, transform it, and it gives you a good, very easy, accessible energy.
This technology affected two organs, the brain and the gut, which it actually affected.
The brain could grow, but the gut actually shrunk.
Okay, it's not obvious to be honest.
(Laughter) But it shrunk to 60 percent of primate gut of my body mass.
So because of having cooked food, it's easier to digest.
Now having a large brain, as you know, is a big advantage, because you can actually influence your environment.
You can influence your own technologies you have invented.
You can continue to innovate and invent.
Now the big brain did this also with cooking.
But how did it actually run this show?
How did it actually interfere?
What kind of criteria did it use?
And this is actually taste reward and energy.
You know we have up to five tastes, three of them sustain us.
Sweet -- energy.
Umami -- this is a meaty taste.
You need proteins for muscles, recovery.
Salty, because you need salt, otherwise your electric body will not work.
And two tastes which protect you -- bitter and sour, which are against poisonous and rotten material.
But of course, they are hard-wired but we use them still in a sophisticated way.
Think about bittersweet chocolate; or think about the acidity of yogurt -- wonderful -- mixed with strawberry fruits.
So we can make mixtures of all this kind of thing because we know that, in cooking, we can transform it to the form.
Reward: this is a more complex and especially integrative form of our brain with various different elements -- the external states, our internal states, how do we feel, and so on are put together.
And something which maybe you don't like but you are so hungry that you really will be satisfied to eat.
So satisfaction was a very important part.
And as I say, energy was necessary.
Now how did the gut actually participate in this development?
And the gut is a silent voice -- it's going more for feelings.
I use the euphemism digestive comfort -- actually -- it's a digestive discomfort, which the gut is concerned with.
If you get a stomach ache, if you get a little bit bloated, was not the right food, was not the right cooking manipulation or maybe other things went wrong.
So my story is a tale of two brains, because it might surprise you, our gut has a full-fledged brain.
All the managers in the room say, "You don't tell me something new, because we know, gut feeling.
This is what we are using."
(Laughter) And actually you use it and it's actually useful.
Because our gut is connected to our emotional limbic system, they do speak with each other and make decisions.
But what it means to have a brain there is that, not only the big brain has to talk with the food, the food has to talk with the brain, because we have to learn actually how to talk to the brains.
Now if there's a gut brain, we should also learn to talk with this brain.
Now 150 years ago, anatomists described very, very carefully -- here is a model of a wall of a gut.
I took the three elements -- stomach, small intestine and colon.
And within this structure, you see these two pinkish layers, which are actually the muscle.
And between this muscle, they found nervous tissues, a lot of nervous tissues, which penetrate actually the muscle -- penetrate the submucosa, where you have all the elements for the immune system.
The gut is actually the largest immune system, defending your body.
It penetrates the mucosa.
This is the layer which actually touches the food you are swallowing and you digest, which is actually the lumen.
Now if you think about the gut, the gut is -- if you could stretch it -- 40 meters long, the length of a tennis court.
If we could unroll it, get out all the folds and so on, it would have 400 sq. meters of surface.
And now this brain takes care over this, to move it with the muscles and to do defend the surface and, of course, digest our food we cook.
So if we give you a specification, this brain, which is autonomous, have 500 million nerve cells, 100 million neurons -- so around the size of a cat brain, so there sleeps a little cat -- thinks for itself, optimizes whatever it digests.
It has 20 different neuron types.
It's got the same diversity you find actually in a pig brain, where you have 100 billion neurons.
It has autonomous organized microcircuits, has these programs which run.
It senses the food; it knows exactly what to do.
It senses it by chemical means and very importantly by mechanical means, because it has to move the food -- it has to mix all the various elements which we need for digestion.
This control of muscle is very, very important, because, you know, there can be reflexes.
If you don't like a food, especially if you're a child, you gag.
It's this brain which makes this reflex.
And then finally, it controls also the secretion of this molecular machinery, which actually digests the food we cook.
Now how do the two brains work with each other?
I took here a model from robotics -- it's called the Subsumption Architecture.
What it means is that we have a layered control system.
The lower layer, our gut brain, has its own goals -- digestion defense -- and we have the higher brain with the goal of integration and generating behaviors.
Now both look -- and this is the blue arrows -- both look to the same food, which is in the lumen and in the area of your intestine.
The big brain integrates signals, which come from the running programs of the lower brain, But subsumption means that the higher brain can interfere with the lower.
It can replace, or it can inhibit actually, signals.
So if we take two types of signals -- a hunger signal for example.
If you have an empty stomach, your stomach produces a hormone called ghrelin.
It's a very big signal; it's sent to the brain says, "Go and eat."
You have stop signals -- we have up to eight stop signals.
At least in my case, they are not listened to.
(Laughter) So what happens if the big brain in the integration overrides the signal?
So if you override the hunger signal, you can have a disorder, which is called anorexia.
Despite generating a healthy hunger signal, the big brain ignores it and activates different programs in the gut.
The more usual case is overeating.
It actually takes the signal and changes it, and we continue, even [though] our eight signals would say, "Stop, enough.
Now the interesting thing is that, along this lower layer -- this gut -- the signal becomes stronger and stronger if undigested, but digestible, material could penetrate.
This we found from bariatric surgery.
That then the signal would be very, very high.
So now back to the cooking question and back to the design.
We have learned to talk to the big brain -- taste and reward, as you know.
Now what would be the language we have to talk to the gut brain that its signals are so strong that the big brain cannot ignore it?
Then we would generate something all of us would like to have -- a balance between the hunger and the satiation.
Now I give you, from our research, a very short claim.
This is fat digestion.
You have on your left an olive oil droplet, and this olive oil droplet gets attacked by enzymes.
This is an in vitro experiment.
It's very difficult to work in the intestine.
Now everyone would expect that when the degradation of the oil happens, when the constituents are liberated, they disappear, they go away because they [were] absorbed.
Actually, what happens is that a very intricate structure appears.
And I hope you can see that there are some ring-like structures in the middle image, which is water.
This whole system generates a huge surface to allow more enzymes to attack the remaining oil.
And finally, on your right side, you see a bubbly, cell-like structure appearing, from which the body will absorb the fat.
Now if we could take this language -- and this is a language of structures -- and make it longer-lasting, that it can go through the passage of the intestine, it would generate stronger signals.
So our research -- and I think the research also at the universities -- are now fixing on these points to say: how can we actually -- and this might sound trivial now to you -- how can we change cooking?
How can we cook that we have this language developed?
So what we have actually, it's not an omnivore's dilemma.
We have a coctivor's opportunity, because we have learned over the last two million years which taste and reward -- quite sophisticated to cook -- to please ourselves, to satisfy ourselves.
If we add the matrix, if we add the structure language, which we have to learn, when we learn it, then we can put it back; and around energy, we could generate a balance, which comes out from our really primordial operation: cooking.
So, to make cooking really a very important element, I would say even philosophers have to change and have to finally recognize that cooking is what made us.
So I would say, coquo ergo sum: I cook, therefore I am.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm a visual artist, and I'm also one of the co-founders of the Plastic Pollution Coalition.
I've been working with plastic bags, which I cut up and sew back together as my primary material for my artwork for the last 20 years.
I turn them into two and three-dimensional pieces and sculptures and installations.
Upon working with the plastic, after about the first eight years, some of my work started to fissure and break down into smaller little bits of plastic.
And I thought, "Great.
It's ephemeral just like us."
Upon educating myself a little further about plastics, I actually realized this was a bad thing.
It's a bad thing that plastic breaks down into smaller little bits, because it's always still plastic.
And what we're finding is that a lot of it is in the marine environment.
I then, in the last few years, learned about the Pacific garbage patch and the gyre.
And my initial reaction -- and I think this is a lot of people's first reaction to learning about it -- is, "Oh my God!
We've got to go out there and clean this thing up."
So I actually developed a proposal to go out with a cargo ship and two decommissioned fishing trawlers, a crane, a chipping machine and a cold-molding machine.
And my intention was to go out to the gyre, raise awareness about this issue and begin to pick up the plastic, chip it into little bits and cold mold it into bricks that could potentially be used as building materials in underdeveloped communities.
I began talking with people who actually had been out to the gyre and were studying the plastic problem in the marine environment and upon doing so, I realized actually that cleaning it up would be a very small drop in the bucket relative to how much is being generated every day around the world, and that actually I needed to back up and look at the bigger picture.
And the bigger picture is: we need to find a way to turn off the faucet.
We need to cut the spigot of single-use and disposable plastics, which are entering the marine environment every day on a global scale.
So in looking at that, I also realized that I was really angry.
I wasn't just concerned about plastic that you're trying to imagine out in the middle of the Pacific Ocean -- of which I have learned there are now 11 gyres, potentially, of plastic in five major oceans in the world.
It's not just that gyre of plastic that I'm concerned about -- it's the gyre of plastic in the supermarket.
I'd go to the supermarket and all of my food is packaged in plastic.
All of my beverages are packaged in plastic, even at the health food market.
I'm also concerned about the plastic in the refrigerator, and I'm concerned about the plastic and the toxins that leach from plastic into us and into our bodies.
So I came together with a group of other people who were all looking at this issue, and we created the Plastic Pollution Coalition.
We have many initiatives that we're working on, but some of them are very basic.
One is: if 80 to 90 percent of what we're finding in the ocean -- of the marine debris that we're finding in the ocean -- is plastic, then why don't we call it what it is.
It's plastic pollution.
Recycling -- everybody kind of ends their books about being sustainable and greening with the idea of recycling.
You put something in a bin and you don't have to think about it again.
What is the reality of that?
In the United States, less than seven percent of our plastics are recycled.
And if you really look into it, particularly when it comes to plastic bottles, most of it is only down-cycled, or incinerated, or shipped to China.
It is down-cycled and turned into lesser things, while a glass bottle can be a glass bottle again or can be used again -- a plastic bottle can never be a plastic bottle again.
So this is a big issue for us.
Another thing that we're looking at and asking people to think about is we've added a fourth R onto the front of the "Reduce, Reuse, Recycle," three R's, and that is refuse.
Whenever possible, refuse single-use and disposable plastics.
Alternatives exist; some of them are very old-school.
I myself am now collecting these cool Pyrex containers and using those instead of Glad and Tupperware containers to store food in.
And I know that I am doing a service to myself and my family.
It's very easy to pick up a stainless-steel bottle or a glass bottle, if you're traveling and you've forgotten to bring your stainless-steel bottle and fill that up with water or filtered water, versus purchasing plastic bottled water.
I guess what I want to say to everybody here -- and I know that you guys know a lot about this issue -- is that this is a huge problem in the oceans, but this is a problem that we've created as consumers and we can solve.
We can solve this by raising awareness of the issue and teaching people to choose alternatives.
So whenever possible, to choose alternatives to single-use plastics.
We can cut the stem -- tide the stem of this into our oceans and in doing so, save our oceans, save our planet, save ourselves.
Thank you. (Applause)
So yeah, I'm a newspaper cartoonist -- political cartoonist.
I don't know if you've heard about it -- newspapers?
It's a sort of paper-based reader.
(Laughter) It's lighter than an iPad, it's a bit cheaper.
You know what they say?
They say the print media is dying -- who says that? Well, the media.
But this is no news, right?
You've read about it already.
(Laughter) Ladies and gentlemen, the world has gotten smaller.
I know it's a cliche, but look, look how small, how tiny it has gotten.
And you know the reason why, of course.
This is because of technology -- yeah.
(Laughter) Any computer designers in the room?
Yeah well, you guys are making my life miserable because track pads used to be round, a nice round shape.
That makes a good cartoon.
But what are you going to do with a flat track pad, those square things?
There's nothing I can do as a cartoonist.
Well, I know the world is flat now.
That's true.
And the Internet has reached every corner of the world, the poorest, the remotest places.
Every village in Africa now has a cyber cafe.
(Laughter) Don't go asking for a Frappuccino there.
So we are bridging the digital divide.
The Third World is connected, we are connected.
And what happens next?
Well, you've got mail.
Yeah.
Well, the Internet has empowered us.
It has empowered you, it has empowered me and it has empowered some other guys as well.
(Laughter) You know, these last two cartoons -- I did them live during a conference in Hanoi.
And they were not used to that in communist 2.0 Vietnam.
(Laughter) So I was cartooning live on a wide screen -- it was quite a sensation -- and then this guy came to me.
He was taking pictures of me and of my sketches, and I thought, "This is great, a Vietnamese fan."
And as he came the second day, I thought, "Wow, that's really a cartoon lover."
And on the third day, I finally understood, the guy was actually on duty.
So by now, there must be a hundred pictures of me smiling with my sketches in the files of the Vietnamese police.
(Laughter) No, but it's true: the Internet has changed the world.
It has rocked the music industry; it has changed the way we consume music.
For those of you old enough to remember, we used to have to go to the store to steal it.
(Laughter) And it has changed the way your future employer will look at your application.
So be careful with that Facebook account -- your momma told you, be careful.
And technology has set us free -- this is free WiFi.
But yeah, it has liberated us from the office desk.
This is your life, enjoy it.
(Laughter) In short, technology, the internet, they have changed our lifestyle.
Tech guru, like this man -- that a German magazine called the philosopher of the 21st century -- they are shaping the way we do things.
They are shaping the way we consume.
They are shaping our very desires.
(Laughter) (Applause) You will not like it.
And technology has even changed our relationship to God.
(Laughter) Now I shouldn't get into this.
Religion and political cartoons, as you may have heard, make a difficult couple, ever since that day of 2005, when a bunch of cartoonists in Denmark drew cartoons that had repercussions all over the world -- demonstrations, fatwa, they provoked violence. People died in the violence.
This was so sickening; people died because of cartoons.
I mean -- I had the feeling at the time that cartoons had been used by both sides, actually.
They were used first by a Danish newspaper, which wanted to make a point on Islam.
A Danish cartoonist told me he was one of the 24 who received the assignment to draw the prophet -- 12 of them refused. Did you know that?
He told me, "Nobody has to tell me what I should draw.
This is not how it works."
And then, of course, they were used by extremists and politicians on the other side.
They wanted to stir up controversy.
You know the story.
We know that cartoons can be used as weapons.
History tells us, they've been used by the Nazis to attack the Jews.
And here we are now.
In the United Nations, half of the world is pushing to penalize the offense to religion -- they call it the defamation of religion -- while the other half of the world is fighting back in defense of freedom of speech.
So the clash of civilizations is here, and cartoons are at the middle of it?
This got me thinking.
Now you see me thinking at my kitchen table, and since you're in my kitchen, please meet my wife.
(Laughter) In 2006, a few months after, I went Ivory Coast -- Western Africa.
Now, talk of a divided place -- the country was cut in two.
You had a rebellion in the North, the government in the South -- the capital, Abidjan -- and in the middle, the French army.
This looks like a giant hamburger.
You don't want to be the ham in the middle.
I was there to report on that story in cartoons.
I've been doing this for the last 15 years; it's my side job, if you want.
So you see the style is different.
This is more serious than maybe editorial cartooning.
I went to places like Gaza during the war in 2009.
So this is really journalism in cartoons.
You'll hear more and more about it.
This is the future of journalism, I think.
And of course, I went to see the rebels in the north.
Those were poor guys fighting for their rights.
There was an ethnic side to this conflict as very often in Africa.
And I went to see the Dozo.
The Dozo, they are the traditional hunters of West Africa.
People fear them -- they help the rebellion a lot.
They are believed to have magical powers.
They can disappear and escape bullets.
I went to see a Dozo chief; he told me about his magical powers.
He said, "I can chop your head off right away and bring you back to life."
I said, "Well, maybe we don't have time for this right now."
(Laughter) "Another time."
So back in Abidjan, I was given a chance to lead a workshop with local cartoonists there and I thought, yes, in a context like this, cartoons can really be used as weapons against the other side.
I mean, the press in Ivory Coast was bitterly divided -- it was compared to the media in Rwanda before the genocide -- so imagine.
And what can a cartoonist do?
Sometimes editors would tell their cartoonists to draw what they wanted to see, and the guy has to feed his family, right?
So the idea was pretty simple.
We brought together cartoonists from all sides in Ivory Coast.
We took them away from their newspaper for three days.
And I asked them to do a project together, tackle the issues affecting their country in cartoons, yes, in cartoons.
Show the positive power of cartoons.
It's a great tool of communication for bad or for good.
And cartoons can cross boundaries, as you have seen.
And humor is a good way, I think, to address serious issues.
And I'm very proud of what they did.
I mean, they didn't agree with each other -- that was not the point.
And I didn't ask them to do nice cartoons.
The first day, they were even shouting at each other.
But they came up with a book, looking back at 13 years of political crisis in Ivory Coast.
So the idea was there.
And I've been doing projects like this, in 2009 in Lebanon, this year in Kenya, back in January.
In Lebanon, it was not a book.
The idea was to have -- the same principal, a divided country -- take cartoonists from all sides and let them do something together.
So in Lebanon, we enrolled the newspaper editors, and we got them to publish eight cartoonists from all sides all together on the same page, addressing the issue affecting Lebanon, like religion in politics and everyday life.
And it worked.
For three days, almost all the newspapers of Beirut published all those cartoonists together -- anti-government, pro-government, Christian, Muslim, of course, English-speaking, well, you name it.
So this was a great project.
And then in Kenya, what we did was addressing the issue of ethnicity, which is a poison in a lot of places in Africa.
And we did video clips -- you can see them if you go to YouTube/Kenyatoons.
So, preaching for freedom of speech is easy here, but as you have seen in contexts of repression or division, again, what can a cartoonist do?
He has to keep his job.
Well I believe that in any context anywhere, he always has the choice at least not to do a cartoon that will feed hatred.
And that's the message I try to convey to them.
I think we all always have the choice in the end not to do the bad thing.
But we need to support these independent, critical and responsible voices in Africa, in Lebanon, in your local newspaper, in the Apple store.
Today, tech companies are the world's largest editors.
They decide what is too offensive or too provocative for you to see.
So really, it's not about the freedom of cartoonists; it's about your freedoms.
And for dictators all over the world, the good news is when cartoonists, journalists and activists shut up.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) ♫ Here we stand ♫ ♫ Like an Adam and an Eve ♫ ♫ Waterfalls ♫ ♫ The Garden of Eden ♫ ♫ Two fools in love ♫ ♫ So beautiful and strong ♫ ♫ Birds in the trees ♫ ♫ Are smiling upon them ♫ ♫ From the age of the dinosaurs ♫ ♫ Cars would run on gasoline ♫ ♫ Where? Where have they gone? ♫ ♫ Now, there's nothing but flowers ♫ ♫ This was a factory ♫ ♫Now there are mountains and rivers ♫ ♫ You got it, you got it ♫ ♫ We caught a rattlesnake ♫ ♫ Now we've got something for dinner ♫ ♫ You got it, you got it ♫ ♫ This was a parking lot ♫ ♫ Now it's all covered with flowers ♫ ♫ You got it, you got it ♫ ♫ If this is paradise ♫ ♫ I wish I had a lawnmower ♫ ♫ You got it, you got it ♫ ♫ This was a shopping mall ♫ ♫ Now it's turned into corn field ♫ ♫ You got it, you got it ♫ ♫ Don't leave me stranded here ♫ ♫ I can't get used to this lifestyle ♫ (Applause) Thomas Dolby: David Byrne.
(Applause)
Okay.
♫ Strolling along in Central Park ♫ ♫ Everyone's out today ♫ ♫ The daisies and dogwoods are all in bloom ♫ ♫ Oh, what a glorious day ♫ ♫ For picnics and Frisbees and roller skaters, ♫ ♫ Friends and lovers and lonely sunbathers ♫ ♫ Everyone's out in merry Manhattan in January ♫ (Laughter) (Applause) ♫ I brought the iced tea; ♫ ♫ Did you bring the bug spray? ♫ ♫ The flies are the size of your head ♫ ♫ Next to the palm tree, ♫ ♫ Did you see the 'gators ♫ ♫ Looking happy and well fed? ♫ ♫ Everyone's out in merry Manhattan in January ♫ (Whistling) Everyone!
(Whistling) (Laughter) ♫ My preacher said, ♫ ♫ Don't you worry ♫ ♫ The scientists have it all wrong ♫ ♫ And so, who cares it's winter here? ♫ ♫ And I have my halter-top on ♫ ♫ I have my halter-top on ♫ ♫ Everyone's out in merry Manhattan in January. ♫ (Applause) Chris Anderson: Jill Sobule!
The big residual is always value for money.
All the time we are trying to get value for money.
What we don't look for is value for many, while we are generating value for money.
Do we care about those four billion people whose income levels are less than two dollars a day, the so-called bottom of the pyramid?
What are the challenges in getting value for money as well as value for many?
We have described here in terms of the performance and the price.
If you have money, of course, you can get the value.
You can get a Mercedes for a very high price, very high performance.
But if you don't have money, what happens?
Well, you are to ride a bicycle, carrying your own weight and also some other weight, so that you can earn the bread for the day.
Well, poor do not remain poor; they become lower-middle-class.
And if they do so, then, of course, the conditions improve, and they start riding on scooters.
But the challenge is, again, they don't get much value, because they can't afford anything more than the scooter.
The issue is, at that price, can you give them some extra value?
A super value, in terms of their ability to ride in a car, to get that dignity, to get that safety, looks practically impossible, isn't it.
Now, this is something that we see on Indian streets all the time.
But many people see the same thing and think things differently, and one of them is here, Ratan Tata.
The great thing about our leaders is that, should they not only have passion in their belly, which practically all of them have, they're also very innovative.
An innovator is one who does not know it cannot be done.
They believe that things can be done.
But great leaders like Ratan have compassion.
And what you said, Lakshmi, is absolutely true: it's not just Ratan Tata, it's the house of Tatas over time.
Let me confirm what she said.
Yes, I went barefoot until I was 12.
I struggled to [unclear] day was a huge issue.
And when I finished my SSC, the eleventh standard, I stood eleventh among 125,000 students.
But I was about to leave the school, because my poor mother couldn't afford schooling.
And it was [unclear] Tata Trust, which gave me six rupees per month, almost a dollar per month for six years.
That's how I'm standing before you.
So that is the House of Tata.
(Applause) Innovation, compassion and passion.
They combine all that.
And it was that compassion which bothered them, because when he saw -- in fact, he told me about eight or nine years ago how he was driving his own car -- he drives his own car by the way -- and he saw in the rain, a family like the one that I showed to you getting drenched with an infant.
And then he said, "Well, I must give them a car that they can afford, one lakh car, $2,000 car."
Of course, as soon as you say something like this people say it is impossible, and that's what was said by Suzuki.
He said, oh, probably he is going to build a three-wheeler with stepney.
And you can see the cartoon here.
Well they didn't build that. They built a proper car. Nano.
And mind you, I'm six feet half an inch, Ratan is taller than me, and we have ample space in the front and ample space in the back in this particular car.
And incredible car.
And of course, nothing succeeds like success; the cynics then turned around, and one after the other they also started saying, "Yes, we also want to make a car in the Nano Segment.
We'll manufacture a car in the Nano Segment."
How did this great story unfold, the making of Nano?
Let me tell you a bit about it.
For example, how we started: Ratan just began with a five-engineer team, young people in their mid-twenties.
And he said, "Well, I won't define the vehicle for you, but I will define the cost for you.
It is one lakh, 100,000 rupees, and you are to make it within that."
And he told them, "Question the unquestionable.
Stretch the envelope."
And at a point in time, he got so engrossed in the whole challenge, that he himself became a member of the team.
Can you believe it?
I still am told about this story of that single wiper design in which he participated.
Until midnight, he'd be thinking.
Early morning he'll be coming back with sort of solutions.
But who was the team leader?
The team leader was Girish Wagh, a 34 year-old boy in [unclear].
And the Nano team average age was just 27 years.
And they did innovation in design and beyond.
Broke many norms of the standard conventions for the first time.
For example, that a two-cylinder gas engine was used in a car with a single balancer shaft.
Adhesives were replacing the rivets.
There was a co-creation, a huge co-creation, with vendors and suppliers.
All ideas on board were welcome.
100 vendors were co-located adjacent to the plant, and innovative business models for automobile dealerships were developed.
Imagine that a fellow who sells cloth, for example, will be selling Nano.
I mean, it was incredible innovation.
Seeking solutions for non-auto sectors.
It was an open innovation, ideas from all over were welcome.
The mechanism of helicopters seats and windows was used, by the way, as well as a dashboard that was inspired by two-wheelers.
The fuel lines and lamps were as in two-wheelers.
And the crux of the matter was, however, getting more from less.
All the time, you have been given an envelope.
You can't cross that envelope, which is 100,000 rupees, 2,000 dollars.
And therefore, each component had to have a dual functionality.
And the seat riser, for example, serving as a mounting for the seat as well as a structural part of the functional rigidity.
Half the number of parts are contained in Nano in comparison to a typical passenger car.
The length is smaller by eight percent by the way.
But the current entry-level cars in comparison to that is eight percent less, but 21 percent more inside space.
And what happened was that -- more from less -- you can see how much more for how much less.
When the Model T was launched -- and this is, by the way, all the figures that are adjusted to 2007 dollar prices -- Model T was 19,700 by Ford.
Volkswagon was 11,333.
And British Motor was around 11,000.
And Nano was, bang, 2,000 dollars.
This is why you started actually a new paradigm shift, where the same people who could not dream of sitting in a car, who were carrying their entire family in a scooter, started dreaming of being in a car.
And those dreams are getting fulfilled.
This is a photograph of a house and a driver and a car near my own home.
The driver's name is Naran.
He has bought his own Nano.
And you can see, there is a physical space that has been created for him, parking that car, along with the owner's car, but more importantly, they've created a space in their mind that "Yes, my chauffeur is going to come in his own car and park it."
And that's why I call it a transformational innovation.
It is not just technological, it is social innovation that we talk about.
And that is where, ladies and gentlemen, this famous theme of getting more from less for more becomes important.
I remember talking about this for the first time in Australia, about one and a half years ago, when their academy honored me with a fellowship.
And unbelievably, in 40 years, I was the first Indian to be honored.
And the title of my talk was therefore "Indian innovation from Gandhi to Gandhian engineering."
And I titled this more from less for more and more people as Gandhian engineering.
And Gandhian engineering, in my judgment, is the one which is going to take the world forward, is going to make a difference, not just for a few, but for everyone.
Let me move from mobility in a car to individual mobility for those unfortunates who have lost their legs.
Here is an American citizen and his son having an artificial foot.
What is its price? 20,000 dollars.
And of course, these feet are so designed that they can walk only on such perfect pavement or roads.
Unfortunately, that's not the case in India.
You can see him walk barefoot on an awkward land, sometimes in a marshy land, and so on and so forth.
More importantly, they not only walk far to work, and not only do they cycle to work, but they cycle for work, as you can see here.
And they climb up for their work.
You have to design an artificial foot for such conditions.
A challenge, of course.
Four billion people, their incomes are less then two dollars a day.
And if you talk about a 20,000-dollar shoe, you're talking about 10,000 days of income.
You just don't have it.
And therefore, you ought to look at alternatives.
And that is how Jaipur Foot was created in India.
It had a revolutionary prosthetic fitment and delivery system, a quick molding and modular components, enabling custom-made, on-the-spot limb fitments.
You could feel it actually in an hour, by the way, whereas the equivalent other feet took something like a day, as so on.
Outer socket made by using heated high-density polyethylene pipes, rather than using heated sheets.
And unique high-ankle design and human-like looks, [unclear] and functions.
And I like to show how it looks and how it works.
(Music) See, he jumps. You can see what stress it must have.
(Text: ... any person with a below the knee limb could do this.
... above the limb, yes, it would be difficult ...
"Did it hurt?"
"No ... not at all."
... he can run a kilometer in four minutes and 30 seconds ...) One kilometer in four minutes and 30 seconds.
(Applause) So that's what it is all about.
And therefore Time took notice of this 28-dollar foot, basically.
(Applause) An incredible story.
Let's move on to something else.
I've been talking about getting more from less for more.
Let's move to health.
We've talked about mobility and the rest of it, let's talk about health.
What's happening in the area of health?
You know, you have new diseases that require new drugs.
And if you look at the drug development 10 years ago and now, what has happened?
10 years ago, it used to cost about a quarter billion.
Today it costs 1.5 billion dollars.
Time taken for moving a molecule to marketplace, after all the human and animal testing, was 10 years, now it is 15 years.
Are you getting more drugs because you are spending more time and more money?
No, I'm sorry.
We used to have 40, now they have come down to 30.
So actually we are getting less from more for less and less people.
Why less and less people? Because it is so expensive, so very few will be able to basically afford that.
Let us just take an example.
Psoriasis is very dreadful disease of the skin.
The cost of treatment, 20,000 dollars.
1,000-dollar antibody injections under the skin, by the way, and 20 of them.
Time for development -- it took around 10 years and 700 million dollars.
Let's start in the spirit of more from less and more for more and start putting some targets.
For example, we don't want 20,000 dollars; we don't have it.
Can we do it [for] 100 dollars?
Time for development, not 10 years.
We are in a hurry. Five years.
Cost of development -- 300 million dollars.
Sorry. I can't spend more than 10 million dollars.
Looks absolutely audacious.
Looks absolutely ridiculous.
You know something? This has been achieved in India.
These targets have been achieved in India.
And how they have been achieved ...
Sir Francis Bacon once said, "When you wish to achieve results that have not been achieved before, it is an unwise fancy to think that they can be achieved by using methods that have been used before."
And therefore, the standard process, where you develop a molecule, put it into mice, into men, are not yielding those results -- the billions of dollars that have been spent.
The Indian cleverness was using its traditional knowledge, however, scientifically validating it and making that journey from men to mice to men, not molecule to mice to men, you know.
And that is how this difference has come.
And you can see this blending of traditional medicine, modern medicine, modern science.
I launched a big program [unclear] CSIR about nine years ago.
He is giving us not just for Psoriasis, for cancer and a whole range of things, changing the whole paradigm.
And you can see this Indian Psoriasis breakthrough obtained by this reverse form of [unclear] by doing things differently.
You can see before treatment and after treatment.
This is really getting more from less for more and more people, because these are all affordable treatments now.
Let me just remind you of what Mahatma Gandhi had said.
He had said, "Earth provides enough to satisfy every man's need, but not every man's greed."
So the message he was giving us was you must get more from less and less and less so that you can share it for more and more people, not only the current generation, but the future generations.
And he also said, "I would prize every invention of science made for the benefit for all."
So he was giving you the message that you must have it for more and more people, not just a few people.
And therefore, ladies and gentlemen, this is the theme, getting more from less for more.
And mind you, it is not getting just a little more for just a little less.
It's not about low cost.
It's about ultra-low cost.
You cannot say it's a mere treatment 10,000 dollars, but because you are poor I'll give it for 9,000.
Sorry, it doesn't work. You have to give it for 100 dollars, 200 dollars.
Is it possible? It has been made possible, by the way, for certain other different reasons.
So you are not talking about low cost, you are talking about ultra-low cost.
You are not talking about affordability, you are talking about extreme affordability.
Because of the four billion people whose income is under two dollars a day.
You're not talking exclusive innovation.
You're talking about inclusive innovation.
And therefore, you're not talking about incremental innovation, you're talking about disruptive innovation.
The ideas have to be such that you think in completely different terms.
And I would also add, it is not only getting more from less for more by more and more people, the whole world working for it.
I was very touched when I saw a breakthrough the other day.
You know, incubators for infants, for example.
They're not available in Africa.
They're not available in Indian villages.
And infants die.
And incubator costs 2,000 dollars.
And there's a 25-dollar incubator giving that performance that had been created.
And by whom?
By young students from Standford University on an extreme affordability project that they had, basically.
Their heart is in the right place, like Ratan Tata.
It's not just innovation, compassion and passion -- compassion in the heart and passion in the belly.
That's the new world that we want to create.
And that is why the message is that of Gandhian engineering.
Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to end before time.
I was also afraid of those 18 minutes.
I've still one and a half to go.
The message, the final message, is this: India gave a great gift to the world.
What was that?
[In the] 20th century, we gave Gandhi to the world.
The 21st century gift, which is very, very important for the whole world, whether it is global economic meltdown, whether it is climate change -- any problem that you talk about is gaining more from less for more and more -- not only the current generations, for the future generations.
And that can come only from Gandhian engineering.
So ladies and gentlemen, I'm very happy to announce, this gift of the 21st century to the world from India, Gandhian engineering.
(Applause) Lakshmi Pratury: Thank you, Dr. Mashelkar. (R.A. Mashelkar: Thank you very much.) LP: A quick question for you.
Now, when you were a young boy in this school, what were your thoughts, like what did you think you could become?
What do you think that drove you?
Was there a vision you had? What is it that drove you?
RAM: I'll tell you a story that drove me, that transformed my life.
I remember, I went to a poor school, because my mother could not gather the 21 rupees, that half a dollar that was required within the stipulated time.
It was [unclear] high school.
But it was a poor school with rich teachers, honestly.
And one of them was [unclear] who taught us physics.
One day he took us out into the sun and tried to show us how to find the focal length of a convex lens.
The lens was here. The piece of paper was there. He moved it up and down.
And there was a bright spot up there.
And then he said, "This is the focal length."
But then he held it for a little while, Lakshmi.
And then the paper burned.
When the paper burned, for some reason he turned to me, and he said, "Mashelkar, like this, if you do not diffuse your energies, if you focus your energies, you can achieve anything in the world."
That gave me a great message: focus and you can achieve.
I said, "Whoa, science is so wonderful, I have to become a scientist."
But more importantly, focus and you can achieve.
And that message, very frankly, is valuable for society today.
What does that focal length do?
It has parallel lines, which are sun rays.
And the property of parallel lines is that they never meet.
What does that convex lens do?
It makes them meet.
This is convex lens leadership.
You know what today's leadership is doing? Concave length.
They divide them farther.
So I learned the lesson of convex lens leadership from that.
And when I was at National Chemical Laboratory [unclear].
When I was at Council of Scientific Industry Research -- 40 laboratories -- when two laboratories were not talking to each other, I would [unclear].
And currently I'm president of Global Research Alliance, 60,000 scientists in nine counties, right from India to the U.S.
I'm trying to build a global team, which will look at the global grand challenges that the world is facing.
That was the lesson. That was the inspirational moment.
LP: Thank you very much. (RAM: Thank you.) (Applause)
I'm going to talk to you about power in this 21st century.
And basically, what I'd like to tell you is that power is changing, and there are two types of changes I want to discuss.
One is power transition, which is change of power amongst states.
And there the simple version of the message is it's moving from West to East.
The other is power diffusion, the way power is moving from all states West or East to non-state actors.
Those two things are the huge shifts of power in our century.
And I want to tell you about them each separately and then how they interact and why, in the end, there may be some good news.
When we talk about power transition, we often talk about the rise of Asia.
It really should be called the recovery or return of Asia.
If we looked at the world in 1800, you'd find that more than half of the world's people lived in Asia and they made more than half the world's product.
Now fast forward to 1900: half the world's people -- more than half -- still live in Asia, but they're now making only a fifth of the world's product.
What happened? The Industrial Revolution, which meant that all of a sudden, Europe and America became the dominant center of the world.
What we're going to see in the 21st century is Asia gradually returning to being more than half of the world's population and more than half of the world's product.
That's important and it's an important shift.
But let me tell you a little bit about the other shift that I'm talking about, which is power diffusion.
To understand power diffusion put this in your mind: computing and communications costs have fallen a thousandfold between 1970 and the beginning of this century.
Now that's a big abstract number.
But to make it more real, if the price of an automobile had fallen as rapidly as the price of computing power, you could buy a car today for five dollars.
Now when the price of any technology declines that dramatically, the barriers to entry go down.
Anybody can play in the game.
So in 1970, if you wanted to communicate from Oxford to Johannesburg to New Delhi to Brasilia and anywhere simultaneously, you could do it.
The technology was there.
But to be able to do it, you had to be very rich -- a government, a multinational corporation, maybe the Catholic Church -- but you had to be pretty wealthy.
Now, anybody has that capacity, which previously was restricted by price just to a few actors.
If they have the price of entry into an Internet cafe -- the last time I looked, it was something like a pound an hour -- and if you have Skype, it's free.
So capabilities that were once restricted are now available to everyone.
And what that means is not that the age of the State is over.
The State still matters.
But the stage is crowded.
The State's not alone. There are many, many actors.
Some of that's good: Oxfam, a great non-governmental actor.
Some of it's bad: Al Qaeda, another non-governmental actor.
But think of what it does to how we think in traditional terms and concepts.
We think in terms of war and interstate war.
And you can think back to 1941 when the government of Japan attacked the United States at Pearl Harbor.
It's worth noticing that a non-state actor attacking the United States in 2001 killed more Americans than the government of Japan did in 1941.
You might think of that as the privatization of war.
So we're seeing a great change in terms of diffusion of power.
Now the problem is that we're not thinking about it in very innovative ways.
So let me step back and ask: what's power?
Power is simple the ability to affect others to get the outcomes you want, and you can do it in three ways.
You can do it with threats of coercion, "sticks," you can do it with payments, "carrots," or you can do it by getting others to want what you want.
And that ability to get others to want what you want, to get the outcomes you want without coercion or payment, is what I call soft power.
And that soft power has been much neglected and much misunderstood, and yet it's tremendously important.
Indeed, if you can learn to use more soft power, you can save a lot on carrots and sticks.
Traditionally, the way people thought about power was primarily in terms of military power.
For example, the great Oxford historian who taught here at this university, A.J.P. Taylor, defined a great power as a country able to prevail in war.
But we need a new narrative if we're to understand power in the 21st century.
It's not just prevailing at war, though war still persists.
It's not whose army wins; it's also whose story wins.
And we have to think much more in terms of narratives and whose narrative is going to be effective.
Now let me go back to the question of power transition between states and what's happening there.
the narratives that we use now tend to be the rise and fall of the great powers.
And the current narrative is all about the rise of China and the decline of the United States.
Indeed, with the 2008 financial crisis, many people said this was the beginning of the end of American power.
The tectonic plates of world politics were shifting.
And president Medvedev of Russia, for example, pronounced in 2008 this was the beginning of the end of United States power.
But in fact, this metaphor of decline is often very misleading.
If you look at history, in recent history, you'll see the cycles of belief in American decline come and go every 10 or 15 years or so.
In 1958, after the Soviets put up Sputnik, it was "That's the end of America."
In 1973, with the oil embargo and the closing of the gold window, that was the end of America.
In the 1980s, as America went through a transition in the Reagan period, between the rust belt economy of the midwest to the Silicon Valley economy of California, that was the end of America.
But in fact, what we've seen is none of those were true.
Indeed, people were over-enthusiastic in the early 2000s, thinking America could do anything, which led us into some disastrous foreign policy adventures, and now we're back to decline again.
The moral of this story is all these narratives about rise and fall and decline tell us a lot more about psychology than they do about reality.
If we try to focus on the reality, then what we need to focus on is what's really happening in terms of China and the United States.
Goldman Sachs has projected that China, the Chinese economy, will surpass that of the U.S.
by 2027.
So we've got, what, 17 more years to go or so before China's bigger.
Now someday, with a billion point three people getting richer, they are going to be bigger than the United States.
But be very careful about these projections such as the Goldman Sachs projection as though that gives you an accurate picture of power transition in this century.
Let me mention three reasons why it's too simple.
First of all, it's a linear projection.
You know, everything says, here's the growth rate of China, here's the growth rate of the U.S., here it goes -- straight line.
History is not linear.
There are often bumps along the road, accidents along the way.
The second thing is that the Chinese economy passes the U.S. economy in, let's say, 2030, which it may it, that will be a measure of total economic size, but not of per capita income -- won't tell you about the composition of the economy.
China still has large areas of underdevelopment and per capita income is a better measure of the sophistication of the economy.
And that the Chinese won't catch up or pass the Americans until somewhere in the latter part, after 2050, of this century.
The other point that's worth noticing is how one-dimensional this projection is.
You know, it looks at economic power measured by GDP.
Doesn't tell you much about military power, doesn't tell you very much about soft power.
It's all very one-dimensional.
And also, when we think about the rise of Asia, or return of Asia as I called it a little bit earlier, it's worth remembering Asia's not one thing.
If you're sitting in Japan, or in New Delhi, or in Hanoi, your view of the rise of China is a little different than if you're sitting in Beijing.
Indeed, one of the advantages that the Americans will have in terms of power in Asia is all those countries want an American insurance policy against the rise of China.
It's as though Mexico and Canada were hostile neighbors to the United States, which they're not.
So these simple projections of the Goldman Sachs type are not telling us what we need to know about power transition.
But you might ask, well so what in any case?
Why does it matter? Who cares?
Is this just a game that diplomats and academics play?
The answer is it matters quite a lot.
Because, if you believe in decline and you get the answers wrong on this, the facts, not the myths, you may have policies which are very dangerous.
Let me give you an example from history.
The Peloponnesian War was the great conflict in which the Greek city state system tore itself apart two and a half millennia ago.
What caused it?
Thucydides, the great historian of the the Peloponnesian War, said it was the rise in the power of Athens and the fear it created in Sparta.
Notice both halves of that explanation.
Many people argue that the 21st century is going to repeat the 20th century, in which World War One, the great conflagration in which the European state system tore itself apart and destroyed its centrality in the world, that that was caused by the rise in the power of Germany and the fear it created in Britain.
So there are people who are telling us this is going to be reproduced today, that what we're going to see is the same thing now in this century.
No, I think that's wrong.
It's bad history.
For one thing, Germany had surpassed Britain in industrial strength by 1900.
And as I said earlier, China has not passed the United States.
But also, if you have this belief and it creates a sense of fear, it leads to overreaction.
And the greatest danger we have of managing this power transition of the shift toward the East is fear.
To paraphrase Franklin Roosevelt from a different context, the greatest thing we have to fear is fear itself.
We don't have to fear the rise of China or the return of Asia.
And if we have policies in which we take it in that larger historical perspective, we're going to be able to manage this process.
Let me say a word now about the distribution of power and how it relates to power diffusion and then pull these two types together.
If you ask how is power distributed in the world today, it's distributed much like a three-dimensional chess game.
Top board: military power among states.
The United States is the only superpower, and it's likely to remain that way for two or three decades.
China's not going to replace the U.S. on this military board.
Middle board of this three-dimensional chess game: economic power among states.
Power is multi-polar.
There are balancers -- the U.S., Europe, China, Japan can balance each other.
The bottom board of this three-dimensional, the board of transnational relations, things that cross borders outside the control of governments, things like climate change, drug trade, financial flows, pandemics, all these things that cross borders outside the control of governments, there nobody's in charge.
It makes no sense to call this unipolar or multi-polar.
Power is chaotically distributed.
And the only way you can solve these problems -- and this is where many greatest challenges are coming in this century -- is through cooperation, through working together, which means that soft power becomes more important, that ability to organize networks to deal with these kinds of problems and to be able to get cooperation.
Another way of putting it is that as we think of power in the 21st century, we want to get away from the idea that power's always zero sum -- my gain is your loss and vice versa.
Power can also be positive sum, where your gain can be my gain.
If China develops greater energy security and greater capacity to deal with its problems of carbon emissions, that's good for us as well as good for China as well as good for everybody else.
So empowering China to deal with its own problems of carbon is good for everybody, and it's not a zero sum, I win, you lose.
It's one in which we can all gain.
So as we think about power in this century, we want to get away from this view that it's all I win, you lose.
Now I don't mean to be Pollyannaish about this.
Wars persist. Power persists.
Military power is important.
Keeping balances is important.
All this still persists.
Hard power is there, and it will remain.
But unless you learn how to mix hard power with soft power into strategies that I call smart power, you're not going to deal with the new kinds of problems that we're facing.
So the key question that we need to think about as we look at this is how do we work together to produce global public goods, things from which all of us can benefit?
How do we define our national interests so that it's not just zero sum, but positive sum.
In that sense, if we define our interests, for example, for the United States the way Britain defined its interests in the 19th century, keeping an open trading system, keeping a monetary stability, keeping freedom of the seas -- those were good for Britain, they were good for others as well.
And in the 21st century, you have to do an analog to that.
How do we produce global public goods, which are good for us, but good for everyone at the same time?
And that's going to be the good news dimension of what we need to think about as we think of power in the 21st century.
There are ways to define our interests in which, while protecting ourselves with hard power, we can organize with others in networks to produce, not only public goods, but ways that will enhance our soft power.
So if one looks at the statements that have been made about this, I am impressed that when Hillary Clinton described the foreign policy of the Obama administration, she said that the foreign policy of the Obama administration was going to be smart power, as she put it, "using all the tools in our foreign policy tool box."
And if we're going to deal with these two great power shifts that I've described, the power shift represented by transition among states, the power shift represented by diffusion of power away from all states, we're going to have to develop a new narrative of power in which we combine hard and soft power into strategies of smart power.
And that's the good news I have. We can do that.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Sustainability represents the what, the where and the how of what is caught.
The who and the why are what's important to me.
I want to know the people behind my dinner choices.
I want to know how I impact them.
I want to know how they impact me.
I want to know why they fish.
I want to know how they rely on the water's bounty for their living.
Understanding all of this enables us to shift our perception of seafood away from a commodity to an opportunity to restore our ecosystem.
It allows for us to celebrate the seafood that we're also so fortunate to eat.
So what do we call this?
I think we call it restorative seafood.
Where sustainability is the capacity to endure and maintain, restorative is the ability to replenish and progress.
Restorative seafood allows for an evolving and dynamic system and acknowledges our relationship with the ocean as a resource, suggesting that we engage to replenish the ocean and to encourage its resiliency.
It is a more hopeful, it is a more human, and is a more useful way of understanding our environment.
Wallet guides -- standard issue by lots in the marine conservation world -- are very handy; they're a wonderful tool.
Green, yellow and red lists [of] seafood species.
The association is very easy: buy green, don't buy red, think twice about yellow.
But in my mind, it's really not enough to just eat green list.
We can't sustain this without the measure of our success really changing the fate of the species in the yellow and the red.
But what if we eat only in the green list?
You've got pole-caught yellowfin tuna here -- comes from sustainable stocks.
Pole caught -- no bycatch.
Great for fishermen. Lots of money. Supporting local economies.
But it's a lion of the sea. It's a top predator.
What's the context of this meal?
Am I sitting down in a steakhouse to a 16-ounce portion of this?
Do I do this three times a week?
I might still be in the green list, but I'm not doing myself, or you, or the oceans any favors.
The point is that we have to have a context, a gauge for our actions in all this.
Example: I've heard that red wine is great for my health -- antioxidants and minerals -- heart healthy.
That's great! I love red wine!
I'm going to drink so much of it. I'm going to be so healthy.
Well, how many bottles is it before you tell me that I have a problem?
Well folks, we have a protein problem.
We have lost this sensibility when it regards our food, and we are paying a cost.
The problem is we are hiding that cost beneath the waves.
We are hiding that cost behind the social acceptance of expanding waistlines.
And we are hiding that cost behind monster profits.
So the first thing about this idea of restorative seafood is that it really takes into account our needs.
Restorative seafood might best be represented not by Jaws, or by Flipper, or the Gordon's fisherman, but rather, by the Jolly Green Giant.
Vegetables: they might yet save the oceans.
Sylvia likes to say that blue is the new green.
Well I'd like to respectfully submit that broccoli green might then be the new blue.
We must continue to eat the best seafood possible, if at all.
But we also must eat it with a ton of vegetables.
The best part about restorative seafood though is that it comes on the half-shell with a bottle of Tabasco and lemon wedges.
It comes in a five-ounce portion of tilapia breaded with Dijon mustard and crispy, broiled breadcrumbs and a steaming pile of pecan quinoa pilaf with crunchy, grilled broccoli so soft and sweet and charred and smoky on the outside with just a hint of chili flake.
Whooo!
This is an easy sell.
And the best part is all of those ingredients are available to every family at the neighborhood Walmart.
Jamie Oliver is campaigning to save America from the way we eat.
Sylvia is campaigning to save the oceans from the way we eat.
There's a pattern here.
Forget nuclear holocaust; it's the fork that we have to worry about.
We have ravaged our Earth and then used the food that we've sourced to handicap ourselves in more ways than one.
So I think we have this whole eating thing wrong.
And so I think it's time we change what we expect from our food.
Sustainability is complicated but dinner is a reality that we all very much understand.
So let's start there.
There's been a lot of movement recently in greening our food systems.
Dan Barber and Alice Waters are leading passionately the green food Delicious Revolution.
But green foods often represent a way for us to disregard the responsibility as eaters.
Just because it comes from a green source doesn't mean we can treat it with disregard on the plate.
We have eco-friendly shrimp.
We can make them; we have that technology.
But we can never have any eco-friendly all-you-can-eat shrimp buffet.
It doesn't work.
Heart-healthy dinner is a very important part of restorative seafood.
While we try to manage declining marine populations, the media's recommending increased consumption of seafood.
Studies say that tens of thousands of American grandmothers, grandfathers, mothers and fathers might be around for another birthday if we included more seafood.
That's a reward I am not willing to pass up.
But it's not all about the seafood.
It's about the way that we look at our plates.
As a chef, I realize the easiest thing for me to do is reduce the portion sizes on my plate.
A couple things happened.
I made more money.
People started buying appetizers and salads, because they knew they weren't going to fill up on the entrees alone.
People spent more time engaging in their meals, engaging with each other over their meals.
People got, in short, more of what they came there for even though they got less protein.
They got more calories over the course of a diversified meal.
They got healthier. I made more money.
This is great.
Environmental consideration was served with every plate, but it was served with a heaping mound of consideration for human interests at the same time.
One of the other things we did was begin to diversify the species that we served -- small silverfish, anchovies, mackerel, sardines were uncommon.
Shellfish, mussels, oysters, clams, tilapia, char -- these were the common species.
We were directing tastes towards more resilience, more restorative options.
This is what we need to favor.
This is what the green list says.
But this is also how we can actually begin to restore our environment.
But what of those big predators, those fashionable species, that green list tuna that I was talking about earlier?
Well, if you must, I have a recipe for you.
It pretty much works with any big fish in the ocean, so here we go.
Start with a 16-ounce portion of big fish.
Get a knife. Cut it into four portions.
Put it on four plates.
Mound up those four plates with vegetables and then open up the very best bottle of Burgundy you have, light the candles and celebrate it.
Celebrate the opportunity you have to eat this.
Invite your friends and neighbors over and repeat once a year, maybe.
I expect a lot from food.
I expect health and joy and family and community.
I expect that producing ingredients, preparing dishes and eating meals is all part of the communion of human interests.
I was lucky enough that my father was a fantastic cook.
And he taught me very early on about the privilege that eating represents.
I remember well the meals of my childhood.
They were reasonable portions of protein served with copious quantities of vegetables and small amounts of starch, usually rice.
This is still how I largely eat today.
I get sick when I go to steakhouses.
I get the meat sweats.
It's like a hangover from protein.
It's disgusting.
But of all the dire news that you'll hear and that you have heard about the state of our oceans, I have the unfortunate burden of delivering to you possibly the very worst of it and that is this whole time your mother was right.
Eat your vegetables.
It's pretty straightforward.
So what are we looking for in a meal?
Well for health, I'm looking for wholesome ingredients that are good for my body.
For joy, I'm looking for butter and salt and sexy things that make things taste less like penance.
For family, I'm looking for recipes that genuflect to my own personal histories.
For community though, we start at the very beginning.
There's no escaping the fact that everything we eat has a global impact.
So try and learn as best you can what that impact is and then take the first step to minimize it.
We've seen an image of our blue planet, our world bank.
But it is more than just a repository of our resources; it's also the global geography of the communion we call dinner.
So if we all take only what we need, then we can begin to share the rest, we can begin to celebrate, we can begin to restore.
We need to savor vegetables.
We need to savor smaller portions of seafood.
And we need to save dinner.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a scientist, and I'm a big fan of Star Trek, especially of Mr. Spock.
Mr. Spock is a scientist as well, and at the same time, he's the first [officer] of the starship Enterprise, and during the adventures of the Enterprise crew, he and his colleagues are dealing a lot with the presence or absence of Mr. Spock's emotions.
Mr. Spock is half-human and half-Vulcan, and Vulcans are an alien race who learn to control and suppress their feelings and to act purely out of logic.
As Mr. Spock is only half-Vulcan, he sees himself constantly in conflict in between logic and emotions, and as he's part of a team, the whole crew is struggling with, is analyzing, and is making fun of this conflict.
And also the fans of Star Trek watch with amusement this seemingly contradictory behavior.
They find it quite fascinating.
And the matter is a golden thread through the whole Star Trek series and movies from the '60s until today.
And that's actually what I want to talk about today: the role of emotions in science.
We tend to think that science is all about facts and logic and human feelings are often neglected or considered an obstacle to get rid of.
I would like to suggest that emotions are as important in science as they are in any other part of our lives.
Science is made by humans, and as human beings, even if we try hard, we cannot get rid of our emotions.
So instead of fighting them, I believe that even in science, we should make use of our feelings, because for breakthroughs and innovation, they are equally important as facts and logic.
I will come back to Mr. Spock, but first let me share my experience on the role of emotions in science, and one story in particular kept me thinking about it for the last couple of years.
I'm working in research on organic light-emitting diodes, so-called OLEDs.
This is how you might know them, as new generation of displays.
OLEDs are more and more used in smartphone displays and TV screens.
They make them appear bright, truly colorful and bendable.
This is how they look like in the research lab of my physicist colleagues.
And this is what I, as a chemist, have in mind when I think about them.
I've loved it ever since I started to work on it.
So I didn't really like the news when the company I had been working for -- that was my previous employer -- announced that they wanted to stop OLED research.
At the time, the management had reasons for this decision, and the company handled it very well, actually.
Nobody lost their jobs, and everybody was rewarded for their performed work.
What I want to show you today is what happened with my scientist colleagues and me during the time in between the announcement and the last working day on our project.
Consider it a small case study on emotions in science.
In 2015, our research team had grown to more than 80 people, and even after the announcement that our project was discontinued, we could not stop working from one day to another.
It took several months to bring all activities to a sound end and to find new jobs within the company for everyone.
Here's what happened.
Even though we knew that we were working on a project that was to be stopped, during those months our output hit the roof.
We were actually working on two different OLED projects: first, the development of materials for blue-shining OLEDs, which had started in 2001; and second, materials for green OLEDs, which had started in 2014.
And the results I show you here concern the green OLED project.
In the graph, you can see how the lifetime, which is a crucial measure for the durability of our devices, developed over time.
In 2015, just half a year into the project, we were told to scale down, to stop working on the project as soon as possible and to start over in other jobs.
Nevertheless, from this time on, our results continued to improve rapidly.
How did that happen?
After the announcement, pretty quickly, colleagues started leaving the team, and soon, we were left in a small group, all pretty much sharing the same attitude of, "I'm going to be the last person leaving the ship."
What I mean is, while the number of scientists working on the project was decreasing, the dedication of people remaining grew dramatically.
And also, a new and more intense team spirit formed.
We all shared the same passion for our work, we all were sad that it was about to end, and we all wanted to show that we could turn our ideas into reality.
We felt that we belonged to something bigger.
And furthermore, our project was less and less in the focus of the management, because they started to think about new projects, restructuring and so on.
This resulted in additional freedom and the possibility to take a few things into our own hands.
Of course, more freedom also means more responsibility, which we were happy to take, because we believed in our work.
We felt empowered.
And these three pillars -- dedication, belonging and empowerment -- worked together in a kind of self-reinforcing cycle, and the closer we got to shutdown, the better our output became.
So we were working with such personal engagement on a project already sentenced to death because we felt connected to something meaningful.
Of course, it was also a hard and sometimes frustrating time, but we were sitting together in the lab, or occasionally in the café, sharing our sadness about the end of our project as well as the joy in our work.
So overall, we had a very intense and mesmerizingly exciting time.
And the lifetime we finally obtained for our materials was on one level with already commercialized materials for green OLEDs at the time, and we achieved this within just one year.
And those results helped our employer to sell the patents for real value.
Now, let me tell you the same story with different characters and a slightly different operation.
The story is part of Star Trek.
And sorry for those of you who haven't seen the movies, but I need to introduce a spoiler here.
After Mr. Spock sacrificed himself to save the starship Enterprise at the end of Star Trek II, Captain Kirk and his core team were determined to hunt through the universe to search for Spock, even though they could see only very little chance in finding him alive.
And Starfleet Command did not give them permission nor a starship to do so, so they took it very passionately into their own hands to travel out to find Spock.
And after dealing with great challenges, they eventually found Spock, and he happily and gratefully joined the team again.
He could feel the dedication and the connection of his team towards their project, which was to save him and to hold the crew together.
And over the years, over the episodes of the saga, Mr. Spock came to realize that the combination of both logic and emotions is crucial for facing challenges and exploring new worlds, and there was no contradiction anymore.
So the storyline here for both our OLED story and Star Trek is actually the basic setting for a lot of breakthrough stories, in and out of science.
The main characters are all part of a great team.
All team members show a huge dedication towards reaching their goal.
They strive to seize all the freedom they can get, and they take the responsibility they need to take.
During the time our OLED project was nearing the end, I received one piece of advice several times.
"Don't take it to your heart.
You can work on something else."
If I had followed it, it would have saved me several depressed evenings and many tears, but at the same time, I would have failed to gain a great deal in personal development and happiness.
And as the same is true for my colleagues and our whole project, we would have achieved far less.
So of course, science should be based on facts and logic.
When I say we should use our emotions in science, I do not suggest we should use feelings instead of facts.
But I say we should not be afraid of using our feelings to implement and to catalyze fact-based science and innovation.
Emotions and logic do not oppose each other.
They complement each other, and they reinforce each other.
The feeling of being dedicated to something meaningful, of belonging to something bigger and of being empowered is crucial for creativity and innovation.
Whatever you are working on, make sure that it matters, and take it to your heart as much as you like.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a bug lover, myself -- not from childhood, by the way, but rather late.
When I bachelored, majoring in zoology at Tel Aviv University, I kind of fell in love with bugs.
And then, within zoology, I took the course or the discipline of entomology, the science of insects.
And then I thought to myself, how can I be practical or help in the science of entomology?
And then I moved to the world of plant protection -- plant protection from insects, from bad bugs.
And then within plant protection, I came into the discipline of biological pest control, which we actually define as the use of living organisms to reduce populations of noxious plant pests.
So it's a whole discipline in plant protection aimed at the reduction of chemicals.
And biological pest control, by the way, or these "good bugs" that we are talking about, they've existed in the world for thousands and thousands of years, for a long, long time.
But only in the last 120 years, people started, or people knew more and more how to exploit, or how to use, this biological control phenomenon, or in fact, natural control phenomenon, for their own needs.
Because biological control phenomenon -- you can see it in your backyard.
Just take a magnifying glass. You see what I have here?
That's a magnifier, times 10.
You just open it, twist leaves, and you see a whole new world of minute insects, or little spiders of one millimeter, one-and-a-half, two millimeters long, and you can distinguish between the good ones and the bad ones.
So this phenomenon of natural control exists literally everywhere.
Here, in front of this building, I'm sure.
Just have a look at the plants.
So it's everywhere, and we need to know how to exploit it.
Well, let's go hand by hand and browse through just a few examples.
What is a pest?
What damage does it actually inflict on the plant?
And what is the natural enemy, the biological control agent, or the "good bug" that we're talking about?
In general, I'm going to talk about insects and spiders, or mites, let us call them.
Insects, those six-legged organisms and spiders or mites, the eight-legged organisms.
Let's have a look at that.
Here is a devastating pest, a spider mite, because it does a lot of webbing, like a spider.
You see the mother in between, and two daughters, probably, on the left and right, and a single egg on the right-hand side.
And then you see what kind of damage it can inflict.
On your right-hand side, you can see a cucumber leaf, in the middle, a cotton leaf, and on the left, a tomato leaf with these little stipplings.
They can literally turn from green to white, because of the sucking, piercing mouth parts of those spiders.
But here comes nature, that provides us with a good spider.
This is a predatory mite -- just as small as a spider mite; one, two millimeters long, not more than that -- running quickly, hunting, chasing the spider mites.
And here, you can see this lady in action on your left-hand side -- just pierces, sucks the body fluids on the left-hand side of the pest mite.
And after five minutes, this is what you see: just a typical dead corpse -- the shriveled, sucked-out, dead corpse of the spider mite, and next to it, two satiated individuals, predatory mites, a mother on the left-hand side, a young nymph on the right-hand side.
By the way, a meal for them for 24 hours, is about five of the spider mites, of the bad mites, and-or 15 to 20 eggs of the pest mites.
By the way, they are always hungry.
(Laughter) And here is another example: aphids.
It's springtime now in Israel.
When temperatures rise sharply, you can see those bad ones, those aphids, all over the plants -- in your hibiscus, in your lantana, in the young, fresh foliage of the so-called spring flush.
By the way, with aphids you have only females, like Amazons.
Females giving rise to females, giving rise to other females.
No males at all.
Parthenogenesis, as it's so called.
And they're very happy with that, apparently.
(Laughter) Here we can see the damage.
Those aphids secrete a sticky, sugary liquid called honeydew, and this just clogs the upper parts of the plant.
Here you see a typical cucumber leaf that turned from green to black because of a black fungus, sooty mold, which is covering it.
And here comes the salvation, through this parasitic wasp.
Here we are not talking about a predator.
Here we are talking a parasite -- not a two-legged parasite, but an eight-legged parasite, of course.
This is a parasitic wasp, again, two millimeters long, slender, a very quick and sharp flier.
And here you can see this parasite in action, like in an acrobatic maneuver.
She stands vis-à-vis in front of the victim at the right-hand side, bending its abdomen and inserting a single egg into the body fluids of the aphid.
By the way, the aphid tries to escape.
She kicks and bites and secretes different liquids, but nothing will happen, in fact -- only the egg of the parasitoid will be inserted into the body fluids of the aphid.
And after a few days, depending upon temperature, the egg will hatch and the larva of this parasite will eat the aphid from the inside.
(Laughter) This is all natural. This is all natural.
This is not fiction, nothing at all.
Again -- in your backyard. In your backyard.
(Laughter) (Applause) But this is the end result: mummies.
This is the visual result of a dead aphid encompassing inside, a developing parasitoid that, after a few minutes, you see halfway out.
The birth is almost complete.
You can see, by the way, in different movies, etc., it takes just a few minutes.
And if this is a female, she'll immediately mate with a male and off she goes, because time is very short.
This female can live only three to four days, and she needs to give rise to around 400 eggs.
That means she has 400 bad aphids to put her eggs into their body fluids.
This is, of course, not the end of it.
There is a whole wealth of other natural enemies and this is just the last example.
Again, we'll start first with the pest: the thrips.
By the way, all these weird names -- I didn't bother you with the Latin names of these creatures, just the popular names.
But this is a nice, slender, very bad pest.
If you can see this: sweet peppers.
This is not just an exotic, ornamental sweet pepper.
This is a sweet pepper which is not consumable because it is suffering from a viral disease transmitted by those thrip adults.
And here comes the natural enemy, minute pirate bug -- "minute," because it is rather small.
Here you can see the adult, black, and two young ones.
And again, in action.
This adult pierces the thrips, sucking it within just several minutes, going to the other prey, continuing all over the place.
And if we spread those minute pirate bugs, the good ones, for example, in a sweet pepper plot, they go to the flowers.
And look -- this flower is flooded with predatory bugs, with the good ones, after wiping out the bad ones, the thrips.
So this is a very positive situation.
No harm to the developing fruit. No harm to the fruit set.
Everything is just fine under these circumstances.
But again, the question is, here you saw them on a one-to-one basis -- the pest, the natural enemy.
What we do is actually this.
In Northeast Israel, in Kibbutz Sde Eliyahu, there is a facility that mass-produces those natural enemies.
In other words, what we do there is amplify the natural control, or the biological control phenomenon.
And in 30,000 square meters of state-of-the-art greenhouses, there, we are mass-producing those predatory mites, those minute pirate bugs, those parasitic wasps, etc.
Many different parts.
By the way, they have a very nice landscape -- you see the Jordanian Mountains on the one hand, and the Jordan Valley on the other hand, and a good, mild winter and a nice, hot summer, which is an excellent condition to mass-produce those creatures.
And by the way, mass-production -- it is not genetic manipulation.
There are no GMOs -- genetically modified organisms -- whatsoever.
We take them from nature, and the only thing that we do is give them the optimal conditions, under the greenhouses or in the climate rooms, in order to proliferate, multiply and reproduce.
And that's what we get.
You see under a microscope.
You see in the upper left corner? You see a single predatory mite.
And this is the whole bunch of predatory mites.
You see this ampul. You see this one.
I have one gram of those predatory mites.
One gram is 80,000 individuals.
80,000 individuals are good enough to control one acre, 4,000 square meters, of a strawberry plot against spider mites for the whole season of almost one year.
And we can produce from this, believe you me, several dozens of kilograms on an annual basis.
So this is what I call amplification of the phenomenon.
And no, we do not disrupt the balance.
On the contrary, because we bring it to every cultural plot where the balance was already disrupted by the chemicals.
Here we come with those natural enemies in order to reverse a little bit of the wheel and to bring more natural balance to the agricultural plot by reducing those chemicals.
And what is the impact?
In this table, you can actually see what is an impact of a successful biological control by good bugs.
For example, in Israel, where we employ more than 1,000 hectares -- 10,000 dunams in Israeli terms -- of biological pests controlling sweet pepper under protection, 75 percent of the pesticides were actually reduced.
And Israeli strawberries, even more -- 80 percent of the pesticides, especially those aimed against pest mites in strawberries.
So the impact is very strong.
And there goes the question, especially if you ask growers, agriculturists: Why biological control?
Why good bugs?
By the way, the number of answers you get equals the number of people you ask.
But if we go, for example, to this place, Southeast Israel, the Arava area above the Great Rift Valley, where the pearl of Israeli agriculture is located, especially under greenhouse conditions, or under screenhouse conditions -- if you drive all the way to Eilat, you see this just in the middle of the desert.
And if you zoom in, you can definitely watch this: grandparents with their grandchildren, distributing the natural enemies, the good bugs, instead of wearing special clothes and gas masks and applying chemicals.
So safety, with respect to the application, is the number one answer that we get from growers, for "Why biological control?"
Number two, many growers are, in fact, petrified by the idea of resistance, that the pests will become resistant to the chemicals, just like in our case, that bacteria becomes resistant to antibiotics.
It's the same, and it can happen very quickly.
Fortunately, in either biological control or even natural control, resistance is extremely rare.
It hardly happens.
Because this is evolution, this is the natural ratio, unlike resistance, which happens in the case of chemicals.
And thirdly, public demand.
The more the public demands the reduction of chemicals, the more growers become aware of the fact that they should, wherever they can and wherever possible, replace the chemical control with biological control.
Even here, there is another grower, you see, very interested in the bugs, the bad ones and the good ones, wearing this magnifier already on her head, just walking safely in her crop.
Finally, I want to get to my vision, or, in fact, to my dream.
Because, you see, this is the reality.
Have a look at the gap.
If we take the overall turnover of the biocontrol industry worldwide, it's 250 million dollars.
And look at the overall pesticide industry in all the crops throughout the world.
I think it's times 100 or something like that.
Twenty-five billion.
So there is a huge gap to bridge.
So actually, how can we do it?
How can we bridge, or let's say, narrow, this gap over the years?
First of all, we need to find more robust, good and reliable biological solutions, more good bugs that we can either mass-produce or actually conserve in the field.
Secondly, to create even more intensive and strict public demand for the reduction of chemicals in agricultural fresh produce.
And thirdly, also to increase awareness by the growers to the potential of this industry.
And this gap really narrows.
Step by step, it does narrow.
So I think my last slide is: All we are saying -- we can actually sing it -- Give nature a chance.
I'm saying it on behalf of all the biocontrol practitioners and implementers, in Israel and abroad, really give nature a chance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music by Anna Oxygen) (Music: "Shells" by Mirah) ♪ You learned how to be a diver ♪ ♪ Put on a mask and believe ♪ ♪ Gather a dinner of shells for me ♪ ♪ Take the tank down so you can breathe ♪ ♪ Below ♪ ♪ Movements slow ♪ ♪ You are an island ♪ ♪ All the secrets until then ♪ ♪ Pried open I held them ♪ ♪ Until they were still ♪ ♪ Until they were still ♪ ♪ Until they were still ♪ (Music) (Music by Caroline Lufkin) (Music by Anna Oxygen) ♪ Dream time, I will find you ♪ ♪ You are shady, you are new ♪ ♪ I'm not so good at mornings ♪ ♪ I can see too clearly ♪ ♪ I prefer the nighttime ♪ ♪ Dark and blurry ♪ ♪ Falling night ♪ ♪ Hovering light ♪ ♪ Calling night ♪ ♪ Hovering light ♪ ♪ In the moontime I will give up my life ♪ ♪ And in the deep dreams ♪ ♪ You will find me ♪ (Applause) [Excerpts from "Myth and Infrastructure"] Bruno Giussani: Come back.
Miwa Matreyek!
(Applause)
I love video games.
I'm also slightly in awe of them.
I'm in awe of their power in terms of imagination, in terms of technology, in terms of concept.
But I think, above all, I'm in awe at their power to motivate, to compel us, to transfix us, like really nothing else we've ever invented has quite done before.
And I think that we can learn some pretty amazing things by looking at how we do this.
And in particular, I think we can learn things about learning.
Now the video games industry is far and away the fastest growing of all modern media.
From about 10 billion in 1990, it's worth 50 billion dollars globally today, and it shows no sign of slowing down.
In four years' time, it's estimated it'll be worth over 80 billion dollars.
That's about three times the recorded music industry.
This is pretty stunning, but I don't think it's the most telling statistic of all.
The thing that really amazes me is that, today, people spend about eight billion real dollars a year buying virtual items that only exist inside video games.
This is a screenshot from the virtual game world, Entropia Universe.
Earlier this year, a virtual asteroid in it sold for 330,000 real dollars.
And this is a Titan class ship in the space game, EVE Online.
And this virtual object takes 200 real people about 56 days of real time to build, plus countless thousands of hours of effort before that.
And yet, many of these get built.
At the other end of the scale, the game Farmville that you may well have heard of, has 70 million players around the world and most of these players are playing it almost every day.
This may all sound really quite alarming to some people, an index of something worrying or wrong in society.
But we're here for the good news, and the good news is that I think we can explore why this very real human effort, this very intense generation of value, is occurring.
And by answering that question, I think we can take something extremely powerful away.
And I think the most interesting way to think about how all this is going on is in terms of rewards.
And specifically, it's in terms of the very intense emotional rewards that playing games offers to people both individually and collectively.
Now if we look at what's going on in someone's head when they are being engaged, two quite different processes are occurring.
On the one hand, there's the wanting processes.
This is a bit like ambition and drive -- I'm going to do that. I'm going to work hard.
On the other hand, there's the liking processes, fun and affection and delight and an enormous flying beast with an orc on the back.
It's a really great image. It's pretty cool.
It's from the game World of Warcraft with more than 10 million players globally, one of whom is me, another of whom is my wife.
And this kind of a world, this vast flying beast you can ride around, shows why games are so very good at doing both the wanting and the liking.
Because it's very powerful. It's pretty awesome.
It gives you great powers.
Your ambition is satisfied, but it's very beautiful.
It's a very great pleasure to fly around.
And so these combine to form a very intense emotional engagement.
But this isn't the really interesting stuff.
The really interesting stuff about virtuality is what you can measure with it.
Because what you can measure in virtuality is everything.
Every single thing that every single person who's ever played in a game has ever done can be measured.
The biggest games in the world today are measuring more than one billion points of data about their players, about what everybody does -- far more detail than you'd ever get from any website.
And this allows something very special to happen in games.
It's something called the reward schedule.
And by this, I mean looking at what millions upon millions of people have done and carefully calibrating the rate, the nature, the type, the intensity of rewards in games to keep them engaged over staggering amounts of time and effort.
Now, to try and explain this in sort of real terms, I want to talk about a kind of task that might fall to you in so many games.
Go and get a certain amount of a certain little game-y item.
Let's say, for the sake of argument, my mission is to get 15 pies and I can get 15 pies by killing these cute, little monsters.
Simple game quest.
Now you can think about this, if you like, as a problem about boxes.
I've got to keep opening boxes.
I don't know what's inside them until I open them.
And I go around opening box after box until I've got 15 pies.
Now, if you take a game like Warcraft, you can think about it, if you like, as a great box-opening effort.
The game's just trying to get people to open about a million boxes, getting better and better stuff in them.
This sounds immensely boring but games are able to make this process incredibly compelling.
And the way they do this is through a combination of probability and data.
Let's think about probability.
If we want to engage someone in the process of opening boxes to try and find pies, we want to make sure it's neither too easy, nor too difficult, to find a pie.
So what do you do? Well, you look at a million people -- no, 100 million people, 100 million box openers -- and you work out, if you make the pie rate about 25 percent -- that's neither too frustrating, nor too easy.
It keeps people engaged.
But of course, that's not all you do -- there's 15 pies.
Now, I could make a game called Piecraft, where all you had to do was get a million pies or a thousand pies.
That would be very boring.
Fifteen is a pretty optimal number.
You find that -- you know, between five and 20 is about the right number for keeping people going.
But we don't just have pies in the boxes.
There's 100 percent up here.
And what we do is make sure that every time a box is opened, there's something in it, some little reward that keeps people progressing and engaged.
In most adventure games, it's a little bit in-game currency, a little bit experience.
But we don't just do that either.
We also say there's going to be loads of other items of varying qualities and levels of excitement.
There's going to be a 10 percent chance you get a pretty good item.
There's going to be a 0.1 percent chance you get an absolutely awesome item.
And each of these rewards is carefully calibrated to the item.
And also, we say, "Well, how many monsters? Should I have the entire world full of a billion monsters?"
No, we want one or two monsters on the screen at any one time.
So I'm drawn on. It's not too easy, not too difficult.
So all this is very powerful.
But we're in virtuality. These aren't real boxes.
So we can do some rather amazing things.
We notice, looking at all these people opening boxes, that when people get to about 13 out of 15 pies, their perception shifts, they start to get a bit bored, a bit testy.
They're not rational about probability.
They think this game is unfair.
It's not giving me my last two pies. I'm going to give up.
If they're real boxes, there's not much we can do, but in a game we can just say, "Right, well.
When you get to 13 pies, you've got 75 percent chance of getting a pie now."
Keep you engaged. Look at what people do -- adjust the world to match their expectation.
Our games don't always do this.
And one thing they certainly do at the moment is if you got a 0.1 percent awesome item, they make very sure another one doesn't appear for a certain length of time to keep the value, to keep it special.
And the point is really that we evolved to be satisfied by the world in particular ways.
Over tens and hundreds of thousands of years, we evolved to find certain things stimulating, and as very intelligent, civilized beings, we're enormously stimulated by problem solving and learning.
But now, we can reverse engineer that and build worlds that expressly tick our evolutionary boxes.
So what does all this mean in practice?
Well, I've come up with seven things that, I think, show how you can take these lessons from games and use them outside of games.
The first one is very simple: experience bars measuring progress -- something that's been talked about brilliantly by people like Jesse Schell earlier this year.
It's already been done at the University of Indiana in the States, among other places.
It's the simple idea that instead of grading people incrementally in little bits and pieces, you give them one profile character avatar which is constantly progressing in tiny, tiny, tiny little increments which they feel are their own.
And everything comes towards that, and they watch it creeping up, and they own that as it goes along.
Second, multiple long and short-term aims -- 5,000 pies, boring, 15 pies, interesting.
So, you give people lots and lots of different tasks.
You say, it's about doing 10 of these questions, but another task is turning up to 20 classes on time, but another task is collaborating with other people, another task is showing you're working five times, another task is hitting this particular target.
You break things down into these calibrated slices that people can choose and do in parallel to keep them engaged and that you can use to point them towards individually beneficial activities.
Third, you reward effort.
It's your 100 percent factor. Games are brilliant at this.
Every time you do something, you get credit; you get a credit for trying.
You don't punish failure. You reward every little bit of effort -- a little bit of gold, a little bit of credit. You've done 20 questions -- tick.
It all feeds in as minute reinforcement.
Fourth, feedback.
This is absolutely crucial, and virtuality is dazzling at delivering this.
If you look at some of the most intractable problems in the world today that we've been hearing amazing things about, it's very, very hard for people to learn if they cannot link consequences to actions.
Pollution, global warming, these things -- the consequences are distant in time and space.
It's very hard to learn, to feel a lesson.
But if you can model things for people, if you can give things to people that they can manipulate and play with and where the feedback comes, then they can learn a lesson, they can see, they can move on, they can understand.
And fifth, the element of uncertainty.
Now this is the neurological goldmine, if you like, because a known reward excites people, but what really gets them going is the uncertain reward, the reward pitched at the right level of uncertainty, that they didn't quite know whether they were going to get it or not.
The 25 percent. This lights the brain up.
And if you think about using this in testing, in just introducing control elements of randomness in all forms of testing and training, you can transform the levels of people's engagement by tapping into this very powerful evolutionary mechanism.
When we don't quite predict something perfectly, we get really excited about it.
We just want to go back and find out more.
As you probably know, the neurotransmitter associated with learning is called dopamine.
It's associated with reward-seeking behavior.
And something very exciting is just beginning to happen in places like the University of Bristol in the U.K., where we are beginning to be able to model mathematically dopamine levels in the brain.
And what this means is we can predict learning, we can predict enhanced engagement, these windows, these windows of time, in which the learning is taking place at an enhanced level.
And two things really flow from this.
The first has to do with memory, that we can find these moments.
When someone is more likely to remember, we can give them a nugget in a window.
And the second thing is confidence, that we can see how game-playing and reward structures make people braver, make them more willing to take risks, more willing to take on difficulty, harder to discourage.
This can all seem very sinister.
But you know, sort of "our brains have been manipulated; we're all addicts."
The word "addiction" is thrown around.
There are real concerns there.
But the biggest neurological turn-on for people is other people.
This is what really excites us.
In reward terms, it's not money; it's not being given cash -- that's nice -- it's doing stuff with our peers, watching us, collaborating with us.
And I want to tell you a quick story about 1999 -- a video game called EverQuest.
And in this video game, there were two really big dragons, and you had to team up to kill them -- 42 people, up to 42 to kill these big dragons.
That's a problem because they dropped two or three decent items.
So players addressed this problem by spontaneously coming up with a system to motivate each other, fairly and transparently.
What happened was, they paid each other a virtual currency they called "dragon kill points."
And every time you turned up to go on a mission, you got paid in dragon kill points.
They tracked these on a separate website.
So they tracked their own private currency, and then players could bid afterwards for cool items they wanted -- all organized by the players themselves.
Now the staggering system, not just that this worked in EverQuest, but that today, a decade on, every single video game in the world with this kind of task uses a version of this system -- tens of millions of people.
And the success rate is at close to 100 percent.
This is a player-developed, self-enforcing, voluntary currency, and it's incredibly sophisticated player behavior.
And I just want to end by suggesting a few ways in which these principles could fan out into the world.
Let's start with business.
I mean, we're beginning to see some of the big problems around something like business are recycling and energy conservation.
We're beginning to see the emergence of wonderful technologies like real-time energy meters.
And I just look at this, and I think, yes, we could take that so much further by allowing people to set targets by setting calibrated targets, by using elements of uncertainty, by using these multiple targets, by using a grand, underlying reward and incentive system, by setting people up to collaborate in terms of groups, in terms of streets to collaborate and compete, to use these very sophisticated group and motivational mechanics we see.
In terms of education, perhaps most obviously of all, we can transform how we engage people.
We can offer people the grand continuity of experience and personal investment.
We can break things down into highly calibrated small tasks.
We can use calculated randomness.
We can reward effort consistently as everything fields together.
And we can use the kind of group behaviors that we see evolving when people are at play together, these really quite unprecedentedly complex cooperative mechanisms.
Government, well, one thing that comes to mind is the U.S. government, among others, is literally starting to pay people to lose weight.
So we're seeing financial reward being used to tackle the great issue of obesity.
But again, those rewards could be calibrated so precisely if we were able to use the vast expertise of gaming systems to just jack up that appeal, to take the data, to take the observations, of millions of human hours and plow that feedback into increasing engagement.
And in the end, it's this word, "engagement," that I want to leave you with.
It's about how individual engagement can be transformed by the psychological and the neurological lessons we can learn from watching people that are playing games.
But it's also about collective engagement and about the unprecedented laboratory for observing what makes people tick and work and play and engage on a grand scale in games.
And if we can look at these things and learn from them and see how to turn them outwards, then I really think we have something quite revolutionary on our hands.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So there are a few things that bring us humans together in the way that an election does.
We stand in elections; we vote in elections; we observe elections.
Our democracies rely on elections.
We all understand why we have elections, and we all leave the house on the same day to go and vote.
We cherish the opportunity to have our say, to help decide the future of the country.
The fundamental idea is that politicians are given mandate to speak for us, to make decisions on our behalf that affect us all.
Without that mandate, they would be corrupt.
Well unfortunately, power corrupts, and so people will do lots of things to get power and to stay in power, including doing bad things to elections.
You see, even if the idea of the election is perfect, running a countrywide election is a big project, and big projects are messy.
Whenever there is an election, it seems like something always goes wrong, someone tries to cheat, or something goes accidentally awry -- a ballot box goes missing here, chads are left hanging over here.
To make sure as few things as possible go wrong, we have all these procedures around the election.
So for example, you come to the polling station, and a poll station worker asks for your ID before giving you a ballot form and asking you to go into a voting booth to fill out your vote.
When you come back out, you get to drop your vote into the ballot box where it mixes with all the other votes, so that no one knows how you voted.
Well, what I want us to think about for a moment is what happens after that, after you drop your vote into the ballot box.
And most people would go home and feel sure that their vote has been counted, because they trust that the election system works.
They trust that election workers and election observers do their jobs and do their jobs correctly.
The ballot boxes go to counting places.
They're unsealed and the votes are poured out and laboriously counted.
Most of us have to trust that that happens correctly for our own vote, and we all have to trust that that happens correctly for all the votes in the election.
So we have to trust a lot of people.
We have to trust a lot of procedures.
And sometimes we even have to trust computers.
So imagine hundreds of millions of voters casting hundreds of millions of votes, all to be counted correctly and all the things that can possibly go wrong causing all these bad headlines, and you cannot help but feel exhausted at the idea of trying to make elections better.
Well in the face of all these bad headlines, researchers have taken a step back and thought about how we can do elections differently.
They've zoomed out and looked at the big picture.
And the big picture is this: elections should be verifiable.
Voters should be able to check that their votes are counted correctly, without breaking election secrecy, which is so very important.
And that's the tough part.
How do we make an election system completely verifiable while keeping the votes absolutely secret?
Well, the way we've come up with uses computers but doesn't depend on them.
And the secret is the ballot form.
And if you look closely at these ballot forms, you'll notice that the candidate list is in a different order on each one.
And that means, if you mark your choices on one of them and then remove the candidate list, I won't be able to tell from the bit remaining what your vote is for.
And on each ballot form there is this encrypted value in the form of this 2D barcode on the right.
And there's some complicated cryptography going on in there, but what's not complicated is voting with one of these forms.
So we can let computers do all the complicated cryptography for us, and then we'll use the paper for verification.
So this is how you vote.
You get one of these ballot forms at random, and then you go into the voting booth, and you mark your choices, and you tear along a perforation.
And you shred the candidate list.
And the bit that remains, the one with your marks -- this is your encrypted vote.
So you let a poll station worker scan your encrypted vote.
And because it's encrypted, it can be submitted, stored and counted centrally and displayed on a website for anyone to see, including you.
So you take this encrypted vote home as your receipt.
And after the close of the election, you can check that your vote was counted by comparing your receipt to the vote on the website.
And remember, the vote is encrypted from the moment you leave the voting booth, so if an election official wants to find out how you voted, they will not be able to.
If the government wants to find out how you voted, they won't be able to.
No hacker can break in and find out how you voted.
No hacker can break in and change your vote, because then it won't match your receipt.
Votes can't go missing because then you won't find yours when you look for it.
But the election magic doesn't stop there.
Instead, we want to make the whole process so transparent that news media and international observers and anyone who wants to can download all the election data and do the count themselves.
They can check that all the votes were counted correctly.
They can check that the announced result of the election is the correct one.
And these are elections by the people, for the people.
So the next step for our democracies are transparent and verifiable elections.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I guess the story actually has to start maybe back in the the 1960s, when I was seven or eight years old, watching Jacques Cousteau documentaries on the living room floor with my mask and flippers on.
Then after every episode, I had to go up to the bathtub and swim around the bathtub and look at the drain, because that's all there was to look at.
And by the time I turned 16, I pursued a career in marine science, in exploration and diving, and lived in underwater habitats, like this one off the Florida Keys, for 30 days total.
Brian Skerry took this shot. Thanks, Brian.
And I've dived in deep-sea submersibles around the world.
And this one is the deepest diving submarine in the world, operated by the Japanese government.
And Sylvia Earle and I were on an expedition in this submarine 20 years ago in Japan.
And on my dive, I went down 18,000 feet, to an area that I thought would be pristine wilderness area on the sea floor.
But when I got there, I found lots of plastic garbage and other debris.
And it was really a turning point in my life, where I started to realize that I couldn't just go have fun doing science and exploration.
I needed to put it into a context.
I needed to head towards conservation goals.
So I began to work with National Geographic Society and others and led expeditions to Antarctica.
I led three diving expeditions to Antarctica.
Ten years ago was a seminal trip, where we explored that big iceberg, B-15, the largest iceberg in history, that broke off the Ross Ice Shelf.
And we developed techniques to dive inside and under the iceberg, such as heating pads on our kidneys with a battery that we dragged around, so that, as the blood flowed through our kidneys, it would get a little boost of warmth before going back into our bodies.
But after three trips to Antarctica, I decided that it might be nicer to work in warmer water.
And that same year, 10 years ago, I headed north to the Phoenix Islands.
And I'm going to tell you that story here in a moment.
But before I do, I just want you to ponder this graph for a moment.
You may have seen this in other forms, but the top line is the amount of protected area on land, globally, and it's about 12 percent.
And you can see that it kind of hockey sticks up around the 1960s and '70s, and it's on kind of a nice trajectory right now.
And that's probably because that's when everybody got aware of the environment and Earth Day and all the stuff that happened in the '60s with the Hippies and everything really did, I think, have an affect on global awareness.
But the ocean-protected area is basically flat line until right about now -- it appears to be ticking up.
And I do believe that we are at the hockey stick point of the protected area in the ocean.
I think we would have gotten there a lot earlier if we could see what happens in the ocean like we can see what happens on land.
But unfortunately, the ocean is opaque, and we can't see what's going on.
And therefore we're way behind on protection.
But scuba diving, submersibles and all the work that we're setting about to do here will help rectify that.
So where are the Phoenix Islands?
They were the world's largest marine-protected area up until last week when the Chagos Archipelago was declared.
It's in the mid-Pacific. It's about five days from anywhere.
If you want to get to the Phoenix Islands, it's five days from Fiji, it's five days from Hawaii, it's five days from Samoa.
It's out in the middle of the Pacific, right around the Equator.
I had never heard of the islands 10 years ago, nor the country, Kiribati, that owns them, till two friends of mine who run a liveaboard dive boat in Fiji said, "Greg, would you lead a scientific expedition up to these islands?
They've never been dived."
And I said, "Yeah.
But tell me where they are and the country that owns them."
So that's when I first learned of the Islands and had no idea what I was getting into.
But I was in for the adventure.
Let me give you a little peek here of the Phoenix Islands-protected area.
It's a very deep-water part of our planet.
The average depths are about 12,000 ft.
There's lots of seamounts in the Phoenix Islands, which are specifically part of the protected area.
Seamounts are important for biodiversity.
There's actually more mountains in the ocean than there are on land.
It's an interesting fact.
And the Phoenix Islands is very rich in those seamounts.
So it's a deep -- think about it in a big three-dimensional space, very deep three-dimensional space with herds of tuna, whales, all kinds of deep sea marine life like we've seen here before.
That's the vessel that we took up there for these studies, early on, and that's what the Islands look like -- you can see in the background.
They're very low to the water, and they're all uninhabited, except one island has about 35 caretakers on it.
And they've been uninhabited for most of time because even in the ancient days, these islands were too far away from the bright lights of Fiji and Hawaii and Tahiti for those ancient Polynesian mariners that were traversing the Pacific so widely.
But we got up there, and I had the unique and wonderful scientific opportunity and personal opportunity to get to a place that had never been dived and just get to an island and go, "Okay, where are we going to dive?
Let's try there," and then falling into the water.
Both my personal and my professional life changed.
Suddenly, I saw a world that I had never seen before in the ocean -- schools of fish that were so dense they dulled the penetration of sunlight from the surface, coral reefs that were continuous and solid and colorful, large fish everywhere, manta rays.
It was an ecosystem. Parrotfish spawning -- this is about 5,000 longnose parrotfish spawning at the entrance to one of the Phoenix Islands.
You can see the fish are balled up and then there's a little cloudy area there where they're exchanging the eggs and sperm for reproduction -- events that the ocean is supposed to do, but struggles to do in many places now because of human activity.
The Phoenix Islands and all the equatorial parts of our planet are very important for tuna fisheries, especially this yellowfin tuna that you see here.
Phoenix Islands is a major tuna location.
And sharks -- we had sharks on our early dives, up to 150 sharks at once, which is an indication of a very, very healthy, very strong, system.
So I thought the scenes of never-ending wilderness would go on forever, but they did finally come to an end.
And we explored the surface of the Islands as well -- very important bird nesting site, some of the most important bird-nesting sites in the Pacific, in the world.
And we finished our trip.
And that's the area again.
You can see the Islands -- there are eight islands -- that pop out of the water.
The peaks that don't come out of the water are the seamounts.
Remember, a seamount turns into an island when it hits the surface.
And what's the context of the Phoenix Islands?
Where do these exist?
Well they exist in the Republic of Kiribati, and Kiribati is located in the Central Pacific in three island groups.
In the west we have the Gilbert Islands.
In the center we have the Phoenix Islands, which is the subject that I'm talking about.
And then over to the east we have the Line Islands.
It's the largest atoll nation in the world.
And they have about 110,000 people spread out over 33 islands.
They control 3.4 million cubic miles of ocean, and that's between one and two percent of all the ocean water on the planet.
And when I was first going up there, I barely knew the name of this country 10 years ago, and people would ask me, "Why are you going to this place called Kiribati?"
And it reminded me of that old joke where the bank robber comes out of the courthouse handcuffed, and the reporter yells, "Hey, Willy. Why do you rob banks?"
And he says, "cause that's where all the money is."
And I would tell people, "Why do I go to Kiribati?
Because that's where all the ocean is."
They basically are one nation that controls most of the equatorial waters of the Central Pacific Ocean.
They're also a country that is in dire danger.
Sea levels are rising, and Kiribati, along with 42 other nations in the world, will be under water within 50 to 100 years due to climate change and the associated sea-level rise from thermal expansion and the melting of freshwater into the ocean.
The Islands rise only one to two meters above the surface.
Some of the islands have already gone under water.
And these nations are faced with a real problem.
We as a world are faced with a problem.
What do we do with displaced fellow Earthlings who no longer have a home on the planet?
The president of the Maldives conducted a mock cabinet meeting underwater recently to highlight the dire straits of these countries.
So it's something we need to focus on.
But back to the Phoenix Islands, which is the subject of this Talk.
After I got back, I said, okay, this is amazing, what we found.
I'd like to go back and share it with the government of Kiribati, who are over in Tarawa, the westernmost group.
So I started contacting them -- because they had actually given me a permit to do this -- and I said, "I want to come up and tell you what we found."
And for some reason they didn't want me to come, or it was hard to find a time and a place, and it took a while, but finally they said, "Okay, you can come.
But if you come, you have to buy lunch for everybody who comes to the seminar."
So I said, "Okay, I'm happy to buy lunch.
Just get whatever anybody wants."
So David Obura, a coral reef biologist, and I went to Tarawa, and we presented for two hours on the amazing findings of the Phoenix Islands.
And the country never knew this. They never had any data from this area.
They'd never had any information from the Phoenix Islands.
After the talk, the Minister of Fisheries walked up to me and he said, "Greg, do you realize that you are the first scientist who has ever come back and told us what they did?"
He said, "We often issue these permits to do research in our waters, but usually we get a note two or three years later, or a reprint.
But you're the first one who's ever come back and told us what you did.
And we really appreciate that. And we're buying you lunch today.
And are you free for dinner?"
And I was free for dinner, and I went out to dinner with the Minister of Fisheries in Kiribati.
And over the course of dinner, I learned that Kiribati gains most of its revenue -- it's a very poor country -- but it gains what revenue is has by selling access to foreign nations to take fish out of its waters, because Kiribati does not have the capacity to take the fish itself.
And the deal that they strike is the extracting country gives Kiribati five percent of the landed value.
So if the United States removes a million dollars' worth of lobsters from a reef, Kiribati gets 50,000 dollars.
And, you know, it didn't seem like a very good deal to me.
So I asked the Minister over dinner, I said, "Would you consider a situation where you would still get paid -- we do the math and figure out what the value of the resource is -- but you leave fish and the sharks and the shrimp in the water?"
He stopped, and he said, "Yes, we would like to do that to deal with our overfishing problem, and I think we would call it a reverse fishing license."
He coined the term "reverse fishing license."
So I said, "Yes, a 'reverse fishing license.'" So we walked away from this dinner really not knowing where to go at that point.
I went back to the States and started looking around to see if I could find examples where reverse fishing licenses had been issued, and it turned out there were none.
There were no oceanic deals where countries were compensated for not fishing.
It had occurred on land, in rainforests of South America and Africa, where landowners had been paid not to cut the trees down.
And Conservation International had struck some of those deals.
So I went to Conservation International and brought them in as a partner and went through the process of valuing the fishery resource, deciding how much Kiribati should be compensated, what the range of the fishes were, brought in a whole bunch of other partners -- the government of Australia, the government of New Zealand, the World Bank.
The Oak Foundation and National Geographic have been big funders of this as well.
And we basically founded the park on the idea of an endowment that would pay the equivalent lost fishing license fees to this very poor country to keep the area intact.
Halfway through this process, I met the president of Kiribati, President Anote Tong.
He's a really important leader, a real visionary, forward-thinking man, and he told me two things when I approached him.
He said, "Greg, there's two things I'd like you to do.
One is, remember I'm a politician, so you've got to go out and work with my ministers and convince the people of Kiribati that this is a good idea.
Secondly, I'd like you to create principles that will transcend my own presidency.
I don't want to do something like this if it's going to go away after I'm voted out of office."
So we had very strong leadership, very good vision and a lot of science, a lot of lawyers involved.
Many, many steps were taken to pull this off.
And it was primarily because Kiribati realized that this was in their own self-interest to do this.
They realized that this was a common cause that they had found with the conservation community.
Then in 2002, when this was all going full-swing, a coral-bleaching event happened in the Phoenix Islands.
Here's this resource that we're looking to save, and it turns out it's the hottest heating event that we can find on record.
The ocean heated up as it does sometimes, and the hot spot formed and stalled right over the Phoenix Islands for six months.
It was over 32 degrees Celsius for six months and it basically killed 60 percent of the coral.
So suddenly we had this area that we were protecting, but now it appeared to be dead, at least in the coral areas.
Of course the deep-sea areas and the open ocean areas were fine, but the coral, which everybody likes to look at, was in trouble.
Well, the good news is it's recovered and recovering fast, faster than any reef we've seen.
This picture was just taken by Brian Skerry a few months ago when we returned to the Phoenix Islands and discovered that, because it is a protected area and has healthy fish populations that keep the algae grazed down and keep the rest of the reef healthy, the coral is booming, is just booming back.
It's almost like if a person has multiple diseases, it's hard to get well, you might die, but if you only have one disease to deal with, you can get better.
And that's the story with climate-change heating.
It's the only threat, the only influence that the reef had to deal with.
There was no fishing, there was no pollution, there was no coastal development, and the reef is on a full-bore recovery.
Now I remember that dinner I had with the Minister of Fisheries 10 years ago when we first brought this up and I got quite animated during the dinner and said, "Well, I think that the conservation community might embrace this idea, Minister."
He paused and put his hands together and said, "Yes, Greg, but the devil will be in the details," he said.
And it certainly was.
The last 10 years have been detail after detail ranging from creating legislation to multiple research expeditions to communication plans, as I said, teams of lawyers, MOUs, creating the Phoenix Islands Trust Board.
And we are now in the process of raising the full endowment.
Kiribati has frozen extracting activities at its current state while we raise the endowment.
We just had our first PIPA Trust Board meeting three weeks ago.
So it's a fully functional up-and-running entity that negotiates the reverse fishing license with the country.
And the PIPA Trust Board holds that license and pays the country for this.
So it's a very solid, very well thought-out, very well grounded system, and it was a bottom-up system, and that was very important with this work, from the bottom up to secure this.
So the conditions for success here are listed.
You can read them yourselves.
But I would say the most important one in my mind was working within the market forces of the situation.
And that insured that we could move this forward and it would have both the self-interest of Kiribati as well as the self-interest of the world.
And I'll leave you with one final slide, that is: how do we scale this up?
How do we realize Sylvia's dream?
Where eventually do we take this?
Here's the Pacific with large MPAs and large conservation zones on it.
And as you can see, we have a patchwork across this ocean.
I've just described to you the one story behind that rectangular area in the middle, the Phoenix Islands, but every other green patch on that has its own story.
And what we need to do now is look at the whole Pacific Ocean in its entirety and make a network of MPAs across the Pacific so that we have our world's largest ocean protected and self-sustaining over time.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
It's 4am in the morning.
I'm waking up in a Boston hotel room and can only think of one thing: tooth pain.
One of my ceramic inlays fell off the evening before.
Five hours later, I'm sitting in a dentist's chair.
But instead of having a repair of my inlay so that I can get rid of my pain, the dentist pitches me on the advantages of a titanium implant surgery.
Ever heard of that?
(Laughter) It essentially means to replace a damaged tooth by an artificial one, that is screwed into your jaw.
Estimated costs for the implant surgery may add up to 10,000 US dollars.
Replacing the ceramic inlay I had before would come in at 100 US dollars.
Was it my health or the money that could be earned with me that was the biggest concern for my dentist?
As it turned out, my experience wasn't an isolated case.
A study by a US national newspaper estimated that in the United States, up to 30 percent of all surgical procedures -- including stent and pacemaker implantations, hip replacements and uterus removals -- were conducted although other nonsurgical treatment options had not been fully exploited by the physician in charge.
Isn't that figure shocking?
Numbers may be slightly different in other countries, but what it means is that if you go to a doctor in the US, you have a not-insignificant chance to be subjected to a surgical intervention without there being an immediate need for it.
Why is this?
Why are some practitioners incentivized to run such unnecessary procedures?
Well, perhaps it is because health care systems themselves incentivize in a nonideal way towards applying or not applying certain procedures or treatments.
As most health care systems reimburse practitioners in a fee-for-service-based fashion on the number and kind of treatments performed, it may be this economic incentive that tempts some practitioners to rather perform high-profit surgical treatments instead of exploring other treatment options.
Although certain countries started to implement performance-based reimbursement, anchored on a quality and efficacy matrix, overall, there's very little in today's health care systems' architecture to incentivize practitioners broadly to actively prevent the appearance of a disease in the first place and to limit the procedures applied to a patient to the most effective options.
So how do we fix this?
What it may take is a fundamental redesign of our health care system's architecture -- a complete rethinking of the incentive structure.
What we may need is a health care system that reimburses practitioners for keeping their customers healthy instead of almost only paying for services once people are already sick.
What we may need is a transformation from today's system that largely cares for the sick, to a system that cares for the healthy.
To change our current "sick care" approach into a true "health care" approach.
It is a paradigm shift from treating people once they have become sick to preserving the health of the healthy before they get sick.
This shift may move the focus of all those involved -- from doctors, to hospitals, to pharmaceutical and medical companies -- on the product that this industry ultimately sells: health.
Imagine the following.
What if we redesign our health care system into one that does not reimburse practitioners for the actual procedures performed on a patient but rather reimburses doctors, hospitals, pharmaceutical and medical companies for every day a single individual is kept healthy and doesn't develop a disease?
In practical terms, we could, for example, use public money to pay a health fee to an insurance company for every day a single individual is kept healthy and doesn't develop a disease or doesn't require any other form of acute medical intervention.
If the individual becomes sick, the insurance company will not receive any further monetary compensation for the medical interventions required to treat the disease of that individual, but they would be obliged to pay for every evidence-based treatment option to return the customer back to health.
Once the customer's healthy again, the health fee for that individual will be paid again.
In effect, all players in the system are now responsible for keeping their customers healthy, and they're incentivized to avoid any unnecessary medical interventions by simply reducing the number of people that eventually become sick.
The more healthy people there are, the less the cost to treat the sick will be, and the higher the economic benefit for all parties being involved in keeping these individuals healthy is.
This change of the incentive structure shifts, now, the attention of the complete health care system away from providing isolated and singular treatment options, towards a holistic view of what is useful for an individual to stay healthy and live long.
Now, to effectively preserve health, people will need to be willing to share their health data on a constant basis, so that the health care system understands early enough if any assistance with regard to their health is needed.
Physical examination, monitoring of lifetime health data as well as genetic sequencing, cardiometabolic profiling and imaging-based technologies will allow customers to make, together with health coaches and general practitioners, optimal and science-guided decisions -- for their diet, their medication and their physical activity -- to diminish their unique probability to fall sick of an identified, individual high-risk disease.
Artificial intelligence-based data analysis and the miniaturization of sensor technologies are already starting to make monitoring of the individual health status possible.
Measuring cardiometabolic parameters by devices like this or the detection of circulating tumor DNA in your bloodstream early on after cancer disease onset are only two examples for such monitoring technologies.
Take cancer.
One of the biggest problems in certain oncological diseases is that a large number of patients is diagnosed too late to allow them to be cured, although the drugs and treatments that could potentially have cured them are already existing today, if the disease had only been detected earlier.
New technologies allow now, based on a few milliliters of blood, to detect the presence of circulating tumor DNA and thus, the presence of cancer, early on in a really convenient manner.
The impact that this early-stage detection can have may be dramatic.
The five-year survival rate for non-small cell lung cancer when diagnosed at stage one, which is early, is 49 percent.
The same, when diagnosed at stage four, which is late, is below one percent.
Being potentially able to prevent a large number of deaths by something as simple as a blood test for circulating tumor DNA could make certain cancer types a manageable disease, as disease onset can be detected earlier and positive treatment outcomes can likely be increased.
In 2012, 50 percent of all Americans had a single chronic disease, resulting in 86 percent of the $3 trillion US health care budget being spent for treating such chronic diseases.
Eighty-six percent.
If new technologies allow now to reduce this 86 percent, why have health care systems not reacted and changed already?
Well, a redesign of what today is a sick care system into a true health care system that focuses on prevention and behavioral changes requires every actor in the system to change.
It requires the political willingness to shift budgets and policies towards prevention and health education to design a new set of financial and non-financial incentives.
It requires creating a regulatory framework for the gathering, using and sharing of personal health data that's at the same time stringent and sensible.
It needs doctors, hospitals, insurers, pharmaceutical and medical companies to reframe their approach and, most important, it can't happen without the willingness and motivation of individuals to change their lifestyle in a sustained way, to prioritize staying healthy, in addition to opening up for sharing the health data on a constant basis.
This change may not come overnight.
But by refocusing the incentives within the health care industry today to actively keep people healthy, we may not only be able to prevent more diseases in the first place but we may also be able to detect the onset of certain preventable diseases earlier than we do today, which will lead to longer and healthier lives for more people.
Most of the technologies that we need to initiate that change are already existing today.
But this is not a technology question.
It is primarily a question of vision and will.
Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
You may have noticed that I'm wearing two different shoes.
It probably looks funny -- it definitely feels funny -- but I wanted to make a point.
Let's say my left shoe corresponds to a sustainable footprint, meaning we humans consume less natural resources than our planet can regenerate, and emit less carbon dioxide than our forests and oceans can reabsorb.
That's a stable and healthy condition.
Today's situation is more like my other shoe.
It's way oversized.
At the second of August in 2017, we had already consumed all resources our planet can regenerate this year.
This is like spending all your money until the 18th of a month and then needing a credit from the bank for the rest of the time.
For sure, you can do this for some months in a row, but if you don't change your behavior, sooner or later, you will run into big problems.
We all know the devastating effects of this excessive exploitation: global warming, rising of the sea levels, melting of the glaciers and polar ice, increasingly extreme climate patterns and more.
The enormity of this problem really frustrates me.
What frustrates me even more is that there are solutions to this, but we keep doing things like we always did.
Today I want to share with you how a new solar technology can contribute to a sustainable future of buildings.
Buildings consume about 40 percent of our total energy demand, so tackling this consumption would significantly reduce our climate emissions.
A building designed along sustainable principles can produce all the power it needs by itself.
To achieve this, you first have to reduce the consumption as much as possible, by using well-insulated walls or windows, for instance.
These technologies are commercially available.
Then you need energy for warm water and heating.
You can get this in a renewable way from the sun through solar-thermal installations or from the ground and air, with heat pumps.
All of these technologies are available.
Then you are left with the need for electricity.
In principle, there are several ways to get renewable electricity, but how many buildings do you know which have a windmill on the roof or a water power plant in the garden?
Probably not so many, because usually, it doesn't make sense.
But the sun provides abundant energy to our roofs and facades.
The potential to harvest this energy at our buildings' surfaces is enormous.
Let's take Europe as an example.
If you would utilize all areas which have a nice orientation to the sun and they're not overly shaded, the power generated by photovoltaics would correspond to about 30 percent of our total energy demand.
But today's photovoltaics have some issues.
They do offer a good cost-performance ratio, but they aren't really flexible in terms of their design, and this makes aesthetics a challenge.
People often imagine pictures like this when thinking about solar cells on buildings.
This may work for solar farms, but when you think of buildings, of streets, of architecture, aesthetics does matter.
This is the reason why we don't see many solar cells on buildings today.
They just don't match.
Our team is working on a totally different solar-cell technology, which is called organic photovoltaics or OPV.
The term organic describes that the material used for light absorption and charge transport are mainly based on the element carbon, and not on metals.
We utilize the mixture of a polymer which is set up by different repeating units, like the pearls in a pearl chain, and a small molecule which has the shape of a football and is called fullerene.
These two compounds are mixed and dissolved to become an ink.
And like ink, they can be printed with simple printing techniques like slot-die coating in a continuous roll-to-roll process on flexible substrates.
The resulting thin layer is the active layer, absorbing the energy of the sun.
This active layer is extremely effective.
You only need a layer thickness of 0.2 micrometers to absorb the energy of the sun.
This is 100 times thinner than a human hair.
To give you another example, take one kilogram of the basic polymer and use it to formulate the active ink.
With this amount of ink, you can print a solar cell the size of a complete football field.
So OPV is extremely material efficient, which I think is a crucial thing when talking about sustainability.
After the printing process, you can have a solar module which could look like this ...
It looks a bit like a plastic foil and actually has many of its features.
It's lightweight ...
it's bendable ...
and it's semi-transparent.
But it can harvest the energy of the sun outdoors and also of this indoor light, as you can see with this small, illuminated LED.
You can use it in its plastic form and take advantage of its low weight and its bendability.
The first is important when thinking about buildings in warmer regions.
Here, the roofs are not designed to bear additionally heavy loads.
They aren't designed for snow in winter, for instance, so heavy silicon solar cells cannot be used for light harvesting, but these lightweight solar foils are very well suited.
The bendability is important if you want to combine the solar cell with membrane architecture.
Imagine the sails of the Sydney Opera as power plants.
Alternatively, you can combine the solar foils with conventional construction materials like glass.
Many glass facade elements contain a foil anyway, to create laminated safety glass.
It's not a big deal to add a second foil in the production process, but then the facade element contains the solar cell and can produce electricity.
Besides looking nice, these integrated solar cells come along with two more important benefits.
Do you remember the solar cell attached to a roof I showed before?
In this case, we install the roof first, and as a second layer, the solar cell.
This is adding on the installation costs.
In the case of integrated solar cells, at the site of construction, only one element is installed, being at the same time the envelope of the building and the solar cell.
Besides saving on the installation costs, this also saves resources, because the two functions are combined into one element.
Earlier, I've talked about optics.
I really like this solar panel -- maybe you have different taste or different design needs ...
No problem.
With the printing process, the solar cell can change its shape and design very easily.
This will give the flexibility to architects, to planners and building owners, to integrate this electricity-producing technology as they wish.
I want to stress that this is not just happening in the labs.
It will take several more years to get to mass adoption, but we are at the edge of commercialization, meaning there are several companies out there with production lines.
They are scaling up their capacities, and so are we, with the inks.
(Shoe drops) This smaller footprint is much more comfortable.
(Laughter) It is the right size, the right scale.
We have to come back to the right scale when it comes to energy consumption.
And making buildings carbon-neutral is an important part here.
In Europe, we have the goal to decarbonize our building stock [by] 2050.
I hope organic photovoltaics will be a big part of this.
Here are a couple of examples.
This is the first commercial installation of fully printed organic solar cells.
"Commercial" means that the solar cells were printed on industrial equipment.
The so-called "solar trees" were part of the German pavilion at the World Expo in Milan in 2015.
They provided shading during the day and electricity for the lighting in the evening.
You may wonder why this hexagonal shape was chosen for the solar cells.
Easy answer: the architects wanted to have a specific shading pattern on the floor and asked for it, and then it was printed as requested.
Being far from a real product, this free-form installation hooked the imagination of the visiting architects much more than we expected.
This other application is closer to the projects and applications we are targeting.
In an office building in São Paulo, Brazil, semitransparent OPV panels are integrated into the glass facade, serving different needs.
First, they provided shading for the meeting rooms behind.
Second, the logo of the company is displayed in an innovative way.
And of course, electricity is produced, reducing the energy footprint of the building.
This is pointing towards a future where buildings are no longer energy consumers, but energy providers.
I want to see solar cells seamlessly integrated into our building shells to be both resource-efficient and a pleasure to look at.
For roofs, silicon solar cells will often continue to be a good solution.
But to exploit the potential of all facades and other areas, such as semitransparent areas, curved surfaces and shadings, I believe organic photovoltaics can offer a significant contribution, and they can be made in any form architects and planners will want them to.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a translator.
I translate from biology into mathematics and vice versa.
I write mathematical models which, in my case, are systems of differential equations, to describe biological mechanisms, such as cell growth.
Essentially, it works like this.
First, I identify the key elements that I believe may be driving behavior over time of a particular mechanism.
Then, I formulate assumptions about how these elements interact with each other and with their environment.
It may look something like this.
Then, I translate these assumptions into equations, which may look something like this.
Finally, I analyze my equations and translate the results back into the language of biology.
A key aspect of mathematical modeling is that we, as modelers, do not think about what things are; we think about what they do.
We think about relationships between individuals, whether they be cells, animals or people, and how they interact with each other and with their environment.
Let me give you an example.
What do foxes and immune cells have in common?
They're both predators, except foxes feed on rabbits, and immune cells feed on invaders, such as cancer cells.
But from a mathematical point of view, a qualitatively same system of predator-prey type equations will describe interactions between foxes and rabbits and cancer and immune cells.
Predator-prey type systems have been studied extensively in scientific literature, describing interactions of two populations, where survival of one depends on consuming the other.
And these same equations provide a framework for understanding cancer-immune interactions, where cancer is the prey, and the immune system is the predator.
And the prey employs all sorts of tricks to prevent the predator from killing it, ranging from camouflaging itself to stealing the predator's food.
This can have some very interesting implications.
For example, despite enormous successes in the field of immunotherapy, there still remains somewhat limited efficacy when it comes solid tumors.
But if you think about it ecologically, both cancer and immune cells -- the prey and the predator -- require nutrients such as glucose to survive.
If cancer cells outcompete the immune cells for shared nutrients in the tumor microenvironment, then the immune cells will physically not be able to do their job.
This predator-prey-shared resource type model is something I've worked on in my own research.
And it was recently shown experimentally that restoring the metabolic balance in the tumor microenvironment -- that is, making sure immune cells get their food -- can give them, the predators, back their edge in fighting cancer, the prey.
This means that if you abstract a bit, you can think about cancer itself as an ecosystem, where heterogeneous populations of cells compete and cooperate for space and nutrients, interact with predators -- the immune system -- migrate -- metastases -- all within the ecosystem of the human body.
And what do we know about most ecosystems from conservation biology?
That one of the best ways to extinguish species is not to target them directly but to target their environment.
And so, once we have identified the key components of the tumor environment, we can propose hypotheses and simulate scenarios and therapeutic interventions all in a completely safe and affordable way and target different components of the microenvironment in such a way as to kill the cancer without harming the host, such as me or you.
And so while the immediate goal of my research is to advance research and innovation and to reduce its cost, the real intent, of course, is to save lives.
And that's what I try to do through mathematical modeling applied to biology, and in particular, to the development of drugs.
It's a field that until relatively recently has remained somewhat marginal, but it has matured.
And there are now very well-developed mathematical methods, a lot of preprogrammed tools, including free ones, and an ever-increasing amount of computational power available to us.
The power and beauty of mathematical modeling lies in the fact that it makes you formalize, in a very rigorous way, what we think we know.
We make assumptions, translate them into equations, run simulations, all to answer the question: In a world where my assumptions are true, what do I expect to see?
It's a pretty simple conceptual framework.
It's all about asking the right questions.
But it can unleash numerous opportunities for testing biological hypotheses.
If our predictions match our observations, great! -- we got it right, so we can make further predictions by changing this or that aspect of the model.
If, however, our predictions do not match our observations, that means that some of our assumptions are wrong, and so our understanding of the key mechanisms of underlying biology is still incomplete.
Luckily, since this is a model, we control all the assumptions.
So we can go through them, one by one, identifying which one or ones are causing the discrepancy.
And then we can fill this newly identified gap in knowledge using both experimental and theoretical approaches.
Of course, any ecosystem is extremely complex, and trying to describe all the moving parts is not only very difficult, but also not very informative.
There's also the issue of timescales, because some processes take place on a scale of seconds, some minutes, some days, months and years.
It may not always be possible to separate those out experimentally.
And some things happen so quickly or so slowly that you may physically never be able to measure them.
But as mathematicians, we have the power to zoom in on any subsystem in any timescale and simulate effects of interventions that take place in any timescale.
Of course, this isn't the work of a modeler alone.
It has to happen in close collaboration with biologists.
And it does demand some capacity of translation on both sides.
But starting with a theoretical formulation of a problem can unleash numerous opportunities for testing hypotheses and simulating scenarios and therapeutic interventions, all in a completely safe way.
It can identify gaps in knowledge and logical inconsistencies and can help guide us as to where we should keep looking and where there may be a dead end.
In other words: mathematical modeling can help us answer questions that directly affect people's health -- that affect each person's health, actually -- because mathematical modeling will be key to propelling personalized medicine.
And it all comes down to asking the right question and translating it to the right equation ...
and back.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) Sun shining up above down here it's 10 below I'm moving on to a place now where the streets are paved with gold There'll be two trains running -- running side by side Some trains are going out Two trains running -- running side by side I'm going to catch that fast express train to my reward in the sky Many rooms in my father's house now -- Oh Lord there's one for you and me Many rooms in my father's house now -- Oh there's one for you and me No blues and no trouble Oh my Lord sweet Jesus victory There's one glory from the moon -- Lord another, oh another from the sun Oh one glory from the moon and another from the sun Behind I'll leave this earthly body when my Lord king Jesus comes Thank you very much.
(Applause)
For as long as I remember, I've loved mathematics.
Actually, it's not 100 percent true.
I've loved mathematics for all but a two-week period in senior high school.
(Laughter) I was top of my class, and we were about to start the Extension Maths course.
I was really excited about this brand new topic coming up, complex numbers.
I like complex.
My teacher was priming us for the concepts with some questions about square roots.
Square of nine -- three; square of 256 -- sixteen.
Too easy.
Then she asked the trick question: What about the square root of negative one?
Of course, we were all over it -- "Come on, Miss!
We all know you can't take the square root of a negative."
"That's true in the real world," she said.
"But in the complex world, the square root of negative one is the imaginary number i."
(Laughter) That day, my entire mathematical world came crashing down on me.
(Laughter) "Imaginary numbers?
Seriously?
But mathematics is a source of truth, please don't go abstract on me.
I would have studied art if I wanted to play with imaginary numbers."
(Laughter) "This is Extension Maths, let's get back with our program!"
She didn't, and over the next couple of weeks, I reluctantly performed meaningless calculations, (Laughter) finding imaginary solutions to quadratic equations.
(Laughter) But then something amazing happened.
We began finding elegant solutions to real-world problems we previously had no answers to, starting with the complex world of imaginary numbers.
So some mathematician 500 years ago decides to have some fun and make up these imaginary numbers, and because of that we can now derive these amazing identities with applications in the real world, in fields like electrical engineering.
Wow!
I gained a whole new level of appreciation for mathematics.
And after my brief mistrust, I was now in love with the subject more than ever.
Francis Su, the mathematician, sums it up beautifully when he says, "We study mathematics for play, for beauty, for truth, for justice and for love."
But if you ask a student today, you'll probably hear a different story.
You might hear "difficult" and "boring."
And they might be right about difficult.
But it's certainly not boring.
In fact, I'd say being difficult to master is part of what makes it beautiful.
Because nothing worth doing is easy.
So we need students to stick around long enough through the difficult parts to appreciate the beauty when it all ties together.
Much like I did for that brief couple of weeks in high school.
Unfortunately, our school systems -- we move students through mathematics in a lockstep process.
So those who fall a little behind find it near impossible to ever catch up and appreciate that beauty.
But why is this a problem?
Why should we care?
Well today, more than ever, our world needs every citizen to be skilled in mathematics.
With the advent of artificial intelligence and automation, many of the jobs we see today will either not exist or be transformed to require less routine work and more analysis and application of expertise.
But we're not producing the extra mathematics students to fill these new roles.
This graph shows the number of students taking Standard Mathematics and Advanced Mathematics over a period of 20 years in Australia.
It's clear that while we have demand for mathematics skills rapidly increasing, supply is in steady decline.
To put things in perspective, half of the students completing high school today in Australia are not prepared to understand any argument about rates of change in data.
In this digital age where fake news can influence election results, this is very concerning.
Let me give you a concrete example.
Let's take a closer look at that graph.
Can everyone see what I've done there to stress my point?
If you can't, let me show you now, with the vertical axis starting at zero, where it should be.
There, you see it now, right?
It's the exact same data but I've manipulated the representation to influence you.
And that's cool, that's my job up here.
(Laughter) But in all seriousness, unless we do something to drastically improve student engagement with mathematics, we'll not only have a huge skills shortage crisis but a fickle population, easily manipulated by whoever can get the most air time.
So what's the solution?
There are a lot of things we have to do.
We need curriculum reform.
We need our best and brightest encouraged to become teachers.
We need to put an end to high-stakes tests and instead follow a mastery-based learning approach.
But all these things take time.
And I'm impatient.
See, I've been thinking about this for eight years now.
Ever since I left my job as a derivative trader to build a web application to help students learn mathematics.
Today, our app is used by schools across the globe.
And we're seeing big improvements for students who use the program regularly.
But here's the thing -- we're only seeing it for students who use the program regularly.
And most of them don't.
So after years of developing and refining the application, our biggest challenge was not so much product related, our biggest challenge was motivating students to want to work on their gaps in understanding.
You can imagine in today's attention economy, we're competing against Facebook, Snapchat and PlayStation to try and get these students' time.
So we went back to the drawing board and started to think about how we could make it worthwhile for students to spend some of their "attention budget" on their education.
We tinkered with gamification elements like points, badges and avatars, and we'd see a temporary spike in engagement but things would go back to normal as soon as the novelty wore off.
Then one day, my cofounder, Alvin, came across a study of students in Chicago led by the behavioral economist, Steven Levitt, where they paid students who improved on their test scores.
He started telling me about some of the things they tested for and the interesting findings they had.
For instance, they found that incentivizing students for inputs, like effort, worked a lot better than incentivizing for outputs, like test scores.
They found that for younger students, you could win them over with a trophy but for older students, you really needed cash.
(Laughter) And the amount of cash mattered -- 10 dollars was good, 20 dollars -- even better.
But perhaps most importantly, they found that the rewards had to be instant rather than promised at a later date.
They went as far as to give the students 20 dollars and say, "Touch it, feel it, smell it --" (Sniffing) "It's all yours.
But if you fail, I'm going to take it back."
And that worked really well.
I immediately got excited about the possibilities of implementing this in our program.
But once the excitement settled down, there were a few concerns that crept in our minds.
Firstly, was this ethical?
(Laughter) Secondly, how would we fund this thing?
(Laughter) And finally, would the results be sustained if the students were no longer paid?
Now, let's look at the ethical part first.
I'm a bit of a mathematical purist.
So I'd be one of the first people to say that we should study mathematics for the sake of mathematics.
Remember -- for play, for beauty, for truth, for justice and for love!
Not for money!
(Laughter) As I struggled with this, I came to see that, while it's a way I look at mathematics now, it's only because I studied it long enough to appreciate it.
It's very difficult to tell a student struggling with mathematics today to work hard for a payoff in the distant future.
And it's not so much bribery that's at work here, because I could bribe students by telling them about my big bonuses in my derivative trading days as a reward for doing well at maths.
But it doesn't pay off for a very long time.
So it's practically naught.
Behavioral economists call this hyperbolic discounting.
And Levitt goes as far as to say that all motivating power vanishes when rewards are handed out with a delay.
So, from a purely economic point of view: if we don't use immediate incentives, we are underinvesting in student outcomes.
I took heart from that, and came to see that as a society, we're actually quite used to financial incentives.
Whether it be by the government, by employers or at home.
For instance, many parents would pay their children an allowance or pocket money for doing chores in the house.
So it wasn't really all that controversial.
As I thought about that, it started to answer that second question of how we were going to fund this.
Naturally, parents are the most invested in their children's education.
So, let's charge them a weekly subscription fee to use our program, but -- if the students complete their weekly maths goal, we'll refund the subscription amount directly into the child's bank account.
We chose three exercises completed over a one week period for a 10 dollar reward.
That way we're incentivizing effort rather than performance over a short enough period and with a substantial enough payout for the students to care.
Now, I remember when I first told my wife about this new business model.
If she had any doubt left that I've gone completely mad, that pretty much confirmed it for her.
She said to me, "Mo ...
you realize that if everybody does their homework, which you want, you're not going to make any revenue, which you don't want.
Great business model."
(Laughter) I say it's more like an antibusiness model, it's free if you use it, but you pay if you don't.
Now, I knew from experience that not everybody in the country was going to jump on and do their maths homework every week.
And if they did, sure we'd go bust pretty quickly, but hey, we would have solved the country's maths skills crisis.
(Laughter) As a company, we've always run a double bottom line, looking to both make a return for investors as well as improve student outcomes.
We know that our path to long-term profitability is through improving student outcomes.
So our dual objectives should never be at odds.
So we're always looking to make our product decisions around helping students reach their weekly maths goal, effectively ensuring that they get paid and not us.
Now you must be wondering: How is this crazy business model going?
You'll be glad to know we're still in business.
We've been testing this now for the last five months on just our personal home users in Australia before we think about rolling it out to schools.
And here are the early results.
The green represents students who are completing their weekly maths goal and the red those who aren't.
You can see a lot more completing their homework than not.
In fact, as our user base has grown, we found the percentage to be pretty steady, at around 75 percent.
So on average, we receive our weekly subscription fee once every four weeks, and the other three weeks, we're rewarding the students.
Now of course we're leaving some money on the table here, but guess what?
It turns out these students are 70 percent more engaged than students not on the reward program.
Check.
From a business perspective, they are less likely to churn and more likely to refer friends, so we're hoping to trade off a lower revenue per user for a bigger and more engaged user base.
Check and check.
Now for that final question.
Would they keep coming back if they were no longer paid?
Mathematics is so much more than just a subject you study at school.
It's a human endeavor.
It's what helps us to understand the world around us.
And the more you know, the more you want to know.
So yes, we've triggered initial engagement with a financial reward.
But in the long run, the money won't matter anymore.
Because in the long run, the wonder of mathematics will be the incentive and understanding it will be the reward.
Thank you.
(Applause)
At some point in our lives, almost every one of us will have our heart broken.
My patient Kathy planned her wedding when she was in middle school.
She would meet her future husband by age 27, get engaged a year later and get married a year after that.
But when Kathy turned 27, she didn't find a husband.
She found a lump in her breast.
She went through many months of harsh chemotherapy and painful surgeries, and then just as she was ready to jump back into the dating world, she found a lump in her other breast and had to do it all over again.
Kathy recovered, though, and she was eager to resume her search for a husband as soon as her eyebrows grew back in.
When you're going on first dates in New York City, you need to be able to express a wide range of emotions.
(Laughter) Soon afterwards, she met Rich and fell in love.
The relationship was everything she hoped it would be.
Six months later, after a lovely weekend in New England, Rich made reservations at their favorite romantic restaurant.
Kathy knew he was going to propose, and she could barely contain her excitement.
But Rich did not propose to Kathy that night.
He broke up with her.
As deeply as he cared for Kathy -- and he did -- he simply wasn't in love.
Kathy was shattered.
Her heart was truly broken, and she now faced yet another recovery.
But five months after the breakup, Kathy still couldn't stop thinking about Rich.
Her heart was still very much broken.
The question is: Why?
Why was this incredibly strong and determined woman unable to marshal the same emotional resources that got her through four years of cancer treatments?
Why do so many of us flounder when we're trying to recover from heartbreak?
Why do the same coping mechanisms that get us through all kinds of life challenges fail us so miserably when our heart gets broken?
In over 20 years of private practice, I have seen people of every age and background face every manner of heartbreak, and what I've learned is this: when your heart is broken, the same instincts you ordinarily rely on will time and again lead you down the wrong path.
You simply cannot trust what your mind is telling you.
For example, we know from studies of heartbroken people that having a clear understanding of why the relationship ended is really important for our ability to move on.
Yet time and again, when we are offered a simple and honest explanation like the one Rich offered Kathy, we reject it.
Heartbreak creates such dramatic emotional pain, our mind tells us the cause must be equally dramatic.
And that gut instinct is so powerful, it can make even the most reasonable and measured of us come up with mysteries and conspiracy theories where none exist.
Kathy became convinced something must have happened during her romantic getaway with Rich that soured him on the relationship, and she became obsessed with figuring out what that was.
And so she spent countless hours going through every minute of that weekend in her mind, searching her memory for clues that were not there.
Kathy's mind tricked her into initiating this wild goose chase.
But what compelled her to commit to it for so many months?
Heartbreak is far more insidious than we realize.
There is a reason we keep going down one rabbit hole after another, even when we know it's going to make us feel worse.
Brain studies have shown that the withdrawal of romantic love activates the same mechanisms in our brain that get activated when addicts are withdrawing from substances like cocaine or opioids.
Kathy was going through withdrawal.
And since she could not have the heroin of actually being with Rich, her unconscious mind chose the methadone of her memories with him.
Her instincts told her she was trying to solve a mystery, but what she was actually doing was getting her fix.
This is what makes heartbreak so difficult to heal.
Addicts know they're addicted.
They know when they're shooting up.
But heartbroken people do not.
But you do now.
And if your heart is broken, you cannot ignore that.
You have to recognize that, as compelling as the urge is, with every trip down memory lane, every text you send, every second you spend stalking your ex on social media, you are just feeding your addiction, deepening your emotional pain and complicating your recovery.
Getting over heartbreak is not a journey.
It's a fight, and your reason is your strongest weapon.
There is no breakup explanation that's going to feel satisfying.
No rationale can take away the pain you feel.
So don't search for one, don't wait for one, just accept the one you were offered or make up one yourself and then put the question to rest, because you need that closure to resist the addiction.
And you need something else as well: you have to be willing to let go, to accept that it's over.
Otherwise, your mind will feed on your hope and set you back.
Hope can be incredibly destructive when your heart is broken.
Heartbreak is a master manipulator.
The ease with which it gets our mind to do the absolute opposite of what we need in order to recover is remarkable.
One of the most common tendencies we have when our heart is broken is to idealize the person who broke it.
We spend hours remembering their smile, how great they made us feel, that time we hiked up the mountain and made love under the stars.
All that does is make our loss feel more painful.
We know that.
Yet we still allow our mind to cycle through one greatest hit after another, like we were being held hostage by our own passive-aggressive Spotify playlist.
(Laughter) Heartbreak will make those thoughts pop into your mind.
And so to avoid idealizing, you have to balance them out by remembering their frown, not just their smile, how bad they made you feel, the fact that after the lovemaking, you got lost coming down the mountain, argued like crazy and didn't speak for two days.
What I tell my patients is to compile an exhaustive list of all the ways the person was wrong for you, all the bad qualities, all the pet peeves, and then keep it on your phone.
(Laughter) And once you have your list, you have to use it.
When I hear even a hint of idealizing or the faintest whiff of nostalgia in a session, I go, "Phone, please."
(Laughter) Your mind will try to tell you they were perfect.
But they were not, and neither was the relationship.
And if you want to get over them, you have to remind yourself of that, frequently.
None of us is immune to heartbreak.
My patient Miguel was a 56-year-old senior executive in a software company.
Five years after his wife died, he finally felt ready to start dating again.
He soon met Sharon, and a whirlwind romance ensued.
They introduced each other to their adult children after one month, and they moved in together after two.
When middle-aged people date, they don't mess around.
It's like "Love, Actually" meets "The Fast and the Furious."
(Laughter) Miguel was happier than he had been in years.
But the night before their first anniversary, Sharon left him.
She had decided to move to the West Coast to be closer to her children, and she didn't want a long-distance relationship.
Miguel was totally blindsided and utterly devastated.
He barely functioned at work for many, many months, and he almost lost his job as a result.
Another consequence of heartbreak is that feeling alone and in pain can significantly impair our intellectual functioning, especially when performing complex tasks involving logic and reasoning.
It temporarily lowers our IQ.
But it wasn't just the intensity of Miguel's grief that confused his employers; it was the duration.
Miguel was confused by this as well and really quite embarrassed by it.
"What's wrong with me?" he asked me in our session.
"What adult spends almost a year getting over a one-year relationship?"
Actually, many do.
Heartbreak shares all the hallmarks of traditional loss and grief: insomnia, intrusive thoughts, immune system dysfunction.
Forty percent of people experience clinically measurable depression.
Heartbreak is a complex psychological injury.
It impacts us in a multitude of ways.
For example, Sharon was both very social and very active.
She had dinners at the house every week.
She and Miguel went on camping trips with other couples.
Although Miguel was not religious, he accompanied Sharon to church every Sunday, where he was welcomed into the congregation.
Miguel didn't just lose his girlfriend; he lost his entire social life, the supportive community of Sharon's church.
He lost his identity as a couple.
Now, Miguel recognized the breakup had left this huge void in his life, but what he failed to recognize is that it left far more than just one.
And that is crucial, not just because it explains why heartbreak could be so devastating, but because it tells us how to heal.
To fix your broken heart, you have to identify these voids in your life and fill them, and I mean all of them.
The voids in your identity: you have to reestablish who you are and what your life is about.
The voids in your social life, the missing activities, even the empty spaces on the wall where pictures used to hang.
But none of that will do any good unless you prevent the mistakes that can set you back, the unnecessary searches for explanations, idealizing your ex instead of focusing on how they were wrong for you, indulging thoughts and behaviors that still give them a starring role in this next chapter of your life when they shouldn't be an extra.
Getting over heartbreak is hard, but if you refuse to be misled by your mind and you take steps to heal, you can significantly minimize your suffering.
And it won't just be you who benefit from that.
You'll be more present with your friends, more engaged with your family, not to mention the billions of dollars of compromised productivity in the workplace that could be avoided.
So if you know someone who is heartbroken, have compassion, because social support has been found to be important for their recovery.
And have patience, because it's going to take them longer to move on than you think it should.
And if you're hurting, know this: it's difficult, it is a battle within your own mind, and you have to be diligent to win.
But you do have weapons.
You can fight.
And you will heal.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It is often said that the stories of history are written by its victors, but if this is true, what becomes of the downtrodden, and how can they ever hope to aspire for something greater if they are never told the stories of their own glorious pasts?
Ostensibly, I stand before you as a mere maker of clothing, but within the folds of ancient fabrics and modern textiles, I have found a higher calling.
Through my work as a designer, I've discovered the importance of providing representation for the marginalized members of our society, and the importance of telling the most vulnerable among us that they no longer have to compromise themselves just so they can fit in with an uncompromising majority.
It turns out that fashion, a discipline many of us consider to be trivial, can actually be a powerful tool for dismantling bias and bolstering the self-images of underrepresented populations.
My interest in using design as a vehicle for social change happens to be a personal one.
As a Nigerian American, I know how easily the term "African" can slip from being an ordinary geographic descriptor to becoming a pejorative.
For those of us from this beautiful continent, to be African is to be inspired by culture and to be filled with undying hope for the future.
So in an attempt to shift the misguided perceptions that many have about the place of my birth, I use design as a means to tell stories, stories about joy, stories about triumph, stories about perseverance all throughout the African diaspora.
I tell these stories as a concerted effort to correct the historical record, because, no matter where any of us is from, each of us has been touched by the complicated histories that brought our families to a foreign land.
These histories shape the way we view the world, and they mold the biases we carry around with us.
To combat these biases, my work draws aesthetics from different parts of the globe and crafts a narrative about the importance of fighting for inclusivity.
By refashioning images from classic European art and marrying them with African aesthetics, I am able to recast people of color in roles of prominence, providing them with a degree of dignity they didn't have in earlier times.
This approach subverts the historically accepted narrative of African inferiority, and it serves as inspiration for people of color who have grown wary of seeing themselves depicted without sophistication and without grace.
Each of these culture-bending tapestries becomes a tailored garment or a silk scarf, like the one I am very coincidentally wearing right now.
(Laughter) And even when surrounded in a structure of European classicism, these narratives boldly extoll the merits of African empowerment.
In this way, the tools of the masters become masterworks to celebrate those who were once subservient.
This metaphor extends beyond the realm of art and out into the real world.
Whether worn by refugees or world-changing entrepreneurs, when people are allowed the freedom to present themselves in a manner that celebrates their own unique identities, a magical thing happens.
We stand taller.
We're more proud and self-aware because we're presenting our true, authentic selves.
And those of us who are around them in turn become more educated, more open and more tolerant of their different points of view.
In this way, the clothes that we wear can be a great illustration of diplomatic soft power.
The clothes that we wear can serve as bridges between our seemingly disparate cultures.
And so, yeah, ostensibly I stand before you as a mere maker of clothing.
But my work has always been about more than fashion.
It has become my purpose to rewrite the cultural narratives so that people of color can be seen in a new and nuanced light, and so that we, the proud children of sub-Saharan Africa, can traverse the globe while carrying ourselves with pride.
It was indeed true that the stories of history were told by its old victors, but I am of a new generation.
My work speaks for those who will no longer let their futures be dictated by a troubled past.
Today, we stand ready to tell our own stories without compromise, without apologies.
But the question still remains: are you prepared for what you are about to hear?
I hope you are, because we are coming regardless.
(Applause)
