One of the biggest levers that we have in the developed world for changing the impact that we have on the planet is changing the way that we live in cities.
We're already an urban planet; that's especially true in the developed world.
And people who live in cities in the developed world tend to be very prosperous, and thus use a lot of stuff.
If we can change the dynamic, by first of all creating cities that are denser and more livable ...
Here, for example, is Vancouver, which if you haven't been there, you ought to go for a visit. It's a fabulous city.
And they are doing density, new density, better than probably anybody else on the planet right now.
They're actually managing to talk North Americans out of driving cars, which is a pretty great thing.
So you have density. You also have growth management.
You leave aside what is natural to be natural.
This is in Portland. That is an actual development.
That land there will remain pasture in perpetuity.
They've bounded the city with a line.
Nature, city. Nothing changes.
Once you do those things, you can start making all sorts of investments.
You can start doing things like, you know, transit systems that actually work to transport people, in effective and reasonably comfortable manners.
You can also start to change what you build.
This is the Beddington Zero Energy Development in London, which is one of the greenest buildings in the world. It's a fabulous place.
We're able to now build buildings that generate all their own electricity, that recycle much of their water, that are much more comfortable than standard buildings, use all-natural light, etc., and, over time, cost less.
Green roofs. Bill McDonough covered that last night, so I won't dwell on that too much.
But once you also have people living in close proximity to each other, one of the things you can do is -- as information technologies develop -- you can start to have smart places.
You can start to know where things are.
When you know where things are, it becomes easier to share them.
When you share them, you end up using less.
So one great example is car-share clubs, which are really starting to take off in the U.S., have already taken off in many places in Europe, and are a great example.
If you're somebody who drives, you know, one day a week, do you really need your own car?
Another thing that information technology lets us do is start figuring out how to use less stuff by knowing, and by monitoring, the amount we're actually using.
So, here's a power cord which glows brighter the more energy that you use, which I think is a pretty cool concept, although I think it ought to work the other way around, that it gets brighter the more you don't use.
But, you know, there may even be a simpler approach.
We could just re-label things.
This light switch that reads, on the one hand, flashfloods, and on the other hand, off.
How we build things can change as well.
This is a bio-morphic building.
It takes its inspiration in form from life.
Many of these buildings are incredibly beautiful, and also much more effective.
This is an example of bio-mimicry, which is something we're really starting to look a lot more for.
In this case, you have a shell design which was used to create a new kind of exhaust fan, which is greatly more effective.
There's a lot of this stuff happening; it's really pretty remarkable.
I encourage you to look on Worldchanging if you're into it.
We're starting to cover this more and more.
There's also neo-biological design, where more and more we're actually using life itself and the processes of life to become part of our industry.
So this, for example, is hydrogen-generating algae.
So we have a model in potential, an emerging model that we're looking for of how to take the cities most of us live in, and turn them into Bright Green cities.
But unfortunately, most of the people on the planet don't live in the cites we live in.
They live in the emerging megacities of the developing world.
And there's a statistic I often like to use, which is that we're adding a city of Seattle every four days, a city the size of Seattle to the planet every four days.
I was giving a talk about two months ago, and this guy, who'd done some work with the U.N., came up to me and was really flustered, and he said, look, you've got that totally wrong; it's totally wrong.
It's every seven days.
So, we're adding a city the size of Seattle every seven days, and most of those cities look more like this than the city that you or I live in.
Most of those cites are growing incredibly quickly.
They don't have existing infrastructure; they have enormous numbers of people who are struggling with poverty, and enormous numbers of people are trying to figure out how to do things in new ways.
So what do we need in order to make developing nation megacities into Bright Green megacities?
Well, the first thing we need is, we need leapfrogging.
And this is one of the things that we are looking for everywhere.
The idea behind leapfrogging is that if you are a person, or a country, who is stuck in a situation where you don't have the tools and technologies that you need, there's no reason for you to invest in last generation's technologies. Right?
That you're much better off, almost universally, looking for a low-cost or locally applicable version of the newest technology.
One place we're all familiar with seeing this is with cell phones. Right?
All throughout the developing world, people are going directly to cell phones, skipping the whole landline stage.
If there are landlines in many developing world cities, they're usually pretty crappy systems that break down a lot and cost enormous amounts of money.
So I rather like this picture here.
I particularly like the Ganesh in the background, talking on the cell phone.
So what we have, increasingly, is cell phones just permeating out through society.
We've heard all about this here this week, so I won't say too much more than that, other than to say what is true for cell phones is true for all sorts of technologies.
The second thing is tools for collaboration, be they systems of collaboration, or intellectual property systems which encourage collaboration. Right?
When you have free ability for people to freely work together and innovate, you get different kinds of solutions.
And those solutions are accessible in a different way to people who don't have capital. Right?
So, you know, we have open source software, we have Creative Commons and other kinds of Copyleft solutions.
And those things lead to things like this.
This is a Telecentro in Sao Paulo.
This is a pretty remarkable program using free and open source software, cheap, sort of hacked-together machines, and basically sort of abandoned buildings -- has put together a bunch of community centers where people can come in, get high-speed internet access, learn computer programming skills for free.
And a quarter-million people every year use these now in Sao Paulo.
And those quarter-million people are some of the poorest people in Sao Paolo.
I particularly like the little Linux penguin in the back. (Laughter) So one of the things that that's leading to is a sort of southern cultural explosion.
And one of the things we're really, really interested in at Worldchanging is the ways in which the south is re-identifying itself, and re-categorizing itself in ways that have less and less to do with most of us in this room.
So it's not, you know, Bollywood isn't just answering Hollywood. Right?
You know, Brazilian music scene isn't just answering the major labels.
It's doing something new. There's new things happening.
There's interplay between them. And, you know, you get amazing things.
Like, I don't know if any of you have seen the movie "City of God?"
Yeah, it's a fabulous movie if you haven't seen it.
And it's all about this question, in a very artistic and indirect kind of way.
You have other radical examples where the ability to use cultural tools is spreading out.
These are people who have just been visited by the Internet bookmobile in Uganda.
And who are waving their first books in the air, which, I just think that's a pretty cool picture. You know?
So you also have the ability for people to start coming together and acting on their own behalf in political and civic ways, in ways that haven't happened before.
And as we heard last night, as we've heard earlier this week, are absolutely, fundamentally vital to the ability to craft new solutions, is we've got to craft new political realities.
And I would personally say that we have to craft new political realities, not only in places like India, Afghanistan, Kenya, Pakistan, what have you, but here at home as well.
Another world is possible.
And sort of the big motto of the anti-globalization movement. Right?
We tweak that a lot.
We talk about how another world isn't just possible; another world's here.
That it's not just that we have to sort of imagine there being a different, vague possibility out there, but we need to start acting a little bit more on that possibility.
We need to start doing things like Lula, President of Brazil.
How many people knew of Lula before today?
OK, so, much, much better than the average crowd, I can tell you that.
So Lula, he's full of problems, full of contradictions, but one of the things that he's doing is, he is putting forward an idea of how we engage in international relations that completely shifts the balance from the standard sort of north-south dialogue into a whole new way of global collaboration.
I would keep your eye on this fellow.
Another example of this sort of second superpower thing is the rise of these games that are what we call "serious play."
We're looking a lot at this. This is spreading everywhere.
This is from "A Force More Powerful." It's a little screenshot.
"A Force More Powerful" is a video game that, while you're playing it, it teaches you how to engage in non-violent insurrection and regime change. (Laughter) Here's another one. This is from a game called "Food Force," which is a game that teaches children how to run a refugee camp.
These things are all contributing in a very dynamic way to a huge rise in, especially in the developing world, in people's interest in and passion for democracy.
We get so little news about the developing world that we often forget that there are literally millions of people out there struggling to change things to be fairer, freer, more democratic, less corrupt.
And, you know, we don't hear those stories enough.
But it's happening all over the place, and these tools are part of what's making it possible.
Now when you add all those things together, when you add together leapfrogging and new kinds of tools, you know, second superpower stuff, etc., what do you get?
Well, very quickly, you get a Bright Green future for the developing world.
You get, for example, green power spread throughout the world.
You get -- this is a building in Hyderabad, India.
It's the greenest building in the world.
You get grassroots solutions, things that work for people who have no capital or limited access.
You get barefoot solar engineers carrying solar panels into the remote mountains.
You get access to distance medicine.
These are Indian nurses learning how to use PDAs to access databases that have information that they don't have access to at home in a distant manner.
You get new tools for people in the developing world.
These are LED lights that help the roughly billion people out there, for whom nightfall means darkness, to have a new means of operating.
These are refrigerators that require no electricity; they're pot within a pot design.
And you get water solutions. Water's one of the most pressing problems.
Here's a design for harvesting rainwater that's super cheap and available to people in the developing world.
Here's a design for distilling water using sunlight.
Here's a fog-catcher, which, if you live in a moist, jungle-like area, will distill water from the air that's clean and drinkable.
Here's a way of transporting water.
I just love this, you know -- I mean carrying water is such a drag, and somebody just came up with the idea of well, what if you rolled it. Right?
I mean, that's a great design.
This is a fabulous invention, LifeStraw.
Basically you can suck any water through this and it will become drinkable by the time it hits your lips.
So, you know, people who are in desperate straits can get this.
This is one of my favorite Worldchanging kinds of things ever.
This is a merry-go-round invented by the company Roundabout, which pumps water as kids play. You know?
Seriously -- give that one a hand, it's pretty great.
And the same thing is true for people who are in absolute crisis. Right?
We're expecting to have upwards of 200 million refugees by the year 2020 because of climate change and political instability.
How do we help people like that?
Well, there's all sorts of amazing new humanitarian designs that are being developed in collaborative ways all across the planet.
Some of those designs include models for acting, such as new models for village instruction in the middle of refugee camps.
New models for pedagogy for the displaced.
And we have new tools.
This is one of my absolute favorite things anywhere.
Does anyone know what this is?
Audience: It detects landmines.
Alex Steffen: Exactly, this is a landmine-detecting flower.
If you are living in one of the places where the roughly half-billion unaccounted for mines are scattered, you can fling these seeds out into the field.
And as they grow up, they will grow up around the mines, their roots will detect the chemicals in them, and where the flowers turn red you don't step.
Yeah, so seeds that could save your life. You know?
(Applause) I also love it because it seems to me that the example, the tools we use to change the world, ought to be beautiful in themselves.
You know, that it's not just enough to survive.
We've got to make something better than what we've got.
And I think that we will.
Just to wrap up, in the immortal words of H.G. Wells, I think that better things are on the way.
I think that, in fact, that "all of the past is but the beginning of a beginning.
All that the human mind has accomplished is but the dream before the awakening."
I hope that that turns out to be true.
The people in this room have given me more confidence than ever that it will.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
As a magician, I try to create images that make people stop and think.
I also try to challenge myself to do things that doctors say are not possible.
I was buried alive in New York City in a coffin, buried alive in a coffin in April, 1999, for a week.
I lived there with nothing but water.
And it ended up being so much fun that I decided I could pursue doing more of these things.
The next one is I froze myself in a block of ice for three days and three nights in New York City.
That one was way more difficult than I had expected.
The one after that, I stood on top of a hundred-foot pillar for 36 hours.
I began to hallucinate so hard that the buildings that were behind me started to look like big animal heads.
So, next I went to London.
In London I lived in a glass box for 44 days with nothing but water.
It was, for me, one of the most difficult things I'd ever done, but it was also the most beautiful.
There was so many skeptics, especially the press in London, that they started flying cheeseburgers on helicopters around my box to tempt me.
(Laughter) So, I felt very validated when the New England Journal of Medicine actually used the research for science.
My next pursuit was I wanted to see how long I could go without breathing, like how long I could survive with nothing, not even air.
I didn't realize that it would become the most amazing journey of my life.
As a young magician, I was obsessed with Houdini and his underwater challenges.
So, I began, early on, competing against the other kids, seeing how long I could stay underwater while they went up and down to breathe, you know, five times, while I stayed under on one breath.
By the time I was a teenager, I was able to hold my breath for three minutes and 30 seconds.
I would later find out that was Houdini's personal record.
In 1987 I heard of a story about a boy that fell through ice and was trapped under a river.
He was underneath, not breathing for 45 minutes.
When the rescue workers came, they resuscitated him and there was no brain damage.
His core temperature had dropped to 77 degrees.
As a magician, I think everything is possible.
And I think if something is done by one person, it can be done by others.
I started to think, if the boy could survive without breathing for that long, there must be a way that I could do it.
So, I met with a top neurosurgeon.
And I asked him, how long is it possible to go without breathing, like how long could I go without air?
And he said to me that anything over six minutes you have a serious risk of hypoxic brain damage.
So, I took that as a challenge, basically.
(Laughter) My first try, I figured that I could do something similar, and I created a water tank, and I filled it with ice and freezing cold water.
And I stayed inside of that water tank hoping my core temperature would start to drop.
And I was shivering.
In my first attempt to hold my breath, I couldn't even last a minute.
So, I realized that was completely not going to work.
I went to talk to a doctor friend -- and I asked him, "How could I do that?"
"I want to hold my breath for a really long time. How could it be done?"
And he said, "David, you're a magician, create the illusion of not breathing, it will be much easier."
(Laughter) So, he came up with this idea of creating a rebreather, with a CO2 scrubber, which was basically a tube from Home Depot, with a balloon duct-taped to it, that he thought we could put inside of me, and somehow be able to circulate the air and rebreathe with this thing in me.
This is a little hard to watch.
But this is that attempt.
So, that clearly wasn't going to work.
(Laughter) Then I actually started thinking about liquid breathing.
There is a chemical that's called perflubron.
And it's so high in oxygen levels that in theory you could breathe it.
So, I got my hands on that chemical, filled the sink up with it, and stuck my face in the sink and tried to breathe that in, which was really impossible.
It's basically like trying to breathe, as a doctor said, while having an elephant standing on your chest.
So, that idea disappeared.
Then I started thinking, would it be possible to hook up a heart/lung bypass machine and have a surgery where it was a tube going into my artery, and then appear to not breathe while they were oxygenating my blood?
Which was another insane idea, obviously.
Then I thought about the craziest idea of all the ideas: to actually do it.
(Laughter) To actually try to hold my breath past the point that doctors would consider you brain dead.
So, I started researching into pearl divers.
You know, because they go down for four minutes on one breath.
And when I was researching pearl divers, I found the world of free-diving.
It was the most amazing thing that I ever discovered, pretty much.
There is many different aspects to free-diving.
There is depth records, where people go as deep as they can.
And then there is static apnea.
That's holding your breath as long as you can in one place without moving.
That was the one that I studied.
The first thing that I learned is when you're holding your breath, you should never move at all; that wastes energy.
And that depletes oxygen, and it builds up CO2 in your blood.
And I learned how to slow my heart rate down.
I had to remain perfectly still and just relax and think that I wasn't in my body, and just control that.
And then I learned how to purge.
Purging is basically hyperventilating.
You blow in and out -- (Breathing loudly) You do that, you get lightheaded, you get tingling.
And you're really ridding your body of CO2.
So, when you hold your breath, it's infinitely easier.
Then I learned that you have to take a huge breath, and just hold and relax and never let any air out, and just hold and relax through all the pain.
Every morning, this is for months, I would wake up and the first thing that I would do is I would hold my breath for, out of 52 minutes, I would hold my breath for 44 minutes.
So, basically what that means is I would purge, I'd breathe really hard for a minute.
And I would hold, immediately after, for five and a half minutes.
Then I would breathe again for a minute, purging as hard as I can, then immediately after that I would hold again for five and a half minutes.
I would repeat this process eight times in a row.
Out of 52 minutes, you're only breathing for eight minutes.
At the end of that you're completely fried, your brain.
You feel like you're walking around in a daze.
And you have these awful headaches.
Basically, I'm not the best person to talk to when I'm doing that stuff.
I started learning about the world-record holder.
His name is Tom Sietas.
And this guy is perfectly built for holding his breath.
He's six foot four. He's 160 pounds.
And his total lung capacity is twice the size of an average person.
I'm six foot one, and fat.
We'll say big-boned.
(Laughter) I had to drop 50 pounds in three months.
So, everything that I put into my body, I considered as medicine.
Every bit of food was exactly what it was for its nutritional value.
I ate really small controlled portions throughout the day.
And I started to really adapt my body.
[Individual results may vary] (Laughter) The thinner I was, the longer I was able to hold my breath.
And by eating so well and training so hard, my resting heart-rate dropped to 38 beats per minute.
Which is lower than most Olympic athletes.
In four months of training, I was able to hold my breath for over seven minutes.
I wanted to try holding my breath everywhere.
I wanted to try it in the most extreme situations to see if I could slow my heart rate down under duress.
(Laughter) I decided that I was going to break the world record live on prime-time television.
The world record was eight minutes and 58 seconds, held by Tom Sietas, that guy with the whale lungs I told you about.
I assumed that I could put a water tank at Lincoln Center and if I stayed there a week not eating, I would get comfortable in that situation and I would slow my metabolism, which I was sure would help me hold my breath longer than I had been able to do it.
I was completely wrong.
I entered the sphere a week before the scheduled air date.
And I thought everything seemed to be on track.
Two days before my big breath-hold attempt, for the record, the producers of my television special thought that just watching somebody holding their breath, and almost drowning, is too boring for television.
(Laughter) So, I had to add handcuffs, while holding my breath, to escape from.
This was a critical mistake.
Because of the movement, I was wasting oxygen.
And by seven minutes I had gone into these awful convulsions.
By 7:08, I started to black out.
And by seven minutes and 30 seconds, they had to pull my body out and bring me back.
I had failed on every level.
(Laughter) So, naturally, the only way out of the slump that I could think of was, I decided to call Oprah.
(Laughter) I told her that I wanted to up the ante and hold my breath longer than any human being ever had.
This was a different record.
This was a pure O2 static apnea record that Guinness had set the world record at 13 minutes.
So, basically you breathe pure O2 first, oxygenating your body, flushing out CO2, and you are able to hold much longer.
I realized that my real competition was the beaver.
(Laughter) (Laughter ends) In January of '08, Oprah gave me four months to prepare and train.
So, I would sleep in a hypoxic tent every night.
A hypoxic tent is a tent that simulates altitude at 15,000 feet.
So, it's like base camp, Everest.
What that does is, you start building up the red bloodcell count in your body, which helps you carry oxygen better.
Every morning, again, after getting out of that tent, your brain is completely wiped out.
My first attempt on pure O2, I was able to go up to 15 minutes.
So, it was a pretty big success.
The neurosurgeon pulled me out of the water because in his mind, at 15 minutes your brain is done, you're brain dead.
So, he pulled me up, and I was fine.
There was one person there that was definitely not impressed.
It was my ex-girlfriend.
While I was breaking the record underwater for the first time, she was sifting through my Blackberry, checking all my messages.
(Laughter) My brother had a picture of it. It is really -- (Laughter) (Laughter ends) I then announced that I was going to go for Sietas' record, publicly.
And what he did in response, is he went on Regis and Kelly, and broke his old record.
Then his main competitor went out and broke his record.
So, he suddenly pushed the record up to 16 minutes and 32 seconds.
Which was three minutes longer than I had prepared.
It was longer than the record.
I wanted to get the Science Times to document this.
I wanted to get them to do a piece on it.
So, I did what any person seriously pursuing scientific advancement would do.
I walked into the New York Times offices and did card tricks to everybody.
(Laughter) So, I don't know if it was the magic or the lure of the Cayman Islands, but John Tierney flew down and did a piece on the seriousness of breath-holding.
While he was there, I tried to impress him, of course.
And I did a dive down to 160 feet, which is basically the height of a 16 story building, and as I was coming up, I blacked out underwater, which is really dangerous; that's how you drown.
Luckily, Kirk had seen me and he swam over and pulled me up.
So, I started full focus.
I completely trained to get my breath-hold time up for what I needed to do.
But there was no way to prepare for the live television aspect of it, being on Oprah.
But in practice, I would do it face down, floating on the pool.
But for TV they wanted me to be upright so they could see my face, basically.
The other problem was the suit was so buoyant that they had to strap my feet in to keep me from floating up.
So, I had to use my legs to hold my feet into the straps that were loose, which was a real problem for me.
That made me extremely nervous, raising the heart rate.
Then, what they also did was, which we never did before, is there was a heart-rate monitor.
And it was right next to the sphere.
So, every time my heart would beat, I'd hear the beep-beep-beep-beep, you know, the ticking, really loud.
Which was making me more nervous.
And there was no way to slow my heart rate down.
Normally, I would start at 38 beats per minute, and while holding my breath, it would drop to 12 beats per minute, which is pretty unusual.
(Laughter) This time it started at 120 beats, and it never went down.
I spent the first five minutes underwater desperately trying to slow my heart rate down.
I was just sitting there thinking, "I've got to slow this down. I'm going to fail."
And I was getting more nervous.
And the heart rate just kept going up and up, all the way up to 150 beats.
Basically it's the same thing that created my downfall at Lincoln Center.
It was a waste of O2.
When I made it to the halfway mark, at eight minutes, I was 100 percent certain that I was not going to be able to make this.
There was no way for me to do it.
I figured, Oprah had dedicated an hour to doing this breath-hold thing, if I had cracked early, it would be a whole show about how depressed I am.
(Laughter) So, I figured I'm better off just fighting and staying there until I black out, at least then they can pull me out and take care of me and all that.
(Laughter) I kept pushing to 10 minutes.
At 10 minutes you start getting all these really strong tingling sensations in your fingers and toes.
And I knew that that was blood shunting, when the blood rushes away from your extremities to provide oxygen to your vital organs.
At 11 minutes I started feeling throbbing sensations in my legs, and my lips started to feel really strange.
At minute 12 I started to have ringing in my ears, and I started to feel my arm going numb.
And I'm a hypochondriac, and I remember arm numb means heart attack.
So, I started to really get really paranoid.
Then at 13 minutes, maybe because of the hypochondria, I started feeling pains all over my chest.
It was awful.
(Laughter) At 14 minutes, I had these awful contractions, like this urge to breathe.
(Laughter) (Laughter ends) At 15 minutes I was suffering major O2 deprivation to the heart.
And I started having ischemia to the heart.
My heartbeat would go from 120 to 50, to 150, to 40, to 20, to 150 again.
It would skip a beat.
It would start. It would stop. And I felt all this.
And I was sure that I was going to have a heart attack.
So, at 16 minutes what I did is I slid my feet out because I knew that if I did go out, if I did have a heart attack, they'd have to jump into the binding and take my feet out before pulling me up.
I was really nervous.
And I didn't take my head out.
But I was just floating there waiting for my heart to stop, just waiting.
They had doctors with the "Pst," you know, sitting there waiting.
And then suddenly I hear screaming.
And I think that there is some weird thing -- that I had died or something had happened.
And then I realized that I had made it to 16:32.
So, with the energy of everybody that was there, I decided to keep pushing.
And I went to 17 minutes and four seconds.
(Applause) (Applause ends) As though that wasn't enough, what I did immediately after is I went to Quest Labs and had them take every blood sample that they could to test for everything and to see where my levels were, so the doctors could use it, once again.
I also didn't want anybody to question it.
I had the world record and I wanted to make sure it was legitimate.
So, I get to New York City the next day, I'm walking out of the Apple store, and this kid walks up to me he's like, "Yo, D!"
I'm like "Yeah?"
He said, "If you really held your breath that long, why'd you come out of the water dry?"
I was like "What?"
(Laughter) And that's my life. So -- (Laughter) As a magician, I try to show things to people that seem impossible.
And I think magic, whether I'm holding my breath or shuffling a deck of cards, is pretty simple.
It's practice, it's training, and it's -- (Sobs) It's practice, it's training and experimenting, (Sobs) while pushing through the pain to be the best that I can be.
And that's what magic is to me, so, thank you.
(Applause)
Right now is the most exciting time to see new Indian art.
Contemporary artists in India are having a conversation with the world like never before.
I thought it might be interesting, even for the many long-time collectors here with us at TED, local collectors, to have an outside view of 10 young Indian artists I wish everyone at TED to know.
The first is Bharti Kher.
The central motif of Bharti's practice is the ready-made store-bought bindi that untold millions of Indian women apply to their foreheads, every day, in an act closely associated with the institution of marriage.
But originally the significance of the bindi is to symbolize the third eye between the spiritual world and the religious world.
Bharti seeks to liberate this everyday cliche, as she calls it, by exploding it into something spectacular.
She also creates life-size fiberglass sculptures, often of animals, which she then completely covers in bindis, often with potent symbolism.
She says she first got started with 10 packets of bindis, and then wondered what she could do with 10 thousand.
Our next artist, Balasubramaniam, really stands at the crossroads of sculpture, painting and installation, working wonders with fiberglass.
Since Bala himself will be speaking at TED I won't spend too much time on him here today, except to say that he really succeeds at making the invisible visible.
Brooklyn-based Chitra Ganesh is known for her digital collages, using Indian comic books called amar chitra kathas as her primary source material.
These comics are a fundamental way that children, especially in the diaspora, learn their religious and mythological folk tales.
I, for one, was steeped in these.
Chitra basically remixes and re-titles these iconic images to tease out some of the sexual and gender politics embedded in these deeply influential comics.
And she uses this vocabulary in her installation work as well.
Jitish Kallat successfully practices across photography, sculpture, painting and installation.
As you can see, he's heavily influenced by graffiti and street art, and his home city of Mumbai is an ever-present element in his work.
He really captures that sense of density and energy which really characterizes modern urban Bombay.
He also creates phantasmagoric sculptures made of bones from cast resin.
Here he envisions the carcass of an autorickshaw he once witnessed burning in a riot.
This next artist, N.S. Harsha, actually has a studio right here in Mysore.
He's putting a contemporary spin on the miniature tradition.
He creates these fine, delicate images which he then repeats on a massive scale.
He uses scale to more and more spectacular effect, whether on the roof of a temple in Singapore, or in his increasingly ambitious installation work, here with 192 functioning sewing machines, fabricating the flags of every member of the United Nations.
Mumbai-based Dhruvi Acharya builds on her love of comic books and street art to comment on the roles and expectations of modern Indian women.
She too mines the rich source material of amar chitra kathas, but in a very different way than Chitra Ganesh.
In this particular work, she actually strips out the images and leaves the actual text to reveal something previously unseen, and provocative.
Raqib Shaw is Kolkata-born, Kashmir-raised, and London-trained.
He too is reinventing the miniature tradition.
He creates these opulent tableaus inspired by Hieronymus Bosch, but also by the Kashmiri textiles of his youth.
He actually applies metallic industrial paints to his work using porcupine quills to get this rich detailed effect.
I'm kind of cheating with this next artist since Raqs Media Collective are really three artists working together.
Raqs are probably the foremost practitioners of multimedia art in India today, working across photography, video and installation.
They frequently explore themes of globalization and urbanization, and their home of Delhi is a frequent element in their work.
Here, they invite the viewer to analyze a crime looking at evidence and clues embedded in five narratives on these five different screens, in which the city itself may have been the culprit.
This next artist is probably the alpha male of contemporary Indian art, Subodh Gupta.
He was first known for creating giant photo-realistic canvases, paintings of everyday objects, the stainless steel kitchen vessels and tiffin containers known to every Indian.
He celebrates these local and mundane objects globally, and on a grander and grander scale, by incorporating them into ever more colossal sculptures and installations.
And finally number 10, last and certainly not least, Ranjani Shettar, who lives and works here in the state of Karnataka, creates ethereal sculptures and installations that really marry the organic to the industrial, and brings, like Subodh, the local global.
These are actually wires wrapped in muslin and steeped in vegetable dye.
And she arranges them so that the viewer actually has to navigate through the space, and interact with the objects.
And light and shadow are a very important part of her work.
She also explores themes of consumerism, and the environment, such as in this work, where these basket-like objects look organic and woven, and are woven, but with the strips of steel, salvaged from cars that she found in a Bangalore junkyard.
10 artists, six minutes, I know that was a lot to take in.
But I can only hope I've whet your appetite to go out and see and learn more about the amazing things that are happening in art in India today.
Thank you very much for looking and listening.
(Applause)
This is actually a painting that hangs at the Countway Library at Harvard Medical School.
And it shows the first time an organ was ever transplanted.
In the front, you see, actually, Joe Murray getting the patient ready for the transplant, while in the back room you see Hartwell Harrison, the Chief of Urology at Harvard, actually harvesting the kidney.
The kidney was indeed the first organ ever to be transplanted to the human.
That was back in 1954, 55 years ago.
Yet we're still dealing with a lot of the same challenges as many decades ago.
Certainly many advances, many lives saved.
But we have a major shortage of organs.
In the last decade the number of patients waiting for a transplant has doubled.
While, at the same time, the actual number of transplants has remained almost entirely flat.
That really has to do with our aging population.
We're just getting older.
Medicine is doing a better job of keeping us alive.
But as we age, our organs tend to fail more.
So, that's a challenge, not just for organs but also for tissues.
Trying to replace pancreas, trying to replace nerves that can help us with Parkinson's.
These are major issues.
This is actually a very stunning statistic.
Every 30 seconds a patient dies from diseases that could be treated with tissue regeneration or replacement.
So, what can we do about it?
We've talked about stem cells tonight.
That's a way to do it.
But still ways to go to get stem cells into patients, in terms of actual therapies for organs.
Wouldn't it be great if our bodies could regenerate?
Wouldn't it be great if we could actually harness the power of our bodies, to actually heal ourselves?
It's not really that foreign of a concept, actually; it happens on the Earth every day.
This is actually a picture of a salamander.
Salamanders have this amazing capacity to regenerate.
You see here a little video.
This is actually a limb injury in this salamander.
And this is actually real photography, timed photography, showing how that limb regenerates in a period of days.
You see the scar form.
And that scar actually grows out a new limb.
So, salamanders can do it.
Why can't we? Why can't humans regenerate?
Actually, we can regenerate.
Your body has many organs and every single organ in your body has a cell population that's ready to take over at the time of injury. It happens every day.
As you age, as you get older.
Your bones regenerate every 10 years.
Your skin regenerates every two weeks.
So, your body is constantly regenerating.
The challenge occurs when there is an injury.
At the time of injury or disease, the body's first reaction is to seal itself off from the rest of the body.
It basically wants to fight off infection, and seal itself, whether it's organs inside your body, or your skin, the first reaction is for scar tissue to move in, to seal itself off from the outside.
So, how can we harness that power?
One of the ways that we do that is actually by using smart biomaterials.
How does this work? Well, on the left side here you see a urethra which was injured.
This is the channel that connects the bladder to the outside of the body.
And you see that it is injured.
We basically found out that you can use these smart biomaterials that you can actually use as a bridge.
If you build that bridge, and you close off from the outside environment, then you can create that bridge, and cells that regenerate in your body, can then cross that bridge, and take that path.
That's exactly what you see here.
It's actually a smart biomaterial that we used, to actually treat this patient.
This was an injured urethra on the left side.
We used that biomaterial in the middle.
And then, six months later on the right-hand side you see this reengineered urethra.
Turns out your body can regenerate, but only for small distances.
The maximum efficient distance for regeneration is only about one centimeter.
So, we can use these smart biomaterials but only for about one centimeter to bridge those gaps.
So, we do regenerate, but for limited distances.
What do we do now, if you have injury for larger organs?
What do we do when we have injuries for structures which are much larger than one centimeter?
Then we can start to use cells.
The strategy here, is if a patient comes in to us with a diseased or injured organ, you can take a very small piece of tissue from that organ, less than half the size of a postage stamp, you can then tease that tissue apart, and look at its basic components, the patient's own cells, you take those cells out, grow and expand those cells outside the body in large quantities, and then we then use scaffold materials.
To the naked eye they look like a piece of your blouse, or your shirt, but actually these materials are fairly complex and they are designed to degrade once inside the body.
It disintegrates a few months later.
It's acting only as a cell delivery vehicle.
It's bringing the cells into the body. It's allowing the cells to regenerate new tissue, and once the tissue is regenerated the scaffold goes away.
And that's what we did for this piece of muscle.
This is actually showing a piece of muscle and how we go through the structures to actually engineer the muscle.
We take the cells, we expand them, we place the cells on the scaffold, and we then place the scaffold back into the patient.
But actually, before placing the scaffold into the patient, we actually exercise it.
We want to make sure that we condition this muscle, so that it knows what to do once we put it into the patient.
That's what you're seeing here. You're seeing this muscle bio-reactor actually exercising the muscle back and forth.
Okay. These are flat structures that we see here, the muscle.
What about other structures?
This is actually an engineered blood vessel.
Very similar to what we just did, but a little bit more complex.
Here we take a scaffold, and we basically -- scaffold can be like a piece of paper here.
And we can then tubularize this scaffold.
And what we do is we, to make a blood vessel, same strategy.
A blood vessel is made up of two different cell types.
We take muscle cells, we paste, or coat the outside with these muscle cells, very much like baking a layer cake, if you will.
You place the muscle cells on the outside.
You place the vascular blood vessel lining cells on the inside.
You now have your fully seeded scaffold.
You're going to place this in an oven-like device.
It has the same conditions as a human body, 37 degrees centigrade, 95 percent oxygen.
You then exercise it, as what you saw on that tape.
And on the right you actually see a carotid artery that was engineered.
This is actually the artery that goes from your neck to your brain.
And this is an X-ray showing you the patent, functional blood vessel.
More complex structures such as blood vessels, urethras, which I showed you, they're definitely more complex because you're introducing two different cell types.
But they are really acting mostly as conduits.
You're allowing fluid or air to go through at steady states.
They are not nearly as complex as hollow organs.
Hollow organs have a much higher degree of complexity, because you're asking these organs to act on demand.
So, the bladder is one such organ.
Same strategy, we take a very small piece of the bladder, less than half the size of a postage stamp.
We then tease the tissue apart into its two individual cell components, muscle, and these bladder specialized cells.
We grow the cells outside the body in large quantities.
It takes about four weeks to grow these cells from the organ.
We then take a scaffold that we shape like a bladder.
We coat the inside with these bladder lining cells.
We coat the outside with these muscle cells.
We place it back into this oven-like device.
From the time you take that piece of tissue, six to eight weeks later you can put the organ right back into the patient.
This actually shows the scaffold.
The material is actually being coated with the cells.
When we did the first clinical trial for these patients we actually created the scaffold specifically for each patient.
We brought patients in, six to eight weeks prior to their scheduled surgery, did X-rays, and we then composed a scaffold specifically for that patient's size pelvic cavity.
For the second phase of the trials we just had different sizes, small, medium, large and extra-large.
(Laughter) It's true.
And I'm sure everyone here wanted an extra-large. Right?
(Laughter) So, bladders are definitely a little bit more complex than the other structures.
But there are other hollow organs that have added complexity to it.
This is actually a heart valve, which we engineered.
And the way you engineer this heart valve is the same strategy.
We take the scaffold, we seed it with cells, and you can now see here, the valve leaflets opening and closing.
We exercise these prior to implantation.
Same strategy.
And then the most complex are the solid organs.
For solid organs, they're more complex because you're using a lot more cells per centimeter.
This is actually a simple solid organ like the ear.
It's now being seeded with cartilage.
That's the oven-like device; once it's coated it gets placed there.
And then a few weeks later we can take out the cartilage scaffold.
This is actually digits that we're engineering.
These are being layered, one layer at a time, first the bone, we fill in the gaps with cartilage.
We then start adding the muscle on top.
And you start layering these solid structures.
Again, fairly more complex organs, but by far, the most complex solid organs are actually the vascularized, highly vascularized, a lot of blood vessel supply, organs such as the heart, the liver, the kidneys.
This is actually an example -- several strategies to engineer solid organs.
This is actually one of the strategies. We use a printer.
And instead of using ink, we use -- you just saw an inkjet cartridge -- we just use cells.
This is actually your typical desktop printer.
It's actually printing this two chamber heart, one layer at a time.
You see the heart coming out there. It takes about 40 minutes to print, and about four to six hours later you see the muscle cells contract.
(Applause) This technology was developed by Tao Ju, who worked at our institute.
And this is actually still, of course, experimental, not for use in patients.
Another strategy that we have followed is actually to use decellularized organs.
We actually take donor organs, organs that are discarded, and we then can use very mild detergents to take all the cell elements out of these organs.
So, for example on the left panel, top panel, you see a liver.
We actually take the donor liver, we use very mild detergents, and we, by using these mild detergents, we take all the cells out of the liver.
Two weeks later, we basically can lift this organ up, it feels like a liver, we can hold it like a liver, it looks like a liver, but it has no cells.
All we are left with is the skeleton, if you will, of the liver, all made up of collagen, a material that's in our bodies, that will not reject.
We can use it from one patient to the next.
We then take this vascular structure and we can prove that we retain the blood vessel supply.
You can see, actually that's a fluoroscopy.
We're actually injecting contrast into the organ.
Now you can see it start. We're injecting the contrast into the organ into this decellularized liver.
And you can see the vascular tree that remains intact.
We then take the cells, the vascular cells, blood vessel cells, we perfuse the vascular tree with the patient's own cells.
We perfuse the outside of the liver with the patient's own liver cells.
And we can then create functional livers.
And that's actually what you're seeing.
This is still experimental. But we are able to actually reproduce the functionality of the liver structure, experimentally.
For the kidney, as I talked to you about the first painting that you saw, the first slide I showed you, 90 percent of the patients on the transplant wait list are waiting for a kidney, 90 percent.
So, another strategy we're following is actually to create wafers that we stack together, like an accordion, if you will.
So, we stack these wafers together, using the kidney cells.
And then you can see these miniature kidneys that we've engineered.
They are actually making urine.
Again, small structures, our challenge is how to make them larger, and that is something we're working on right now at the institute.
One of the things that I wanted to summarize for you then is what is a strategy that we're going for in regenerative medicine.
If at all possible, we really would like to use smart biomaterials that we can just take off the shelf and regenerate your organs.
We are limited with distances right now, but our goal is actually to increase those distances over time.
If we cannot use smart biomaterials, then we'd rather use your very own cells.
Why? Because they will not reject.
We can take cells from you, create the structure, put it right back into you, they will not reject.
And if possible, we'd rather use the cells from your very specific organ.
If you present with a diseased wind pipe we'd like to take cells from your windpipe.
If you present with a diseased pancreas we'd like to take cells from that organ.
Why? Because we'd rather take those cells which already know that those are the cell types you want.
A windpipe cell already knows it's a windpipe cell.
We don't need to teach it to become another cell type.
So, we prefer organ-specific cells.
And today we can obtain cells from most every organ in your body, except for several which we still need stem cells for, like heart, liver, nerve and pancreas.
And for those we still need stem cells.
If we cannot use stem cells from your body then we'd like to use donor stem cells.
And we prefer cells that will not reject and will not form tumors.
And we're working a lot with the stem cells that we published on two years ago, stem cells from the amniotic fluid, and the placenta, which have those properties.
So, at this point, I do want to tell you that some of the major challenges we have.
You know, I just showed you this presentation, everything looks so good, everything works. Actually no, these technologies really are not that easy.
Some of the work you saw today was performed by over 700 researchers at our institute across a 20-year time span.
So, these are very tough technologies.
Once you get the formula right you can replicate it.
But it takes a lot to get there.
So, I always like to show this cartoon.
This is how to stop a runaway stage.
And there you see the stagecoach driver, and he goes, on the top panel, He goes A, B, C, D, E, F.
He finally stops the runaway stage.
And those are usually the basic scientists, The bottom is usually the surgeons.
(Laughter) I'm a surgeon so that's not that funny.
(Laughter) But actually method A is the correct approach.
And what I mean by that is that anytime we've launched one of these technologies to the clinic, we've made absolutely sure that we do everything we can in the laboratory before we ever launch these technologies to patients.
And when we launch these technologies to patients we want to make sure that we ask ourselves a very tough question.
Are you ready to place this in your own loved one, your own child, your own family member, and then we proceed.
Because our main goal, of course, is first, to do no harm.
I'm going to show you now, a very short clip, It's a five second clip of a patient who received one of the engineered organs.
We started implanting some of these structures over 14 years ago.
So, we have patients now walking around with organs, engineered organs, for over 10 years, as well.
I'm going to show a clip of one young lady.
She had a spina bifida defect, a spinal cord abnormality.
She did not have a normal bladder. This is a segment from CNN.
We are just taking five seconds.
This is a segment that Sanjay Gupta actually took care of.
Video: Kaitlyn M: I'm happy. I was always afraid that I was going to have like, an accident or something.
And now I can just go and go out with my friends, go do whatever I want.
Anthony Atala: See, at the end of the day, the promise of regenerative medicine is a single promise.
And that is really very simple, to make our patients better.
Thank you for your attention.
(Applause)
Can geographic information make you healthy?
In 2001 I got hit by a train.
My train was a heart attack.
I found myself in a hospital in an intensive-care ward, recuperating from emergency surgery.
And I suddenly realized something: that I was completely in the dark.
I started asking my questions, "Well, why me?"
"Why now?" "Why here?"
"Could my doctor have warned me?"
So, what I want to do here in the few minutes I have with you is really talk about what is the formula for life and good health.
Genetics, lifestyle and environment.
That's going to sort of contain our risks, and if we manage those risks we're going to live a good life and a good healthy life.
Well, I understand the genetics and lifestyle part.
And you know why I understand that?
Because my physicians constantly ask me questions about this.
Have you ever had to fill out those long, legal-size forms in your doctor's office?
I mean, if you're lucky enough you get to do it more than once, right?
(Laughter) Do it over and over again. And they ask you questions about your lifestyle and your family history, your medication history, your surgical history, your allergy history ... did I forget any history?
But this part of the equation I didn't really get, and I don't think my physicians really get this part of the equation.
What does that mean, my environment?
Well, it can mean a lot of things.
This is my life. These are my life places.
We all have these.
While I'm talking I'd like you to also be thinking about: How many places have you lived?
Just think about that, you know, wander through your life thinking about this.
And you realize that you spend it in a variety of different places.
You spend it at rest and you spend it at work.
And if you're like me, you're in an airplane a good portion of your time traveling some place.
So, it's not really simple when somebody asks you, "Where do you live, where do you work, and where do you spend all your time?
And where do you expose yourselves to risks that maybe perhaps you don't even see?"
Well, when I have done this on myself, I always come to the conclusion that I spend about 75 percent of my time relatively in a small number of places.
And I don't wander far from that place for a majority of my time, even though I'm an extensive global trekker.
Now, I'm going to take you on a little journey here.
I started off in Scranton, Pennsylvania.
I don't know if anybody might hail from northeastern Pennsylvania, but this is where I spent my first 19 years with my little young lungs.
You know, breathing high concentrations here of sulfur dioxide, carbon dioxide and methane gas, in unequal quantities -- 19 years of this.
And if you've been in that part of the country, this is what those piles of burning, smoldering coal waste look like.
So then I decided to leave that part of the world, and I was going to go to the mid-west.
OK, so I ended up in Louisville, Kentucky.
Well, I decided to be neighbors to a place called Rubbertown.
They manufacture plastics. They use large quantities chloroprene and benzene.
Okay, I spent 25 years, in my middle-age lungs now, breathing various concentrations of that.
And on a clear day it always looked like this, so you never saw it.
It was insidious and it was really happening.
Then I decided I had to get really smart, I would take this job in the West Coast.
And I moved to Redlands California.
Very nice, and there my older, senior lungs, as I like to call them, I filled with particulate matter, carbon dioxide and very high doses of ozone.
Okay? Almost like the highest in the nation.
Alright, this is what it looks like on a good day.
If you've been there, you know what I'm talking about.
So, what's wrong with this picture?
Well, the picture is, there is a huge gap here.
The one thing that never happens in my doctor's office: They never ask me about my place history.
No doctor, can I remember, ever asking me, "Where have you lived?"
They haven't asked me what kind of the quality of the drinking water that I put in my mouth or the food that I ingest into my stomach.
They really don't do that. It's missing.
Look at the kind of data that's available.
This data's from all over the world -- countries spend billions of dollars investing in this kind of research.
Now, I've circled the places where I've been.
Well, by design, if I wanted to have a heart attack I'd been in the right places. Right?
So, how many people are in the white?
How many people in the room have spent the majority of their life in the white space?
Anybody? Boy you're lucky.
How many have spent it in the red places?
Oh, not so lucky.
There are thousands of these kinds of maps that are displayed in atlases all over the world.
They give us some sense of what's going to be our train wreck.
But none of that's in my medical record.
And it's not in yours either.
So, here's my friend Paul.
He's a colleague. He allowed his cell phone to be tracked every two hours, 24/7, 365 days out of the year for the last two years, everywhere he went.
And you can see he's been to a few places around the United States.
And this is where he has spent most of his time.
If you really studied that you might have some clues as to what Paul likes to do.
Anybody got any clues? Ski. Right.
We can zoom in here, and we suddenly see that now we see where Paul has really spent a majority of his time.
And all of those black dots are all of the toxic release inventories that are monitored by the EPA.
Did you know that data existed?
For every community in the United States, you could have your own personalized map of that.
So, our cell phones can now build a place history.
This is how Paul did it. He did it with his iPhone.
This might be what we end up with.
This is what the physician would have in front of him and her when we enter that exam room instead of just the pink slip that said I paid at the counter. Right?
This could be my little assessment.
And he looks at that and he says, "Whoa Bill, I suggest that maybe you not decide, just because you're out here in beautiful California, and it's warm every day, that you get out and run at six o'clock at night.
I'd suggest that that's a bad idea Bill, because of this report."
What I'd like to leave you for are two prescriptions.
Okay, number one is, we must teach physicians about the value of geographical information.
It's called geomedicine. There are about a half a dozen programs in the world right now that are focused on this.
And they're in the early stages of development.
These programs need to be supported, and we need to teach our future doctors of the world the importance of some of the information I've shared here with you today.
The second thing we need to do is while we're spending billions and billions of dollars all over the world building an electronic health record, we make sure we put a place history inside that medical record.
It not only will be important for the physician; it will be important for the researchers that now will have huge samples to draw upon.
But it will also be useful for us.
I could have made the decision, if I had this information, not to move to the ozone capital of the United States, couldn't I? I could make that decision.
Or I could negotiate with my employer to make that decision in the best interest of myself and my company.
With that, I would like to just say that Jack Lord said this almost 10 years ago.
Just look at that for a minute.
That was what the conclusion of the Dartmouth Atlas of Healthcare was about, was saying that we can explain the geographic variations that occur in disease, in illness, in wellness, and how our healthcare system actually operates.
That was what he was talking about on that quote.
And I would say he got it right almost a decade ago.
So, I'd very much like to see us begin to really seize this as an opportunity to get this into our medical records.
So with that, I'll leave you that in my particular view of view of health: Geography always matters.
And I believe that geographic information can make both you and me very healthy. Thank you.
(Applause)
Video: Narrator: An event seen from one point of view gives one impression.
Seen from another point of view, it gives quite a different impression.
But it's only when you get the whole picture you can fully understand what's going on.
Sasha Vucinic: It's a great clip, isn't it?
And I found that in 29 seconds, it tells more about the power of, and importance of, independent media than I could say in an hour.
So I thought that it will be good to start with it.
And also start with a little bit of statistics.
According to relevant researchers, 83 percent of the population of this planet lives in the societies without independent press.
Think about that number: 83 percent of the population on the whole planet does not really know what is going on in their countries.
The information they get gets filtered through somebody who either twists that information, or colors that information, does something with it.
So they're deprived of understanding their reality.
That is just to understand how big and important this problem is.
Now those of you who are lucky enough to live in those societies that represent 17 percent, I think should enjoy it until it lasts.
You know, Sunday morning, you flick the paper, get your cappuccino.
Enjoy it while it lasts.
Because as we heard yesterday, countries can lose stars from their flags, but they can also lose press freedom, as I guess Americans among us can tell us more about.
But that's totally another and separate topic.
So I can go back to my story.
My story starts -- the story I want to share -- starts in 1991.
At that time I was running B92, the only independent, for that matter the only electronic media, in the country.
And I guess we were sharing -- we had that regular life of the only independent media in the country, operating in hostile environment, where government really wants to make your life miserable.
And there are different ways.
Yeah, it was the usual cocktail: a little bit of threats, a little bit of friendly advice, a little bit of financial police, a little bit of text control, so you always have somebody who never leaves your office.
But what they really do, which is very powerful, and that is what governments in the late '90s started doing if they don't like independent media companies -- you know, they threaten your advertisers.
Once they threaten your advertisers, market forces are actually, you know, destroyed, and the advertisers do not want to come -- no matter how much does it make sense for them -- do not want to come and advertise.
And you have a problem making ends meet.
At that time at the beginning of the '90s, we had that problem, which was, you know, survival below one side, but what was really painful for me was, remember, the beginning of the '90s, Yugoslavia is falling apart.
We were sitting over there with a country in a downfall, in a slow-motion downfall.
And we all had all of that on tapes.
We had the ability to understand what was going on.
We were actually recording history.
The problem was that we had to re-tape that history a week later; because if we did not, we could not afford enough tapes to keep archives of that history.
So if I gave you that picture, I don't want to go too long on that.
In that context a gentleman came to my office at that time.
It was still 1991.
He was running a media systems organization which is still in business, the gentleman is still in business.
And what did I know at that time about media systems?
I would think media systems were organizations, which means they should help you.
So I prepared two plans for that meeting, two strategic plans: the small one and the big one.
The small one was, I just wanted him to help us get those damn tapes, so we can keep that archive for the next 50 years.
The big plan was to ask him for a 1,000,000-dollar loan.
Because I thought, I still maintain, that serious and independent media companies are great business.
And I thought that B92 will survive and be a great company once Milosevic is gone, which turned out to be true.
It's now probably either the biggest or the second biggest media company in the country.
And I thought that the only thing that we needed at that time was 1,000,000-dollar loan to take us through those hard times.
To make a long story short, the gentleman comes into the office, great suit and tie.
I gave him what I thought was a brilliant explanation of the political situation and explained how hard and difficult the war will be.
Actually, I underestimated the atrocities, I have to admit.
Anyway, after that whole, big, long explanation, the only question he had for me -- and this is not a joke -- is, are we paying royalties after we broadcast music of Michael Jackson?
That was really the only question he had.
He left, and I remember being actually very angry at myself because I thought there must be an institution in the world that is providing loans to media companies.
It's so obvious, straight in your face, and somebody must have thought of it.
Somebody must have started something like that.
And I thought, I'm just dumb and I cannot find it.
You know, in my defense, there was no Google at that time; you could not just Google in '91.
So I thought that that's actually my problem.
Now we go from here, fast forward to 1995.
I have -- I left the country, I have a meeting with George Soros, trying for the third time to convince him that his foundation should invest in something that should operate like a media bank.
And basically what I was saying is very simple.
You know, forget about charity; it doesn't work.
Forget about handouts; 20,000 dollars do not help anybody.
What you should do is you should treat media companies as a business.
It's business anywhere.
Media business, or any other business, it needs to be capitalized.
And what these guys need, actually, is access to capital.
So third meeting, arguments are pretty well exercised.
At the end of the meeting he says, look, it is not going to work; you will never see your money back; but my foundations will put 500,000 dollars so you can test the idea.
See that it will not work.
He said, I'll give you a rope to hang yourself.
(Laughter) I knew two things after that meeting.
First, under no circumstances I want to hang myself.
And second, that I have no idea how to make it work.
You see, at the level of a concept, it was a great concept.
But it's one thing to have a concept; it's a totally separate thing to actually make it work.
So I had absolutely no idea how that could actually work.
Had the wrong idea; I thought that we can be a bank.
You see banks -- I don't know if there are any bankers over here; I apologize in advance -- but it's the best job in the world.
You know, you find somebody who is respectable and has a lot of money.
You give them more money; they repay you that over a time.
You collect interest and do nothing in between.
So I thought, why don't we get into that business?
(Laughter) So here we are having our first client, brilliant.
First independent newspaper in Slovakia.
The government cutting them off from all the printing facilities in Bratislava.
So here's the daily newspaper that has to be printed 400 kilometers away from the capital.
It's a daily newspaper with a deadline of 4 p.m.
That means that they have no sports; they have no latest news; circulation goes down.
It's a kind of very nice, sophisticated way how to economically strangle a daily newspaper.
They come to us with a request for a loan.
They want to -- the only way for them to survive is to get a printing press.
And we said, that's fine; let's meet; you'll bring us your business plan, which eventually they did.
We start the meeting.
I get these two pieces of paper, not like this, A4 format, so it's much bigger.
A lot of numbers there. A lot of numbers.
But however you put it, you know, the numbers do not make any sense.
And that's the best they could do.
We were the best that they could do.
So that is how we understood what our method is.
It's not a bank. We had to actually go into these companies and earn our return by fixing them -- by establishing management systems, by providing all that knowledge, how do you run a business on one side -- while they all know how to run, how to create content.
Just quickly on the results.
Over these 10 years, 40 million dollars in affordable financing, average interest rate five percent to six percent.
Lately we are going wild, charging seven percent from time to time.
We do it in 17 countries of the developing world.
And here is the most stunning number.
Return rate -- the one that Soros was so worried about -- 97 percent.
97 percent of all the scheduled repayments came back to us on time.
What do we typically finance?
We finance anything that a media company would need, from printing presses to transmitters.
What is most important is we do it either in form of loans, equities, lease -- whatever is appropriate for, you know, supporting anybody.
But what is most important here is, who do we finance?
We believe that in the last 10 years companies that we've financed are actually the best media companies in the developing world.
That is a "Who is Who" list.
And I could spend hours talking about them, because they're all kind of heroes.
And I can, but I'll give you just, maybe one, and depending on time I may give you two examples who we work with.
You see we started working in Eastern and Central Europe, and moved to Russia.
Our first loan in Russia was in Chelyabinsk.
I'll bet half of you have never heard of that place.
In the south of Russia there's a guy called Boris Nikolayevich Kirshin, who is running an independent newspaper there.
The city was closed until early '90s because, of all things, they were producing glass for Tupolev planes.
Anyway, he's running independent newspaper there.
After two years working with us, he becomes the most respected newspaper in that small place.
Governor comes to him one day, actually invites him to come to his office.
He goes and sees the governor. The governor says, Boris Nikolayevich, I understand you are doing a great job, and you are the most respected newspaper in our district.
And I want to offer you a deal.
Can you please give me your newspaper for the next nine months, because I have elections -- there are elections coming up in nine months.
I will not run, but it's very important for me who is going to succeed me.
So give me the paper for nine months. I'll give it back to you.
I have no interest in being in media business.
How much would that cost?
Boris Nikolayevich says, "It's not for sale."
The governor says, "We will close you."
Boris Nikolayevich says, "No, you cannot do it."
Six months later the newspaper was closed.
Luckily, we had enough time to help Boris Nikolayevich take all the assets out of that company and bring him into a new one, to get all the subscription lists, rehire staff.
So what the governor got was an empty shell.
But that is what happens if you're in business of independent media, and if you are a banker for independent media.
So it sounds like a great story.
Somewhere down the road we opened a media management center.
We started our media lab, sounds like a real great story.
But there is a second angle to that.
The second angle, like in this clip.
If you take the camera above, you start thinking about these numbers again.
40 million dollars over 10 years spread over 17 countries.
That is not too much, is it?
It's actually just a drop in the sea.
Because when you think about the importance, some of the issues that we were talking about last night -- this last session we had about Africa and his hypothetical 50 billion dollars destined for Africa.
All of those, not all, half of those problems mentioned last night -- government accountability, corruption, how do you fight corruption, giving voice to unheard, to poor -- it's why independent media is in business.
And it's why it was invented.
So from that perspective, what we did is just really one drop in the sea of that need that we can identify.
Now ours is just one story.
I'm sure that in this room there are, like, 15 other wonderful stories of nonprofits doing spectacular work.
Here is where the problem is, and I'll explain to you as well as I can what the problem is.
And it's called fundraising.
Imagine that this third of this room is filled with people who represent different foundations.
Imagine two thirds over here running excellent organizations, doing very important work.
Now imagine that every second person over here is deaf, does not hear, and switch the lights off.
Now that is how difficult it is to match people from this side of the room with people of that side of the room.
So we thought that some kind of a big idea is needed to reform, to totally rethink fundraising.
You know, instead of people running in this dark, trying to find their own match, who will be willing, who has the same goals.
Instead of all of that we thought there is -- something new needs to be invented.
And we came up with this idea of issuing bonds, press freedom bonds.
If there are investors willing to finance U.S. government budget deficit, why wouldn't we find investors willing to finance press freedom deficit?
We've decided to do it this fall; we will issue them, probably in denominations of 1,000 dollars.
I don't want to advertise them too much; that's not the point.
But the point is, if we ever survive to actually issue them, find enough investors that this can be considered a success, there's nothing stopping the next organization to start to issue bonds next spring.
And those can be environmental bonds.
And then two weeks later, Iqbal Quadir can issue his electricity in Bangladesh bonds.
And before you know it, any social cause can be actually financed in this way.
Now we do daydreaming in 11:30 with 55 seconds left.
But let's take the idea further.
You do it, you start it in the States, because it's, you know, concepts are very, very close to American minds.
But you can actually bring it to Europe, too.
You can bring it to Asia.
You can, once you have all of those different points, you can make it easy for investors.
Put all of those bonds at one place and they sit down and click.
Once you have more than 10 of them you have to develop some kind of a matrix.
What do investors get?
On one side financial, on the other side social.
So that brings the idea of some kind of rating agency, Morningstar type.
It says, you know, social impact over here is spectacular, five stars.
Financial, they give you one percent, only one star.
Now take it to the last step.
Once you have all of that put together, there's not one reason why you couldn't actually have a marketplace for all of that, where you cannot dispose of all of those bonds in a pretty quick way.
And in that way you organize the financing so there are no dark rooms, no blind people running around to find each other.
Thank you.
I'm going to speak to you today about architectural agency.
What I mean by that is that it's time for architecture to do things again, not just represent things.
This is a construction helmet that I received two years ago at the groundbreaking of the largest project I, and my firm, have ever been involved in.
I was thrilled to get it. I was thrilled to be the only person standing on the stage with a shiny silver helmet.
I thought it represented the importance of the architect.
I stayed thrilled until I got home, threw the helmet onto my bed, fell down onto my bed and realized inside there was an inscription.
(Laughter) Now, I think that this is a great metaphor for the state of architecture and architects today.
We are for decorative purposes only.
(Laughter) Now, who do we have to blame?
We can only blame ourselves. Over the last 50 years the design and construction industry has gotten much more complex and has gotten much more litigious.
And we architects are cowards.
So, as we have faced liability, we have stepped back and back, and unfortunately, where there is liability, guess what there is: power.
So, eventually we have found ourselves in a totally marginalized position, way over here.
Now, what did we do? We're cowards, but we're smart cowards.
And so we redefined this marginalized position as the place of architecture.
And we announced, "Hey, architecture, it's over here, in this autonomous language we're going to seed control of processes."
And we were going to do something that was horrible for the profession.
We actually created an artificial schism between creation and execution, as if you could actually create without knowing how to execute and as if you could actually execute without knowing how to create.
Now, something else happened.
And that's when we began to sell the world that architecture was created by individuals creating genius sketches.
And that the incredible amount of effort to deliver those sketches for years and years and years is not only something to be derided, but we would merely write it off as merely execution.
Now I'd argue that that is as absurd as stating that 30 minutes of copulation is the creative act, and nine months of gestation, and, God forbid, 24 hours of child labor is merely execution.
So, what do we architects need to do? We need to stitch back creation and execution.
And we need to start authoring processes again instead of authoring objects.
Now, if we do this, I believe we can go back 50 years and start reinjecting agency, social engineering, back into architecture.
Now, there are all kinds of things that we architects need to learn how to do, like managing contracts, learning how to write contracts, understanding procurement processes, understanding the time value of money and cost estimation.
But I'm going to reduce this to the beginning of the process, into three very pedantic statements.
The first is: Take core positions with your client.
I know it's shocking, right, that architecture would actually say that.
The second position is: Actually take positions.
Take joint positions with your client.
This is the moment in which you as the architect and your client can begin to inject vision and agency.
But it has to be done together.
And then only after this is done are you allowed to do this, begin to put forward architectural manifestations that manifest those positions.
And both owner and architect alike are empowered to critique those manifestations based on the positions that you've taken.
Now, I believe that one really amazing thing will happen if you do this.
I'd like to call it the lost art of productively losing control.
You do not know what the end result is.
But I promise you, with enough brain power and enough passion and enough commitment, you will arrive at conclusions that will transcend convention, and will simply be something that you could not have initially or individually conceived of.
Alright, now I'm going to reduce all of this to a series of simple dumb sketches.
This is the modus operandi that we have today.
We roll 120-foot Spartan, i.e. our vision, up to our clients' gates of Troy.
And we don't understand why they won't let us in. Right?
Well, how about instead of doing that, we roll up to the gates something they want.
Now this is a little bit of a dangerous metaphor, because of course we all know that inside of the Trojan Horse were a bunch of people with spears.
So, we can change the metaphor. Let's call the Trojan Horse the vessel by which you get through the gate, get through the constraints of a project.
At which point, you and your client have the ability to start considering what you're going to put inside that vessel, the agency, the vision.
And if you do that, you do that responsibly, I believe that instead of delivering Spartans, you can deliver maidens.
And if I could summarize that all up into one single sketch it would be this.
If we are so good at our craft shouldn't we be able to conceive of an architectural manifestation that slides seamlessly through the project's and the client's constraints?
Now, with that in mind, I'm going to show a project that's very dear to many people in this room-- well, maybe not dear, but certainly close to many people in this room.
And that's a project that is just about to open next week, the new home for the Dallas Theater Center, the Dee and Charles Wyly Theatre.
Now, I'm going to present it on the same terms: issue, position and architectural manifestation.
Now, the first issue that we faced was that the Dallas Theater Center had a notoriety that was beyond what you would expect of some place outside of the triumvirate of New York, Chicago and Seattle.
And this had to do with the ambitions of the leadership.
But it also had to do with something rather unusual, and that was this horrible little building that they'd been performing in.
Why was this horrible little building so important to their renown and their innovation?
Because they could do whatever they wanted to to this building.
When you're on Broadway, you cannot tear the proscenium down.
This building, when an artistic director wanted to do a "Cherry Orchard" and wanted people and wanted people to come out of a well on the stage, they brought a backhoe in, and they simply dug the hole.
Well, that's exciting.
And you can start to get the best artistic directors, scenic designers and actors from around the country to come to perform here because you can do things you can't do elsewhere.
So, the first position we took was, "Hey, we as architects had better not show up and do a pristine building that doesn't engender the same freedoms that this old dilapidated shed provided the company."
The second issue is a nuance of the first.
And that's that the company and the building was multiform.
That meant that they were able to perform, as long as they had labor they were able to go between proscenium, thrust, flat floor, arena, traverse, you name it.
All they needed was labor.
Well, something happened. In fact something happened to all institutions around the world.
It started to become hard to raise operational costs, operational budgets.
So, they stopped having inexpensive labor.
And eventually they had to freeze their organization into something called a bastardized thruscenium.
So, the second position we took is that the freedoms that we provided, the ability to move between stage configurations, had better be able to be done without relying on operational costs. Alright? Affordably.
The architectural manifestation was frankly just dumb.
It was to take all the things that are known as front of house and back of house and redefine them as above house and below house.
At first blush you think, "Hey it's crazy, what could you possibly gain?"
We created what we like to call superfly.
(Laughter) Now, superfly, the concept is you take all the freedoms you normally associate with the flytower, and you smear them across flytower and auditorium.
Suddenly the artistic director can move between different stage and audience configurations.
And because that flytower has the ability to pick up all the pristine elements, suddenly the rest of the environment can be provisional. And you can drill, cut, nail, screw paint and replace, with a minimum of cost.
But there was a third advantage that we got by doing this move that was unexpected.
And that was that it freed up the perimeter of the auditorium in a most unusual way.
And that provided the artistic director suddenly the ability to define suspension of disbelief.
So, the building affords artistic directors the freedom to conceive of almost any kind of activity underneath this floating object.
But also to challenge the notion of suspension of disbelief such that in the last act of Macbeth, if he or she wants you to associate the parable that you're seeing with Dallas, with your real life, he or she can do so.
Now, in order to do this we and the clients had to do something fairly remarkable.
In fact it really was the clients who had to do it.
They had to make a decision, based on the positions we took to redefine the budget being from two thirds capital-A architecture and one-third infrastructure, to actually the inverse, two-thirds infrastructure and one-third capital-A architecture.
That's a lot for a client to commit to before you actually see the fruition of the concept.
But based on the positions, they took the educated leap of faith to do so.
And effectively we created what we like to call a theater machine.
Now, that theater machine has ability to move between a whole series of configurations at the push of a button and a few stagehands in a short amount of time.
But it also has the potential to not only provide multiform but multi-processional sequences.
Meaning: The artistic director doesn't necessarily need to go through our lobby.
One of the things that we learned when we visited various theaters is they hate us architects, because they say the first thing they have to do, the first five minutes of any show, is they have to get our architecture out of the mind of their patron.
Well now there are potentials of this building to allow the artistic director to actually move into the building without using our architecture.
So, in fact, there is the building, there is what we call the draw.
You're going down into our lobby, go through the lobby with our own little dangly bits, whether you like them or not, up through the stair that leads you into the auditorium.
But there is also the potential to allow people to move directly from the outside, in this case suggesting kind of Wagnerian entrance, into the interior of the auditorium.
And here is the fruition of that in actuality.
These are the two large pivoting doors that allow people to move directly from the outside, in or from the inside, out, performers or audience alike.
Now, imagine what that could be. I have to say honestly this is not something yet the building can do because it takes too long.
But imagine the freedoms if you could take this further, that in fact you could consider a Wagnerian entry, a first act in thrust, an intermission in Greek, a second act in arena, and you leave through our lobby with dangly bits.
Now that, I would say, is architecture performing.
It is taking the hand of the architect to actually remove the hand of the architect in favor of the hand of the artistic director.
I'll go through the three basic configurations.
This is the flat floor configuration.
You notice that there is no proscenium, the balconies have been raised up, there are no seats, the floor in the auditorium is flat.
The first configuration is easy to understand.
The balconies come down, you see that the orchestra begins to have a rake that's frontal towards the end stage, and the seats come in.
The third configuration is a little harder to understand.
Here you see that the balconies actually have to move out of the way in order to bring a thrust into the space.
And some of the seats need to actually change their direction, and change their rake, to allow that to happen.
I'll do it again so you can see it.
There you see it's the side balconies for the proscenium.
And there it is in the thrust configuration.
In order to do that, again, we needed a client who was willing to take educational risks.
And they told us one important thing: "You shall not beta-test."
Meaning, nothing that we do can we be the first ones to do it.
But they were willing for us to apply technologies from other areas that already had failsafe mechanisms to this building.
And the solution in terms of the balconies was to use something that we all know as a scoreboard lift.
Now, if you were to take a scoreboard and drop it on dirt and whiskey, that would be bad.
If you were not able to take the scoreboard out of the arena and be able to do the Ice Capades the next night, that would also be bad.
And so this technology already had all the failsafe mechanisms and allowed the theater and our client to actually do this with confidence that they would be able to change over their configurations at will.
The second technology that we applied was actually using things that you know from the stage side of an opera house.
In this case what we're doing is we're taking the orchestra floor, lifting it up, spinning it, changing the rake, taking it back to flat floor, changing the rake again. In essence, you can begin to define rakes and viewing angles of people in the orchestra seating, at will.
Here you see the chairs being spun around to go from proscenium or end stage to thrust configuration.
The proscenium, also. As far as we know this is the first building in the world in which the proscenium can entirely fly out of the space.
Here you see the various acoustic baffles as well as the flying mechanisms and catwalks over the auditorium.
And ultimately, up in the flytower, the scene sets that allow the transformations to occur.
As I said, all that was in service of creating a flexible yet affordable configuration.
But we got this other benefit, and that was the ability of the perimeter to suddenly engage Dallas on the outside.
Here you see the building in its current state with blinds closed. This is a trompe l'oeil.
Actually this is not a curtain. These are vinyl blinds that are integrated into the windows themselves, again with failsafe mechanisms that can be lifted such that you can completely demystify, if you chose, the operations of the theater going on behind, rehearsals and so forth.
But you also have the ability to allow the audience to see Dallas, to perform with Dallas as the backdrop of your performance.
Now, if I'll take you through -- this is an early concept sketch -- take you through kind of a mixture of all these things together.
Effectively you would have something like this.
You would be allowed to bring objects or performers into the performing chamber: "Aida," their elephants, you can bring the elephants in.
You would be able to expose the auditorium to Dallas or vice versa, Dallas to the auditorium.
You'd be able to open portions in order to change the procession, allow people to come in and out for an intermission, or to enter for the beginning or the end of a performance.
As I said, all the balconies can move, but they can also be disappeared completely.
The proscenium can fly.
You can bring large objects into the chamber itself.
But most convincingly when we had to confront the idea of changing costs from architecture to infrastructure, is something that is represented by this.
And again, this is not all the flexibilities of the building that is actually built, but at least suggests the ideas.
This building has the ability, in short order, to go back to a flat floor organization such that they can rent it out.
Now, if there is anyone here from American Airlines, please consider doing your Christmas party here.
(Laughter) That allows the company to raise operational budgets without having to compete with other venues with much larger auditoriums.
That's an enormous benefit.
So, the theater company has the ability to do totally hermetic, light-controlled, sound-controlled, great acoustics, great intimacy Shakespeare, but can also do Beckett with the skyline of Dallas sitting behind it.
Here it is in a flat floor configuration.
The theater has been going through its kind of paces.
Here it is in an end stage configuration.
It's actually beautiful. There was a rock band.
We stood outside trying to see if the acoustics worked, and you could see the guys doing this but you couldn't hear them.
It was very unusual.
Here it is in a thrust configuration.
And last but not least, you see this already has the ability to create events in order to generate operational budgets to overcome the building in fact performing to allow the company to overcome their biggest problem.
I'm going to show you a brief time lapse.
As I said, this can be done with only two people, and with a minimum amount of time.
This is the first time that actually the changeover was done and so there is literally thousands of people because everyone was excited and wanted to be a part of it.
So, in a way try to disregard all the thousands of ants running around.
And think of it being done with just a few people.
Again, just a couple people are required.
(Laughter) I promise.
Et voila.
(Applause) So, just in conclusion, a few shots.
This is the AT&amp;T Performing Arts Center's Dee and Charles Wyly Theater.
There it is at night.
And last but not least the entire AT&amp;T Performing Arts Center.
You can see the Winspear Opera House on the right and the Dee and Charles Wyly Theater on the left.
And to remind you that here is an example in which architecture actually did something.
But we got to that conclusion without understanding where we were going, what we knew were a series of issues that the company and the client was confronted with.
And we took positions with them, and it was through those positions that we began to take architectural manifestations and we arrived at a conclusion that none of us, really none of us could ever have conceived of initially or individually.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Namaste. Good morning.
I'm very happy to be here in India.
And I've been thinking a lot about what I have learned over these last particularly 11 years with V-Day and "The Vagina Monologues," traveling the world, essentially meeting with women and girls across the planet to stop violence against women.
What I want to talk about today is this particular cell, or grouping of cells, that is in each and every one of us.
And I want to call it the girl cell.
And it's in men as well as in women.
I want you to imagine that this particular grouping of cells is central to the evolution of our species and the continuation of the human race.
And I want you imagine that at some point in history a group of powerful people invested in owning and controlling the world understood that the suppression of this particular cell, the oppression of these cells, the reinterpretation of these cells, the undermining of these cells, getting us to believe in the weakness of these cells and the crushing, eradicating, destroying, reducing these cells, basically began the process of killing off the girl cell, which was, by the way, patriarchy.
I want you to imagine that the girl is a chip in the huge macrocosm of collective consciousness.
And it is essential to balance, to wisdom and to actually the future of all of us.
And then I want you to imagine that this girl cell is compassion, and it's empathy, and it's passion itself, and it's vulnerability, and it's openness, and it's intensity, and it's association, and it's relationship, and it is intuitive.
And then let's think how compassion informs wisdom, and that vulnerability is our greatest strength, and that emotions have inherent logic, which lead to radical, appropriate, saving action.
And then let's remember that we've been taught the exact opposite by the powers that be, that compassion clouds your thinking, that it gets in the way, that vulnerability is weakness, that emotions are not to be trusted, and you're not supposed to take things personally, which is one of my favorites.
I think the whole world has essentially been brought up not to be a girl.
How do we bring up boys? What does it mean to be a boy?
To be a boy really means not to be a girl.
To be a man means not to be a girl.
To be a woman means not to be a girl.
To be strong means not to be a girl.
To be a leader means not to be a girl.
I actually think that being a girl is so powerful that we've had to train everyone not to be that.
(Laughter) And I'd also like to say that the irony of course, is that denying girl, suppressing girl, suppressing emotion, refusing feeling has lead thus here.
Where we have now come to live in a world where the most extreme forms of violence, the most horrific poverty, genocide, mass rapes, the destruction of the Earth, is completely out of control.
And because we have suppressed our girl cells and suppressed our girl-ship, we do not feel what is going on.
So, we are not being charged with the adequate response to what is happening.
I want to talk a little bit about the Democratic Republic of Congo.
For me, it was the turning point of my life.
I have spent a lot of time there in the last three years.
I feel up to that point I had seen a lot in the world, a lot of violence.
I essentially lived in the rape mines of the world for the last 12 years.
But the Democratic Republic of Congo really was the turning point in my soul.
I went and I spent time in a place called Bukavu in a hospital called the Panzi Hospital, with a doctor who was as close to a saint as any person I've ever met.
His name is Dr. Denis Mukwege.
In the Congo, for those of you who don't know, there has been a war raging for the last 12 years, a war that has killed nearly six million people.
It is estimated that somewhere between 300,000 and 500,000 women have been raped there.
When I spent my first weeks at Panzi hospital I sat with women who sat and lined up every day to tell me their stories.
Their stories were so horrific, and so mind-blowing and so on the other side of human existence, that to be perfectly honest with you, I was shattered.
And I will tell you that what happened is through that shattering, listening to the stories of eight-year-old girls who had their insides eviscerated, who had guns and bayonets and things shoved inside them so they had holes, literally, inside them where their pee and poop came out of them.
Listening to the story of 80-year-old women who were tied to chains and circled, and where groups of men would come and rape them periodically, all in the name of economic exploitation to steal the minerals so the West can have it and profit from them.
My mind was so shattered.
But what happened for me is that that shattering actually emboldened me in a way I have never been emboldened.
That shattering, that opening of my girl cell, that kind of massive breakthrough of my heart allowed me to become more courageous, and braver, and actually more clever than I had been in the past in my life.
I want to say that I think the powers that be know that empire-building is actually -- that feelings get in the way of empire-building.
Feelings get in the way of the mass acquisition of the Earth, and excavating the Earth, and destroying things.
I remember, for example, when my father, who was very, very violent, used to beat me.
And he would actually say, while he was beating me, "Don't you cry. Don't you dare cry."
Because my crying somehow exposed his brutality to him.
And even in the moment he didn't want to be reminded of what he was doing.
I know that we have systematically annihilated the girl cell.
And I want to say we've annihilated it in men as well as in women.
And I think in some ways we've been much harsher to men in the annihilation of their girl cell.
(Applause) I see how boys have been brought up, and I see this across the planet: to be tough, to be hardened, to distance themselves from their tenderness, to not cry.
I actually realized once in Kosovo, when I watched a man break down, that bullets are actually hardened tears, that when we don't allow men to have their girl self and have their vulnerability, and have their compassion, and have their hearts, that they become hardened and hurtful and violent.
And I think we have taught men to be secure when they are insecure, to pretend they know things when they don't know things, or why would we be where we are?
To pretend they're not a mess when they are a mess.
And I will tell you a very funny story.
On my way here on the airplane, I was walking up and down the aisle of the plane.
And all these men, literally at least 10 men, were in their little seats watching chick flicks.
And they were all alone, and I thought, "This is the secret life of men."
(Laughter) I've traveled, as I said, to many, many countries, and I've seen, if we do what we do to the girl inside us then obviously it's horrific to think what we do to girls in the world.
And we heard from Sunitha yesterday, and Kavita about what we do to girls.
But I just want to say that I've met girls with knife wounds and cigarette burns, who are literally being treated like ashtrays.
I've seen girls be treated like garbage cans.
I've seen girls who were beaten by their mothers and brothers and fathers and uncles.
I've seen girls starving themselves to death in America in institutions to look like some idealized version of themselves.
I've seen that we cut girls and we control them and we keep them illiterate, or we make them feel bad about being too smart.
We silence them. We make them feel guilty for being smart. We get them to behave, to tone it down, not to be too intense.
We sell them, we kill them as embryos, we enslave them, we rape them.
We are so accustomed to robbing girls of the subject of being the subjects of their lives that we have now actually objectified them and turned them into commodities.
The selling of girls is rampant across the planet.
And in many places they are worth less than goats and cows.
But I also want to talk about the fact that if one in eight people on the planet are girls between the ages of 10 to 24, they are they key, really, in the developing world, as well as in the whole world, to the future of humanity.
And if girls are in trouble because they face systematic disadvantages that keep them where society wants them to be, including lack of access to healthcare, education, healthy foods, labor force participation.
The burden of all the household tasks usually falls on girls and younger siblings, which ensures that they will never overcome these barriers.
The state of girls, the condition of girls, will, in my belief -- and that's the girl inside us and the girl in the world -- determine whether the species survives.
And what I want to suggest is that, having talked to girls, because I just finished a new book called "I Am an Emotional Creature: The Secret Life of Girls Around the World," I've been talking to girls for five years, and one of the things that I've seen is true everywhere is that the verb that's been enforced on girl is the verb "to please."
Girls are trained to please.
I want to change the verb.
I want us all to change the verb.
I want the verb to be "educate," or "activate," or "engage," or "confront," or "defy," or "create."
If we teach girls to change the verb we will actually enforce the girl inside us and the girl inside them.
And I have to now share a few stories of girls I've seen across the planet who have engaged their girl, who have taken on their girl in spite of all the circumstances around them.
I know a 14-year-old girl in the Netherlands, for example, who is demanding that she take a boat and go around the entire world by herself.
There is a teenage girl who just recently went out and knew that she needed 56 stars tattooed on the right side of her face.
There is a girl, Julia Butterfly Hill, who lived for a year in a tree because she wanted to protect the wild oaks.
There is a girl who I met 14 years ago in Afghanistan who I have adopted as my daughter because her mother was killed. Her mother was a revolutionary.
And this girl, when she was 17 years old, wore a burqa in Afghanistan, and went into the stadiums and documented the atrocities that were going on towards women, underneath her burqa, with a video.
And that video became the video that went out all over the world after 9/11 to show what was going on in Afghanistan.
I want to talk about Rachel Corrie who was in her teens when she stood in front of an Israeli tank to say, "End the occupation."
And she knew she risked death and she was literally gunned down and rolled over by that tank.
And I want to talk about a girl that I just met recently in Bukavu, who was impregnated by her rapist.
And she was holding her baby.
And I asked her if she loved her baby.
And she looked into her baby's eyes and she said, "Of course I love my baby. How could I not love my baby?
It's my baby and it's full of love."
The capacity for girls to overcome situations and to move on levels, to me, is mind-blowing.
There is a girl named Dorcas, and I just met her in Kenya.
Dorcas is 15 years old, and she was trained in self-defense.
A few months ago she was picked up on the street by three older men.
They kidnapped her, they put her in a car.
And through her self-defense, she grabbed their Adam's apples, she punched them in the eyes and she got herself free and out of the car.
In Kenya, in August, I went to visit one of the V-Day safe houses for girls, a house we opened seven years ago with an amazing woman named Agnes Pareyio.
Agnes was a woman who was cut when she was a little girl, she was female genitally mutilated.
And she made a decision as many women do across this planet, that what was done to her would not be enforced and done to other women and girls.
So, for years Agnes walked through the Rift valley.
She taught girls what a healthy vagina looked like, and what a mutilated vagina looked like.
And in that time she saved many girls. And when we met her we asked her what we could do for her, and she said, "Well, if you got me a Jeep I could get around a lot faster."
So, we got her a Jeep. And then she saved 4,500 girls.
And then we asked her, "Okay, what else do you need?"
And she said, "Well, now, I need a house."
So, seven years ago Agnes built the first V-Day safe house in Narok, Kenya, in the Masai land.
And it was a house where girls could run away, they could save their clitoris, they wouldn't be cut, they could go to school.
And in the years that Agnes has had the house, she has changed the situation there.
She has literally become deputy mayor.
She's changed the rules.
The whole community has bought in to what she's doing.
When we were there she was doing a ritual where she reconciles girls, who have run away, with their families.
And there was a young girl named Jaclyn.
Jaclyn was 14 years old and she was in her Masai family and there's a drought in Kenya.
So cows are dying, and cows are the most valued possession.
And Jaclyn overheard her father talking to an old man about how he was about to sell her for the cows.
And she knew that meant she would be cut.
She knew that meant she wouldn't go to school.
She knew that meant she wouldn't have a future.
She knew she would have to marry that old man, and she was 14.
So, one afternoon, she'd heard about the safe house, Jaclyn left her father's house and she walked for two days, two days through Masai land.
She slept with the hyenas. She hid at night.
She imagined her father killing her on one hand, and Mama Agnes greeting her, with the hope that she would greet her when she got to the house.
And when she got to the house she was greeted.
Agnes took her in, and Agnes loved her, and Agnes supported her for the year.
She went to school and she found her voice, and she found her identity, and she found her heart.
Then, her time was ready when she had to go back to talk to her father about the reconciliation, after a year.
I had the privilege of being in the hut when she was reunited with her father and reconciled.
In that hut, we walked in, and her father and his four wives were sitting there, and her sisters who had just returned because they had all fled when she had fled, and her primary mother, who had been beaten in standing up for her with the elders.
When her father saw her and saw who she had become, in her full girl self, he threw his arms around her and broke down crying.
He said, "You are beautiful. You have grown into a gorgeous woman.
We will not cut you.
And I give you my word, here and now, that we will not cut your sisters either."
And what she said to him was, "You were willing to sell me for four cows, and a calf and some blankets.
But I promise you, now that I will be educated I will always take care of you, and I will come back and I will build you a house.
And I will be in your corner for the rest of your life."
For me, that is the power of girls.
And that is the power of transformation.
I want to close today with a new piece from my book.
And I want to do it tonight for the girl in everybody here.
And I want to do it for Sunitha.
And I want to do it for the girls that Sunitha talked about yesterday, the girls who survive, the girls who can become somebody else.
But I really want to do it for each and every person here, to value the girl in us, to value the part that cries, to value the part that's emotional, to value the part that's vulnerable, to understand that's where the future lies.
This is called "I'm An Emotional Creature."
And it happened because I met a girl in Watts, L.A.
I was asking girls if they like being a girl, and all the girls were like, "No, I hate it. I can't stand it.
It's all bad. My brothers get everything."
And this girl just sat up and went, "I love being a girl.
I'm an emotional creature!"
(Laughter) This is for her: I love being a girl.
I can feel what you're feeling as you're feeling inside the feeling before.
I am an emotional creature.
Things do not come to me as intellectual theories or hard-pressed ideas.
They pulse through my organs and legs and burn up my ears.
Oh, I know when your girlfriend's really pissed off, even though she appears to give you what you want.
I know when a storm is coming.
I can feel the invisible stirrings in the air.
I can tell you he won't call back. It's a vibe I share.
I am an emotional creature.
I love that I do not take things lightly.
Everything is intense to me, the way I walk in the street, the way my momma wakes me up, the way it's unbearable when I lose, the way I hear bad news.
I am an emotional creature.
I am connected to everything and everyone. I was born like that.
Don't you say all negative that it's only only a teenage thing, or it's only because I'm a girl.
These feelings make me better.
They make me present. They make me ready. They make me strong.
I am an emotional creature.
There is a particular way of knowing.
It's like the older women somehow forgot.
I rejoice that it's still in my body.
Oh, I know when the coconut's about to fall.
I know we have pushed the Earth too far.
I know my father isn't coming back, and that no one's prepared for the fire.
I know that lipstick means more than show, and boys are super insecure, and so-called terrorists are made, not born.
I know that one kiss could take away all my decision-making ability.
(Laughter) And you know what? Sometimes it should.
This is not extreme. It's a girl thing, what we would all be if the big door inside us flew open.
Don't tell me not to cry, to calm it down, not to be so extreme, to be reasonable.
I am an emotional creature.
It's how the earth got made, how the wind continues to pollinate.
You don't tell the Atlantic Ocean to behave.
I am an emotional creature.
Why would you want to shut me down or turn me off?
I am your remaining memory.
I can take you back.
Nothing's been diluted.
Nothing's leaked out.
I love, hear me, I love that I can feel the feelings inside you, even if they stop my life, even if they break my heart, even if they take me off track, they make me responsible.
I am an emotional, I am an emotional, incondotional, devotional creature.
And I love, hear me, I love, love, love being a girl.
Can you say it with me?
I love, I love, love, love being a girl!
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Please close your eyes, and open your hands.
Now imagine what you could place in your hands: an apple, maybe your wallet.
Now open your eyes.
What about a life?
What you see here is a premature baby.
He looks like he's resting peacefully, but in fact he's struggling to stay alive because he can't regulate his own body temperature.
This baby is so tiny he doesn't have enough fat on his body to stay warm.
Sadly, 20 million babies like this are born every year around the world.
Four million of these babies die annually.
But the bigger problem is that the ones who do survive grow up with severe, long-term health problems.
The reason is because in the first month of a baby's life, its only job is to grow.
If it's battling hypothermia, its organs can't develop normally, resulting in a range of health problems from diabetes, to heart disease, to low I.Q.
Imagine: Many of these problems could be prevented if these babies were just kept warm.
That is the primary function of an incubator.
But traditional incubators require electricity and cost up to 20 thousand dollars.
So, you're not going to find them in rural areas of developing countries.
As a result, parents resort to local solutions like tying hot water bottles around their babies' bodies, or placing them under light bulbs like the ones you see here -- methods that are both ineffective and unsafe.
I've seen this firsthand over and over again.
On one of my first trips to India, I met this young woman, Sevitha, who had just given birth to a tiny premature baby, Rani.
She took her baby to the nearest village clinic, and the doctor advised her to take Rani to a city hospital so she could be placed in an incubator.
But that hospital was over four hours away, and Sevitha didn't have the means to get there, so her baby died.
Inspired by this story, and dozens of other similar stories like this, my team and I realized what was needed was a local solution, something that could work without electricity, that was simple enough for a mother or a midwife to use, given that the majority of births still take place in the home.
We needed something that was portable, something that could be sterilized and reused across multiple babies and something ultra-low-cost, compared to the 20,000 dollars that an incubator in the U.S. costs.
So, this is what we came up with.
What you see here looks nothing like an incubator.
It looks like a small sleeping bag for a baby.
You can open it up completely. It's waterproof.
There's no seams inside so you can sterilize it very easily.
But the magic is in this pouch of wax.
It's a wax-like substance with a melting point of human body temperature, 37 degrees Celsius.
You can melt this simply using hot water and then when it melts it's able to maintain one constant temperature for four to six hours at a time, after which you simply reheat the pouch.
So, you then place it into this little pocket back here, and it creates a warm micro-environment for the baby.
Looks simple, but we've reiterated this dozens of times by going into the field to talk to doctors, moms and clinicians to ensure that this really meets the needs of the local communities.
We plan to launch this product in India in 2010, and the target price point will be 25 dollars, less than 0.1 percent of the cost of a traditional incubator.
Over the next five years we hope to save the lives of almost a million babies.
But the longer-term social impact is a reduction in population growth.
This seems counterintuitive, but turns out that as infant mortality is reduced, population sizes also decrease, because parents don't need to anticipate that their babies are going to die.
We hope that the Embrace infant warmer and other simple innovations like this represent a new trend for the future of technology: simple, localized, affordable solutions that have the potential to make huge social impact.
In designing this we followed a few basic principles.
We really tried to understand the end user, in this case, people like Sevitha.
We tried to understand the root of the problem rather than being biased by what already exists.
And then we thought of the most simple solution we could to address this problem.
In doing this, I believe we can truly bring technology to the masses.
And we can save millions of lives through the simple warmth of an Embrace.
So, imagine you're standing on a street anywhere in America and a Japanese man comes up to you and says, "Excuse me, what is the name of this block?"
And you say, "I'm sorry, well, this is Oak Street, that's Elm Street.
This is 26th, that's 27th."
He says, "OK, but what is the name of that block?"
You say, "Well, blocks don't have names.
Streets have names; blocks are just the unnamed spaces in between streets."
He leaves, a little confused and disappointed.
So, now imagine you're standing on a street, anywhere in Japan, you turn to a person next to you and say, "Excuse me, what is the name of this street?"
They say, "Oh, well that's Block 17 and this is Block 16."
And you say, "OK, but what is the name of this street?"
And they say, "Well, streets don't have names.
Blocks have names.
Just look at Google Maps here. There's Block 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
All of these blocks have names, and the streets are just the unnamed spaces in between the blocks.
And you say then, "OK, then how do you know your home address?"
He said, "Well, easy, this is District Eight.
There's Block 17, house number one."
You say, "OK, but walking around the neighborhood, I noticed that the house numbers don't go in order."
He says, "Of course they do. They go in the order in which they were built.
The first house ever built on a block is house number one.
The second house ever built is house number two.
Third is house number three. It's easy. It's obvious."
So, I love that sometimes we need to go to the opposite side of the world to realize assumptions we didn't even know we had, and realize that the opposite of them may also be true.
So, for example, there are doctors in China who believe that it's their job to keep you healthy.
So, any month you are healthy you pay them, and when you're sick you don't have to pay them because they failed at their job. They get rich when you're healthy, not sick.
(Applause) In most music, we think of the "one" as the downbeat, the beginning of the musical phrase: one, two, three, four.
But in West African music, the "one" is thought of as the end of the phrase, like the period at the end of a sentence.
So, you can hear it not just in the phrasing, but the way they count off their music: two, three, four, one.
And this map is also accurate.
(Laughter) There's a saying that whatever true thing you can say about India, the opposite is also true.
So, let's never forget, whether at TED, or anywhere else, that whatever brilliant ideas you have or hear, that the opposite may also be true.
Domo arigato gozaimashita.
As a researcher, every once in a while you encounter something a little disconcerting.
And this is something that changes your understanding of the world around you, and teaches you that you're very wrong about something that you really believed firmly in.
And these are unfortunate moments, because you go to sleep that night dumber than when you woke up.
So, that's really the goal of my talk, is to A, communicate that moment to you and B, have you leave this session a little dumber than when you entered.
So, I hope I can really accomplish that.
So, this incident that I'm going to describe really began with some diarrhea.
Now, we've known for a long time the cause of diarrhea.
That's why there's a glass of water up there.
For us, it's a problem, the people in this room.
For babies, it's deadly.
They lack nutrients, and diarrhea dehydrates them.
And so, as a result, there is a lot of death, a lot of death.
In India in 1960, there was a 24 percent child mortality rate, lots of people didn't make it. This is incredibly unfortunate.
One of the big reasons this happened was because of diarrhea.
Now, there was a big effort to solve this problem, and there was actually a big solution.
This solution has been called, by some, "potentially the most important medical advance this century."
Now, the solution turned out to be simple.
And what it was was oral rehydration salts.
Many of you have probably used this.
It's brilliant. It's a way to get sodium and glucose together so that when you add it to water the child is able to absorb it even during situations of diarrhea.
Remarkable impact on mortality.
Massive solution to the problem.
Flash forward: 1960, 24 percent child mortality has dropped to 6.5 percent today.
Still a big number, but a big drop.
It looks like the technological problem is solved.
But if you look, even today there are about 400,000 diarrhea-related deaths in India alone.
What's going on here?
Well the easy answer is, we just haven't gotten those salts to those people.
That's actually not true.
If you look in areas where these salts are completely available, the price is low or zero, these deaths still continue abated.
Maybe there's a biological answer.
Maybe these are the deaths that simple rehydration alone doesn't solve. That's not true either.
Many of these deaths were completely preventable, and this what I want to think of as the disconcerting thing, what I want to call "the last mile" problem.
See, we spent a lot of energy, in many domains -- technological, scientific, hard work, creativity, human ingenuity -- to crack important social problems with technology solutions.
That's been the discoveries of the last 2,000 years, that's mankind moving forward.
But in this case we cracked it, but a big part of the problem still remains.
Nine hundred and ninety-nine miles went well, the last mile's proving incredibly stubborn.
Now, that's for oral rehydration therapy.
Maybe this is something unique about diarrhea.
Well, it turns out -- and this is where things get really disconcerting -- it's not unique to diarrhea.
It's not even unique to poor people in India.
Here's an example from a variety of contexts.
I've put a bunch of examples up here.
I'll start with insulin, diabetes medication in the U.S.
OK, the American population.
On Medicaid -- if you're fairly poor you get Medicaid, or if you have health insurance -- insulin is pretty straightforward.
You get it, either in pill form or you get it as an injection; you have to take it every day to maintain your blood sugar levels.
Massive technological advance: took an incredibly deadly disease, made it solvable.
Adherence rates. How many people are taking their insulin every day?
About on average, a typical person is taking it 75 percent of the time.
As a result, 25,000 people a year go blind, hundreds of thousands lose limbs, every year, for something that's solvable.
Here I have a bunch of other examples, all suffer from the last mile problem.
It's not just medicine.
Here's another example from technology: agriculture. We think there's a food problem, so we create new seeds.
We think there's an income problem, so we create new ways of farming that increase income.
Well, look at some old ways, some ways that we'd already cracked.
Intercropping. Intercropping really increases income.
Sometimes in rice we found incredible increases in yield when you mix different varieties of rice side by side.
Some people are doing that, many are not. What's going on?
This is the last mile.
The last mile is, everywhere, problematic.
Alright, what's the problem?
The problem is this little three-pound machine that's behind your eyes and between your ears.
This machine is really strange, and one of the consequences is that people are weird.
They do lots of inconsistent things.
(Applause) They do lots of inconsistent things.
And the inconsistencies create, fundamentally, this last mile problem.
See, when we were dealing with our biology, bacteria, the genes, the things inside here, the blood?
That's complex, but it's manageable.
When we're dealing with people like this?
The mind is more complex.
That's not as manageable, and that's what we're struggling with.
Let me go back to diarrhea for a second.
Here's a question that was asked in the National Sample Survey, which is a survey asked of many Indian women: "Your child has diarrhea.
Should you increase, maintain or decrease the number of fluids?"
Just so you don't embarrass yourselves, I'll give you the right answer: It's increase.
Now, diarrhea's interesting because it's been around for thousands of years, ever since humankind really lived side by side enough to have really polluted water.
One Roman strategy that was very interesting was that -- and it really gave them a comparative advantage -- they made sure their soldiers didn't drink even remotely muddied waters.
Because if some of your troops get diarrhea they're not that effective on the battlefield.
So, if you think of Roman comparative advantage part of it was the breast shields, the breastplates, but part of it was drinking the right water.
So, here are these women. They've seen their parents have struggled with diarrhea, they've struggled with diarrhea, they've seen lots of deaths. How do they answer this question?
In India, 35 to 50 percent say "Reduce."
Think about what that means for a second.
Thirty-five to 50 percent of women forget oral rehydration therapy, they are increasing -- they are actually making their child more likely to die through their actions.
How is that possible?
Well, one possibility -- I think that's how most people respond to this -- is to say, "That's just stupid."
I don't think that's stupid.
I think there is something very profoundly right in what these women are doing.
And that is, you don't put water into a leaky bucket.
So, think of the mental model that goes behind reducing the intake.
Just doesn't make sense.
Now, the model is intuitively right.
It just doesn't happen to be right about the world.
But it makes a whole lot of sense at some deep level.
And that, to me, is the fundamental challenge of the last mile.
This first challenge is what I refer to as the persuasion challenge.
Convincing people to do something -- take oral rehydration therapy, intercrop, whatever it might be -- is not an act of information: "Let's give them the data, and when they have data they'll do the right thing."
It's more complex than that.
And if you want to understand how it's more complex let me start with something kind of interesting.
I'm going to give you a little math problem, and I want you to just yell out the answer as fast as possible.
A bat and a ball together cost $1.10.
The bat costs a dollar more than the ball.
How much does the ball cost? Quick.
So, somebody out there says, "Five."
A lot of you said, "Ten."
Let's think about 10 for a second.
If the ball costs 10, the bat costs...
this is easy, $1.10.
Yeah. So, together they would cost $1.20.
So, here you all are, ostensibly educated people.
Most of you look smart.
The combination of that produces something that is actually, you got this thing wrong.
How is that possible? Let's go to something else.
I know algebra can be complicated.
So, let's dial this back. That's what? Fifth grade? Fourth grade?
Let's go back to kindergarten. OK?
There's a great show on American television that you have to watch.
It's called "Are You Smarter Than a Fifth Grader?"
I think we've learned the answer to that here.
Let's move to kindergarten. Let's see if we can beat five-year-olds.
Here's what I'm going to do: I'm going to put objects on the screen.
I just want you to name the color of the object.
That's all it is. OK?
I want you to do it fast, and say it out loud with me, and do it quickly. I'll make the first one easy for you.
Ready? Black.
Now the next ones I want you to do quickly and say it out loud.
Ready? Go.
Audience: Red. Green.
Yellow. Blue. Red.
(Laughter) Sendhil Mullainathan: That's pretty good.
Almost out of kindergarten.
What is all this telling us?
You see, what's going on here, and in the bat and ball problem is that you have some intuitive ways of interacting with the world, some models that you use to understand the world.
These models, like the leaky bucket, work well in most situations.
I suspect most of you -- I hope that's true for the rest of you -- actually do pretty well with addition and subtraction in the real world.
I found a problem, a specific problem that actually found an error with that.
Diarrhea, and many last mile problems, are like that.
They are situations where the mental model doesn't match the reality.
Same thing here: You had an intuitive response to this that was very quick.
You read "blue" and you wanted to say "blue," even though you knew your task was red.
Now, I do this stuff because it's fun.
But it's more profound than fun.
I'll give you a good example of how it actually effects persuasion.
BMW is a pretty safe car.
And they are trying to figure out, "Safety is good.
I want to advertise safety. How am I going to advertise safety?"
"I could give people numbers. We do well on crash tests."
But the truth of the matter is, you look at that car, it doesn't look like a Volvo, and it doesn't look like a Hummer.
So, what I want you to think about for a few minutes is: How would you convey safety of the BMW? Okay?
So now, while you're thinking about that let's move to a second task.
The second task is fuel efficiency. Okay?
Here's another puzzle for all of you.
One person walks into a car lot, and they're thinking about buying this Toyota Yaris.
They are saying, "This is 35 miles per gallon. I'm going to do the environmentally right thing, I'm going to buy the Prius, 50 miles per gallon."
Another person walks into the lot, and they're about to buy a Hummer, nine miles per gallon, fully loaded, luxury.
And they say, "You know what? Do I need turbo? Do I need this heavyweight car?"
I'm going to do something good for the environment.
I'm going to take off some of that weight, and I'm going to buy a Hummer that's 11 miles per gallon."
Which one of these people has done more for the environment?
See, you have a mental model.
Fifty versus 35, that's a big move. Eleven versus nine? Come on.
Turns out, go home and do the math, the nine to 11 is a bigger change. That person has saved more gallons.
Why? Because we don't care about miles per gallon, we care about gallons per mile.
Think about how powerful that is if you're trying to encourage fuel efficiency.
Miles per gallon is the way we present things.
If we want to encourage change of behavior, gallons per mile would have far more effectiveness.
Researchers have found these type of anomalies.
Okay, back to BMW. What should they do?
The problem BMW faces is this car looks safe.
This car, which is my Mini, doesn't look that safe.
Here was BMW's brilliant insight, which they embodied into an ad campaign.
They showed a BMW driving down the street.
There's a truck on the right. Boxes fall out of the truck.
The car swerves to avoid it, and therefore doesn't get into an accident.
BWM realizes safety, in people's minds, has two components.
You can be safe because when you're hit, you survive, or you can be safe because you avoid accidents.
Remarkably successful campaign, but notice the power of it.
It harnesses something you already believe.
Now, even if I persuaded you to do something, it's hard sometimes to actually get action as a result.
You all probably intended to wake up, I don't know, 6:30, 7 a.m.
This is a battle we all fight every day, along with trying to get to the gym.
Now, this is an example of that battle, and makes us realize intentions don't always translate into action, and so one of the fundamental challenges is how we would actually do that. OK?
So, let me now talk about the last mile problem.
So far, I've been pretty negative.
I've been trying to show you the oddities of human behavior.
And I think maybe I'm being too negative.
Maybe it's the diarrhea.
Maybe the last mile problem really should be thought of as the last mile opportunity.
Let's go back to diabetes.
This is a typical insulin injection.
Now, carrying this thing around is complicated.
You gotta carry the bottle, you gotta carry the syringe.
It's also painful.
Now, you may think to yourself, "Well, if my eyes depended on it, you know, I would obviously use it every day."
But the pain, the discomfort, you know, paying attention, remembering to put it in your purse when you go on a long trip: These are the day-to-day of life, and they do pose problems.
Here is an innovation, a design innovation.
This is a pen, it's called an insulin pen, preloaded.
The needle is particularly sharp.
You just gotta carry this thing around.
It's much easier to use, much less painful.
Anywhere between five and 10 percent increase in adherence, just as a result of this.
That's what I'm talking about as a last mile opportunity.
You see, we tend to think the problem is solved when we solve the technology problem.
But the human innovation, the human problem still remains, and that's a great frontier that we have left.
This isn't about the biology of people; this is now about the brains, the psychology of people, and innovation needs to continue all the way through the last mile.
Here's another example of this.
This is from a company called Positive Energy.
This is about energy efficiency.
We're spending a lot of time on fuel cells right now.
What this company does is they send a letter to households that say, "Here's your energy use, here's your neighbor's energy use: You're doing well." Smiley face.
"You're doing worse." Frown.
And what they find is just this letter, nothing else, has a two to three percent reduction in electricity use.
And you want to think about the social value of that in terms of carbon offsets, reduced electricity, 900 million dollars per year.
Why? Because for free, this isn't a new technology, this is a letter -- we're getting a Big Bang in behavior.
So, how do we tackle the last mile?
I think this tells us there is an opportunity.
And I think to tackle it, we need to combine psychology, marketing, art, we've seen that.
But you know what we need to combine it with?
We need to combine this with the scientific method.
See what's really puzzling and frustrating about the last mile, to me, is that the first 999 miles are all about science.
No one would say, "Hey, I think this medicine works, go ahead and use it."
We have testing, we go to the lab, we try it again, we have refinement.
But you know what we do on the last mile?
"Oh, this is a good idea. People will like this. Let's put it out there."
The amount of resources we put in are disparate.
We put billions of dollars into fuel-efficient technologies.
How much are we putting into energy behavior change in a credible, systematic, testing way?
Now, I think that we're on the verge of something big.
We're on the verge of a whole new social science.
It's a social science that recognizes -- much like science recognizes the complexity of the body, biology recognizes the complexity of the body -- we'll recognize the complexity of the human mind.
The careful testing, retesting, design, are going to open up vistas of understanding, complexities, difficult things.
And those vistas will both create new science, and fundamental change in the world as we see it, in the next hundred years.
All right. Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Sendhil, thank you so much.
So, this whole area is so fascinating.
I mean, it sometimes feels, listening to behavioral economists that they are kind of putting into place academically, what great marketers have sort of intuitively known for a long time.
How much is your field talking to great marketers about their insights into human psychology?
Because they've seen it on the ground.
Sendhil Mullainathan: Yeah, we spend a lot of time talking to marketers, and I think 60 percent of it is exactly what you say, there are insights to be gleaned there.
Forty percent of it is about what marketing is.
Marketing is selling an ad to a firm.
So, in some sense, a lot of marketing is about convincing a CEO, "This is a good ad campaign."
So, there is a little bit of slippage there.
That's just a caveat. That's different from actually having an effective ad campaign.
And one of the new movements in marketing is: How do we actually measure effectiveness? Are we effective?
CA: How you take your insights here and actually get them integrated into working business models on the ground, in Indian villages, for example?
SM: So, the scientific method I alluded to is pretty important.
We work closely with companies that have operational capacity, or nonprofits that have operational capacity.
And then we say, "Well, you want to get this behavior change.
Let's come up with a few ideas, test them, see which is working, go back, synthesize, and try to come up with a thing that works," and then we're able to scale with partners.
It's kind of the model that has worked in other contexts.
If you have biological problems we try and fix it, see if it works, and then work the scale.
CA: Alright Sendhil, thanks so much for coming to TED. Thank you.
(Applause)
When my brother called me in December of 1998, he said, "The news does not look good."
This is him on the screen.
He'd just been diagnosed with ALS, which is a disease that the average lifespan is three years.
It paralyzes you. It starts by killing the motor neurons in your spinal cord.
And you go from being a healthy, robust 29-year-old male to someone that cannot breathe, cannot move, cannot speak.
This has actually been, to me, a gift, because we began a journey to learn a new way of thinking about life.
And even though Steven passed away three years ago we had an amazing journey as a family.
We did not even -- I think adversity is not even the right word.
We looked at this and we said, "We're going to do something with this in an incredibly positive way."
And I want to talk today about one of the things that we decided to do, which was to think about a new way of approaching healthcare.
Because, as we all know here today, it doesn't work very well.
I want to talk about it in the context of a story.
This is the story of my brother.
But it's just a story. And I want to go beyond the story, and go to something more.
"Given my status, what is the best outcome I can hope to achieve, and how do I get there?"
is what we are here to do in medicine, is what everyone should do.
And those questions all have variables to them.
All of our statuses are different.
All of our hopes and dreams, what we want to accomplish, is different, and our paths will be different, they are all stories.
But it's a story until we convert it to data and so what we do, this concept we had, was to take Steven's status, "What is my status?"
and go from this concept of walking, breathing, and then his hands, speak, and ultimately happiness and function.
So, the first set of pathologies, they end up in the stick man on his icon, but the rest of them are really what's important here.
Because Steven, despite the fact that he was paralyzed, as he was in that pool, he could not walk, he could not use his arms -- that's why he had the little floaty things on them, did you see those? -- he was happy. We were at the beach, he was raising his son, and he was productive.
And we took this, and we converted it into data.
But it's not a data point at that one moment in time.
It is a data point of Steven in a context.
Here he is in the pool. But here he is healthy, as a builder: taller, stronger, got all the women, amazing guy.
Here he is walking down the aisle, but he can barely walk now, so it's impaired.
And he could still hold his wife's hand, but he couldn't do buttons on his clothes, can't feed himself.
And here he is, paralyzed completely, unable to breathe and move, over this time journey.
These stories of his life, converted to data.
He renovated my carriage house when he was completely paralyzed, and unable to speak, and unable to breathe, and he won an award for a historic restoration.
So, here's Steven alone, sharing this story in the world.
And this is the insight, the thing that we are excited about, because we have gone away from the community that we are, the fact that we really do love each other and want to care for each other.
We need to give to others to be successful.
So, Steven is sharing this story, but he is not alone.
There are so many other people sharing their stories.
Not stories in words, but stories in data and words.
And we convert that information into this structure, this understanding, this ability to convert those stories into something that is computable, to which we can begin to change the way medicine is done and delivered.
We did this for ALS. We can do this for depression, Parkinson's disease, HIV.
These are not simple, they are not internet scalable; they require thought and processes to find the meaningful information about the disease.
So, this is what it looks like when you go to the website.
And I'm going to show you what Patients Like Me, the company that myself, my youngest brother and a good friend from MIT started.
Here are the actual patients, there are 45,000 of them now, sharing their stories as data.
Here is an M.S. patient.
His name is Mike, and he is uniformly impaired on cognition, vision, walking, sensation.
Those are things that are different for each M.S. patient.
Each of them can have a different characteristic.
You can see fibromyalgia, HIV, ALS, depression.
Look at this HIV patient down here, Zinny.
It's two years of this disease. All of the symptoms are not there.
But he is working to keep his CD4 count high and his viral level low so he can make his life better.
But you can aggregate this and you can discover things about treatments.
Look at this, 2,000 people almost, on Copaxone.
These are patients currently on drugs, sharing data.
I love some of these, physical exercise, prayer.
Anyone want to run a comparative effectiveness study on prayer against something? Let's look at prayer.
What I love about this, just sort of interesting design problems.
These are why people pray.
Here is the schedule of how frequently they -- it's a dose.
So, anyone want to see the 32 patients that pray for 60 minutes a day, and see if they're doing better, they probably are.
Here they are. It's an open network, everybody is sharing. We can see it all.
Or, I want to look at anxiety, because people are praying for anxiety.
And here is data on 15,000 people's current anxiety, right now.
How they treat it, the drugs, the components of it, their side effects, all of it in a rich environment, and you can drill down and see the individuals.
This amazing data allows us to drill down and see what this drug is for -- 1,500 people on this drug, I think. Yes.
I want to talk to the 58 patients down here who are taking four milligrams a day.
And I want to talk to the ones of those that have been doing it for more than two years.
So, you can see the duration.
All open, all available.
I'm going to log in.
And this is my brother's profile.
And this is a new version of our platform we're launching right now.
This is the second generation. It's going to be in Flash.
And you can see here, as this animates over, Steven's actual data against the background of all other patients, against this information.
The blue band is the 50th percentile. Steven is the 75th percentile, that he has non-genetic ALS.
You scroll down in this profile and you can see all of his prescription drugs, but more than that, in the new version, I can look at this interactively.
Wait, poor spinal capacity.
Doesn't this remind you of a great stock program?
Wouldn't it be great if the technology we used to take care of ourselves was as good as the technology we use to make money?
Detrol. In the side effects for his drug, integrated into that, the stem cell transplant that he had, the first in the world, shared openly for anyone who wants to see it.
I love here -- the cyberkinetics implant, which was, again, the only patient's data that was online and available.
You can adjust the time scale. You can adjust the symptoms.
You can look at the interaction between how I treat my ALS.
So, you click down on the ALS tab there.
I'm taking three drugs to manage it. Some of them are experimental.
I can look at my constipation, how to manage it.
I can see magnesium citrate, and the side effects from that drug all integrated in the time in which they're meaningful.
But I want more.
I don't want to just look at this cool device, I want to take this data and make something even better.
I want my brother's center of the universe and his symptoms and his drugs, and all of the things that interact among those, the side effects, to be in this beautiful data galaxy that we can look at in any way we want to understand it, so that we can take this information and go beyond just this simple model of what a record is.
I don't even know what a medical record is.
I want to solve a problem. I want an application.
So, can I take this data -- rearrange yourself, put the symptoms in the left, the drugs across the top, tell me everything we know about Steven and everyone else, and what interacts.
Years after he's had these drugs, I learned that everything he did to manage his excess saliva, including some positive side effects that came from other drugs, were making his constipation worse.
And if anyone's ever had severe constipation, and you don't understand how much of an impact that has on your life -- yes, that was a pun.
You're trying to manage these, and this grid is available here, and we want to understand it.
No one's ever had this kind of information.
So, patients have this. We're for patients.
This is all about patient health care, there was no doctors on our network.
This is about the patients.
So, how can we take this and bring them a tool that they can go back and they can engage the medical system?
And we worked hard, and we thought about it and we said, "What's something we can use all the time, that we can use in the medical care system, that everyone will understand?"
So, the patients print it out, because hospitals usually block us because they believe we are a social network.
It's actually the most used feature on the website.
Doctors actually love this sheet, and they're actually really engaged.
So, we went from this story of Steven and his history to data, and then back to paper, where we went back and engaged the medical care system.
And here's another paper.
This is a journal, PNAS -- I think it's the Proceedings of the National Academy of Science of the United States of America.
You've seen multiple of these today, when everyone's bragging about the amazing things they've done.
This is a report about a drug called lithium.
Lithium, that is a drug used to treat bipolar disorder, that a group in Italy found slowed ALS down in 16 patients, and published it.
Now, we'll skip the critiques of the paper.
But the short story is: If you're a patient, you want to be on the blue line.
You don't want to be on the red line, you want to be on the blue line.
Because the blue line is a better line. The red line is way downhill, the blue line is a good line.
So, you know we said -- we looked at this, and what I love also is that people always accuse these Internet sites of promoting bad medicine and having people do things irresponsibly.
So, this is what happened when PNAS published this.
Ten percent of the people in our system took lithium.
Ten percent of the patients started taking lithium based on 16 patients of data in a bad publication.
And they call the Internet irresponsible.
Here's the implication of what happens.
There's this one guy, named Humberto, from Brazil, who unfortunately passed away nine months ago, who said, "Hey, listen. Can you help us answer this question?
Because I don't want to wait for the next trial, it's going to be years.
I want to know now. Can you help us?"
So, we launched some tools, we let them track their blood levels.
We let them share the data and exchange it.
You know, a data network.
And they said, you know, "Jamie, PLM, can you guys tell us whether this works or not?"
And we went around and we talked to people, and they said, "You can't run a clinical trial like this. You know?
You don't have the blinding, you don't have data, it doesn't follow the scientific method.
It's never going to work. You can't do it."
So, I said, "Okay well we can't do that. Then we can do something harder."
(Laughter) I can't say whether lithium works in all ALS patients, but I can say whether it works in Humberto.
I bought a Mac about two years ago, I converted over, and I was so excited about this new feature of the time machine that came in Leopard. And we said -- because it's really cool, you can go back and you can look at the entire history of your computer, and find everything you've lost, and I loved it.
And I said, "What if we built a time machine for patients, except instead of going backwards, we go forwards.
Can we find out what's going to happen to you, so that you can maybe change it?"
So, we did. We took all the patients like Humberto, That's the Apple background, we stole that because we didn't have time to build our own. This is a real app by the way.
This is not just graphics.
And you take those data, and we find the patients like him, and we bring their data together. And we bring their histories into it.
And then we say, "Well how do we line them all up?"
So, we line them all up so they go together around the meaningful points, integrated across everything we know about the patient.
Full information, the entire course of their disease.
And that's what is going to happen to Humberto, unless he does something.
And he took lithium, and he went down the line.
And it works almost every time.
Now, the ones that it doesn't work are interesting.
But almost all the time it works.
It's actually scary. It's beautiful.
So, we couldn't run a clinical trial, we couldn't figure it out.
But we could see whether it was going to work for Humberto.
And yeah, all the clinicians in the audience will talk about power and all the standard deviation. We'll do that later.
But here is the answer of the mean of the patients that actually decided to take lithium.
These are all the patients that started lithium.
It's the Intent to Treat Curve.
You can see here, the blue dots on the top, the light ones, those are the people in the study in PNAS that you wanted to be on. And the red ones are the ones, the pink ones on the bottom are the ones you didn't want to be.
And the ones in the middle are all of our patients from the start of lithium at time zero, going forward, and then going backward.
So, you can see we matched them perfectly, perfectly.
Terrifyingly accurate matching.
And going forward, you actually don't want to be a lithium patient this time.
You're actually doing slightly worse -- not significantly, but slightly worse. You don't want to be a lithium patient this time.
But you know, a lot of people dropped out, the trial, there is too much drop out.
Can we do the even harder thing? Can we go to the patients that actually decided to stay on lithium, because they were so convinced they were getting better?
We asked our control algorithm, are those 69 patients -- by the way, you'll notice that's four times the number of patients in the clinical trial -- can we look at those patients and say, "Can we match them with our time machine to the other patients that are just like them, and what happens?"
Even the ones that believed they were getting better matched the controls exactly. Exactly.
Those little lines? That's the power.
So, we -- I can't tell you lithium doesn't work. I can't tell you that if you did it at a higher dose or if you run the study proper -- I can tell you that for those 69 people that took lithium, they didn't do any better than the people that were just like them, just like me, and that we had the power to detect that at about a quarter of the strengths reported in the initial study.
We did that one year ahead of the time when the first clinical trial funded by the NIH for millions of dollars failed for futility last week, and announced it.
So, remember I told you about my brother's stem cell transplant.
I never really knew whether it worked.
And I put 100 million cells in his cisterna magna, in his lumbar cord, and filled out the IRBs and did all this work, and I never really knew.
How did I not know?
I mean, I didn't know what was going to happen to him.
I actually asked Tim, who is the quant in our group -- we actually searched for about a year to find someone who could do the sort of math and statistics and modeling in healthcare, couldn't find anybody. So, we went to the finance industry.
And there are these guys who used to model the future of interest rates, and all that kind of stuff.
And some of them were available. So, we hired one.
(Laughter) We hired them, set them up, assisting at lab.
I I.M. him things. That's the way I communicate with him, is like a little guy in a box. I I.M.ed Tim. I said, "Tim can you tell me whether my brother's stem cell transplant worked or not?"
And he sent me this two days ago.
It was that little outliers there. You see that guy that lived a long time?
We have to go talk to him. Because I'd like to know what happened.
Because something went different.
But my brother didn't. My brother went straight down the line.
It only works about 12 months.
It's the first version of the time machine.
First time we ever tried it. We'll try to get it better later but 12 months so far.
And, you know, I look at this, and I get really emotional.
You look at the patients, you can drill in all the controls, you can look at them, you can ask them.
And I found a woman that had -- we found her, she was odd because she had data after she died.
And her husband had come in and entered her last functional scores, because he knew how much she cared.
And I am thankful.
I can't believe that these people, years after my brother had died, helped me answer the question about whether an operation I did, and spent millions of dollars on years ago, worked or not.
I wished it had been there when I'd done it the first time, and I'm really excited that it's here now, because the lab that I founded has some data on a drug that might work, and I'd like to show it.
I'd like to show it in real time, now, and I want to do that for all of the diseases that we can do that for.
I've got to thank the 45,000 people that are doing this social experiment with us.
There is an amazing journey we are going on to become human again, to be part of community again, to share of ourselves, to be vulnerable, and it's very exciting. So, thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to begin with a little experiment.
In a moment, I'm going to ask if you would close your eyes and see if you can work out what emotions you're feeling right now.
Now, you're not going to tell anyone or anything.
The idea is to see how easy or perhaps hard you find it to pinpoint exactly what you're feeling.
And I thought I'd give you 10 seconds to do this.
OK?
Right, let's start.
OK, that's it, time's up.
How did it go?
You were probably feeling a little bit under pressure, maybe suspicious of the person next to you.
Did they definitely have their eyes closed?
Perhaps you felt some strange, distant worry about that email you sent this morning or excitement about something you've got planned for this evening.
Maybe you felt that exhilaration that comes when we get together in big groups of people like this; the Welsh called it "hwyl," from the word for boat sails.
Or maybe you felt all of these things.
There are some emotions which wash the world in a single color, like the terror felt as a car skids.
But more often, our emotions crowd and jostle together until it is actually quite hard to tell them apart.
Some slide past so quickly you'd hardly even notice them, like the nostalgia that will make you reach out to grab a familiar brand in the supermarket.
And then there are others that we hurry away from, fearing that they'll burst on us, like the jealousy that causes you to search a loved one's pockets.
And of course, there are some emotions which are so peculiar, you might not even know what to call them.
Perhaps sitting there, you had a little tingle of a desire for an emotion one eminent French sociologist called "ilinx," the delirium that comes with minor acts of chaos.
For example, if you stood up right now and emptied the contents of your bag all over the floor.
Perhaps you experienced one of those odd, untranslatable emotions for which there's no obvious English equivalent.
You might have felt the feeling the Dutch called "gezelligheid," being cozy and warm inside with friends when it's cold and damp outside.
Maybe if you were really lucky, you felt this: "basorexia," a sudden urge to kiss someone.
(Laughter) We live in an age when knowledge of emotions is an extremely important commodity, where emotions are used to explain many things, exploited by our politicians, manipulated by algorithms.
Emotional intelligence, which is the skill of being able to recognize and name your own emotions and those of other people, is considered so important, that this is taught in our schools and businesses and encouraged by our health services.
But despite all of this, I sometimes wonder if the way we think about emotions is becoming impoverished.
Sometimes, we're not even that clear what an emotion even is.
You've probably heard the theory that our entire emotional lives can be boiled down to a handful of basic emotions.
This idea is actually about 2,000 years old, but in our own time, some evolutionary psychologists have suggested that these six emotions -- happiness, sadness, fear, disgust, anger, surprise -- are expressed by everyone across the globe in exactly the same way, and therefore represent the building blocks of our entire emotional lives.
Well, if you look at an emotion like this, then it looks like a simple reflex: it's triggered by an external predicament, it's hardwired, it's there to protect us from harm.
So you see a bear, your heart rate quickens, your pupils dilate, you feel frightened, you run very, very fast.
The problem with this picture is, it doesn't entirely capture what an emotion is.
Of course, the physiology is extremely important, but it's not the only reason why we feel the way we do at any given moment.
What if I was to tell you that in the 12th century, some troubadours didn't see yawning as caused by tiredness or boredom like we do today, but thought it a symbol of the deepest love?
Or that in that same period, brave men -- knights -- commonly fainted out of dismay?
What if I was to tell you that some early Christians who lived in the desert believed that flying demons who mainly came out at lunchtime could infect them with an emotion they called "accidie," a kind of lethargy that was sometimes so intense it could even kill them?
Or that boredom, as we know and love it today, was first really only felt by the Victorians, in response to new ideas about leisure time and self-improvement?
What if we were to think again about those odd, untranslatable words for emotions and wonder whether some cultures might feel an emotion more intensely just because they've bothered to name and talk about it, like the Russian "toska," a feeling of maddening dissatisfaction said to blow in from the great plains.
The most recent developments in cognitive science show that emotions are not simple reflexes, but immensely complex, elastic systems that respond both to the biologies that we've inherited and to the cultures that we live in now.
They are cognitive phenomena.
They're shaped not just by our bodies, but by our thoughts, our concepts, our language.
The neuroscientist Lisa Feldman Barrett has become very interested in this dynamic relationship between words and emotions.
She argues that when we learn a new word for an emotion, new feelings are sure to follow.
As a historian, I've long suspected that as language changes, our emotions do, too.
When we look to the past, it's easy to see that emotions have changed, sometimes very dramatically, in response to new cultural expectations and religious beliefs, new ideas about gender, ethnicity and age, even in response to new political and economic ideologies.
There is a historicity to emotions that we are only recently starting to understand.
So I agree absolutely that it does us good to learn new words for emotions, but I think we need to go further.
I think to be truly emotionally intelligent, we need to understand where those words have come from, and what ideas about how we ought to live and behave they are smuggling along with them.
Let me tell you a story.
It begins in a garret in the late 17th century, in the Swiss university town of Basel.
Inside, there's a dedicated student living some 60 miles away from home.
He stops turning up to his lectures, and his friends come to visit and they find him dejected and feverish, having heart palpitations, strange sores breaking out on his body.
Doctors are called, and they think it's so serious that prayers are said for him in the local church.
And it's only when they're preparing to return this young man home so that he can die, that they realize what's going on, because once they lift him onto the stretcher, his breathing becomes less labored.
And by the time he's got to the gates of his hometown, he's almost entirely recovered.
And that's when they realize that he's been suffering from a very powerful form of homesickness.
It's so powerful, that it might have killed him.
Well, in 1688, a young doctor, Johannes Hofer, heard of this case and others like it and christened the illness "nostalgia."
The diagnosis quickly caught on in medical circles around Europe.
The English actually thought they were probably immune because of all the travel they did in the empire and so on.
But soon there were cases cropping up in Britain, too.
The last person to die from nostalgia was an American soldier fighting during the First World War in France.
How is it possible that you could die from nostalgia less than a hundred years ago?
But today, not only does the word mean something different -- a sickening for a lost time rather than a lost place -- but homesickness itself is seen as less serious, sort of downgraded from something you could die from to something you're mainly worried your kid might be suffering from at a sleepover.
This change seems to have happened in the early 20th century.
But why?
Was it the invention of telephones or the expansion of the railways?
Was it perhaps the coming of modernity, with its celebration of restlessness and travel and progress that made sickening for the familiar seem rather unambitious?
You and I inherit that massive transformation in values, and it's one reason why we might not feel homesickness today as acutely as we used to.
It's important to understand that these large historical changes influence our emotions partly because they affect how we feel about how we feel.
Today, we celebrate happiness.
Happiness is supposed to make us better workers and parents and partners; it's supposed to make us live longer.
In the 16th century, sadness was thought to do most of those things.
It's even possible to read self-help books from that period which try to encourage sadness in readers by giving them lists of reasons to be disappointed.
(Laughter) These self-help authors thought you could cultivate sadness as a skill, since being expert in it would make you more resilient when something bad did happen to you, as invariably it would.
I think we could learn from this today.
Feel sad today, and you might feel impatient, even a little ashamed.
Feel sad in the 16th century, and you might feel a little bit smug.
Of course, our emotions don't just change across time, they also change from place to place.
The Baining people of Papua New Guinea speak of "awumbuk," a feeling of lethargy that descends when a houseguest finally leaves.
(Laughter) Now, you or I might feel relief, but in Baining culture, departing guests are thought to shed a sort of heaviness so they can travel more easily, and this heaviness infects the air and causes this awumbuk.
And so what they do is leave a bowl of water out overnight to absorb this air, and then very early the next morning, they wake up and have a ceremony and throw the water away.
Now, here's a good example of spiritual practices and geographical realities combining to bring a distinct emotion into life and make it disappear again.
One of my favorite emotions is a Japanese word, "amae."
Amae is a very common word in Japan, but it is actually quite hard to translate.
It means something like the pleasure that you get when you're able to temporarily hand over responsibility for your life to someone else.
(Laughter) Now, anthropologists suggest that one reason why this word might have been named and celebrated in Japan is because of that country's traditionally collectivist culture, whereas the feeling of dependency may be more fraught amongst English speakers, who have learned to value self-sufficiency and individualism.
This might be a little simplistic, but it is tantalizing.
What might our emotional languages tell us not just about what we feel, but about what we value most?
Most people who tell us to pay attention to our well-being talk of the importance of naming our emotions.
But these names aren't neutral labels.
They are freighted with our culture's values and expectations, and they transmit ideas about who we think we are.
Learning new and unusual words for emotions will help attune us to the more finely grained aspects of our inner lives.
But more than this, I think these words are worth caring about, because they remind us how powerful the connection is between what we think and how we end up feeling.
True emotional intelligence requires that we understand the social, the political, the cultural forces that have shaped what we've come to believe about our emotions and understand how happiness or hatred or love or anger might still be changing now.
Because if we want to measure our emotions and teach them in our schools and listen as our politicians tell us how important they are, then it is a good idea that we understand where the assumptions we have about them have come from, and whether they still truly speak to us now.
I want to end with an emotion I often feel when I'm working as a historian.
It's a French word, "dpaysement."
It evokes the giddy disorientation that you feel in an unfamiliar place.
One of my favorite parts of being a historian is when something I've completely taken for granted, some very familiar part of my life, is suddenly made strange again.
Dpaysement is unsettling, but it's exciting, too.
And I hope you might be having just a little glimpse of it right now.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I work with a species called "Bonobo."
And I'm happy most of the time, because I think this is the happiest species on the planet.
It's kind of a well-kept secret.
This species lives only in the Congo.
And they're not in too many zoos, because of their sexual behavior.
Their sexual behavior is too human-like for most of us to be comfortable with.
(Laughter) But -- (Laughter) actually, we have a lot to learn from them, because they're a very egalitarian society and they're a very empathetic society.
And sexual behavior is not confined to one aspect of their life that they sort of set aside.
It permeates their entire life.
And it's used for communication.
And it's used for conflict resolution.
And I think perhaps somewhere in our history we sort of, divided our lives up into lots of parts.
We divided our world up with lots of categories.
And so everything sort of has a place that it has to fit.
But I don't think that we were that way initially.
There are many people who think that the animal world is hard-wired and that there's something very, very special about man.
Maybe it's his ability to have causal thought.
Maybe it's something special in his brain that allows him to have language.
Maybe it's something special in his brain that allows him to make tools or to have mathematics.
Well, I don't know. There were Tasmanians who were discovered around the 1600s and they had no fire.
They had no stone tools.
To our knowledge they had no music.
So when you compare them to the Bonobo, the Bonobo is a little hairier.
He doesn't stand quite as upright.
But there are a lot of similarities.
And I think that as we look at culture, we kind of come to understand how we got to where we are.
And I don't really think it's in our biology; I think we've attributed it to our biology, but I don't really think it's there.
So what I want to do now is introduce you to a species called the Bonobo.
This is Kanzi.
He's a Bonobo.
Right now, he's in a forest in Georgia.
His mother originally came from a forest in Africa.
And she came to us when she was just at puberty, about six or seven years of age.
Now this shows a Bonobo on your right, and a chimpanzee on your left.
Clearly, the chimpanzee has a little bit harder time of walking.
The Bonobo, although shorter than us and their arms still longer, is more upright, just as we are.
This shows the Bonobo compared to an australopithecine like Lucy.
As you can see, there's not a lot of difference between the way a Bonobo walks and the way an early australopithecine would have walked.
As they turn toward us you'll see that the pelvic area of early australopithecines is a little flatter and doesn't have to rotate quite so much from side to side.
So the -- the bipedal gait is a little easier.
And now we see all four.
Video: Narrator: The wild Bonobo lives in central Africa, in the jungle encircled by the Congo River.
Canopied trees as tall as 40 meters, 130 feet, grow densely in the area.
It was a Japanese scientist who first undertook serious field studies of the Bonobo, almost three decades ago.
Bonobos are built slightly smaller than the chimpanzee.
Slim-bodied, Bonobos are by nature very gentle creatures.
Long and careful studies have reported many new findings on them.
One discovery was that wild Bonobos often walk bidpedally.
What's more, they are able to walk upright for long distances.
Susan Savage-Rumbaugh (video): Let's go say hello to Austin first and then go to the A frame.
SS: This is Kanzi and I, in the forest.
None of the things you will see in this particular video are trained.
None of them are tricks.
They all happened to be captured on film spontaneously, by NHK of Japan.
We have eight Bonobos.
Video: Look at all this stuff that's here for our campfire.
SS: An entire family at our research centre.
Video: You going to help get some sticks?
Good.
We need more sticks, too.
I have a lighter in my pocket if you need one.
That's a wasps' nest.
You can get it out.
I hope I have a lighter.
You can use the lighter to start the fire.
SS: So Kanzi is very interested in fire.
He doesn't do it yet without a lighter, but I think if he saw someone do it, he might be able to do -- make a fire without a lighter.
He's learning about how to keep a fire going.
He's learning the uses for a fire, just by watching what we do with fire.
(Laughter) This is a smile on the face of a Bonobo.
These are happy vocalizations.
Video: You're happy.
You're very happy about this part.
You've got to put some water on the fire. You see the water?
Good job.
SS: Forgot to zip up the back half of his backpack.
But he likes to carry things from place to place.
Video: Austin, I hear you saying "Austin."
SS: He talks to other Bonobos at the lab, long-distance, farther than we can hear.
This is his sister.
This is her first time to try to drive a golf cart.
Video: Goodbye.
(Laughter) SS: She's got the pedals down, but not the wheel.
She switches from reverse to forward and she holds onto the wheel, rather than turns it.
(Laughter) Like us, she knows that that individual in the mirror is her.
(Music) Video: Narrator: By raising Bonobos in a culture that is both Bonobo and human, and documenting their development across two decades, scientists are exploring how cultural forces (Laughter) may have operated during human evolution.
His name is Nyota.
It means "star" in Swahili.
(Music) Panbanisha is trying to give Nyota a haircut with a pair of scissors.
In the wild, the parent Bonobo is known to groom its offspring.
Here Panbanisha uses scissors, instead of her hands, to groom Nyota.
Very impressive.
Subtle maneuvering of the hands is required to perform delicate tasks like this.
Nyota tries to imitate Panbanisha by using the scissors himself.
Realizing that Nyota might get hurt, Panbanisha, like any human mother, carefully tugs to get the scissors back.
He can now cut through tough animal hide.
SS: Kanzi's learned to make stone tools.
Video: Kanzi now makes his tools, just as our ancestors may have made them, two-and-a-half million years ago -- by holding the rocks in both hands, to strike one against the other.
He has learned that by using both hands and aiming his glancing blows, he can make much larger, sharper flakes.
Kanzi chooses a flake he thinks is sharp enough.
The tough hide is difficult to cut, even with a knife.
The rock that Kanzi is using is extremely hard and ideal for stone tool making, but difficult to handle, requiring great skill.
Kanzi's rock is from Gona, Ethiopia and is identical to that used by our African ancestors two-and-a-half million years ago.
These are the rocks Kanzi used and these are the flakes he made.
The flat sharp edges are like knife blades.
Compare them to the tools our ancestors used; they bear a striking resemblance to Kanzi's.
Panbanisha is longing to go for a walk in the woods.
She keeps staring out the window.
SS: This is -- let me show you something we didn't think they would do.
Video: For several days now, Panbanisha has not been outside.
SS: I normally talk about language.
Video: Then Panbanisha does something unexpected.
SS: But since I'm advised not to do what I normally do, I haven't told you that these apes have language.
It's a geometric language.
Video: She takes a piece of chalk and begins writing something on the floor.
What is she writing?
SS: She's also saying the name of that, with her voice.
Video: Now she comes up to Dr. Sue and starts writing again.
SS: These are her symbols on her keyboard.
(Music) They speak when she touches them.
Video: Panbanisha is communicating to Dr. Sue where she wants to go.
"A frame" represents a hut in the woods.
Compare the chalk writing with the lexigram on the keyboard.
Panbanisha began writing the lexigrams on the forest floor.
SS (video): Very nice. Beautiful, Panbanisha.
SS: At first we didn't really realize what she was doing, until we stood back and looked at it and rotated it.
Video: This lexigram also refers to a place in the woods.
The curved line is very similar to the lexigram.
The next symbol Panbanisha writes represents "collar."
It indicates the collar that Panbanisha must wear when she goes out.
SS: That's an institutional requirement.
Video: This symbol is not as clear as the others, but one can see Panbanisha is trying to produce a curved line and several straight lines.
Researchers began to record what Panbanisha said, by writing lexigrams on the floor with chalk.
Panbanisha watched.
Soon she began to write as well.
The Bonobo's abilities have stunned scientists around the world.
How did they develop?
SS (video): We found that the most important thing for permitting Bonobos to acquire language is not to teach them.
It's simply to use language around them, because the driving force in language acquisition is to understand what others, that are important to you, are saying to you.
Once you have that capacity, the ability to produce language comes rather naturally and rather freely.
So we want to create an environment in which Bonobos, like all of the individuals with whom they are interacting -- we want to create an environment in which they have fun, and an environment in which the others are meaningful individuals for them.
Narrator: This environment brings out unexpected potential in Kanzi and Panbanisha.
Panbanisha is enjoying playing her harmonica, until Nyota, now one year old, steals it.
Then he peers eagerly into his mother's mouth.
Is he looking for where the sound came from?
Dr. Sue thinks it's important to allow such curiosity to flourish.
This time Panbanisha is playing the electric piano.
She wasn't forced to learn the piano; she saw a researcher play the instrument and took an interest.
Researcher: Go ahead. Go ahead. I'm listening.
Do that real fast part that you did. Yeah, that part.
Narrator: Kanzi plays the xylophone; using both hands he enthusiastically accompanies Dr. Sue's singing.
Kanzi and Panbanisha are stimulated by this fun-filled environment, which promotes the emergence of these cultural capabilities.
(Laughter) Researcher: OK, now get the monsters. Get them.
Take the cherries too.
Now watch out, stay away from them now.
Now you can chase them again. Time to chase them.
Now you have to stay away. Get away.
Run away. Run.
Now we can chase them again. Go get them.
Oh no!
Good Kanzi. Very good. Thank you so much.
Narrator: None of us, Bonobo or human, can possibly even imagine?
SS: So we have a bi-species environment, we call it a "panhomoculture."
We're learning how to become like them.
We're learning how to communicate with them, in really high-pitched tones.
We're learning that they probably have a language in the wild.
And they're learning to become like us.
Because we believe that it's not biology; it's culture.
So we're sharing tools and technology and language with another species.
Thank you.
The problem I want to talk with you about is really the problem of: How does one supply health care in a world in which cost is everything?
How do you do that?
And the basic paradigm we want to suggest to you, I want to suggest to you, is one in which you say that in order to treat disease, you have to first know what you're treating, that's diagnostics, and then you have to do something.
The program we're involved in is something we call "Diagnostics for All," or "zero-cost diagnostics."
How do you provide medically relevant information at as close as possible to zero cost?
How do you do it?
Let me just give you two examples.
The rigors of military medicine are not so dissimilar from the third world: poor resources, a rigorous environment -- a series of problems -- light weight and things of this kind.
And also they're not so different from the home health care and diagnostic system world.
So, the technology I want to talk about is for the third world, for the developing world, but it has, I think, much broader application, because information is so important in the health care system.
So you see two examples here.
One is a lab that is actually a fairly high-end laboratory in Africa.
The second is basically an entrepreneur who is set up and doing who-knows-what at a table in a market.
I don't know what kind of health care is delivered there.
But it's not really what is probably most efficient.
What is our approach?
The way in which one typically approaches a problem of lowering cost, starting from the perspective of the United States, is to take our solution, and then try to cut cost out of it.
No matter how you do that, you're not going to start with a $100,000 instrument and bring it down to no cost.
It isn't going to work.
So the approach we took was the other way around, to ask: What is the cheapest possible stuff that you could make a diagnostic system out of, and get useful information and add function?
And what we've chosen is paper.
What you see here is a prototypic device.
It's about a centimeter on the side.
It's about the size of a fingernail.
The lines around the edges are a polymer.
It's made of paper.
And paper, of course, wicks fluid, as you know, paper, cloth -- drop wine on the tablecloth, and the wine wicks all over everything.
Put it on your shirt, it ruins the shirt.
That's what a hydrophilic surface does.
So in this device, the idea is that you drip the bottom end of it in a drop of, in this case, urine.
The fluid wicks its way into those chambers at the top.
The brown color indicates the amount of glucose in the urine, the blue color indicates the amount of protein in the urine.
And the combination of those two is a first-order shot at a number of useful things that you want.
So, this is an example of a device made from a simple piece of paper.
Now, how simple can you make the production?
Why do we choose paper?
There's an example of the same thing on a finger, showing you basically what it looks like.
One reason for using paper is that it's everywhere.
We have made these kinds of devices using napkins and toilet paper and wraps, and all kinds of stuff.
So the production capability is there.
The second is, you can put lots and lots of tests in a very small place.
I'll show you in a moment that the stack of paper there would probably hold something like 100,000 tests, something of that kind.
And then finally, a point you don't think of so much in developed world medicine: it eliminates sharps.
And what sharps means is needles, things that stick.
If you've taken a sample of someone's blood and the someone might have hepatitis C, you don't want to make a mistake and stick it in you.
You don't want to do that.
So how do you dispose of that?
It's a problem everywhere, and here, you simply burn it.
So it's a sort of a practical approach to starting on things.
Now, you say, "If paper is a good idea, other people have surely thought of it."
And the answer is, of course, yes.
Those half of you, roughly, who are women, at some point may have had a pregnancy test.
And the most common of these is in a device that looks like the thing on the left.
It's something called a lateral-flow immunoassay.
In that particular test, urine, either containing a hormone called hCG, does or does not flow across a piece of paper.
And there are two bars; one bar indicates that the test is working, and if the second bar shows up, you're pregnant.
This is a terrific kind of test in a binary world, and the nice thing about pregnancy is either you are pregnant or you're not pregnant; you're not partially pregnant or thinking about being pregnant or something of that sort.
So it works very well there, but it doesn't work very well when you need more quantitative information.
There are also dipsticks, but if you look at the dipsticks, they're for another kind of urine analysis.
There are an awful lot of colors and things like that.
What do you actually do about that in a difficult circumstance?
So the approach we started with is to ask: Is it really practical to make things of this sort?
And that problem is now, in a purely engineering way, solved.
And the procedure that we have is simply to start with paper.
You run it through a new kind of printer called a wax printer.
The wax printer does what looks like printing.
It is printing.
You put that on, you warm it a little bit, the wax prints through, so it absorbs into the paper, and you end up with the device you want.
The printers cost 800 bucks now.
We estimate that if you were to run them 24 hours a day, they'd make about 10 million tests a year.
So it's a solved problem. That particular problem is solved.
And there is an example of the kind of thing that you see.
That's on a piece of 8 by 12 paper.
That takes about two seconds to make.
And so I regard that as done.
There's a very important issue here, which is that because it's a printer, a color printer, it prints colors.
I'll show you in a moment, that's actually quite useful.
Now, the next question that you would like to ask is: What would you like to measure? What would you like to analyze?
And the thing you'd most like to analyze, we're a fair distance from.
It's what's called "fever of undiagnosed origin."
Someone comes into the clinic, they have a fever, they feel bad.
Do they have TB? Do they have AIDS? Do they have a common cold?
The triage problem.
That's a hard problem for reasons I won't go through.
There are an awful lot of things that you'd like to distinguish among.
But then there are a series of things -- AIDS, hepatitis, malaria, TB, others -- and simpler ones, such as guidance of treatment.
Now, even that's more complicated than you think.
A friend of mine works in transcultural psychiatry, and he is interested in the question of why people do and don't take their meds.
So Dapsone, or something like that, you have to take for a while.
He has a wonderful story of talking to a villager in India and saying, "Have you taken your Dapsone?" "Yes."
"Have you taken it every day?" "Yes."
"Have you taken if for a month?" "Yes."
What the guy actually meant was that he'd fed a 30-day dose of Dapsone to his dog that morning.
(Laughter) And he was telling the truth, because in a different culture, the dog is a surrogate for you; "today," "this month," "since the rainy season" -- there are lots of opportunities for misunderstanding.
(Laughter) And so an issue here is to, in some cases, figure out how to deal with matters that seem uninteresting, like compliance.
Now, take a look at what a typical test looks like.
Prick a finger, you get some blood -- about 50 microliters.
That's about all you're going to get, because you can't use the usual sort of systems.
You can't manipulate it very well; I'll show something about that in a moment.
So you take the drop of blood, no further manipulations, you put it on a little device, the device filters out the blood cells, lets the serum go through, and you get a series of colors down in the bottom there.
And the colors indicate "disease" or "normal."
But even that's complicated, because to me, colors might indicate "normal," but after all, we're all suffering from probably an excess of education.
What do you do about something which requires quantitative analysis?
And so the solution that we and many other people are thinking about there, and at this point, there is a dramatic flourish, and out comes the universal solution to everything these days, which is a cell phone -- in this particular case, a camera phone.
They're everywhere -- six billion a month in India.
And the idea is that what one does is to take the device, you dip it, you develop the color, you take a picture, the picture goes to a central laboratory.
You don't have to send out a doctor, you send out somebody who can just take the sample, and in the clinic either a doctor, or ideally, a computer in this case, does the analysis.
Turns out to work actually quite well, particularly when your color printer has printed the color bars that indicate how things work.
So my view of the health care worker of the future is not a doctor, but an 18-year-old, otherwise unemployed, who has two things: a backpack full of these tests and a lancet to occasionally take a blood sample, and an AK-47.
And these are the things that get him through his day.
(Laughter) There's another very interesting connection here, and that is, that what one wants to do is pass through useful information over what is generally a pretty awful telephone system.
It turns out there's an enormous amount of information already available on that subject, which is the Mars Rover problem.
How do you get back an accurate view of the color on Mars if you have a really terrible bandwidth to do it with?
And the answer is not complicated, but it's one which I don't want to go through here, other than to say that the communication systems for doing this are really pretty well understood.
Also, a fact which you may not know is that the compute capability of this thing is not so different from the compute capability of your desktop computer.
This is a fantastic device which is only beginning to be tapped.
I don't know whether the idea of one computer, one child makes any sense.
Here's the computer of the future, because this screen is already there and they're ubiquitous.
All right, let me show you just a little bit about advanced devices.
And we'll start by posing a little problem.
What you see here is another centimeter-sized device, and the different colors are different colors of dye.
And you notice something which might strike you as a little bit interesting, which is, the yellow seems to disappear, get through the blue, and then get through the red.
How does that happen?
How do you make something flow through something?
And, of course the answer is, "You don't."
You make it flow under and over.
But now the question is: How do you make it flow under and over in a piece of paper?
The answer is that what you do -- and the details are not terribly important here -- is to make something more elaborate: You take several different layers of paper, each one containing its own little fluid system, and you separate them by pieces of, literally, double-sided carpet tape, the stuff you use to stick the carpets onto the floor.
And the fluid will flow from one layer into the next.
It distributes itself, flows through further holes, distributes itself.
And what you see, at the lower right-hand side there, is a sample in which a single sample of blood has been put on the top, and it has gone through and distributed itself into these 16 holes on the bottom, in a piece of paper -- basically, it looks like a chip, two pieces of paper thick.
And in this particular case, we were just interested in the replicability of that.
But that is, in principle, the way you solve the "fever of unexplained origin" problem, because each one of those spots then becomes a test for a particular set of markers of disease, and this will work in due course.
Here is an example of a slightly more complicated device.
There's the chip.
You dip in a corner.
The fluid goes into the center.
It distributes itself out into these various wells or holes and turns color, all done with paper and carpet tape.
So it's, I think, as low-cost as we're likely to be able to come up and make things.
Now, I have two last little stories to tell you in finishing off this business.
This is one: One of the things you occasionally need to do is separate blood cells from serum.
And the question was, here we do it by taking a sample, we put it in a centrifuge, we spin it, and you get blood cells out.
Terrific.
What happens if you don't have electricity, a centrifuge, and whatever?
And we thought for a while of how you might do this, and the way, in fact, you do it, is what's shown here.
You get an eggbeater, which is everywhere, and you saw off a blade, and then you take tubing, and you stick it on that.
You put the blood in, somebody sits there and spins it.
It works really, really well.
And we sat down, we did the physics of eggbeaters and self-aligning tubes and all the rest of that kind of thing, and sent it off to a journal.
We were very proud of this, particularly the title, which was "Eggbeater as Centrifuge."
(Laughter) And we sent it off, and by return mail, it came back.
I called up the editor and I said, "What's going on? How is this possible?"
The editor said, with enormous disdain, "I read this.
And we're not going to publish it, because we only publish science."
(Laughter) And it's an important issue, because it means that we have to, as a society, think about what we value.
And if it's just papers and Phys. Rev. letters, we've got a problem.
Here is another example of something which is -- this is a little spectrophotometer.
It measures the absorption of light in a sample.
The neat thing about this is, you have a light source that flickers on and off at about 1,000 hertz, another light source that detects that light at 1,000 hertz, and so you can run this system in broad daylight.
It performs about equivalently to a system that's on the order of 100,000 dollars.
It costs 50 dollars.
We can probably make it for 50 cents if we put our mind to it.
Why doesn't somebody do it?
The answer is: How do you make a profit in a capitalist system, doing that?
Interesting problem.
So, let me finish by saying that we've thought about this as a kind of engineering problem.
And we've asked: What is the scientific unifying idea here?
And we've decided we should think about this not so much in terms of cost, but in terms of simplicity.
Simplicity is a neat word.
You've got to think about what simplicity means.
I know what it is, but I don't actually know what it means.
So I actually was interested enough in this to put together several groups of people.
The most recent involved a couple of people at MIT, one of them being an exceptionally bright kid who is one of the very few people I would think of who's an authentic genius.
We all struggled for an entire day to think about simplicity.
And I want to give you the answer of this deep scientific thought.
[What is simplicity?
"It's impossible to f..k it up"] (Laughter) So, in a sense, you get what you pay for.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm a cancer doctor, and I walked out of my office and walked by the pharmacy in the hospital three or four years ago, and this was the cover of Fortune magazine sitting in the window of the pharmacy.
And so, as a cancer doctor, you look at this, and you get a little bit downhearted.
But when you start to read the article by Cliff, who himself is a cancer survivor, who was saved by a clinical trial where his parents drove him from New York City to upstate New York to get an experimental therapy for -- at the time -- Hodgkin's disease, which saved his life, he makes remarkable points here.
And the point of the article was that we have gotten reductionist in our view of biology, in our view of cancer.
For the last 50 years, we have focused on treating the individual gene in understanding cancer, not in controlling cancer.
So, this is an astounding table.
And this is something that sobers us in our field everyday in that, obviously, we've made remarkable impacts on cardiovascular disease, but look at cancer. The death rate in cancer in over 50 years hasn't changed.
We've made small wins in diseases like chronic myelogenous leukemia, where we have a pill that can put 100 percent of people in remission, but in general, we haven't made an impact at all in the war on cancer.
So, what I'm going to tell you today, is a little bit of why I think that's the case, and then go out of my comfort zone and tell you where I think it's going, where a new approach -- that we hope to push forward in terms of treating cancer.
Because this is wrong.
So, what is cancer, first of all?
Well, if one has a mass or an abnormal blood value, you go to a doctor, they stick a needle in.
They way we make the diagnosis today is by pattern recognition: Does it look normal? Does it look abnormal?
So, that pathologist is just like looking at this plastic bottle.
This is a normal cell. This is a cancer cell.
That is the state-of-the-art today in diagnosing cancer.
There's no molecular test, there's no sequencing of genes that was referred to yesterday, there's no fancy looking at the chromosomes.
This is the state-of-the-art and how we do it.
You know, I know very well, as a cancer doctor, I can't treat advanced cancer.
So, as an aside, I firmly believe in the field of trying to identify cancer early.
It is the only way you can start to fight cancer, is by catching it early.
We can prevent most cancers.
You know, the previous talk alluded to preventing heart disease.
We could do the same in cancer.
I co-founded a company called Navigenics, where, if you spit into a tube -- and we can look look at 35 or 40 genetic markers for disease, all of which are delayable in many of the cancers -- you start to identify what you could get, and then we can start to work to prevent them.
Because the problem is, when you have advanced cancer, we can't do that much today about it, as the statistics allude to.
So, the thing about cancer is that it's a disease of the aged.
Why is it a disease of the aged?
Because evolution doesn't care about us after we've had our children.
See, evolution protected us during our childbearing years and then, after age 35 or 40 or 45, it said "It doesn't matter anymore, because they've had their progeny."
So if you look at cancers, it is very rare -- extremely rare -- to have cancer in a child, on the order of thousands of cases a year.
As one gets older? Very, very common.
Why is it hard to treat?
Because it's heterogeneous, and that's the perfect substrate for evolution within the cancer.
It starts to select out for those bad, aggressive cells, what we call clonal selection.
But, if we start to understand that cancer isn't just a molecular defect, it's something more, then we'll get to new ways of treating it, as I'll show you.
So, one of the fundamental problems we have in cancer is that, right now, we describe it by a number of adjectives, symptoms: "I'm tired, I'm bloated, I have pain, etc."
You then have some anatomic descriptions, you get that CT scan: "There's a three centimeter mass in the liver."
You then have some body part descriptions: "It's in the liver, in the breast, in the prostate."
And that's about it.
So, our dictionary for describing cancer is very, very poor.
It's basically symptoms.
It's manifestations of a disease.
What's exciting is that over the last two or three years, the government has spent 400 million dollars, and they've allocated another billion dollars, to what we call the Cancer Genome Atlas Project.
So, it is the idea of sequencing all of the genes in the cancer, and giving us a new lexicon, a new dictionary to describe it.
You know, in the mid-1850's in France, they started to describe cancer by body part.
That hasn't changed in over 150 years.
It is absolutely archaic that we call cancer by prostate, by breast, by muscle.
It makes no sense, if you think about it.
So, obviously, the technology is here today, and, over the next several years, that will change.
You will no longer go to a breast cancer clinic.
You will go to a HER2 amplified clinic, or an EGFR activated clinic, and they will go to some of the pathogenic lesions that were involved in causing this individual cancer.
So, hopefully, we will go from being the art of medicine more to the science of medicine, and be able to do what they do in infectious disease, which is look at that organism, that bacteria, and then say, "This antibiotic makes sense, because you have a particular bacteria that will respond to it."
When one is exposed to H1N1, you take Tamiflu, and you can remarkably decrease the severity of symptoms and prevent many of the manifestations of the disease.
Why? Because we know what you have, and we know how to treat it -- although we can't make vaccine in this country, but that's a different story.
The Cancer Genome Atlas is coming out now.
The first cancer was done, which was brain cancer.
In the next month, the end of December, you'll see ovarian cancer, and then lung cancer will come several months after.
There's also a field of proteomics that I'll talk about in a few minutes, which I think is going to be the next level in terms of understanding and classifying disease.
But remember, I'm not pushing genomics, proteomics, to be a reductionist.
I'm doing it so we can identify what we're up against.
And there's a very important distinction there that we'll get to.
In health care today, we spend most of the dollars -- in terms of treating disease -- most of the dollars in the last two years of a person's life.
We spend very little, if any, dollars in terms of identifying what we're up against.
If you could start to move that, to identify what you're up against, you're going to do things a hell of a lot better.
If we could even take it one step further and prevent disease, we can take it enormously the other direction, and obviously, that's where we need to go, going forward.
So, this is the website of the National Cancer Institute.
And I'm here to tell you, it's wrong.
So, the website of the National Cancer Institute says that cancer is a genetic disease.
The website says, "If you look, there's an individual mutation, and maybe a second, and maybe a third, and that is cancer."
But, as a cancer doc, this is what I see.
This isn't a genetic disease.
So, there you see, it's a liver with colon cancer in it, and you see into the microscope a lymph node where cancer has invaded.
You see a CT scan where cancer is in the liver.
Cancer is an interaction of a cell that no longer is under growth control with the environment.
It's not in the abstract; it's the interaction with the environment.
It's what we call a system.
The goal of me as a cancer doctor is not to understand cancer.
And I think that's been the fundamental problem over the last five decades, is that we have strived to understand cancer.
The goal is to control cancer.
And that is a very different optimization scheme, a very different strategy for all of us.
I got up at the American Association of Cancer Research, one of the big cancer research meetings, with 20,000 people there, and I said, "We've made a mistake.
We've all made a mistake, myself included, by focusing down, by being a reductionist.
We need to take a step back."
And, believe it or not, there were hisses in the audience.
People got upset, but this is the only way we're going to go forward.
You know, I was very fortunate to meet Danny Hillis a few years ago.
We were pushed together, and neither one of us really wanted to meet the other.
I said, "Do I really want to meet a guy from Disney, who designed computers?"
And he was saying: Does he really want to meet another doctor?
But people prevailed on us, and we got together, and it's been transformative in what I do, absolutely transformative.
We have designed, and we have worked on the modeling -- and much of these ideas came from Danny and from his team -- the modeling of cancer in the body as complex system.
And I'll show you some data there where I really think it can make a difference and a new way to approach it.
The key is, when you look at these variables and you look at this data, you have to understand the data inputs.
You know, if I measured your temperature over 30 days, and I asked, "What was the average temperature?"
and it came back at 98.7, I would say, "Great."
But if during one of those days your temperature spiked to 102 for six hours, and you took Tylenol and got better, etc., I would totally miss it.
So, one of the problems, the fundamental problems in medicine is that you and I, and all of us, we go to our doctor once a year.
We have discrete data elements; we don't have a time function on them.
Earlier it was referred to this direct life device.
You know, I've been using it for two and a half months.
It's a staggering device, not because it tells me how many kilocalories I do every day, but because it looks, over 24 hours, what I've done in a day.
And I didn't realize that for three hours I'm sitting at my desk, and I'm not moving at all.
And a lot of the functions in the data that we have as input systems here are really different than we understand them, because we're not measuring them dynamically.
And so, if you think of cancer as a system, there's an input and an output and a state in the middle.
So, the states, are equivalent classes of history, and the cancer patient, the input, is the environment, the diet, the treatment, the genetic mutations.
The output are our symptoms: Do we have pain? Is the cancer growing? Do we feel bloated, etc.?
Most of that state is hidden.
So what we do in our field is we change and input, we give aggressive chemotherapy, and we say, "Did that output get better? Did that pain improve, etc.?"
And so, the problem is that it's not just one system, it's multiple systems on multiple scales.
It's a system of systems.
And so, when you start to look at emergent systems, you can look at a neuron under a microscope.
A neuron under the microscope is very elegant with little things sticking out and little things over here, but when you start to put them together in a complex system, and you start to see that it becomes a brain, and that brain can create intelligence, what we're talking about in the body, and cancer is starting to model it like a complex system.
Well, the bad news is that these robust -- and robust is a key word -- emergent systems are very hard to understand in detail.
The good news is you can manipulate them.
You can try to control them without that fundamental understanding of every component.
One of the most fundamental clinical trials in cancer came out in February in the New England Journal of Medicine, where they took women who were pre-menopausal with breast cancer.
So, about the worst kind of breast cancer you can get.
They had gotten their chemotherapy, and then they randomized them, where half got placebo, and half got a drug called Zoledronic acid that builds bone.
It's used to treat osteoporosis, and they got that twice a year.
They looked and, in these 1,800 women, given twice a year a drug that builds bone, you reduce the recurrence of cancer by 35 percent.
Reduce occurrence of cancer by a drug that doesn't even touch the cancer.
So the notion, you change the soil, the seed doesn't grow as well.
You change that system, and you could have a marked effect on the cancer.
Nobody has ever shown -- and this will be shocking -- nobody has ever shown that most chemotherapy actually touches a cancer cell.
It's never been shown.
There's all these elegant work in the tissue culture dishes, that if you give this cancer drug, you can do this effect to the cell, but the doses in those dishes are nowhere near the doses that happen in the body.
If I give a woman with breast cancer a drug called Taxol every three weeks, which is the standard, about 40 percent of women with metastatic cancer have a great response to that drug.
And a response is 50 percent shrinkage.
Well, remember that's not even an order of magnitude, but that's a different story.
They then recur, I give them that same drug every week.
Another 30 percent will respond.
They then recur, I give them that same drug over 96 hours by continuous infusion, another 20 or 30 percent will respond.
So, you can't tell me it's working by the same mechanism in all three size.
It's not. We have no idea the mechanism.
So the idea that chemotherapy may just be disrupting that complex system, just like building bone disrupted that system and reduced recurrence, chemotherapy may work by that same exact way.
The wild thing about that trial also, was that it reduced new primaries, so new cancers, by 30 percent also.
So, the problem is, yours and mine, all of our systems are changing.
They're dynamic.
I mean, this is a scary slide, not to take an aside, but it looks at obesity in the world.
And I'm sorry if you can't read the numbers, they're kind of small.
But, if you start to look at it, that red, that dark color there, more than 75 percent of the population of those countries are obese.
Look a decade ago, look two decades ago: markedly different.
So, our systems today are dramatically different than our systems a decade or two ago.
So the diseases we have today, which reflect patterns in the system over the last several decades, are going to change dramatically over the next decade or so based on things like this.
So, this picture, although it is beautiful, is a 40-gigabyte picture of the whole proteome.
So this is a drop of blood that has gone through a superconducting magnet, and we're able to get resolution where we can start to see all of the proteins in the body.
We can start to see that system.
Each of the red dots are where a protein has actually been identified.
The power of these magnets, the power of what we can do here, is that we can see an individual neutron with this technology.
So, again, this is stuff we're doing with Danny Hillis and a group called Applied Proteomics, where we can start to see individual neutron differences, and we can start to look at that system like we never have before.
So, instead of a reductionist view, we're taking a step back.
So this is a woman, 46 years old, who had recurrent lung cancer.
It was in her brain, in her lungs, in her liver.
She had gotten Carboplatin Taxol, Carboplatin Taxotere, Gemcitabine, Navelbine: Every drug we have she had gotten, and that disease continued to grow.
She had three kids under the age of 12, and this is her CT scan.
And so what this is, is we're taking a cross-section of her body here, and you can see in the middle there is her heart, and to the side of her heart on the left there is this large tumor that will invade and will kill her, untreated, in a matter of weeks.
She goes on a pill a day that targets a pathway, and again, I'm not sure if this pathway was in the system, in the cancer, but it targeted a pathway, and a month later, pow, that cancer's gone.
Six months later it's still gone.
That cancer recurred, and she passed away three years later from lung cancer, but she got three years from a drug whose symptoms predominately were acne.
That's about it.
So, the problem is that the clinical trial was done, and we were a part of it, and in the fundamental clinical trial -- the pivotal clinical trial we call the Phase Three, we refused to use a placebo.
Would you want your mother, your brother, your sister to get a placebo if they had advanced lung cancer and had weeks to live?
And the answer, obviously, is not.
So, it was done on this group of patients.
Ten percent of people in the trial had this dramatic response that was shown here, and the drug went to the FDA, and the FDA said, "Without a placebo, how do I know patients actually benefited from the drug?"
So the morning the FDA was going to meet, this was the editorial in the Wall Street Journal.
(Laughter) And so, what do you know, that drug was approved.
The amazing thing is another company did the right scientific trial, where they gave half placebo and half the drug.
And we learned something important there.
What's interesting is they did it in South America and Canada, where it's "more ethical to give placebos."
They had to give it also in the U.S. to get approval, so I think there were three U.S. patients in upstate New York who were part of the trial.
But they did that, and what they found is that 70 percent of the non-responders lived much longer and did better than people who got placebo.
So it challenged everything we knew in cancer, is that you don't need to get a response.
You don't need to shrink the disease.
If we slow the disease, we may have more of a benefit on patient survival, patient outcome, how they feel, than if we shrink the disease.
The problem is that, if I'm this doc, and I get your CT scan today and you've got a two centimeter mass in your liver, and you come back to me in three months and it's three centimeters, did that drug help you or not?
How do I know?
Would it have been 10 centimeters, or am I giving you a drug with no benefit and significant cost?
So, it's a fundamental problem.
And, again, that's where these new technologies can come in.
And so, the goal obviously is that you go into your doctor's office -- well, the ultimate goal is that you prevent disease, right?
The ultimate goal is that you prevent any of these things from happening.
That is the most effective, cost-effective, best way we can do things today.
But if one is unfortunate to get a disease, you'll go into your doctor's office, he or she will take a drop of blood, and we will start to know how to treat your disease.
The way we've approached it is the field of proteomics, again, this looking at the system.
It's taking a big picture.
The problem with technologies like this is that if one looks at proteins in the body, there are 11 orders of magnitude difference between the high-abundant and the low-abundant proteins.
So, there's no technology in the world that can span 11 orders of magnitude.
And so, a lot of what has been done with people like Danny Hillis and others is to try to bring in engineering principles, try to bring the software.
We can start to look at different components along this spectrum.
And so, earlier was talked about cross-discipline, about collaboration.
And I think one of the exciting things that is starting to happen now is that people from those fields are coming in.
Yesterday, the National Cancer Institute announced a new program called the Physical Sciences and Oncology, where physicists, mathematicians, are brought in to think about cancer, people who never approached it before.
Danny and I got 16 million dollars, they announced yesterday, to try to attach this problem.
A whole new approach, instead of giving high doses of chemotherapy by different mechanisms, to try to bring technology to get a picture of what's actually happening in the body.
So, just for two seconds, how these technologies work -- because I think it's important to understand it.
What happens is every protein in your body is charged, so the proteins are sprayed in, the magnet spins them around, and then there's a detector at the end.
When it hit that detector is dependent on the mass and the charge.
And so we can accurately -- if the magnet is big enough, and your resolution is high enough -- you can actually detect all of the proteins in the body and start to get an understanding of the individual system.
And so, as a cancer doctor, instead of having paper in my chart, in your chart, and it being this thick, this is what data flow is starting to look like in our offices, where that drop of blood is creating gigabytes of data.
Electronic data elements are describing every aspect of the disease.
And certainly the goal is we can start to learn from every encounter and actually move forward, instead of just having encounter and encounter, without fundamental learning.
So, to conclude, we need to get away from reductionist thinking.
We need to start to think differently and radically.
And so, I implore everyone here: Think differently. Come up with new ideas.
Tell them to me or anyone else in our field, because over the last 59 years, nothing has changed.
We need a radically different approach.
You know, Andy Grove stepped down as chairman of the board at Intel -- and Andy was one of my mentors, tough individual.
When Andy stepped down, he said, "No technology will win. Technology itself will win."
And I'm a firm believer, in the field of medicine and especially cancer, that it's going to be a broad platform of technologies that will help us move forward and hopefully help patients in the near-term.
Thank you very much.
John Hockenberry: It's great to be here with you, Tom.
And I want to start with a question that has just been consuming me since I first became familiar with your work.
In you work there's always this kind of hybrid quality of a natural force in some sort of interplay with creative force.
Are they ever in equilibrium in the way that you see your work?
Tom Shannon: Yeah, the subject matter that I'm looking for, it's usually to solve a question.
I had the question popped into my head: What does the cone that connects the sun and the Earth look like if you could connect the two spheres?
And in proportion, what would the size of the sphere and the length, and what would the taper be to the Earth?
And so I went about and made that sculpture, turning it out of solid bronze.
And I did one that was about 35 feet long.
The sun end was about four inches in diameter, and then it tapered over about 35 feet to about a millimeter at the Earth end.
And so for me, it was really exciting just to see what it looks like if you could step outside and into a larger context, as though you were an astronaut, and see these two things as an object, because they are so intimately bound, and one is meaningless without the other.
JH: Is there a relief in playing with these forces?
And I'm wondering how much of a sense of discovery there is in playing with these forces.
TS: Well, like the magnetically levitated objects -- like that silver one there, that was the result of hundreds of experiments with magnets, trying to find a way to make something float with the least possible connection to the ground.
So I got it down to just one tether to be able to support that.
JH: Now is this electromagnetic here, or are these static?
TS: Those are permanent magnets, yeah.
JH: Because if the power went out, there would just be a big noise.
TS: Yeah.
It's really unsatisfactory having plug-in art.
JH: I agree.
TS: The magnetic works are a combination of gravity and magnetism, so it's a kind of mixture of these ambient forces that influence everything.
The sun has a tremendous field that extends way beyond the planets and the Earth's magnetic field protects us from the sun.
So there's this huge invisible shape structures that magnetism takes in the universe.
But with the pendulum, it allows me to manifest these invisible forces that are holding the magnets up.
My sculptures are normally very simplified.
I try to refine them down to very simple forms.
But the paintings become very complex, because I think the fields that are supporting them, they're billowing, and they're interpenetrating, and they're interference patterns.
JH: And they're non-deterministic.
I mean, you don't know necessarily where you're headed when you begin, even though the forces can be calculated.
So the evolution of this -- I gather this isn't your first pendulum.
TS: No. (JH: No.) TS: The first one I did was in the late 70's, and I just had a simple cone with a spigot at the bottom of it.
I threw it into an orbit, and it only had one color, and when it got to the center, the paint kept running out, so I had to run in there, didn't have any control over the spigot remotely.
So that told me right away: I need a remote control device.
But then I started dreaming of having six colors.
I sort of think about it as the DNA -- these colors, the red, blue, yellow, the primary colors and white and black.
And if you put them together in different combinations -- just like printing in a sense, like how a magazine color is printed -- and put them under certain forces, which is orbiting them or passing them back and forth or drawing with them, these amazing things started appearing.
JH: It looks like we're loaded for bear here.
TS: Yeah, well let's put a couple of canvases.
I'll ask a couple of my sons to set up the canvases here.
I want to just say -- so this is Jack, Nick and Louie.
JH: Thanks guys.
TS: So here are the -- JH: All right, I'll get out of the way here.
TS: I'm just going to throw this into an orbit and see if I can paint everybody's shoes in the front.
(Laughter) JH: Whoa. That is ...
ooh, nice.
TS: So something like this.
I'm doing this as a demo, and it's more playful, but inevitably, all of this can be used.
I can redeem this painting, just continuing on, doing layers upon layers.
And I keep it around for a couple of weeks, and I'm contemplating it, and I'll do another session with it and bring it up to another level, where all of this becomes the background, the depth of it.
JH: That's fantastic.
So the valves at the bottom of those tubes there are like radio-controlled airplane valves.
TS: Yes, they're servos with cams that pinch these rubber tubes.
And they can pinch them very tight and stop it, or you can have them wide open.
And all of the colors come out one central port at the bottom.
You can always be changing colors, put aluminum paint, or I could put anything into this.
It could be tomato sauce, or anything could be dispensed -- sand, powders or anything like that.
JH: So many forces there.
You've got gravity, you've got the centrifugal force, you've got the fluid dynamics.
Each of these beautiful paintings, are they images in and of themselves, or are they records of a physical event called the pendulum approaching the canvas?
TS: Well, this painting here, I wanted to do something very simple, a simple, iconic image of two ripples interfering.
So the one on the right was done first, and then the one on the left was done over it.
And then I left gaps so you could see the one that was done before.
And then when I did the second one, it really disturbed the piece -- these big blue lines crashing through the center of it -- and so it created a kind of tension and an overlap.
There are lines in front of the one on the right, and there are lines behind the one on the left, and so it takes it into different planes.
What it's also about, just the little events, the events of the interpenetration of -- JH: Two stars, or -- TS: Two things that happened -- there's an interference pattern, and then a third thing happens.
There are shapes that come about just by the marriage of two events that are happening, and I'm very interested in that.
Like the occurrence of moire patterns.
Like this green one, this is a painting I did about 10 years ago, but it has some -- see, in the upper third -- there are these moires and interference patterns that are radio kind of imagery.
And that's something that in painting I've never seen done.
I've never seen a representation of a kind of radio interference patterns, which are so ubiquitous and such an important part of our lives.
JH: Is that a literal part of the image, or is my eye making that interference pattern -- is my eye completing that interference pattern?
TS: It is the paint actually, makes it real.
It's really manifested there.
If I throw a very concentric circle, or concentric ellipse, it just dutifully makes these evenly spaced lines, which get closer and closer together, which describes how gravity works.
There's something very appealing about the exactitude of science that I really enjoy.
And I love the shapes that I see in scientific observations and apparatus, especially astronomical forms and the idea of the vastness of it, the scale, is very interesting to me.
My focus in recent years has kind of shifted more toward biology.
Some of these paintings, when you look at them very close, odd things appear that really look like horses or birds or crocodiles, elephants.
There are lots of things that appear.
When you look into it, it's sort of like looking at cloud patterns, but sometimes they're very modeled and highly rendered.
And then there are all these forms that we don't know what they are, but they're equally well-resolved and complex.
So I think, conceivably, those could be predictive.
Because since it has the ability to make forms that look like forms that we're familiar with in biology, it's also making other forms that we're not familiar with.
And maybe it's the kind of forms we'll discover underneath the surface of Mars, where there are probably lakes with fish swimming under the surface.
JH: Oh, let's hope so. Oh, my God, let's.
Oh, please, yes. Oh, I'm so there.
You know, it seems at this stage in your life, you also very personally are in this state of confrontation with a sort of dissonant -- I suppose it's an electromagnetic force that somehow governs your Parkinson's and this creative force that is both the artist who is in the here and now and this sort of arc of your whole life.
Is that relevant to your work?
TS: As it turns out, this device kind of comes in handy, because I don't have to have the fine motor skills to do, that I can operate slides, which is more of a mental process.
I'm looking at it and making decisions: It needs more red, it needs more blue, it needs a different shape.
And so I make these creative decisions and can execute them in a much, much simpler way.
I mean, I've got the symptoms.
I guess Parkinson's kind of creeps up over the years, but at a certain point you start seeing the symptoms.
In my case, my left hand has a significant tremor and my left leg also.
I'm left-handed, and so I draw.
All my creations really start on small drawings, which I have thousands of, and it's my way of just thinking.
I draw with a simple pencil, and at first, the Parkinson's was really upsetting, because I couldn't get the pencil to stand still.
JH: So you're not a gatekeeper for these forces.
You don't think of yourself as the master of these forces.
You think of yourself as the servant.
TS: Nature is -- well, it's a godsend.
It just has so much in it.
And I think nature wants to express itself in the sense that we are nature, humans are of the universe.
The universe is in our mind, and our minds are in the universe.
And we are expressions of the universe, basically.
As humans, ultimately being part of the universe, we're kind of the spokespeople or the observer part of the constituency of the universe.
And to interface with it, with a device that lets these forces that are everywhere act and show what they can do, giving them pigment and paint just like an artist, it's a good ally.
It's a terrific studio assistant.
JH: Well, I love the idea that somewhere within this idea of fine motion and control with the traditional skills that you have with your hand, some sort of more elemental force gets revealed, and that's the beauty here.
Tom, thank you so much. It's been really, really great.
TS: Thank you, John.
(Applause)
I am going to speak about corruption, but I would like to juxtapose two different things.
One is the large global economy, the large globalized economy, and the other one is the small, and very limited, capacity of our traditional governments and their international institutions to govern, to shape, this economy.
Because there is this asymmetry, which creates, basically, failing governance.
Failing governance in many areas: in the area of corruption and the area of destruction of the environment, in the area of exploitation of women and children, in the area of climate change, in all the areas in which we really need a capacity to reintroduce the primacy of politics into the economy, which is operating in a worldwide arena.
And I think corruption, and the fight against corruption, and the impact of corruption, is probably one of the most interesting ways to illustrate what I mean with this failure of governance.
Let me talk about my own experience.
I used to work as the director of the World Bank office in Nairobi for East Africa.
At that time, I noticed that corruption, that grand corruption, that systematic corruption, was undermining everything we were trying to do.
And therefore, I began to not only try to protect the work of the World Bank, our own projects, our own programs against corruption, but in general, I thought, "We need a system to protect the people in this part of the world from the ravages of corruption."
And as soon as I started this work, I received a memorandum from the World Bank, from the legal department first, in which they said, "You are not allowed to do this.
You are meddling in the internal affairs of our partner countries.
This is forbidden by the charter of the World Bank, so I want you to stop your doings."
In the meantime, I was chairing donor meetings, for instance, in which the various donors, and many of them like to be in Nairobi -- it is true, it is one of the unsafest cities of the world, but they like to be there because the other cities are even less comfortable.
And in these donor meetings, I noticed that many of the worst projects -- which were put forward by our clients, by the governments, by promoters, many of them representing suppliers from the North -- that the worst projects were realized first.
Let me give you an example: a huge power project, 300 million dollars, to be built smack into one of the most vulnerable, and one of the most beautiful, areas of western Kenya.
And we all noticed immediately that this project had no economic benefits: It had no clients, nobody would buy the electricity there, nobody was interested in irrigation projects.
To the contrary, we knew that this project would destroy the environment: It would destroy riparian forests, which were the basis for the survival of nomadic groups, the Samburu and the Turkana in this area.
So everybody knew this is a, not a useless project, this is an absolute damaging, a terrible project -- not to speak about the future indebtedness of the country for these hundreds of millions of dollars, and the siphoning off of the scarce resources of the economy from much more important activities like schools, like hospitals and so on.
And yet, we all rejected this project, none of the donors was willing to have their name connected with it, and it was the first project to be implemented.
The good projects, which we as a donor community would take under our wings, they took years, you know, you had too many studies, and very often they didn't succeed.
But these bad projects, which were absolutely damaging -- for the economy for many generations, for the environment, for thousands of families who had to be resettled -- they were suddenly put together by consortia of banks, of supplier agencies, of insurance agencies -- like in Germany, Hermes, and so on -- and they came back very, very quickly, driven by an unholy alliance between the powerful elites in the countries there and the suppliers from the North.
Now, these suppliers were our big companies.
They were the actors of this global market, which I mentioned in the beginning.
They were the Siemenses of this world, coming from France, from the UK, from Japan, from Canada, from Germany, and they were systematically driven by systematic, large-scale corruption.
We are not talking about 50,000 dollars here, or 100,000 dollars there, or one million dollars there.
No, we are talking about 10 million, 20 million dollars on the Swiss bank accounts, on the bank accounts of Liechtenstein, of the president's ministers, the high officials in the para-statal sectors.
This was the reality which I saw, and not only one project like that: I saw, I would say, over the years I worked in Africa, I saw hundreds of projects like this.
And so, I became convinced that it is this systematic corruption which is perverting economic policy-making in these countries, which is the main reason for the misery, for the poverty, for the conflicts, for the violence, for the desperation in many of these countries.
That we have today more than a billion people below the absolute poverty line, that we have more than a billion people without proper drinking water in the world, twice that number, more than two billion people without sanitation and so on, and the consequent illnesses of mothers and children, still, child mortality of more than 10 million people every year, children dying before they are five years old: The cause of this is, to a large extent, grand corruption.
Now, why did the World Bank not let me do this work?
I found out afterwards, after I left, under a big fight, the World Bank.
The reason was that the members of the World Bank thought that foreign bribery was okay, including Germany.
In Germany, foreign bribery was allowed.
It was even tax-deductible.
No wonder that most of the most important international operators in Germany, but also in France and the UK and Scandinavia, everywhere, systematically bribed.
Not all of them, but most of them.
And this is the phenomenon which I call failing governance, because when I then came to Germany and started this little NGO here in Berlin, at the Villa Borsig, we were told, "You cannot stop our German exporters from bribing, because we will lose our contracts.
We will lose to the French, we will lose to the Swedes, we'll lose to the Japanese."
And therefore, there was a indeed a prisoner's dilemma, which made it very difficult for an individual company, an individual exporting country to say, "We are not going to continue this deadly, disastrous habit of large companies to bribe."
So this is what I mean with a failing governance structure, because even the powerful government, which we have in Germany, comparatively, was not able to say, "We will not allow our companies to bribe abroad."
They needed help, and the large companies themselves have this dilemma.
Many of them didn't want to bribe.
Many of the German companies, for instance, believe that they are really producing a high-quality product at a good price, so they are very competitive.
They are not as good at bribing as many of their international competitors are, but they were not allowed to show their strengths, because the world was eaten up by grand corruption.
And this is why I'm telling you this: Civil society rose to the occasion.
We had this small NGO, Transparency International.
They began to think of an escape route from this prisoner's dilemma, and we developed concepts of collective action, basically trying to bring various competitors together around the table, explaining to all of them how much it would be in their interests if they simultaneously would stop bribing, and to make a long story short, we managed to eventually get Germany to sign together with the other OECD countries and a few other exporters.
In 1997, a convention, under the auspices of the OECD, which obliged everybody to change their laws and criminalize foreign bribery.
(Applause) Well, thank you. I mean, it's interesting, in doing this, we had to sit together with the companies.
We had here in Berlin, at the Aspen Institute on the Wannsee, we had sessions with about 20 captains of industry, and we discussed with them what to do about international bribery.
In the first session -- we had three sessions over the course of two years.
And President von Weizscker, by the way, chaired one of the sessions, the first one, to take the fear away from the entrepreneurs, who were not used to deal with non-governmental organizations.
And in the first session, they all said, "This is not bribery, what we are doing." This is customary there.
This is what these other cultures demand.
They even applaud it.
In fact, [unclear] still says this today.
And so there are still a lot of people who are not convinced that you have to stop bribing.
But in the second session, they admitted already that they would never do this, what they are doing in these other countries, here in Germany, or in the U.K., and so on.
Cabinet ministers would admit this.
And in the final session, at the Aspen Institute, we had them all sign an open letter to the Kohl government, at the time, requesting that they participate in the OECD convention.
And this is, in my opinion, an example of soft power, because we were able to convince them that they had to go with us.
We had a longer-term time perspective.
We had a broader, geographically much wider, constituency we were trying to defend.
And that's why the law has changed.
That's why Siemens is now in the trouble they are in and that's why MIN is in the trouble they are in.
In some other countries, the OECD convention is not yet properly enforced.
And, again, civil societies breathing down the neck of the establishment.
In London, for instance, where the BAE got away with a huge corruption case, which the Serious Fraud Office tried to prosecute, 100 million British pounds, every year for ten years, to one particular official of one particular friendly country, who then bought for 44 billion pounds of military equipment.
This case, they are not prosecuting in the UK.
Why? Because they consider this as contrary to the security interest of the people of Great Britain.
Civil society is pushing, civil society is trying to get a solution to this problem, also in the U.K., and also in Japan, which is not properly enforcing, and so on.
In Germany, we are pushing the ratification of the UN convention, which is a subsequent convention.
We are, Germany, is not ratifying.
Why? Because it would make it necessary to criminalize the corruption of deputies.
In Germany, we have a system where you are not allowed to bribe a civil servant, but you are allowed to bribe a deputy.
This is, under German law, allowed, and the members of our parliament don't want to change this, and this is why they can't sign the U.N. convention against foreign bribery -- one of they very, very few countries which is preaching honesty and good governance everywhere in the world, but not able to ratify the convention, which we managed to get on the books with about 160 countries all over the world.
I see my time is ticking.
Let me just try to draw some conclusions from what has happened.
I believe that what we managed to achieve in fighting corruption, one can also achieve in other areas of failing governance.
By now, the United Nations is totally on our side.
The World Bank has turned from Saulus to Paulus; under Wolfensohn, they became, I would say, the strongest anti-corruption agency in the world.
Most of the large companies are now totally convinced that they have to put in place very strong policies against bribery and so on.
And this is possible because civil society joined the companies and joined the government in the analysis of the problem, in the development of remedies, in the implementation of reforms, and then later, in the monitoring of reforms.
Of course, if civil society organizations want to play that role, they have to grow into this responsibility.
Not all civil society organizations are good.
The Ku Klux Klan is an NGO.
So, we must be aware that civil society has to shape up itself.
They have to have a much more transparent financial governance.
They have to have a much more participatory governance in many civil society organizations.
We also need much more competence of civil society leaders.
This is why we have set up the governance school and the Center for Civil Society here in Berlin, because we believe most of our educational and research institutions in Germany and continental Europe in general, do not focus enough, yet, on empowering civil society and training the leadership of civil society.
But what I'm saying from my very practical experience: If civil society does it right and joins the other actors -- in particular, governments, governments and their international institutions, but also large international actors, in particular those which have committed themselves to corporate social responsibility -- then in this magical triangle between civil society, government and private sector, there is a tremendous chance for all of us to create a better world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Sadly, in the next 18 minutes when I do our chat, four Americans that are alive will be dead through the food that they eat.
My name's Jamie Oliver.
I'm 34 years old.
I'm from Essex in England and for the last seven years I've worked fairly tirelessly to save lives in my own way.
I'm not a doctor; I'm a chef, I don't have expensive equipment or medicine.
I use information, education.
I profoundly believe that the power of food has a primal place in our homes that binds us to the best bits of life.
We have an awful, awful reality right now.
America, you're at the top of your game.
This is one of the most unhealthy countries in the world.
Can I please just see a raise of hands for how many of you have children in this room today?
Put your hands up.
You can continue to put your hands up, aunties and uncles as well.
Most of you. OK.
We, the adults of the last four generations, have blessed our children with the destiny of a shorter lifespan than their own parents.
Your child will live a life ten years younger than you because of the landscape of food that we've built around them.
Two-thirds of this room, today, in America, are statistically overweight or obese.
You lot, you're all right, but we'll get you eventually, don't worry.
(Laughter) The statistics of bad health are clear, very clear.
We spend our lives being paranoid about death, murder, homicide, you name it; it's on the front page of every paper, CNN.
Look at homicide at the bottom, for God's sake.
Right?
(Laughter) (Applause) Every single one of those in the red is a diet-related disease.
Any doctor, any specialist will tell you that.
Fact: diet-related disease is the biggest killer in the United States, right now, here today.
This is a global problem.
It's a catastrophe.
England is right behind you, as usual.
(Laughter) I know they were close, but not that close.
Mexico, Australia, Germany, India, China, all have massive problems of obesity and bad health.
Think about smoking.
It costs way less than obesity now.
Obesity costs you Americans 10 percent of your health-care bills, 150 billion dollars a year.
In 10 years, it's set to double: 300 billion dollars a year.
Let's be honest, guys, you haven't got that cash.
(Laughter) I came here to start a food revolution that I so profoundly believe in.
We need it. The time is now.
We're in a tipping-point moment.
I've been doing this for seven years.
I've been trying in America for seven years.
Now is the time when it's ripe -- ripe for the picking.
I went to the eye of the storm.
Or it was last year.
We've got a new one this year, but we'll work on that next season.
(Laughter) Huntington, West Virginia. Beautiful town.
I wanted to put heart and soul and people, your public, around the statistics that we've become so used to.
I want to introduce you to some of the people that I care about: your public, your children.
She's 16 years old.
She's got six years to live because of the food that she's eaten.
She's the third generation of Americans that hasn't grown up within a food environment where they've been taught to cook at home or in school, or her mom, or her mom's mom.
She has six years to live.
She's eating her liver to death.
This is a normal family, guys.
Stacy does her best, but she's third-generation as well; she was never taught to cook at home or at school.
Justin here, 12 years old, he's 350 pounds.
He gets bullied, for God's sake.
The daughter there, Katie, she's four years old.
She's obese before she even gets to primary school.
Marissa, she's all right, she's one of your lot.
Her father, who was obese, died in her arms, And then the second most important man in her life, her uncle, died of obesity, and now her step-dad is obese.
You see, the thing is, obesity and diet-related disease doesn't just hurt the people that have it; it's all of their friends, families, brothers, sisters.
Pastor Steve: an inspirational man, one of my early allies in Huntington, West Virginia.
He has to bury the people, OK?
He's fed up with burying his friends, his family, his community.
Come winter, three times as many people die.
He's sick of it.
By the way, this is what they get buried in.
We're not geared up to do this.
Can't even get them out the door, and I'm being serious.
Can't even get them there. Forklift.
This is our landscape of food.
I need you to understand it.
You've probably heard all this before.
Over the last 30 years, what's happened that's ripped the heart out of this country?
Let's be frank and honest.
Let's start with the Main Street.
The big brands are some of the most important powers, powerful powers, in this country.
(Sighs) Supermarkets as well.
Big companies. Big companies.
Thirty years ago, most of the food was largely local and largely fresh.
Now it's largely processed and full of all sorts of additives, extra ingredients, and you know the rest of the story.
Portion size is obviously a massive, massive problem.
Labeling is a massive problem.
The labeling in this country is a disgrace.
The industry wants to self-police themselves.
What, in this kind of climate? They don't deserve it.
How can you say something is low-fat when it's full of so much sugar?
Home.
The biggest problem with the home is that used to be the heart of passing on food culture, what made our society.
That is not happening anymore.
And you know, as we go to work and as life changes, and as life always evolves, we kind of have to look at it holistically -- step back for a moment, and re-address the balance.
It hasn't happened for 30 years, OK?
I want to show you a situation that is very normal right now; the Edwards family.
(Video) Jamie Oliver: Let's have a talk.
This stuff goes through you and your family's body every week.
And I need you to know that this is going to kill your children early.
How are you feeling?
Stacy: Just feeling really sad and depressed right now.
But, you know, I want my kids to succeed in life and this isn't going to get them there.
But I'm killing them.
JO: Yes you are. You are.
Normal.
Let's get on schools, something that I'm fairly much a specialist in.
OK, school.
School was always invented to arm us with the tools to make us creative, do wonderful things, make us earn a living, etc., etc.
You know, it's been kind of in this sort of tight box for a long, long time, OK?
But we haven't really evolved it to deal with the health catastrophes of America, OK?
School food is something that most kids -- 31 million a day, actually -- have twice a day, more than often, breakfast and lunch, 180 days of the year.
So you could say that school food is quite important, really, judging the circumstances.
(Laughter) Before I crack into my rant, which I'm sure you're waiting for -- (Laughter) I need to say one thing, and it's so important in, hopefully, the magic that happens and unfolds in the next three months.
The lunch ladies, the lunch cooks of America -- I offer myself as their ambassador.
I'm not slagging them off.
They're doing the best they can do.
They're doing their best.
But they're doing what they're told, and what they're being told to do is wrong.
The system is highly run by accountants; there's not enough, or any, food-knowledgeable people in the business.
There's a problem: If you're not a food expert, and you've got tight budgets and it's getting tighter, then you can't be creative, you can't duck and dive and write different things around things.
If you're an accountant, and a box-ticker, the only thing you can do in these circumstances is buy cheaper shit.
Now, the reality is, the food that your kids get every day is fast food, it's highly processed, there's not enough fresh food in there at all.
You know, the amount of additives, E numbers, ingredients you wouldn't believe -- there's not enough veggies at all.
French fries are considered a vegetable.
Knives and forks? No, they're too dangerous.
They have scissors in the classroom, but knives and forks? No.
And the way I look at it is: If you don't have knives and forks in your school, you're purely endorsing, from a state level, fast food, because it's handheld.
And yes, by the way, it is fast food: It's sloppy Joes, it's burgers, it's wieners, it's pizzas, it's all of that stuff.
(Sighs) Ten percent of what we spend on health care, as I said earlier, is on obesity, and it's going to double.
We're not teaching our kids.
There's no statutory right to teach kids about food, elementary or secondary school, OK?
We don't teach kids about food, right?
And this is a little clip from an elementary school, which is very common in England.
(Video) Who knows what this is?
Child: Potatoes.
Jamie Oliver: Potato? So, you think these are potatoes?
Do you know what that is?
Child: Broccoli?
JO: What about this? Our good old friend.
Child: Celery.
Child: Onion. JO: Onion? No.
JO: Immediately you get a really clear sense of "Do the kids know anything about where food comes from?"
Who knows what that is? Child: Uh, pear?
JO: What do you think this is? Child: I don't know.
JO: If the kids don't know what stuff is, then they will never eat it.
(Laughter) JO: Normal. England and America, England and America.
Guess what fixed that.
We've got to start teaching our kids about food in schools, period.
(Applause) I want to tell you about something that kind of epitomizes the trouble that we're in, guys, OK?
I want to talk about something so basic as milk.
Every kid has the right to milk at school.
Your kids will be having milk at school, breakfast and lunch, right?
They'll be having two bottles, OK?
But milk ain't good enough anymore.
Don't get me wrong, I support milk -- but someone at the milk board probably paid a lot of money for some geezer to work out that if you put loads of flavorings, colorings and sugar in milk, more kids will drink it.
Yeah.
Obviously now that's going to catch on the apple board is going to work out that if they make toffee apples they'll eat more as well.
Do you know what I mean?
For me, there isn't any need to flavor the milk.
Okay? There's sugar in everything.
I know the ins and outs of those ingredients.
Even the milk hasn't escaped the kind of modern-day problems.
There's our milk. There's our carton.
In that is nearly as much sugar as one of your favorite cans of fizzy pop, and they are having two a day.
We've got one kid, here -- having, you know, eight tablespoons of sugar a day.
You know, there's your week.
There's your month.
And I've taken the liberty of putting in just the five years of elementary school sugar, just from milk.
Now, I don't know about you guys, but judging the circumstances, right, any judge in the whole world, would look at the statistics and the evidence, and they would find any government of old guilty of child abuse.
That's my belief.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Now, if I came up here, and I wish I could come up here today and hang a cure for AIDS or cancer, you'd be fighting and scrambling to get to me.
This, all this bad news, is preventable.
That's the good news.
It's very, very preventable.
So, let's just think about, we got a problem here, we need to reboot.
Here is the thing, right, it cannot just come from one source.
To reboot and make real tangible change, real change, so that I could look you in the white of the eyes and say, "In 10 years' time, the history of your children's lives, happiness -- and let's not forget, you're clever if you eat well, you know you're going to live longer -- all of that stuff, it will look different. OK?"
So, supermarkets.
Where else do you shop so religiously?
How much money do you spend, in your life, in a supermarket?
Love them.
They owe us to put a food ambassador in every major supermarket.
They need to help us shop.
They need to show us how to cook quick, tasty, seasonal meals for people that are busy.
This is not expensive.
It is done in some, and it needs to be done across the board in America soon, and quick.
The big brands, you know, the food brands, need to put food education at the heart of their businesses.
I know, easier said than done.
It's the future. It's the only way.
Fast food.
With the fast-food industry you know, it's very competitive.
I've had loads of secret papers and dealings with fast food restaurants.
I mean, basically they've weaned us on to these hits of sugar, salt and fat, and x, y, and z, and everyone loves them, right?
So, these guys are going to be part of the solution.
But we need to get the government to work with all of the fast food purveyors and the restaurant industry, and over a five, six, seven year period wean of us off the extreme amounts of fat, sugar and all the other non-food ingredients.
Now, also, back to the sort of big brands: labeling, I said earlier, is an absolute farce and has got to be sorted.
Obviously, in schools, we owe it to them to make sure those 180 days of the year, from that little precious age of four, until 18, 20, 24, whatever, they need to be cooked proper, fresh food from local growers on site, OK?
There needs to be a new standard of fresh, proper food for your children, yeah?
(Applause) Under the circumstances, it's profoundly important that every single American child leaves school knowing how to cook 10 recipes that will save their life.
Life skills.
(Applause) That means that they can be students, young parents, and be able to sort of duck and dive around the basics of cooking, no matter what recession hits them next time.
If you can cook, recession money doesn't matter.
The workplace, we haven't really talked about it.
You know, it's now time for corporate responsibility to really look at what they feed or make available to their staff.
The staff are the moms and dads of America's children.
Marissa, her father died in her hand, I think she'd be quite happy if corporate America could start feeding their staff properly.
Definitely they shouldn't be left out.
Now, look, if we do all this stuff, and we can, it's so achievable.
Absolutely.
But the home needs to start passing on cooking again, for sure.
For sure, pass it on as a philosophy.
And for me, it's quite romantic, but it's about if one person teaches three people how to cook something, and they teach three of their mates, that only has to repeat itself 25 times, and that's the whole population of America.
Romantic, yes, but most importantly, it's about trying to get people to realize that every one of your individual efforts makes a difference.
We've got to put back what's been lost.
Huntington's Kitchen.
Huntington, where I made this program, we've got this prime-time program that hopefully will inspire people to really get on this change.
I truly believe that change will happen.
Huntington's Kitchen. I work with a community.
I found local sustainable funding to get every single school in the area from the junk, onto the fresh food: six-and-a-half grand per school.
(Applause) That's all it takes, six-and-a-half grand per school.
The Kitchen is 25 grand a month. Okay?
This can do 5,000 people a year, which is 10 percent of their population, and it's people on people.
You know, it's local cooks teaching local people.
It's free cooking lessons, guys, in the Main Street.
This is real, tangible change, real, tangible change.
Around America, if we just look back now, there is plenty of wonderful things going on.
There is plenty of beautiful things going on.
There are angels around America doing great things in schools -- farm-to-school set-ups, garden set-ups, education -- there are amazing people doing this already.
The problem is they all want to roll out what they're doing to the next school, but there's no cash.
We need to recognize the experts and the angels quickly, identify them, and allow them to easily find the resource to keep rolling out what they're already doing, and doing well.
Businesses of America need to support Mrs. Obama to do the things that she wants to do.
(Applause) And look, I know it's weird having an English person standing here before you talking about all this.
All I can say is: I care.
I'm a father, and I love this country.
And I believe truly, actually, that if change can be made in this country, beautiful things will happen around the world.
If America does it, other people will follow.
It's incredibly important.
(Audience) Yeah!
(Applause) When I was in Huntington, trying to get a few things to work when they weren't, I thought "If I had a magic wand, what would I do?"
And I thought, "You know what?
I'd just love to be put in front of some of the most amazing movers and shakers in America."
I'm here.
So, my wish.
Dyslexic, so I'm a bit slow.
My wish is for you to help a strong, sustainable movement to educate every child about food, to inspire families to cook again, and to empower people everywhere to fight obesity.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause continues)
About a year and a half ago, Stephen Lawler, who also gave a talk here at TED in 2007 on Virtual Earth, brought me over to become the architect of Bing Maps, which is Microsoft's online-mapping effort.
In the past two and a half, we've been very hard at work on redefining the way maps work online.
And we really are seeing this in very different terms from the kind of mapping and direction site that one is used to.
So, the first thing that you might notice about the mapping site is just the fluidity of the zooming and the panning, which, if you're familiar at all with Seadragon, that's where it comes from.
Mapping is, of course, not just about cartography, it's also about imagery.
So, as we zoom-in beyond a certain level this resolves into a kind of Sim City-like virtual view at 45 degrees.
This can be viewed from any of the cardinal directions to show you the 3D structure of the city, all the facades.
Now, we see this space, this three-dimensional environment, as being a canvas on which all sorts of applications can play out, and map's directions are really just one of them.
If you click on this, you'll see some of the ones that we've put out, just in the past couple of months since we've launched.
So, for example, a couple of days after the disaster in Haiti, we had an earthquake map that showed before and after pictures from the sky.
This wonderful one which I don't have time to show you is taking hyper-local blogs in real time and mapping those stories, those entries to the places that are referred to on the blogs.
It's wonderful.
But I'm going to show you some more candy sort of stuff.
So, we see the imagery, of course, not stopping at the sky.
These little green bubbles represent photosynths that users have made.
I'm not going to dive into them either, but photosynths are integrated into the map.
Everything that's cased in blue is an area where we've taken imagery on the ground as well.
And so, when you fly down -- (Applause) Thank you. When you fly down to the ground, and you see this kind of panoramic imagery, the first thing that you might notice is that it's not just a picture, there's just as much three-dimensional understanding of this environment as there is of the three-dimensional city from above, so if I click on something to get a closer view of it, then, the fact that that transition looks as it does, is a function of all of that geometry, all of that 3D understanding behind this model.
Now, I'll show you a fun app that -- we've been working on a collaboration with our friends at Flickr.
This takes Flickr, georegistered imagery and uses photosynth-like processes to connect that imagery to our imagery, so -- I'm not sure if that's the one I actually meant to pull up, but -- (Laughter) But notice -- this is, of course, a popular tourist site, and there are lots of photos around here, and these photos are all taken at different times.
So this one was taken around five.
So that's the Flickr photo, that's our imagery.
So you really see how this kind of crowd-sourced imagery is integrating, in a very deep way, into the map itself.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) There are several reasons why this is interesting and one of them, of course, is time travel.
And I'm not going to show you some of the wonderful historic imagery in here, but there are some with horses and carriages and so on as well.
But what's cool about this is that, not only is it augmenting this visual representation of the world with things that are coming in from users, but it also is the foundation for augmented reality, and that's something that I'll be showing you more of in just a moment.
Now I just made a transition indoors. That's also interesting.
OK, notice there's now a roof above us.
We're inside the Pike Place Market.
And this is something that we're able to do with a backpack camera, so, we're now not only imaging in the street with this camera on tops of cars, but we're also imaging inside.
And from here, we're able to do the same sorts of registration, not only of still images, but also of video.
So this is something that we're now going to try for the first time, live, and this is really, truly, very frightening.
(Laughter) OK.
(Ringing) All right, guys, are you there?
(Noise) All right. I'm hitting it. I'm punching play.
I'm live. All right. There we go.
So, these are our friends in Pike Place Market, the lab.
(Applause) So they're broadcasting this live.
OK, George, can you pan back over to the corner market?
Because I want to show points of interest.
No, no. The other way.
Yeah, yeah, back to the corner, back to the corner.
I don't want to see you guys yet.
OK, OK, back to the corner, back to the corner, back to the corner.
OK, never mind.
What I wanted to show you was these points of interest over here on top of the image because what that gives you a sense of is the way, if you're actually on the spot, you can think about this -- this is taking a step in addition to augmented reality.
What the hell are you guys -- oh, sorry.
(Laughter) We're doing two different -- OK, I'm hanging up now.
We're doing two different things here.
One of them is to take that real ...
(Laughter) All right, let me just take a moment and thank the team.
They've done a fantastic job of pulling this together.
(Applause) I'm going to abandon them now and walk back outside.
And while I walk outside, I'll just mention that here we're using this for telepresence, but you can equally well use this on the spot, for augmented reality.
When you use it on the spot, it means that you're able to bring all of that metadata and information about the world to you.
So here, we're taking the extra step of also broadcasting it.
That was being broadcast, by the way, on a 4G network from the market.
All right, and now there's one last TED talk that Microsoft has given in the past several years.
And that's Curtis Wong, WorldWide Telescope.
So, we're going to head over to the dumpsters, where it's traditional, after a long day at the market, to go out for a break, but also stare up at the sky.
This is the integration of WorldWide Telescope into our maps.
(Applause) This is the current -- thank you -- this is the current time. If we scrub the time, then we can see how the sky will look at different times, and we can get all of this very detailed information about different times, different dates: Let's move the moon a little higher in the sky, maybe change the date.
I would like to kind of zoom in on the moon.
So, this is an astronomically complete representation of the sky integrated right into the Earth.
All right now, I've overrun my time, so I've got to stop.
Thank you all very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk today about energy and climate.
And that might seem a bit surprising, because my full-time work at the foundation is mostly about vaccines and seeds, about the things that we need to invent and deliver to help the poorest two billion live better lives.
But energy and climate are extremely important to these people; in fact, more important than to anyone else on the planet.
The climate getting worse means that many years, their crops won't grow: there will be too much rain, not enough rain; things will change in ways their fragile environment simply can't support.
And that leads to starvation, it leads to uncertainty, it leads to unrest.
So, the climate changes will be terrible for them.
Also, the price of energy is very important to them.
In fact, if you could pick just one thing to lower the price of to reduce poverty, by far you would pick energy.
Now, the price of energy has come down over time.
Really advanced civilization is based on advances in energy.
The coal revolution fueled the Industrial Revolution, and, even in the 1900s, we've seen a very rapid decline in the price of electricity, and that's why we have refrigerators, air-conditioning; we can make modern materials and do so many things.
And so, we're in a wonderful situation with electricity in the rich world.
But as we make it cheaper -- and let's say, let's go for making it twice as cheap -- we need to meet a new constraint, and that constraint has to do with CO2.
CO2 is warming the planet, and the equation on CO2 is actually a very straightforward one.
If you sum up the CO2 that gets emitted, that leads to a temperature increase, and that temperature increase leads to some very negative effects: the effects on the weather; perhaps worse, the indirect effects, in that the natural ecosystems can't adjust to these rapid changes, and so you get ecosystem collapses.
Now, the exact amount of how you map from a certain increase of CO2 to what temperature will be, and where the positive feedbacks are -- there's some uncertainty there, but not very much.
And there's certainly uncertainty about how bad those effects will be, but they will be extremely bad.
I asked the top scientists on this several times: Do we really have to get down to near zero?
Can't we just cut it in half or a quarter?
And the answer is, until we get near to zero, the temperature will continue to rise.
And so that's a big challenge.
It's very different than saying, "We're a twelve-foot-high truck trying to get under a ten-foot bridge, and we can just sort of squeeze under."
This is something that has to get to zero.
Now, we put out a lot of carbon dioxide every year -- over 26 billion tons.
For each American, it's about 20 tons.
For people in poor countries, it's less than one ton.
It's an average of about five tons for everyone on the planet.
And somehow, we have to make changes that will bring that down to zero.
It's been constantly going up.
It's only various economic changes that have even flattened it at all, so we have to go from rapidly rising to falling, and falling all the way to zero.
This equation has four factors, a little bit of multiplication.
So you've got a thing on the left, CO2, that you want to get to zero, and that's going to be based on the number of people, the services each person is using on average, the energy, on average, for each service, and the CO2 being put out per unit of energy.
So let's look at each one of these, and see how we can get this down to zero.
Probably, one of these numbers is going to have to get pretty near to zero.
(Laughter) That's back from high school algebra.
But let's take a look.
First, we've got population.
The world today has 6.8 billion people.
That's headed up to about nine billion.
Now, if we do a really great job on new vaccines, health care, reproductive health services, we could lower that by, perhaps, 10 or 15 percent.
But there, we see an increase of about 1.3.
The second factor is the services we use.
This encompasses everything: the food we eat, clothing, TV, heating.
These are very good things.
Getting rid of poverty means providing these services to almost everyone on the planet.
And it's a great thing for this number to go up.
In the rich world, perhaps the top one billion, we probably could cut back and use less, but every year, this number, on average, is going to go up, and so, overall, that will more than double the services delivered per person.
Here we have a very basic service: Do you have lighting in your house to be able to read your homework?
And, in fact, these kids don't, so they're going out and reading their schoolwork under the street lamps.
Now, efficiency, "E," the energy for each service -- here, finally we have some good news.
We have something that's not going up.
Through various inventions and new ways of doing lighting, through different types of cars, different ways of building buildings -- there are a lot of services where you can bring the energy for that service down quite substantially.
Some individual services even bring it down by 90 percent.
There are other services, like how we make fertilizer, or how we do air transport, where the rooms for improvement are far, far less.
And so overall, if we're optimistic, we may get a reduction of a factor of three to even, perhaps, a factor of six.
But for these first three factors now, we've gone from 26 billion to, at best, maybe 13 billion tons, and that just won't cut it.
So let's look at this fourth factor -- this is going to be a key one -- and this is the amount of CO2 put out per each unit of energy.
So the question is: Can you actually get that to zero?
If you burn coal, no.
If you burn natural gas, no.
Almost every way we make electricity today, except for the emerging renewables and nuclear, puts out CO2.
And so, what we're going to have to do at a global scale, is create a new system.
So we need energy miracles.
Now, when I use the term "miracle," I don't mean something that's impossible.
The microprocessor is a miracle.
The Internet and its services are a miracle.
So the people here have participated in the creation of many miracles.
Usually, we don't have a deadline where you have to get the miracle by a certain date.
Usually, you just kind of stand by, and some come along, some don't.
This is a case where we actually have to drive at full speed and get a miracle in a pretty tight timeline.
Now, I thought, "How could I really capture this?
Is there some kind of natural illustration, some demonstration that would grab people's imagination here?"
I thought back to a year ago when I brought mosquitoes, and somehow people enjoyed that.
(Laughter) It really got them involved in the idea of, you know, there are people who live with mosquitoes.
With energy, all I could come up with is this.
I decided that releasing fireflies would be my contribution to the environment here this year.
So here we have some natural fireflies.
I'm told they don't bite; in fact, they might not even leave that jar.
(Laughter) Now, there's all sorts of gimmicky solutions like that one, but they don't really add up to much.
We need solutions, either one or several, that have unbelievable scale and unbelievable reliability.
And although there's many directions that people are seeking, I really only see five that can achieve the big numbers.
I've left out tide, geothermal, fusion, biofuels.
Those may make some contribution, and if they can do better than I expect, so much the better.
But my key point here is that we're going to have to work on each of these five, and we can't give up any of them because they look daunting, because they all have significant challenges.
Let's look first at burning fossil fuels, either burning coal or burning natural gas.
What you need to do there seems like it might be simple, but it's not.
And that's to take all the CO2, after you've burned it, going out the flue, pressurize it, create a liquid, put it somewhere, and hope it stays there.
Now, we have some pilot things that do this at the 60 to 80 percent level.
But getting up to that full percentage -- that will be very tricky.
And agreeing on where these CO2 quantities should be put will be hard, but the toughest one here is this long-term issue: Who's going to be sure?
Who's going to guarantee something that is literally billions of times larger than any type of waste you think of in terms of nuclear or other things?
This is a lot of volume.
So that's a tough one.
Next would be nuclear.
It also has three big problems: cost, particularly in highly regulated countries, is high; the issue of safety, really feeling good about nothing could go wrong, that, even though you have these human operators, the fuel doesn't get used for weapons.
And then what do you do with the waste?
Although it's not very large, there are a lot of concerns about that.
People need to feel good about it.
So three very tough problems that might be solvable, and so, should be worked on.
The last three of the five, I've grouped together.
These are what people often refer to as the renewable sources.
And they actually -- although it's great they don't require fuel -- they have some disadvantages.
One is that the density of energy gathered in these technologies is dramatically less than a power plant.
This is energy farming, so you're talking about many square miles, thousands of times more area than you think of as a normal energy plant.
Also, these are intermittent sources.
The sun doesn't shine all day, it doesn't shine every day, and likewise, the wind doesn't blow all the time.
And so, if you depend on these sources, you have to have some way of getting the energy during those time periods that it's not available.
So we've got big cost challenges here.
We have transmission challenges; for example, say this energy source is outside your country, you not only need the technology, but you have to deal with the risk of the energy coming from elsewhere.
And, finally, this storage problem.
To dimensionalize this, I went through and looked at all the types of batteries made -- for cars, for computers, for phones, for flashlights, for everything -- and compared that to the amount of electrical energy the world uses.
What I found is that all the batteries we make now could store less than 10 minutes of all the energy.
And so, in fact, we need a big breakthrough here, something that's going to be a factor of 100 better than the approaches we have now.
It's not impossible, but it's not a very easy thing.
Now, this shows up when you try to get the intermittent source to be above, say, 20 to 30 percent of what you're using.
If you're counting on it for 100 percent, you need an incredible miracle battery.
Now, how are we going to go forward on this -- what's the right approach?
Is it a Manhattan Project? What's the thing that can get us there?
Well, we need lots of companies working on this -- hundreds.
In each of these five paths, we need at least a hundred people.
A lot of them, you'll look at and say, "They're crazy."
That's good.
And, I think, here in the TED group, we have many people who are already pursuing this.
Bill Gross has several companies, including one called eSolar that has some great solar thermal technologies.
Vinod Khosla is investing in dozens of companies that are doing great things and have interesting possibilities, and I'm trying to help back that.
Nathan Myhrvold and I actually are backing a company that, perhaps surprisingly, is actually taking the nuclear approach.
There are some innovations in nuclear: modular, liquid.
Innovation really stopped in this industry quite some ago, so the idea that there's some good ideas laying around is not all that surprising.
The idea of TerraPower is that, instead of burning a part of uranium -- the one percent, which is the U235 -- we decided, "Let's burn the 99 percent, the U238."
It is kind of a crazy idea.
In fact, people had talked about it for a long time, but they could never simulate properly whether it would work or not, and so it's through the advent of modern supercomputers that now you can simulate and see that, yes, with the right materials approach, this looks like it would work.
And because you're burning that 99 percent, you have greatly improved cost profile.
You actually burn up the waste, and you can actually use as fuel all the leftover waste from today's reactors.
So instead of worrying about them, you just take that, it's a great thing.
It breeds this uranium as it goes along, so it's kind of like a candle.
You see it's a log there, often referred to as a traveling wave reactor.
In terms of fuel, this really solves the problem.
I've got a picture here of a place in Kentucky.
This is the leftover, the 99 percent, where they've taken out the part they burn now, so it's called depleted uranium.
That would power the US for hundreds of years.
And simply by filtering seawater in an inexpensive process, you'd have enough fuel for the entire lifetime of the rest of the planet.
So, you know, it's got lots of challenges ahead, but it is an example of the many hundreds and hundreds of ideas that we need to move forward.
So let's think: How should we measure ourselves?
What should our report card look like?
Well, let's go out to where we really need to get, and then look at the intermediate.
For 2050, you've heard many people talk about this 80 percent reduction.
That really is very important, that we get there.
And that 20 percent will be used up by things going on in poor countries -- still some agriculture; hopefully, we will have cleaned up forestry, cement.
So, to get to that 80 percent, the developed countries, including countries like China, will have had to switch their electricity generation altogether.
The other grade is: Are we deploying this zero-emission technology, have we deployed it in all the developed countries and are in the process of getting it elsewhere?
That's super important.
That's a key element of making that report card.
Backing up from there, what should the 2020 report card look like?
Well, again, it should have the two elements.
We should go through these efficiency measures to start getting reductions: The less we emit, the less that sum will be of CO2, and therefore, the less the temperature.
But in some ways, the grade we get there, doing things that don't get us all the way to the big reductions, is only equally, or maybe even slightly less, important than the other, which is the piece of innovation on these breakthroughs.
These breakthroughs, we need to move those at full speed, and we can measure that in terms of companies, pilot projects, regulatory things that have been changed.
There's a lot of great books that have been written about this.
The Al Gore book, "Our Choice," and the David MacKay book, "Sustainable Energy Without the Hot Air."
They really go through it and create a framework that this can be discussed broadly, because we need broad backing for this.
There's a lot that has to come together.
So this is a wish.
It's a very concrete wish that we invent this technology.
If you gave me only one wish for the next 50 years -- I could pick who's president, I could pick a vaccine, which is something I love, or I could pick that this thing that's half the cost with no CO2 gets invented -- this is the wish I would pick.
This is the one with the greatest impact.
If we don't get this wish, the division between the people who think short term and long term will be terrible, between the US and China, between poor countries and rich, and most of all, the lives of those two billion will be far worse.
So what do we have to do?
What am I appealing to you to step forward and drive?
We need to go for more research funding.
When countries get together in places like Copenhagen, they shouldn't just discuss the CO2.
They should discuss this innovation agenda.
You'd be stunned at the ridiculously low levels of spending on these innovative approaches.
We do need the market incentives -- CO2 tax, cap and trade -- something that gets that price signal out there.
We need to get the message out.
We need to have this dialogue be a more rational, more understandable dialogue, including the steps that the government takes.
This is an important wish, but it is one I think we can achieve.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause) CA: Thank you.
I mean, first of all, can you give a sense of what scale of investment this is?
Bill Gates: To actually do the software, buy the supercomputer, hire all the great scientists, which we've done, that's only tens of millions.
And even once we test our materials out in a Russian reactor to make sure our materials work properly, then you'll only be up in the hundreds of millions.
The tough thing is building the pilot reactor -- finding the several billion, finding the regulator, the location that will actually build the first one of these.
Once you get the first one built, if it works as advertised, then it's just clear as day, because the economics, the energy density, are so different than nuclear as we know it.
CA: So to understand it right, this involves building deep into the ground, almost like a vertical column of nuclear fuel, of this spent uranium, and then the process starts at the top and kind of works down?
BG: That's right.
Today, you're always refueling the reactor, so you have lots of people and lots of controls that can go wrong, where you're opening it up and moving things in and out -- that's not good.
So if you have very -- (Laughter) very cheap fuel that you can put 60 years in -- just think of it as a log -- put it down and not have those same complexities.
And it just sits there and burns for the 60 years, and then it's done.
CA: It's a nuclear power plant that is its own waste disposal solution.
BG: Yeah; what happens with the waste, you can let it sit there -- there's a lot less waste under this approach -- then you can actually take that and put it into another one and burn that.
And we start out, actually, by taking the waste that exists today that's sitting in these cooling pools or dry-casking by reactors -- that's our fuel to begin with.
So the thing that's been a problem from those reactors is actually what gets fed into ours, and you're reducing the volume of the waste quite dramatically as you're going through this process.
CA: You're talking to different people around the world about the possibilities.
Where is there most interest in actually doing something with this?
BG: Well, we haven't picked a particular place, and there's all these interesting disclosure rules about anything that's called "nuclear."
So we've got a lot of interest.
People from the company have been in Russia, India, China.
I've been back seeing the secretary of energy here, talking about how this fits into the energy agenda.
So I'm optimistic.
This is a variant on something that has been done.
It's an important advance, but it's like a fast reactor, and a lot of countries have built them, so anybody who's done a fast reactor is a candidate to be where the first one gets built.
CA: So, in your mind, timescale and likelihood of actually taking something like this live?
BG: Well, we need -- for one of these high-scale, electro-generation things that's very cheap, we have 20 years to invent and then 20 years to deploy.
That's sort of the deadline that the environmental models have shown us that we have to meet.
And TerraPower -- if things go well, which is wishing for a lot -- could easily meet that.
And there are, fortunately now, dozens of companies -- we need it to be hundreds -- who, likewise, if their science goes well, if the funding for their pilot plants goes well, that they can compete for this.
And it's best if multiple succeed, because then you could use a mix of these things.
We certainly need one to succeed.
CA: In terms of big-scale possible game changers, is this the biggest that you're aware of out there?
BG: An energy breakthrough is the most important thing.
It would have been, even without the environmental constraint, but the environmental constraint just makes it so much greater.
In the nuclear space, there are other innovators.
You know, we don't know their work as well as we know this one, but the modular people, that's a different approach.
There's a liquid-type reactor, which seems a little hard, but maybe they say that about us.
And so, there are different ones, but the beauty of this is a molecule of uranium has a million times as much energy as a molecule of, say, coal.
And so, if you can deal with the negatives, which are essentially the radiation, the footprint and cost, the potential, in terms of effect on land and various things, is almost in a class of its own.
CA: If this doesn't work, then what?
Do we have to start taking emergency measures to try and keep the temperature of the earth stable?
BG: If you get into that situation, it's like if you've been overeating, and you're about to have a heart attack.
Then where do you go?
There is a line of research on what's called geoengineering, which are various techniques that would delay the heating to buy us 20 or 30 years to get our act together.
Now, that's just an insurance policy; you hope you don't need to do that.
Some people say you shouldn't even work on the insurance policy because it might make you lazy, that you'll keep eating because you know heart surgery will be there to save you.
I'm not sure that's wise, given the importance of the problem, but there's now the geoengineering discussion about: Should that be in the back pocket in case things happen faster, or this innovation goes a lot slower than we expect?
CA: Climate skeptics: If you had a sentence or two to say to them, how might you persuade them that they're wrong?
BG: Well, unfortunately, the skeptics come in different camps.
The ones who make scientific arguments are very few.
Are they saying there's negative feedback effects that have to do with clouds that offset things?
There are very, very few things that they can even say there's a chance in a million of those things.
The main problem we have here -- it's kind of like with AIDS: you make the mistake now, and you pay for it a lot later.
And so, when you have all sorts of urgent problems, the idea of taking pain now that has to do with a gain later, and a somewhat uncertain pain thing.
In fact, the IPCC report -- that's not necessarily the worst case, and there are people in the rich world who look at IPCC and say, "OK, that isn't that big of a deal."
The fact is it's that uncertain part that should move us towards this.
But my dream here is that, if you can make it economic, and meet the CO2 constraints, then the skeptics say, "OK, I don't care that it doesn't put out CO2, I kind of wish it did put out CO2.
But I guess I'll accept it, because it's cheaper than what's come before."
(Applause) CA: So that would be your response to the Bjrn Lomborg argument, basically if you spend all this energy trying to solve the CO2 problem, it's going to take away all your other goals of trying to rid the world of poverty and malaria and so forth, it's a stupid waste of the Earth's resources to put money towards that when there are better things we can do.
BG: Well, the actual spending on the R&amp;D piece -- say the US should spend 10 billion a year more than it is right now -- it's not that dramatic.
It shouldn't take away from other things.
The thing you get into big money on, and reasonable people can disagree, is when you have something that's non-economic and you're trying to fund that -- that, to me, mostly is a waste.
Unless you're very close, and you're just funding the learning curve and it's going to get very cheap, I believe we should try more things that have a potential to be far less expensive.
If the trade-off you get into is, "Let's make energy super expensive," then the rich can afford that.
I mean, all of us here could pay five times as much for our energy and not change our lifestyle.
The disaster is for that two billion.
And even Lomborg has changed.
His shtick now is, "Why isn't the R&amp;D getting more discussed?"
He's still, because of his earlier stuff, still associated with the skeptic camp, but he's realized that's a pretty lonely camp, and so, he's making the R&amp;D point.
And so there is a thread of something that I think is appropriate.
The R&amp;D piece -- it's crazy how little it's funded.
CA: Well, Bill, I suspect I speak on behalf of most people here to say I really hope your wish comes true.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Someone once said that politics is, of course, "showbiz for ugly people."
So, on that basis, I feel like I've really arrived.
The other thing to think of is what an honor it is, as a politician, to give a TED talk, particularly here in the U.K., where the reputation of politics, with the expenses scandal, has sunk so low.
There was even a story recently that scientists had thought about actually replacing rats in their experiments with politicians.
And someone asked,"Why?"
and they said, "Well, there's no shortage of politicians, no one really minds what happens to them and, after all, there are some things that rats just won't do."
(Laughter) Now, I know you all love data, so I'm starting with a data-rich slide.
This, I think, is the most important fact to bear in mind in British politics or American politics, and that is: We have run out of money.
We have vast budget deficits.
This is my global public debt clock, and, as you can see, it's 32 trillion and counting.
And I think what this leads to is a very simple recognition, that there's one question in politics at the moment above all other, and it's this one: How do we make things better without spending more money?
Because there isn't going to be a lot of money to improve public services, or to improve government, or to improve so many of the things that politicians talk about.
So what follows from that is that if you think it's all about money -- you can only measure success in public services in health care and education and policing by spending more money, you can only measure progress by spending money -- you're going to have a pretty miserable time.
But if you think a whole lot of other things matter that lead up to well being -- things like your family relationships, friendship, community, values -- then, actually, this is an incredibly exciting time to be in politics.
And the really simple argument I want to make tonight, the really straightforward argument is this: That if we combine the right political philosophy, the right political thinking, with the incredible information revolution that has taken place, and that all of you know so much more about than I do, I think there's an incredible opportunity to actually remake politics, remake government, remake public services, and achieve what's up on that slide, which is a big increase in our well-being.
That's the argument I want to make tonight.
So, starting with the political philosophy.
Now I'm not saying for a minute that British Conservatives have all the answers.
Of course we don't.
But there are two things at heart that I think drive a conservative philosophy that are really relevant to this whole debate.
The first is this: We believe that if you give people more power and control over their lives, if you give people more choice, if you put them in the driving seat, then actually, you can create a stronger and better society.
And if you marry this fact with the incredible abundance of information that we have in our world today, I think you can completely, as I've said, remake politics, remake government, remake your public services.
The second thing we believe is we believe in going with the grain of human nature.
Politics and politicians will only succeed if they actually try and treat with people as they are, rather than as they would like them to be.
Now, if you combine this very simple, very conservative thought -- go with the grain of human nature -- with all the advances in behavioral economics, some of which we were just hearing about, again, I think we can achieve a real increase in well-being, in happiness, in a stronger society without necessarily having to spend a whole lot more money.
Now, why do I think now is the moment to make this argument?
Well, I'm afraid you're going to suffer a short, condensed history lesson about what I would say are the three passages of history: the pre-bureaucratic age, the bureaucratic age and what we now live in, which I think is a post-bureaucratic age.
A simpler way of thinking of it is that we have gone from a world of local control, then we went to a world of central control, and now we're in a world of people control.
Local power, central power, now, people power.
Now, here is King Cnut, king a thousand years ago.
Thought he could turn back the waves; couldn't turn back the waves.
Couldn't actually turn back very much, because if you were king a thousand years ago, while it still took hours and hours and weeks and weeks to traverse your own country, there wasn't much you were in charge of.
You weren't in charge of policing, justice, education, health, welfare.
You could just about go to war and that was about it.
This was the pre-bureaucratic age, an age in which everything had to be local.
You had to have local control because there was no nationally-available information because travel was so restricted.
So this was the pre-bureaucratic age.
Next part of the cold history lesson, the lovely picture of the British Industrial Revolution.
Suddenly, all sorts of transport, travel information were possible, and this gave birth to, what I like to call, the bureaucratic age.
And hopefully this slide is going to morph beautifully. There we are.
Suddenly, you have the big, strong, central state.
It was able -- but only it was able -- to organize health care, education, policing, justice.
And it was a world of, as I say, not local power, but now central power.
It had sucked all that power up from the localities.
It was able to do that itself.
The next great stage, which all of you are so familiar with: the massive information revolution.
Just consider this one fact: One hundred years ago, sending these 10 words cost 50 dollars.
Right now, here we are linked up to Long Beach and everywhere else, and all these secret locations for a fraction of that cost, and we can send and receive huge quantities of information without it costing anything.
So we're now living in a post-bureaucratic age, where genuine people power is possible.
Now, what does this mean for our politics, for our public services, for our government?
Well I can't, in the time I've got, give huge numbers of examples, but let me just give a few of the ways that life can change.
And this is so obvious, in a way, because you think about how all of you have changed the way we shop, the way we travel, the way that business is done.
That is already happened; the information and Internet revolution has actually gone all the way through our societies in so many different ways, but it hasn't, in every way, yet touched our government.
So, how could this happen?
Well, I think there are three chief ways that it should make an enormous difference: in transparency, in greater choice and in accountability, in giving us that genuine people power.
If we take transparency, here is one of my favorite websites, the Missouri Accountability Portal.
In the old days, only the government could hold the information, and only a few elected people could try and grab that information and question it and challenge it.
Now here, on one website, one state in America, every single dollar spent by that government is searchable, is analyzable, is checkable.
Think of the huge change that means: Any business that wants to bid for a government contract can see what currently is being spent.
Anyone thinking, "I could do that service better, I could deliver it cheaper," it's all available there.
We have only, in government and in politics, started to scratch the surface of what people are doing in the commercial world with the information revolution.
So, complete transparency will make a huge difference.
In this country, if we win the election, we are going to make all government spending over 25,000 pounds transparent and available online, searchable for anyone to see.
We're going to make every contract -- we're announcing this today -- available on the Internet so anyone can see what the terms are, what the conditions are, driving huge value for money, but also huge increases, I believe, in well-being as well.
Choice. Now you all shop online, compare online, do everything online, and yet this revolution has hardly touched the surface of public services like education, or health care or policing, and you're going to see this change massively.
We should be making this change with the information revolution in our country, with searchable health sites, so you can see what operations work out properly, what records doctors have, the cleanliness of hospitals, who does best at infection control -- all of the information that would once be locked in the Department of Health is now available for all of us to see.
And the third of these big changes: accountability.
This, I think, is a huge change.
It is a crime map. This is a crime map from Chicago.
So, instead of having a situation where only the police have the information about which crimes are committed where, and we have to employ people in government to try and hold the police to account, suddenly, we've got this vast opportunity for people power, where we, as citizens, can see what crimes are being committed -- where, when and by whom -- and we can hold the police to account.
And you can see this looks a bit like a chef's hat, but actually that's an assault, the one in blue.
You can see what crime is committed where, and you have the opportunity to hold your police force to account.
So those three ways -- transparency, accountability and choice -- will make a huge difference.
Now I also said the other principle that I think we should work on is understanding of people, is recognizing that going with the grain of human nature you can achieve so much more.
Now, we're got a huge revolution in understanding of why people behave in the way that they do, and a great opportunity to put that knowledge and information to greater use.
We're working with some of these people.
We're being advised by some of these people, as was said, to try and bring all the experience to book.
Let me just give you one example that I think is incredibly simple, and I love.
We want to get people to be more energy efficient.
Why? It cuts fuel poverty, it cuts their bills, and it cuts carbon emissions at the same time.
How do you do it?
Well, we've had government information campaigns over the years when they tell you to switch off the lights when you leave the home.
We even had -- one government minister once told us to brush our teeth in the dark.
I don't think they lasted very long.
Look at what this does. This is a simple piece of behavioral economics.
The best way to get someone to cut their electricity bill is to show them their own spending, to show them what their neighbors are spending, and then show what an energy conscious neighbor is spending.
That sort of behavioral economics can transform people's behavior in a way that all the bullying and all the information and all the badgering from a government cannot possibly achieve.
Other examples are recycling.
We all know we need to recycle more.
How do we make it happen?
All the proof from America is that actually, if you pay people to recycle, if you give them a carrot rather than a stick, you can transform their behavior.
So what does all this add up to?
Here are my two favorite U.S. speeches of the last 50 years.
Obviously, here we have JFK with that incredibly simple and powerful formulation, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country," an incredibly noble sentiment.
But when he made that speech, what could you do to build the stronger, better society?
You could fight for your country, you could die for your country, you could serve in your country's civil service, but you didn't really have the information and the knowledge and the ability to help build the stronger society in the way that you do now.
And I think an even more wonderful speech, which I'm going to read a big chunk of, which sums up what I said at the beginning about believing there is more to life than money, and more that we should try and measure than money.
And it is Robert Kennedy's beautiful description of why gross national product captures so little: It "does not allow for the health of our children, the quality of their education, or the joy of their play.
It does not include the beauty of our poetry or the strength of our marriages, the intelligence of our public debate.
It measures neither our wit nor our courage, neither our wisdom nor our learning, neither our compassion nor our devotion to our country.
It measures everything, in short, except that which makes life worthwhile."
Again, a sentiment that was so noble and beautifully put 40 years ago, and a beautiful dream 40 years ago, but now with the huge advances in information technology, with the massive changes in behavioral economics, with all that we know about how you advance well-being, that if we combine those insights of giving power to people, and using information to make that possible, and using the insight of going with the grain of human nature, while at the same time, understanding why people behave in the way they do, it is a dream more easy to realize today than it was when it was made in that beautiful speech 40 years ago.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to share with you a discovery that I made a few months ago while writing an article for Italian Wired.
I always keep my thesaurus handy whenever I'm writing anything, but I'd already finished editing the piece, and I realized that I had never once in my life looked up the word "disabled" to see what I'd find.
Let me read you the entry.
"Disabled, adjective: crippled, helpless, useless, wrecked, stalled, maimed, wounded, mangled, lame, mutilated, run-down, worn-out, weakened, impotent, castrated, paralyzed, handicapped, senile, decrepit, laid-up, done-up, done-for, done-in cracked-up, counted-out; see also hurt, useless and weak.
Antonyms, healthy, strong, capable."
I was reading this list out loud to a friend and at first was laughing, it was so ludicrous, but I'd just gotten past "mangled," and my voice broke, and I had to stop and collect myself from the emotional shock and impact that the assault from these words unleashed.
You know, of course, this is my raggedy old thesaurus so I'm thinking this must be an ancient print date, right?
But, in fact, the print date was the early 1980s, when I would have been starting primary school and forming an understanding of myself outside the family unit and as related to the other kids and the world around me.
And, needless to say, thank God I wasn't using a thesaurus back then.
I mean, from this entry, it would seem that I was born into a world that perceived someone like me to have nothing positive whatsoever going for them, when in fact, today I'm celebrated for the opportunities and adventures my life has procured.
So, I immediately went to look up the 2009 online edition, expecting to find a revision worth noting.
Here's the updated version of this entry.
Unfortunately, it's not much better.
I find the last two words under "Near Antonyms," particularly unsettling: "whole" and "wholesome."
So, it's not just about the words.
It's what we believe about people when we name them with these words.
It's about the values behind the words, and how we construct those values.
Our language affects our thinking and how we view the world and how we view other people.
In fact, many ancient societies, including the Greeks and the Romans, believed that to utter a curse verbally was so powerful, because to say the thing out loud brought it into existence.
So, what reality do we want to call into existence: a person who is limited, or a person who's empowered?
By casually doing something as simple as naming a person, a child, we might be putting lids and casting shadows on their power.
Wouldn't we want to open doors for them instead?
One such person who opened doors for me was my childhood doctor at the A.I. duPont Institute in Wilmington, Delaware.
His name was Dr. Pizzutillo, an Italian American, whose name, apparently, was too difficult for most Americans to pronounce, so he went by Dr. P.
And Dr. P always wore really colorful bow ties and had the very perfect disposition to work with children.
I loved almost everything about my time spent at this hospital, with the exception of my physical therapy sessions.
I had to do what seemed like innumerable repetitions of exercises with these thick, elastic bands -- different colors, you know -- to help build up my leg muscles, and I hated these bands more than anything -- I hated them, had names for them. I hated them.
And, you know, I was already bargaining, as a five year-old child, with Dr. P to try to get out of doing these exercises, unsuccessfully, of course.
And, one day, he came in to my session -- exhaustive and unforgiving, these sessions -- and he said to me, "Wow. Aimee, you are such a strong and powerful little girl, I think you're going to break one of those bands.
When you do break it, I'm going to give you a hundred bucks."
Now, of course, this was a simple ploy on Dr. P's part to get me to do the exercises I didn't want to do before the prospect of being the richest five-year-old in the second floor ward, but what he effectively did for me was reshape an awful daily occurrence into a new and promising experience for me.
And I have to wonder today to what extent his vision and his declaration of me as a strong and powerful little girl shaped my own view of myself as an inherently strong, powerful and athletic person well into the future.
This is an example of how adults in positions of power can ignite the power of a child.
But, in the previous instances of those thesaurus entries, our language isn't allowing us to evolve into the reality that we would all want, the possibility of an individual to see themselves as capable.
Our language hasn't caught up with the changes in our society, many of which have been brought about by technology.
Certainly, from a medical standpoint, my legs, laser surgery for vision impairment, titanium knees and hip replacements for aging bodies that are allowing people to more fully engage with their abilities, and move beyond the limits that nature has imposed on them -- not to mention social networking platforms allow people to self-identify, to claim their own descriptions of themselves, so they can go align with global groups of their own choosing.
So, perhaps technology is revealing more clearly to us now what has always been a truth: that everyone has something rare and powerful to offer our society, and that the human ability to adapt is our greatest asset.
The human ability to adapt, it's an interesting thing, because people have continually wanted to talk to me about overcoming adversity, and I'm going to make an admission: This phrase never sat right with me, and I always felt uneasy trying to answer people's questions about it, and I think I'm starting to figure out why.
Implicit in this phrase of "overcoming adversity" is the idea that success, or happiness, is about emerging on the other side of a challenging experience unscathed or unmarked by the experience, as if my successes in life have come about from an ability to sidestep or circumnavigate the presumed pitfalls of a life with prosthetics, or what other people perceive as my disability.
But, in fact, we are changed. We are marked, of course, by a challenge, whether physically, emotionally or both.
And I'm going to suggest that this is a good thing.
Adversity isn't an obstacle that we need to get around in order to resume living our life.
It's part of our life.
And I tend to think of it like my shadow.
Sometimes I see a lot of it, sometimes there's very little, but it's always with me.
And, certainly, I'm not trying to diminish the impact, the weight, of a person's struggle.
There is adversity and challenge in life, and it's all very real and relative to every single person, but the question isn't whether or not you're going to meet adversity, but how you're going to meet it.
So, our responsibility is not simply shielding those we care for from adversity, but preparing them to meet it well.
And we do a disservice to our kids when we make them feel that they're not equipped to adapt.
There's an important difference and distinction between the objective medical fact of my being an amputee and the subjective societal opinion of whether or not I'm disabled.
And, truthfully, the only real and consistent disability I've had to confront is the world ever thinking that I could be described by those definitions.
In our desire to protect those we care about by giving them the cold, hard truth about their medical prognosis, or, indeed, a prognosis on the expected quality of their life, we have to make sure that we don't put the first brick in a wall that will actually disable someone.
Perhaps the existing model of only looking at what is broken in you and how do we fix it, serves to be more disabling to the individual than the pathology itself.
By not treating the wholeness of a person, by not acknowledging their potency, we are creating another ill on top of whatever natural struggle they might have.
We are effectively grading someone's worth to our community.
So we need to see through the pathology and into the range of human capability.
And, most importantly, there's a partnership between those perceived deficiencies and our greatest creative ability.
So it's not about devaluing, or negating, these more trying times as something we want to avoid or sweep under the rug, but instead to find those opportunities wrapped in the adversity.
So maybe the idea I want to put out there is not so much overcoming adversity as it is opening ourselves up to it, embracing it, grappling with it, to use a wrestling term, maybe even dancing with it.
And, perhaps, if we see adversity as natural, consistent and useful, we're less burdened by the presence of it.
This year we celebrate the 200th birthday of Charles Darwin, and it was 150 years ago, when writing about evolution, that Darwin illustrated, I think, a truth about the human character.
To paraphrase: It's not the strongest of the species that survives, nor is it the most intelligent that survives; it is the one that is most adaptable to change.
Conflict is the genesis of creation.
From Darwin's work, amongst others, we can recognize that the human ability to survive and flourish is driven by the struggle of the human spirit through conflict into transformation.
So, again, transformation, adaptation, is our greatest human skill.
And, perhaps, until we're tested, we don't know what we're made of.
Maybe that's what adversity gives us: a sense of self, a sense of our own power.
So, we can give ourselves a gift.
We can re-imagine adversity as something more than just tough times.
Maybe we can see it as change.
Adversity is just change that we haven't adapted ourselves to yet.
I think the greatest adversity that we've created for ourselves is this idea of normalcy.
Now, who's normal?
There's no normal.
There's common, there's typical. There's no normal, and would you want to meet that poor, beige person if they existed?
(Laughter) I don't think so.
If we can change this paradigm from one of achieving normalcy to one of possibility -- or potency, to be even a little bit more dangerous -- we can release the power of so many more children, and invite them to engage their rare and valuable abilities with the community.
Anthropologists tell us that the one thing we as humans have always required of our community members is to be of use, to be able to contribute.
There's evidence that Neanderthals, 60,000 years ago, carried their elderly and those with serious physical injury, and perhaps it's because the life experience of survival of these people proved of value to the community.
They didn't view these people as broken and useless; they were seen as rare and valuable.
A few years ago, I was in a food market in the town where I grew up in that red zone in northeastern Pennsylvania, and I was standing over a bushel of tomatoes.
It was summertime: I had shorts on.
I hear this guy, his voice behind me say, "Well, if it isn't Aimee Mullins."
And I turn around, and it's this older man. I have no idea who he is.
And I said, "I'm sorry, sir, have we met? I don't remember meeting you."
He said, "Well, you wouldn't remember meeting me.
I mean, when we met I was delivering you from your mother's womb."
(Laughter) Oh, that guy.
And, but of course, actually, it did click.
This man was Dr. Kean, a man that I had only known about through my mother's stories of that day, because, of course, typical fashion, I arrived late for my birthday by two weeks.
And so my mother's prenatal physician had gone on vacation, so the man who delivered me was a complete stranger to my parents.
And, because I was born without the fibula bones, and had feet turned in, and a few toes in this foot and a few toes in that, he had to be the bearer -- this stranger had to be the bearer of bad news.
He said to me, "I had to give this prognosis to your parents that you would never walk, and you would never have the kind of mobility that other kids have or any kind of life of independence, and you've been making liar out of me ever since."
(Laughter) (Applause) The extraordinary thing is that he said he had saved newspaper clippings throughout my whole childhood, whether winning a second grade spelling bee, marching with the Girl Scouts, you know, the Halloween parade, winning my college scholarship, or any of my sports victories, and he was using it, and integrating it into teaching resident students, med students from Hahnemann Medical School and Hershey Medical School.
And he called this part of the course the X Factor, the potential of the human will.
No prognosis can account for how powerful this could be as a determinant in the quality of someone's life.
And Dr. Kean went on to tell me, he said, "In my experience, unless repeatedly told otherwise, and even if given a modicum of support, if left to their own devices, a child will achieve."
See, Dr. Kean made that shift in thinking.
He understood that there's a difference between the medical condition and what someone might do with it.
And there's been a shift in my thinking over time, in that, if you had asked me at 15 years old, if I would have traded prosthetics for flesh-and-bone legs, I wouldn't have hesitated for a second.
I aspired to that kind of normalcy back then.
But if you ask me today, I'm not so sure.
And it's because of the experiences I've had with them, not in spite of the experiences I've had with them.
And perhaps this shift in me has happened because I've been exposed to more people who have opened doors for me than those who have put lids and cast shadows on me.
See, all you really need is one person to show you the epiphany of your own power, and you're off.
If you can hand somebody the key to their own power -- the human spirit is so receptive -- if you can do that and open a door for someone at a crucial moment, you are educating them in the best sense.
You're teaching them to open doors for themselves.
In fact, the exact meaning of the word "educate" comes from the root word "educe."
It means "to bring forth what is within, to bring out potential."
So again, which potential do we want to bring out?
There was a case study done in 1960s Britain, when they were moving from grammar schools to comprehensive schools.
It's called the streaming trials. We call it "tracking" here in the States.
It's separating students from A, B, C, D and so on.
And the "A students" get the tougher curriculum, the best teachers, etc.
Well, they took, over a three-month period, D-level students, gave them A's, told them they were "A's," told them they were bright, and at the end of this three-month period, they were performing at A-level.
And, of course, the heartbreaking, flip side of this study, is that they took the "A students" and told them they were "D's."
And that's what happened at the end of that three-month period.
Those who were still around in school, besides the people who had dropped out.
A crucial part of this case study was that the teachers were duped too.
The teachers didn't know a switch had been made.
They were simply told, "These are the 'A-students,' these are the 'D-students.'" And that's how they went about teaching them and treating them.
So, I think that the only true disability is a crushed spirit, a spirit that's been crushed doesn't have hope, it doesn't see beauty, it no longer has our natural, childlike curiosity and our innate ability to imagine.
If instead, we can bolster a human spirit to keep hope, to see beauty in themselves and others, to be curious and imaginative, then we are truly using our power well.
When a spirit has those qualities, we are able to create new realities and new ways of being.
I'd like to leave you with a poem by a fourteenth-century Persian poet named Hafiz that my friend, Jacques Dembois told me about, and the poem is called "The God Who Only Knows Four Words": "Every child has known God, not the God of names, not the God of don'ts, but the God who only knows four words and keeps repeating them, saying, 'Come dance with me.
Come, dance with me. Come, dance with me.'" Thank you.
(Applause)
If you'd like to learn how to play the lobster, we have some here.
And that's not a joke, we really do.
So come up afterwards and I'll show you how to play a lobster.
So, actually, I started working on what's called the mantis shrimp a few years ago because they make sound.
This is a recording I made of a mantis shrimp that's found off the coast of California.
And while that's an absolutely fascinating sound, it actually turns out to be a very difficult project.
And while I was struggling to figure out how and why mantis shrimp, or stomatopods, make sound, I started to think about their appendages.
And mantis shrimp are called "mantis shrimp" after the praying mantises, which also have a fast feeding appendage. And I started to think, well, maybe it will be interesting, while listening to their sounds, to figure out how these animals generate very fast feeding strikes.
And so today I'll talk about the extreme stomatopod strike, work that I've done in collaboration with Wyatt Korff and Roy Caldwell.
So, mantis shrimp come in two varieties: there are spearers and smashers.
And this is a spearing mantis shrimp, or stomatopod.
And he lives in the sand, and he catches things that go by overhead.
So, a quick strike like that. And if we slow it down a bit, this is the mantis shrimp -- the same species -- recorded at 1,000 frames a second, played back at 15 frames per second.
And you can see it's just a really spectacular extension of the limbs, exploding upward to actually just catch a dead piece of shrimp that I had offered it.
Now, the other type of mantis shrimp is the smasher stomatopod, and these guys open up snails for a living.
And so this guy gets the snail all set up and gives it a good whack.
(Laughter) So, I'll play it one more time.
He wiggles it in place, tugs it with his nose, and smash.
And a few smashes later, the snail is broken open, and he's got a good dinner.
So, the smasher raptorial appendage can stab with a point at the end, or it can smash with the heel.
And today I'll talk about the smashing type of strike.
And so the first question that came to mind was, well, how fast does this limb move?
Because it's moving pretty darn fast on that video.
And I immediately came upon a problem.
Every single high-speed video system in the biology department at Berkeley wasn't fast enough to catch this movement.
We simply couldn't capture it on video.
And so this had me stymied for quite a long period of time.
And then a BBC crew came cruising through the biology department, looking for a story to do about new technologies in biology.
And so we struck up a deal.
I said, "Well, if you guys rent the high-speed video system that could capture these movements, you guys can film us collecting the data."
And believe it or not, they went for it. (Laughter) So we got this incredible video system. It's very new technology -- it just came out about a year ago -- that allows you to film at extremely high speeds in low light.
And low light is a critical issue with filming animals, because if it's too high, you fry them. (Laughter) So this is a mantis shrimp. There are the eyes up here, and there's that raptorial appendage, and there's the heel.
And that thing's going to swing around and smash the snail.
And the snail's wired to a stick, so he's a little bit easier to set up the shot. And -- yeah.
(Laughter) I hope there aren't any snail rights activists around here.
(Laughter) So this was filmed at 5,000 frames per second, and I'm playing it back at 15. And so this is slowed down 333 times.
And as you'll notice, it's still pretty gosh darn fast slowed down 333 times. It's an incredibly powerful movement.
The whole limb extends out. The body flexes backwards -- just a spectacular movement.
And so what we did is, we took a look at these videos, and we measured how fast the limb was moving to get back to that original question.
And we were in for our first surprise.
So what we calculated was that the limbs were moving at the peak speed ranging from 10 meters per second all the way up to 23 meters per second.
And for those of you who prefer miles per hour, that's over 45 miles per hour in water. And this is really darn fast.
In fact, it's so fast we were able to add a new point on the extreme animal movement spectrum.
And mantis shrimp are officially the fastest measured feeding strike of any animal system. So our first surprise.
(Applause) So that was really cool and very unexpected.
So, you might be wondering, well, how do they do it?
And actually, this work was done in the 1960s by a famous biologist named Malcolm Burrows.
And what he showed in mantis shrimp is that they use what's called a "catch mechanism," or "click mechanism."
And what this basically consists of is a large muscle that takes a good long time to contract, and a latch that prevents anything from moving.
So the muscle contracts, and nothing happens.
And once the muscle's contracted completely, everything's stored up -- the latch flies upward, and you've got the movement.
And that's basically what's called a "power amplification system."
It takes a long time for the muscle to contract, and a very short time for the limb to fly out.
And so I thought that this was sort of the end of the story.
This was how mantis shrimps make these very fast strikes.
But then I took a trip to the National Museum of Natural History.
And if any of you ever have a chance, backstage of the National Museum of Natural History is one of the world's best collections of preserved mantis shrimp. And what -- (Laughter) this is serious business for me.
(Laughter) So, this -- what I saw, on every single mantis shrimp limb, whether it's a spearer or a smasher, is a beautiful saddle-shaped structure right on the top surface of the limb. And you can see it right here.
It just looks like a saddle you'd put on a horse.
It's a very beautiful structure.
And it's surrounded by membranous areas. And those membranous areas suggested to me that maybe this is some kind of dynamically flexible structure.
And this really sort of had me scratching my head for a while.
And then we did a series of calculations, and what we were able to show is that these mantis shrimp have to have a spring.
There needs to be some kind of spring-loaded mechanism in order to generate the amount of force that we observe, and the speed that we observe, and the output of the system.
So we thought, OK, this must be a spring -- the saddle could very well be a spring.
And we went back to those high-speed videos again, and we could actually visualize the saddle compressing and extending.
And I'll just do that one more time.
And then if you take a look at the video -- it's a little bit hard to see -- it's outlined in yellow.
The saddle is outlined in yellow. You can actually see it extending over the course of the strike, and actually hyperextending.
So, we've had very solid evidence showing that that saddle-shaped structure actually compresses and extends, and does, in fact, function as a spring.
The saddle-shaped structure is also known as a "hyperbolic paraboloid surface," or an "anticlastic surface."
And this is very well known to engineers and architects, because it's a very strong surface in compression.
It has curves in two directions, one curve upward and opposite transverse curve down the other, so any kind of perturbation spreads the forces over the surface of this type of shape.
So it's very well known to engineers, not as well known to biologists.
It's also known to quite a few people who make jewelry, because it requires very little material to build this type of surface, and it's very strong.
So if you're going to build a thin gold structure, it's very nice to have it in a shape that's strong.
Now, it's also known to architects. One of the most famous architects is Eduardo Catalano, who popularized this structure.
And what's shown here is a saddle-shaped roof that he built that's 87 and a half feet spanwise.
It's two and a half inches thick, and supported at two points.
And one of the reasons why he designed roofs this way is because it's -- he found it fascinating that you could build such a strong structure that's made of so few materials and can be supported by so few points.
And all of these are the same principles that apply to the saddle-shaped spring in stomatopods.
In biological systems it's important not to have a whole lot of extra material requirements for building it.
So, very interesting parallels between the biological and the engineering worlds. And interestingly, this turns out -- the stomatopod saddle turns out to be the first described biological hyperbolic paraboloid spring.
That's a bit long, but it is sort of interesting.
So the next and final question was, well, how much force does a mantis shrimp produce if they're able to break open snails?
And so I wired up what's called a load cell.
A load cell measures forces, and this is actually a piezoelectronic load cell that has a little crystal in it.
And when this crystal is squeezed, the electrical properties change and it -- which -- in proportion to the forces that go in.
So these animals are wonderfully aggressive, and are really hungry all the time. And so all I had to do was actually put a little shrimp paste on the front of the load cell, and they'd smash away at it.
And so this is just a regular video of the animal just smashing the heck out of this load cell.
And we were able to get some force measurements out.
And again, we were in for a surprise.
I purchased a 100-pound load cell, thinking, no animal could produce more than 100 pounds at this size of an animal.
And what do you know? They immediately overloaded the load cell.
So these are actually some old data where I had to find the smallest animals in the lab, and we were able to measure forces of well over 100 pounds generated by an animal about this big.
And actually, just last week I got a 300-pound load cell up and running, and I've clocked these animals generating well over 200 pounds of force.
And again, I think this will be a world record.
I have to do a little bit more background reading, but I think this will be the largest amount of force produced by an animal of a given -- per body mass. So, really incredible forces.
And again, that brings us back to the importance of that spring in storing up and releasing so much energy in this system.
But that was not the end of the story.
Now, things -- I'm making this sound very easy, this is actually a lot of work.
And I got all these force measurements, and then I went and looked at the force output of the system.
And this is just very simple -- time is on the X-axis and the force is on the Y-axis. And you can see two peaks.
And that was what really got me puzzled.
The first peak, obviously, is the limb hitting the load cell.
But there's a really large second peak half a millisecond later, and I didn't know what that was.
So now, you'd expect a second peak for other reasons, but not half a millisecond later.
Again, going back to those high-speed videos, there's a pretty good hint of what might be going on.
Here's that same orientation that we saw earlier.
There's that raptorial appendage -- there's the heel, and it's going to swing around and hit the load cell.
And what I'd like you to do in this shot is keep your eye on this, on the surface of the load cell, as the limb comes flying through.
And I hope what you are able to see is actually a flash of light.
Audience: Wow.
Sheila Patek: And so if we just take that one frame, what you can actually see there at the end of that yellow arrow is a vapor bubble.
And what that is, is cavitation.
And cavitation is an extremely potent fluid dynamic phenomenon which occurs when you have areas of water moving at extremely different speeds.
And when this happens, it can cause areas of very low pressure, which results in the water literally vaporizing.
And when that vapor bubble collapses, it emits sound, light and heat, and it's a very destructive process.
And so here it is in the stomatopod. And again, this is a situation where engineers are very familiar with this phenomenon, because it destroys boat propellers.
People have been struggling for years to try and design a very fast rotating boat propeller that doesn't cavitate and literally wear away the metal and put holes in it, just like these pictures show.
So this is a potent force in fluid systems, and just to sort of take it one step further, I'm going to show you the mantis shrimp approaching the snail.
This is taken at 20,000 frames per second, and I have to give full credit to the BBC cameraman, Tim Green, for setting this shot up, because I could never have done this in a million years -- one of the benefits of working with professional cameramen.
You can see it coming in, and an incredible flash of light, and all this cavitation spreading over the surface of the snail.
So really, just an amazing image, slowed down extremely, to extremely slow speeds.
And again, we can see it in slightly different form there, with the bubble forming and collapsing between those two surfaces.
In fact, you might have even seen some cavitation going up the edge of the limb.
So to solve this quandary of the two force peaks: what I think was going on is: that first impact is actually the limb hitting the load cell, and the second impact is actually the collapse of the cavitation bubble.
And these animals may very well be making use of not only the force and the energy stored with that specialized spring, but the extremes of the fluid dynamics. And they might actually be making use of fluid dynamics as a second force for breaking the snail.
So, really fascinating double whammy, so to speak, from these animals.
So, one question I often get after this talk -- so I figured I'd answer it now -- is, well, what happens to the animal?
Because obviously, if it's breaking snails, the poor limb must be disintegrating. And indeed it does.
That's the smashing part of the heel on both these images, and it gets worn away. In fact, I've seen them wear away their heel all the way to the flesh.
But one of the convenient things about being an arthropod is that you have to molt. And every three months or so these animals molt, and they build a new limb and it's no problem.
Very, very convenient solution to that particular problem.
So, I'd like to end on sort of a wacky note.
(Laughter) Maybe this is all wacky to folks like you, I don't know.
(Laughter) So, the saddles -- that saddle-shaped spring -- has actually been well known to biologists for a long time, not as a spring but as a visual signal.
And there's actually a spectacular colored dot in the center of the saddles of many species of stomatopods.
And this is quite interesting, to find evolutionary origins of visual signals on what's really, in all species, their spring.
And I think one explanation for this could be going back to the molting phenomenon.
So these animals go into a molting period where they're unable to strike -- their bodies become very soft.
And they're literally unable to strike or they will self-destruct.
This is for real. And what they do is, up until that time period when they can't strike, they become really obnoxious and awful, and they strike everything in sight; it doesn't matter who or what.
And the second they get into that time point when they can't strike any more, they just signal. They wave their legs around.
And it's one of the classic examples in animal behavior of bluffing.
It's a well-established fact of these animals that they actually bluff. They can't actually strike, but they pretend to.
And so I'm very curious about whether those colored dots in the center of the saddles are conveying some kind of information about their ability to strike, or their strike force, and something about the time period in the molting cycle.
So sort of an interesting strange fact to find a visual structure right in the middle of their spring.
So to conclude, I mostly want to acknowledge my two collaborators, Wyatt Korff and Roy Caldwell, who worked closely with me on this.
And also the Miller Institute for Basic Research in Science, which gave me three years of funding to just do science all the time, and for that I'm very grateful. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want to talk about my investigations into what technology means in our lives -- not just our immediate life, but in the cosmic sense, in the kind of long history of the world and our place in the world.
What is this stuff?
What is the significance?
And so, I want to kind of go through my little story of what I found out.
One of the first things I started to investigate was the history of the name of technology.
In the United States, there is a State of the Union address given by every president since 1790.
And each one of those is kind of summing up the most important things for the United States at that time.
If you search for the word "technology," it was not used until 1952.
So, technology was sort of absent from everybody's thinking until 1952, which happened to be the year of my birth.
And obviously, technology had existed before then, but we weren't aware of it.
And so it was sort of an awakening of this force in our life.
I actually did research to find out the first use of the word "technology."
It was in 1829, and it was invented by a guy who was starting a curriculum -- a course, bringing together all the kinds of arts and crafts, and industry -- and he called it "Technology."
And that's the very first use of the word.
So what is this stuff that we're all consumed by and bothered by?
Alan Kay calls it, "Technology is anything that was invented after you were born."
(Laughter) Which is sort of the idea we normally have about what technology is: it's all that new stuff.
It's not roads, or penicillin, or factory tires; it's the new stuff.
My friend Danny Hillis says kind of a similar one, he says, "Technology is anything that doesn't work yet."
(Laughter) Which is, again, a sense that it's all new.
But we know that it's just not new.
It actually goes way back, and what I want to suggest is, it goes a long way back.
So, another way to think about technology, what it means, is to imagine a world without technology.
If we were to eliminate every single bit of technology in the world today -- and I mean everything, from blades to scrapers to cloth -- we, as a species, would not live very long.
We would die by the billions, and very quickly: the wolves would get us, we would be defenseless, we would be unable to grow enough food or find enough food.
Even the hunter-gatherers used some elementary tools.
So, they had minimal technology, but they had some technology.
And if we study those hunter-gatherer tribes and the Neanderthal, which are very similar to early man, we find out a very curious thing about this world without technology, and this is a kind of a curve of their average age.
There are no Neanderthal fossils that are older than 40 years old that we've ever found, and the average age of most of these hunter-gatherer tribes is 20 to 30.
There are very few young infants, because they die -- high mortality rate -- and there's very few old people.
So the profile is sort of for your average San Francisco neighborhood: a lot of young people.
And if you go there, you say, "Hey, everybody's really healthy."
Well, that's because they're all young.
Same thing with the hunter-gatherer tribes and early man: you didn't live beyond the age of 30.
So it was a world without grandparents.
And grandparents are very important, because they are the transmitter of cultural evolution and information.
Imagine a world where basically everybody was 20 to 30 years old.
How much learning can you do?
You can't do very much learning in your own life, it's so short, and there's nobody to pass on what you do learn.
So that's one aspect.
It was a very short life.
But at the same time, anthropologists know that most hunter-gatherer tribes of the world, with that very little technology, actually did not spend a very long time gathering the food they needed: three to six hours a day.
Some anthropologists call that the original affluent society, because they had bankers' hours, basically.
So it was possible to get enough food.
But when the scarcity came, when the highs and lows and the droughts came, then people went into starvation.
And that's why they didn't live very long.
So what technology brought, through the very simple tools like these stone tools here -- even something as small as this -- the early bands of humans were actually able to eliminate to extinction about 250 megafauna animals in North America when they first arrived 10,000 years ago.
So, long before the industrial age, we've been affecting the planet on a global scale with just a small amount of technology.
The other thing that the early man invented was fire.
And fire was used to clear out, and again, affected the ecology of grass and whole continents, and was used in cooking.
It enabled us to actually eat all kinds of things.
It was, in a certain sense, in a McLuhan sense, an external stomach, in the sense that it was cooking food that we could not eat otherwise.
And if we didn't have fire, we actually could not live.
Our bodies have adapted to these new diets.
Our bodies have changed in the last 10,000 years.
So, with that little bit of technology, humans went from a small band of 10,000 or so -- the same number as Neanderthals everywhere -- and we suddenly exploded.
With the invention of language around 50,000 years ago, the number of humans exploded, and very quickly became the dominant species on the planet.
And they migrated into the rest of the world at two kilometers per year until, within several tens of thousands of years, we occupied every single watershed on the planet and became the most dominant species, with a very small amount of technology.
And even at that time, with the introduction of agriculture, 8,000, 10,000 years ago, we started to see climate change.
So climate change is not a new thing; what's new is just the degree of it.
Even during the agricultural age, there was climate change.
So already, small amounts of technology were transforming the world.
And what this means, and where I'm going, is that technology has become the most powerful force in the world.
All the things we see today that are changing our lives, we can always trace back to the introduction of some new technology.
So it's a force, that is the most powerful force that has been unleashed on this planet, and in such a degree, that I think it's become who we are.
In fact, our humanity and everything that we think about ourselves, is something we've invented.
So we've invented ourselves.
Of all the animals that we've domesticated, the most important animal has been us.
So humanity is our greatest invention, but of course, we're not done yet.
We're still inventing, and this is what technology is allowing us to do; it's continually to reinvent ourselves.
It's a very, very strong force.
I call this entire thing -- us humans as our technology, everything that we've made, gadgets in our lives -- we call that the technium.
That's this world.
My working definition of technology is: anything useful that a human mind makes.
It's not just hammers and gadgets, like laptops.
But it's also law.
And, of course, cities are ways to make things more useful to us.
While this is something that comes from our mind, it also has its roots deeply into the cosmos.
It goes back.
The origins and roots of technology go back to the Big Bang, in this way, in that they are part of this self-organizing thread that starts at the Big Bang and goes through galaxies and stars, into life, into us.
And the three major phases of the early universe was energy, when the dominant force was energy; then the dominant force, as it cooled, became matter; and then, with the invention of life four billion years ago, the dominant force in our neighborhood became information.
That's what life is: an information process that was restructuring and making new order.
So, energy and matter, Einstein showed were equivalent, and now new sciences of quantum computing show that entropy and information and matter and energy are all interrelated.
You put energy into the right kind of system, and out comes wasted heat, entropy, and extropy, which is order.
It's the increased order.
Where does this order come from?
Its roots go way back.
But we do know that the self-organization trend throughout the universe is long, and it began with things like galaxies; they maintained their order for billions of years.
Stars are basically nuclear fission machines that self-organize and self-sustain themselves for billions of years: order against the extropy of the world.
And flowers and plants are the same thing, extended, and technology is basically an extension of life.
One trend that we notice in all those things is that the amount of energy per gram per second that flows through this is actually increasing.
The amount of energy is increasing through this little sequence.
And the amount of energy per gram per second that flows through life is actually greater than a star -- because of the star's long lifespan, the energy density in life is actually higher than a star.
And the energy density that we see in the greatest amount anywhere in the universe is actually in a PC chip.
There is more energy flowing through, per gram per second, than anything that we have any other experience with.
And so, what I would suggest is that if you want to see where technology is going, we continue that trajectory, and we say, "Well, it's going to become more energy-dense, that's where it's going."
And so what I've done is, I've taken the same kinds of things and looked at other aspects of evolutionary life and say, "What are the general trends in evolutionary life?"
And there are things moving towards greater complexity, moving towards greater diversity, moving towards greater specialization, sentience, ubiquity, and most important, evolvability.
Those very same things are also present in technology.
That's where technology is going.
In fact, technology is accelerating all the aspects of life.
And we can see that happening; just as there's diversity in life, there's more diversity in things we make.
Things in life start off being general cells, and they become specialized: you have tissue cells, muscle, brain cells.
The same thing happens with, say, a hammer, which is general at first and becomes more specific.
So I would like to say that while there are six kingdoms of life, we can think of technology basically as a seventh kingdom of life.
It's a branching off from the human form.
But technology has its own agenda, like anything, like life itself.
For instance, right now, three-quarters of the energy that we use is actually used to feed the technium itself.
In transportation, it's not to move us; it's to move the stuff we make or buy.
I use the word "want." Technology wants.
This is a robot that wants to plug itself in to get more power.
Your cat wants more food.
A bacterium, which has no consciousness at all, wants to move towards light.
It has an urge, and technology has an urge.
At the same time, it wants to give us things, and what it gives us is basically progress.
You can take all kinds of curves, and they're all pointing up.
There's really no dispute about progress, if we discount the cost of that.
And that's the thing that bothers most people, is that progress is really real, but we wonder and question: What are the environmental costs of it?
I did a survey of the number of species of artifacts in my house, and there's 6,000.
When King Henry of England died, he had 18,000 things in his house, but that was the entire wealth of England, so ...
(Laughter) And with that entire wealth of England, King Henry could not buy any antibiotics, he could not buy refrigeration, he could not buy a trip of a thousand miles, whereas this rickshaw wallah in India could save up and buy antibiotics and he could buy refrigeration.
He could buy things that King Henry, in all his wealth, could never buy.
That's what progress is about.
So, technology is selfish; technology is generous.
That conflict, that tension, will be with us forever: sometimes it wants to do what it wants to do, and sometimes it's going to do things for us.
Right now the default position when a new technology comes along, is people talk about the precautionary principle, which is very common in Europe, which says, basically, "Don't do anything.
When you meet a new technology, stop, until it can be proven that it does no harm."
I think that really leads nowhere.
But a better way is what I call the proactionary principle, which is, you engage with technology.
You try it out.
You obviously do what the precautionary principle suggests, you try to anticipate it, but after anticipating it, you constantly asses it, not just once, but eternally.
And when it diverts from what you want, we prioritize risk, we evaluate not just the new stuff, but the old stuff.
We fix it; but most importantly, we relocate it.
And what I mean by that is, we find a new job for it.
Nuclear energy, fission, is a really bad idea for bombs.
But it may be a pretty good idea relocated into sustainable nuclear energy for electricity, instead of burning coal.
When we have a bad idea, the response to a bad idea is not no ideas, it's not to stop thinking.
The response to a bad idea -- like, say, a tungsten lightbulb -- is a better idea.
So, better ideas is really always the response to technology we don't like; it's basically better technology.
And actually, in a certain sense, technology is a kind of a method for generating better ideas, if you can think about it that way.
So, maybe spraying DDT on crops is a really bad idea.
But DDT sprayed on local homes -- there's nothing better to eliminate malaria, besides insect DDT-impregnated mosquito nets.
But that's a really good idea; that's a good job for technology.
So our job as humans is to parent our mind children, to find them good friends, to find them a good job.
And so, every technology is sort of a creative force looking for the right job.
That's actually my son, right here.
(Laughter) There are no bad technologies, just as there are no bad children.
We don't say children are neutral; children are positive.
We just have to find them the right place.
And so, what technology gives us over the long term -- over this sort of extended evolution from the beginning of time, through the invention of the plants and animals, and the evolution of life, the evolution of brains -- what that is constantly giving us is increasing differences: It's increasing diversity, it's increasing options, it's increasing choices, opportunities, possibilities and freedoms.
That's what we get from technology all the time.
That's why people leave villages and go into cities -- because they are always gravitating towards increased choices and possibilities.
And we are aware of the price; we pay a price for that, but we're aware of it, and generally, we will pay the price for increased freedoms, choices and opportunities.
Even technology wants clean water.
Is technology diametrically opposed to nature?
Because technology is an extension of life, it's in parallel and aligned with the same things that life wants.
So that I think technology loves biology, if we allow it to.
Great movement starting billions of years ago is moving through us and it continues to go, and our choice, so to speak, in technology, is really to align ourselves with this force much greater than ourselves.
So, technology is more than just the stuff in your pocket; it's more than just gadgets, it's more than just things that people invent.
It's actually part of a very long story -- a great story -- that began billions of years ago.
It's moving through us, this self-organization, and we're extending and accelerating it, and we can be part of it by aligning the technology that we make with it.
And I really appreciate your attention today.
Thank you.
I've always been interested in the relationship of formal structures and human behavior.
If you build a wide road out to the outskirts of town, people will move there.
Well, law is also a powerful driver of human behavior.
And what I'd like to discuss today is the need to overhaul and simplify the law to release the energy and passion of Americans, so that we can begin to address the challenges of our society.
You might have noticed that law has grown progressively denser in your lives over the last decade or two.
If you run a business, it's hard to do much of anything without calling your general counsel.
Indeed, there is this phenomenon now where the general counsels are becoming the CEOs.
It's a little bit like the Invasion Of The Body Snatchers.
You need a lawyer to run the company, because there's so much law.
But it's not just business that's affected by this, it's actually pressed down into the daily activities of ordinary people.
A couple of years ago I was hiking near Cody, Wyoming.
It was in a grizzly bear preserve, although no one told me that before we went.
And our guide was a local science teacher.
She was wholly unconcerned about the bears, but she was terrified of lawyers.
The stories started pouring out.
She'd just been involved in an episode where a parent had threatened to sue the school because she lowered the grade of the student by 10 percent when he turned the paper in late.
The principal didn't want to stand up to the parent because he didn't want to get dragged into some legal proceedings.
So, she had to go to meeting after meeting, same arguments made over and over again.
After 30 days of sleepless nights, she finally capitulated and raised the grade.
She said, "Life's too short, I just can't keep going with this."
About the same time, she was going to take two students to a leadership conference in Laramie, which is a couple of hours away, and she was going to drive them in her car, but the school said, "No, you can't drive them in the car for liability reasons.
You have to go in a school bus."
So, they provided a bus that held 60 people and drove the three of them back and forth several hours to Laramie.
Her husband is also a science teacher, and he takes his biology class on a hike in the nearby national park.
But he was told he couldn't go on the hike this year because one of the students in the class was disabled, so the other 25 students didn't get to go on the hike either.
At the end of this day I could have filled a book just with stories about law from this one teacher.
Now, we've been taught to believe that law is the foundation of freedom.
But somehow or another, in the last couple of decades, the land of the free has become a legal minefield.
It's really changed our lives in ways that are sort of imperceptible; and yet, when you pull back, you see it all the time.
It's changed the way we talk. I was talking to a pediatrician friend in North Carolina. He said, "Well you know, I don't deal with patients the same way anymore.
You wouldn't want to say something off-the-cuff that might be used against you."
This is a doctor, whose life is caring for people.
My own law firm has a list of questions that I'm not allowed to ask when interviewing candidates, such as the sinister question, bulging with hidden motives and innuendo, "Where are you from?"
(Laughter) Now for 20 years, tort reformers have been sounding the alarm that lawsuits are out of control.
And we read every once in while about these crazy lawsuits, like the guy in the District of Columbia who sued his dry cleaners for 54 million dollars because they lost his pair of pants.
The case went on for two years; I think he's still appealing the case.
But the reality is, these crazy cases are relatively rare. They don't usually win.
And the total of direct tort cost in this country is about two percent, which is twice as much as in other countries but, as taxes go, hardly crippling.
But the direct costs are really only the tip of the iceberg.
What's happened here, again, almost without our knowing, is our culture has changed.
People no longer feel free to act on their best judgment.
So, what do we do about it?
We certainly don't want to give up the rights, when people do something wrong, to seek redress in the courts.
We need regulation to make sure people don't pollute and such.
We lack even a vocabulary to deal with this problem, and that's because we have the wrong frame of reference.
We've been trained to think that the way to look at every dispute, every issue, is a matter of kind of individual rights.
And so we peer through a legal microscope, and look at everything.
Is it possible that there are extenuating circumstances that explain why Johnny turned his paper in late in Cody, Wyoming?
Is it possible that the doctor might have done something differently when the sick person gets sicker?
And of course the hindsight bias is perfect.
There's always a different scenario that you can sketch out where it's possible that something could have been done differently.
And yet, we've been trained to squint into this legal microscope, hoping that we can judge any dispute against the standard of a perfect society, where everyone will agree what's fair, and where accidents will be extinct, risk will be no more.
Of course, this is Utopia; it's a formula for paralysis, not freedom.
It's not the basis of the rule of law, it's not the basis of a free society.
So, now I have the first of four propositions I'm going to leave with you about how you simplify the law: You've got to judge law mainly by its effect on the broader society, not individual disputes.
Absolutely vital.
So, let's pull back from the anecdotes for a second and look at our society from high above.
Is it working?
What does the macro-data show us?
Well, the healthcare system has been transformed: a culture pervaded with defensiveness, universal distrust of the system of justice, universal practice of defensive medicine.
It's very hard to measure because there are mixed motives.
Doctors can make more on ordering tests sometimes, and also they no longer even know what's right or wrong.
But reliable estimates range between 60 billion and 200 billion dollars per year.
That's enough to provide care to all the people in America who don't have it.
The trial lawyers say, "Well, this legal fear makes doctors practice better medicine."
Well that's been studied too, by the Institute of Medicine and others. Turns out that's not the case.
The fear has chilled professional interaction so thousands of tragic errors occur because doctors are afraid to speak up: "Are you sure that's the right dosage?"
Because they're not sure, and they don't want to take legal responsibility.
Let's go to schools.
As we saw with the teacher in Cody, Wyoming, she seems to be affected by the law.
Well it turns out the schools are literally drowning in law.
You could have a separate section of a law library around each of the following legal concepts: due process, special education, no child left behind, zero tolerance, work rules ...
it goes on. We did a study of all the rules that affect one school in New York. The Board of Ed. had no idea.
Tens of thousands of discreet rules, 60 steps to suspend a student from school: It's a formula for paralysis.
What's the effect of that? One is a decline in order.
Again, studies have shown it's directly attributable to the rise of due process.
Public agenda did a survey for us a couple of years ago where they found that 43 percent of the high school teachers in America say that they spend at least half of their time maintaining order in the classroom.
That means those students are getting half the learning they're supposed to, because if one child is disrupting the class no one can learn.
And what happens when the teacher tries to assert order?
They're threatened with a legal claim.
We also surveyed that. Seventy-eight percent of the middle and high school teachers in America have been threatened by their students with violating their rights, with lawsuits by their students. They are threatening, their students.
It's not that they usually sue, it's not that they would win, but it's an indication of the corrosion of authority.
And how has this system of law worked for government?
It doesn't seem to be working very well does it?
Neither in Sacramento nor in Washington.
The other day at the State of the Union speech, President Obama said, and I think we could all agree with this goal, "From the first railroads to the interstate highway system, our nation has always been the first to compete.
There is no reason Europe or China should have the fastest trains."
Well, actually there is a reason: Environmental review has evolved into a process of no pebble left unturned for any major project taking the better part of a decade, then followed by years of litigation by anybody who doesn't like the project.
Then, just staying above the Earth for one more second, people are acting like idiots, (Laughter) all across the country.
(Applause) Idiots. A couple of years ago, Broward County, Florida, banned running at recess.
(Laughter) That means all the boys are going to be ADD.
I mean it's just absolutely a formula for failure.
My favorite, though, are all the warning labels.
"Caution: Contents are hot," on billions of coffee cups.
Archeologists will dig us up in a thousand years and they won't know about defensive medicine and stuff, but they'll see all these labels, "Contents are extremely hot."
They'll think it was some kind of aphrodisiac.
That's the only explanation. Because why would you have to tell people that something was actually hot?
My favorite warning was one on a five-inch fishing lure.
I grew up in the South and whiled away the summers fishing.
Five-inch fishing lure, it's a big fishing lure, with a three pronged hook in the back, and outside it said, "Harmful if swallowed."
(Laughter) So, none of these people are doing what they think is right.
And why not? They don't trust the law. Why don't they trust the law?
Because it gives us the worst of both worlds: It's random -- anybody can sue for almost anything and take it to a jury, not even an effort at consistency -- and it's also too detailed.
In the areas that are regulated, there are so many rules no human could possibly know it.
Well how do you fix it? We could spend 10,000 lifetimes trying to prune this legal jungle.
But the challenge here is not one of just amending the law, because the hurdle for success is trust.
People -- for law to be the platform for freedom, people have to trust it.
So, that's my second proposition: Trust is an essential condition to a free society.
Life is complicated enough without legal fear.
But law is different than other kinds of uncertainties, because it carries with it the power of state.
And so the state can come in.
It actually changes the way people think.
It's like having a little lawyer on your shoulders all day long, whispering in your ear, "Could that go wrong? Might that go wrong?"
It drives people from the smart part of the brain -- that dark, deep well of the subconscious, where instincts and experience, and all the other factors of creativity and good judgment are -- it drives us to the thin veneer of conscious logic.
Pretty soon the doctor's saying, "Well, I doubt if that headache could be a tumor, but who would protect me if it were? So maybe I'll just order the MRI."
Then you've wasted 200 billion dollars in unnecessary tests.
If you make people self-conscious about their judgments, studies show you will make them make worse judgments.
If you tell the pianist to think about how she's hitting the notes when she's playing the piece, she can't play the piece.
Self-consciousness is the enemy of accomplishment.
Edison stated it best. He said, "Hell, we ain't got no rules around here, we're trying to accomplish something."
(Laughter) So, how do you restore trust?
Tweaking the law's clearly not good enough, and tort reform, which is a great idea, lowers your cost if you're a businessperson, but it's like a Band-Aid on this gaping wound of distrust.
States with extensive tort reform still suffer all these pathologies.
So, what's needed is not just to limit claims, but actually create a dry ground of freedom.
It turns out that freedom actually has a formal structure.
And it is this: Law sets boundaries, and on one side of those boundaries are all the things you can't do or must do -- you can't steal, you've got to pay your taxes -- but those same boundaries are supposed to define and protect a dry ground of freedom.
Isaiah Berlin put it this way: "Law sets frontiers, not artificially drawn, within which men shall be inviolable."
We've forgotten that second part.
Those dikes have burst. People wade through law all day long.
So, what's needed now is to rebuild these boundaries.
And it's especially important to rebuild them for lawsuits.
Because what people can sue for establishes the boundaries for everybody else's freedom.
If someone brings a lawsuit over, "A kid fell off the seesaw," it doesn't matter what happens in the lawsuit, all the seesaws will disappear.
Because no one will want to take the risk of a lawsuit.
And that's what's happened. There are no seesaws, jungle gyms, merry-go-rounds, climbing ropes, nothing that would interest a kid over the age of four, because there's no risk associated with it.
So, how do we rebuild it?
Life is too complex for...
(Applause) Life is too complex for a software program.
All these choices involve value judgments and social norms, not objective facts.
And so here is the fourth proposition.
This is what we have, the philosophy we have to change to.
And there are two essential elements of it: We have to simplify the law.
We have to migrate from all this complexity towards general principles and goals.
The constitution is only 16 pages long.
Worked pretty well for 200 years.
Law has to be simple enough so that people can internalize it in their daily choices.
If they can't internalize it, they won't trust it.
And how do you make it simple?
Because life is complex, and here is the hardest and biggest change: We have to restore the authority to judges and officials to interpret and apply the law.
(Applause) We have to rehumanize the law.
To make law simple so that you feel free, the people in charge have to be free to use their judgment to interpret and apply the law in accord with reasonable social norms.
As you're going down, and walking down the sidewalk during the day, you have to think that if there is a dispute, there's somebody in society who sees it as their job to affirmatively protect you if you're acting reasonably.
That person doesn't exist today.
This is the hardest hurdle.
It's actually not very hard. Ninety-eight percent of cases, this is a piece of cake.
Maybe you've got a claim in small claims court for your lost pair of pants for $100, but not in a court of general jurisdiction for millions of dollars.
Case dismissed without prejudice or refiling in small claims court.
Takes five minutes. That's it, it's not that hard.
But it's a hard hurdle because we got into this legal quicksand because we woke up in the 1960s to all these really bad values: racism, gender discrimination, pollution -- they were bad values. And we wanted to create a legal system where no one could have bad values anymore.
The problem is, we created a system where we eliminated the right to have good values.
It doesn't mean that people in authority can do whatever they want.
They're still bounded by legal goals and principles: The teacher is accountable to the principal, the judge is accountable to an appellate court, the president is accountable to voters.
But the accountability's up the line judging the decision against the effect on everybody, not just on the disgruntled person.
You can't run a society by the lowest common denominator.
(Applause) So, what's needed is a basic shift in philosophy.
We can pull the plug on a lot of this stuff if we shift our philosophy.
We've been taught that authority is the enemy of freedom.
It's not true. Authority, in fact, is essential to freedom.
Law is a human institution; responsibility is a human institution.
If teachers don't have authority to run the classroom, to maintain order, everybody's learning suffers.
If the judge doesn't have the authority to toss out unreasonable claims, then all of us go through the day looking over our shoulders.
If the environmental agency can't decide that the power lines are good for the environment, then there's no way to bring the power from the wind farms to the city.
A free society requires red lights and green lights, otherwise it soon descends into gridlock.
That's what's happened to America. Look around.
What the world needs now is to restore the authority to make common choices.
It's the only way to get our freedom back, and it's the only way to release the energy and passion needed so that we can meet the challenges of our time. Thank you.
(Applause)
Does anybody know when the stethoscope was invented?
Any guesses? 1816.
And what I can say is, in 2016, doctors aren't going to be walking around with stethoscopes.
There's a whole lot better technology coming, and that's part of the change in medicine.
What has changed our society has been wireless devices.
But the future are digital medical wireless devices, OK?
So, let me give you some examples of this to kind of make this much more concrete.
This is the first one. This is an electrocardiogram.
And, as a cardiologist, to think that you could see in real time a patient, an individual, anywhere in the world on your smartphone, watching your rhythm -- that's incredible, and it's with us today.
But that's just the beginning.
You check your email while you're sitting here.
In the future you're going to be checking all your vital signs, all your vital signs: your heart rhythm, your blood pressure, your oxygen, your temperature, etc.
This is already available today.
This is AirStrip Technologies.
It's now wired -- or I should say, wireless -- by taking the aggregate of these signals in the hospital, in the intensive care unit, and putting it on a smartphone for physicians.
If you're an expectant parent, what about the ability to monitor, continuously, fetal heart rate, or intrauterine contractions, and not having to worry so much that things are fine as the pregnancy, and moving over into the time of delivery?
And then as we go further, today we have continuous glucose sensors.
Right now, they are under the skin, but in the future, they won't have to be implanted.
And of course, the desired range -- trying to keep glucose between 75 and less than 200, checking it every five minutes in a continuous glucose sensor -- you'll see how that can impact diabetes.
And what about sleep?
We're going to zoom in on that a little bit.
We're supposed to spend a third of our life in sleep.
What if, on your phone, which will be available in the next few weeks, you had every minute of your sleep displayed?
And this is, of course, as you can see, the awake is the orange.
The REM sleep, rapid eye movement, dream state, is in light green; and light is gray, light sleep; and deep sleep, the best restorative sleep, is that dark green.
How about counting every calorie?
And this is ability, in real time, to actually take measurements of caloric intake as well as expenditure, through a Band-Aid.
Now, what I've talked about are physiologic metrics.
But what I want to get to, the next frontier, very quickly, and why the stethoscope is on its way out, is because we can transcend listening to the valve sounds, and the breath sounds, because now, introduced by G.E. is a handheld ultra-sound.
Why is this important? Because this is so much more sensitive.
Here is an example of an abdominal ultrasound, and also a cardiac echo, which can be sent wireless, and then there's an example of fetal monitoring on your smartphone.
So, we're not just talking about physiologic metrics -- the key measurements of vital signs, and all those things in physiology -- but also all the imaging that one could look at in your smartphone.
Now, this is an example of another obsolete technology, soon to be buried: the Holter Monitor.
Twenty-four hour recording, lots of wires.
This is now a little tiny patch.
You can put it on for two weeks and send it in the mail.
Now, how does this work? Well, there is these smart Band-Aids or these sensors that one would put on, on a shoe or on the wrist.
And this sends a signal and it creates a body area network to a gateway.
Gateway could be a smartphone or it could be a dedicated gateway, as today many of these things are dedicated gateways, because they are not so well integrated.
That signal goes to the web, the cloud, and then it can be processed and sent anywhere: to a caregiver, to a physician, back to the patient, etc.
So, that's basically very simplistic technology of how this works.
Now, I have this device on.
I didn't want to take my shirt off to show you, but I can tell you it's on.
This is a device that not only measures cardiac rhythm, as you saw already, but it also goes well beyond that.
This is me now. And you can see the ECG.
Below that's the actual heart rate and the trend; to the right of that is a bioconductant.
That's the fluid status, fluid status, that's really important if you're monitoring somebody with heart failure.
And below that's temperature, and respiration, and oxygen, and then the position activity.
So, this is really striking, because this device measures seven things that are very much vital signs for monitoring someone with heart failure. OK?
And why is this important? Well, this is the most expensive bed.
What if we could reduce the need for hospital beds?
Well, we can. First of all, heart failure is the number one reason for hospital admissions and readmissions in this country.
The cost of heart failure is 37 billion dollars a year, which is 80 percent related to hospitalization.
And in the course of 30 days after a hospital stay for a Medicare greater than 65 years or older, is -- 27 percent are readmitted in 30 days, and by six months, over 56 percent are readmitted.
So, can we improve that? Well the idea is we take this device that I'm wearing, and we put it on 600 patients with heart failure, randomly assigned, versus 600 patients who don't have active monitoring, and see whether we can reduce heart failure readmissions, and that's exciting. And we'll start that trial, and you'll hear more about how we're going to do that, but that's a type of wireless device trial that could change medicine in the years ahead.
Why now? Why has this all of a sudden become a reality, an exciting direction in the future of medicine?
What we have is, in a way, a perfect positive storm.
This sets up consumer-driven healthcare.
That's where this is all starting.
Let me just give you specifics about why this is a big movement if you're not aware of it: 1.2 million Americans have gotten a Nike shoe, which is a body-area network that connects the shoe, the sole of the shoe to the iPhone, or an iPod.
And this Wired Magazine cover article really captured a lot of this; it talked a lot about the Nike shoe and how quickly that's been adopted to monitor exercise physiology and energy expenditure.
Here are some things, the principles that are guiding principles to keep in mind: "A data-driven health revolution promises to make us all better, faster, and stronger. Living by numbers."
And this one, which is really telling, this was from July, this cover article: "The personal metrics movement goes way beyond diet and exercise. It's about tracking every facet of life, from sleep to mood to pain, 24/7/365."
Well, I tried this device.
A lot of you have gotten that Phillips Direct Life.
I didn't have one of those, but I got the Fitbit.
That looks like this.
It's like a wireless accelerometer, pedometer.
And I want to just give you the results of that testing, because I wanted to understand about the consumer movement.
I hope the, by the way, the Phillips Direct Life works better -- I hope so.
But this monitors food, it monitors activity and tracks weight.
However you have to put in most of this stuff.
The only thing it really tracks by itself is activity, and even then, it's not complete.
So, you exercise and it picks up the exercise.
You put in your height and weight, it calculates BMI, and of course it tells you how many calories you're expending from the exercise, and how many you took in, if you go in and enter all the foods.
But it really wants you to enter all your activity.
And so I went to this, and of course I was gratified that it picked up the 42 minutes of exercise, elliptical exercise I did, but then it wants more information.
So, it says, "You want to log sexual activity.
How long did you do it for?"
(Laughter) And it says, "How hard was it?"
(Laughter) Furthermore it says, "Start time."
Now, this doesn't appear -- this just doesn't work, I mean, this just doesn't work.
So, now I want to move to sleep.
Who would ever have thought you could have your own EEG at your home, tagged to a very nice alarm clock, by the way?
This is the headband that goes with this alarm clock.
It monitors your brainwaves continuously, when you're sleeping.
So, I did this thing for seven days getting ready for TEDMed.
This is an important part of our life, one-third you're supposed to be sleeping.
Of course how many here have any problems with sleeping?
It's usually 90 percent. So, you tell me you sleep better than expected.
Okay, well this was a week of my life in sleeping, and you get a Z.Q. score. Instead of an I.Q. score, you get a Z.Q. score when you wake up.
You say, "Oh, OK." And a Z.Q. score is adjusted to age, and you want to get as high as you possibly can.
So this is the moment-by-moment, or minute-by-minute sleep.
And you see that Z.Q. there was 80-odd.
And the wake time is in orange.
And this can be a problem, as I learned.
Because it not only helps you with quantifying your sleep, but also tells others you're awake.
So, when my wife came in and she could tell you're awake.
"Eric, I want to talk. I want to talk."
And I'm trying to play possum.
This thing is very, very impressive.
OK. So, that's the first night.
And this one is now 67, and that's not a good score.
And this tells you, of course, how much you had in REM sleep, in deep sleep, and all this sort of thing.
This was really fascinating because this gave that quantitation about all the different phases of sleep.
So, it also then tells you how you do compared to your age group.
It's like a managed competition of sleep.
And really interesting stuff.
Look at this thing and say, "Well, I didn't think I was a very good sleeper, but actually I did better than average in 50 to 60 year olds." OK?
And the key thing was, what I didn't know, was that I was a really good dreamer.
OK. Now let's move from sleep to diseases.
Eighty percent of Americans have chronic disease, or 80 percent of age greater than 65 have two or more chronic disease, 140 million Americans have one or more chronic disease, and 80 percent of our 1.5, whatever, trillion expenditures are related to chronic disease.
Now, diabetes is one of the big ones.
Almost 24 million people have diabetes.
And here is the latest map. It was published just a little more than a week ago in the New York Times, and it isn't looking good.
That is, for men, 29 percent in the country over 60 have Type II diabetes, and women, although it's less, it's terribly high.
But of course we have a way to measure that now on a continuous basis, with a sensor that detects blood glucose, and it's important because we could detect hyperglycemia that otherwise wouldn't be known, and also hypoglycemia.
And you can see the red dots, in this particular patient's case, were finger sticks, which would have missed both ends.
But by continuous monitoring, it captures all that vital information.
The future of this though, is being able to move this to a Band-Aid type phenomenon, and that's not so far away.
So, let me just give you, very quickly, 10 top targets for wireless medicine.
All these things are possible -- some of them are very close, or already, as you heard, are available today, in some way or form.
Alzheimer's disease: there's five million people affected, and you can check vital signs, activity, balance.
Asthma: large number, we could detect things like pollen count, air quality, respiratory rate. Breast cancer, I'll show you an example of that real quickly.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Depression, there's a great approach to that in mood disorders.
Diabetes I've just mentioned. Heart failure we already talked about. Hypertension: 74 million people could have continuous blood-pressure monitoring to come up with much better management and prevention.
And obesity we already talked about, the ways to get to that.
And sleep disorders.
This is effective around the world. The access to smartphones and cell phones today is extraordinary.
And this article from The Economist summed it up beautifully about the opportunities in health across the developing world: "Mobile phones made a bigger difference to the lives of more people, more quickly, than any previous technology."
And that's before we got going on the m-health world.
Aging: The problem is enormous, 300,000 broken hips per year; but the solutions are extraordinary, and they include so many different things.
One of the ones I just wanted to mention: The iShoe is another example of a sensor that improves proprioception among the elderly to prevent falling.
One of many different techniques using wireless sensors.
So, we can change medicine across the continuum of care, across the ages from premies or unborn children to seniors; the pharmaceutical arena changes; the full spectrum of disease -- I hope I've given you a sense of that -- across the globe.
There are two things that can really accelerate this whole process.
One of them -- we're very fortunate -- is to develop a dedicated institute and that's work that started with the work that Scripps with Qualcomm ...
and then the great fortune of meeting up with Gary and Mary West, to get behind this wireless health institute.
San Diego is an extraordinary place for this.
There's over 650 wireless companies, 100 of which or more are working in wireless health.
It's the number one source of commerce, and interestingly it dovetails beautifully with over 500 life science companies.
The wireless institute, the West Wireless Health Institute, is really the outgrowth of two extraordinary people who are here this evening: Gary and Mary West. And I'd like to give it up for them for getting behind this.
(Applause) Their fantastic philanthropic investment made this possible, and this is really a nonprofit education center which is just about to open. It looks like this, this whole building dedicated.
And what it's trying to do is accelerate this era: to take unmet medical needs, to work and innovate -- and we just appointed the chief engineer, Mehran Mehregany, it was announced on Monday -- then to move up with development, clinical trial validation and then changing medical practice, the most challenging thing of all, requiring attention to reimbursement, healthcare policy, healthcare economics.
The other big thing, besides having this fantastic institute to catalyze this process is guidance, and that's of course relying on the fact that medicine goes digital.
If we understand biology from genomics and omics and wireless through physiologic phenotyping, that's big.
Because what it does is allow a convergence like we've never had before.
Over 80 major diseases have been cracked at the genomic level, but this is quite extraordinary: More has been learned about the underpinnings of disease in the last two and a half years than in the history of man.
And when you put that together with, for example, now an app for the iPhone with your genotype to guide drug therapy ...
but, the future -- we can now tell who's going to get Type II diabetes from all the common variants, and that's going to get filled in more with low-frequency variants in the future.
We can tell who's going to get breast cancer from the various genes.
We can also know who's likely to get atrial fibrillation.
And finally, another example: sudden cardiac death.
Each of these has a sensor.
We can give glucose a sensor for diabetes to prevent it.
We can prevent, or have the earliest detection possible, for breast cancer with an ultrasound device given to the patient.
An iPatch, iRhythm, for atrial fibrillation.
And vital-signs monitoring to prevent sudden cardiac death.
We lose 700,000 people a year in the U.S. from sudden cardiac death.
So, I hope I've convinced you of this, of the impact on hospital clinic resources is profound and then the impact on diseases is equally impressive across all these different diseases and more.
It's really taking individualized medicine to a new height and it's hyper-innovative, and I think it represents the black swan of medicine.
Thanks for your attention.
I think I'll start out and just talk a little bit about what exactly autism is.
Autism is a very big continuum that goes from very severe -- the child remains nonverbal -- all the way up to brilliant scientists and engineers.
And I actually feel at home here, because there's a lot of autism genetics here.
(Laughter) You wouldn't have any -- (Applause) It's a continuum of traits.
When does a nerd turn into Asperger, which is just mild autism?
I mean, Einstein and Mozart and Tesla would all be probably diagnosed as autistic spectrum today.
And one of the things that is really going to concern me is getting these kids to be the ones that are going to invent the next energy things that Bill Gates talked about this morning.
OK, now, if you want to understand autism: animals.
I want to talk to you now about different ways of thinking.
You have to get away from verbal language.
I think in pictures. I don't think in language.
Now, the thing about the autistic mind is it attends to details.
This is a test where you either have to pick out the big letters or the little letters, and the autistic mind picks out the little letters more quickly.
And the thing is, the normal brain ignores the details.
Well, if you're building a bridge, details are pretty important because it'll fall down if you ignore the details.
And one of my big concerns with a lot of policy things today is things are getting too abstract.
People are getting away from doing hands-on stuff.
I'm really concerned that a lot of the schools have taken out the hands-on classes, because art, and classes like that -- those are the classes where I excelled.
In my work with cattle, I noticed a lot of little things that most people don't notice would make the cattle balk.
For example, this flag waving right in front of the veterinary facility.
This feed yard was going to tear down their whole veterinary facility; all they needed to do was move the flag.
Rapid movement, contrast.
In the early '70s when I started, I got right down in the chutes to see what cattle were seeing.
People thought that was crazy.
A coat on a fence would make them balk, shadows would make them balk, a hose on the floor -- people weren't noticing these things.
A chain hanging down ...
And that's shown very, very nicely in the movie.
In fact, I loved the movie, how they duplicated all my projects.
That's the geek side.
And, actually, it's called "Temple Grandin," not "Thinking in Pictures."
So what is thinking in pictures?
It's literally movies in your head.
My mind works like Google for images.
When I was a young kid, I didn't know my thinking was different.
I thought everybody thought in pictures.
Then when I did my book, "Thinking in Pictures," I started interviewing people about how they think.
And I was shocked to find out that my thinking was quite different.
Like if I say, "Think about a church steeple," most people get this sort of generalized generic one.
Now, maybe that's not true in this room, but it's going to be true in a lot of different places.
I see only specific pictures.
They flash up into my memory, just like Google for pictures.
And in the movie, they've got a great scene in there, where the word "shoe" is said, and a whole bunch of '50s and '60s shoes pop into my imagination.
OK, there's my childhood church; that's specific.
OK, how about famous ones?
And they just kind of come up, kind of like this.
Just really quickly, like Google for pictures.
And they come up one at a time, and then I think, "OK, well, maybe we can have it snow, or we can have a thunderstorm," and I can hold it there and turn them into videos.
Now, visual thinking was a tremendous asset in my work designing cattle-handling facilities.
And I've worked really hard on improving how cattle are treated at the slaughter plant.
I've got that stuff up on YouTube, if you want to look at it.
(Laughter) But one of the things that I was able to do in my design work is I could test-run a piece of equipment in my mind, just like a virtual reality computer system.
And this is an aerial view of a recreation of one of my projects that was used in the movie.
That was like just so super cool.
And there were a lot of, kind of, Asperger types and autism types working out there on the movie set, too.
(Laughter) But one of the things that really worries me is: Where's the younger version of those kids going today?
They're not ending up in Silicon Valley, where they belong.
(Laughter) (Applause) One of the things I learned very early on because I wasn't that social, is I had to sell my work, and not myself.
And the way I sold livestock jobs is I showed off my drawings, I showed off pictures of things.
Another thing that helped me as a little kid is, boy, in the '50s, you were taught manners.
You were taught you can't pull the merchandise off the shelves in the store and throw it around.
When kids get to be in third or fourth grade, you might see that this kid's going to be a visual thinker, drawing in perspective.
Now, I want to emphasize that not every autistic kid is going to be a visual thinker.
Now, I had this brain scan done several years ago, and I used to joke around about having a gigantic Internet trunk line going deep into my visual cortex.
This is tensor imaging.
And my great big Internet trunk line is twice as big as the control's.
The red lines there are me, and the blue lines are the sex and age-matched control.
And there I got a gigantic one, and the control over there, the blue one, has got a really small one.
And some of the research now is showing that people on the spectrum actually think with the primary visual cortex.
Now, the thing is, the visual thinker is just one kind of mind.
You see, the autistic mind tends to be a specialist mind -- good at one thing, bad at something else.
And where I was bad was algebra.
And I was never allowed to take geometry or trig.
Gigantic mistake.
I'm finding a lot of kids who need to skip algebra, go right to geometry and trig.
Now, another kind of mind is the pattern thinker.
More abstract.
These are your engineers, your computer programmers.
This is pattern thinking.
That praying mantis is made from a single sheet of paper -- no scotch tape, no cuts.
And there in the background is the pattern for folding it.
Here are the types of thinking: photo-realistic visual thinkers, like me; pattern thinkers, music and math minds.
Some of these oftentimes have problems with reading.
You also will see these kind of problems with kids that are dyslexic.
You'll see these different kinds of minds.
And then there's a verbal mind, they know every fact about everything.
Now, another thing is the sensory issues.
I was really concerned about having to wear this gadget on my face.
And I came in half an hour beforehand so I could have it put on and kind of get used to it, and they got it bent so it's not hitting my chin.
But sensory is an issue.
Some kids are bothered by fluorescent lights; others have problems with sound sensitivity.
You know, it's going to be variable.
Now, visual thinking gave me a whole lot of insight into the animal mind.
Because think about it: an animal is a sensory-based thinker, not verbal -- thinks in pictures, thinks in sounds, thinks in smells.
Think about how much information there is on the local fire hydrant.
He knows who's been there -- (Laughter) When they were there.
There's a ton of information on that fire hydrant.
It's all very detailed information.
And looking at these kind of details gave me a lot of insight into animals.
Now, the animal mind, and also my mind, puts sensory-based information into categories.
Man on a horse, and a man on the ground -- that is viewed as two totally different things.
You could have a horse that's been abused by a rider.
They'll be absolutely fine with the veterinarian and with the horseshoer, but you can't ride him.
You have another horse, where maybe the horseshoer beat him up, and he'll be terrible for anything on the ground with the veterinarian, but a person can ride him.
Cattle are the same way.
Man on a horse, a man on foot -- they're two different things.
You see, it's a different picture.
See, I want you to think about just how specific this is.
Now, this ability to put information into categories, I find a lot of people are not very good at this.
When I'm out troubleshooting equipment or problems with something in a plant, they don't seem to be able to figure out: "Do I have a training-people issue?
Or do I have something wrong with the equipment?"
In other words, categorize equipment problem from a people problem.
I find a lot of people have difficulty doing that.
Now, let's say I figure out it's an equipment problem.
Is it a minor problem, with something simple I can fix?
Or is the whole design of the system wrong?
People have a hard time figuring that out.
Let's just look at something like, you know, solving problems with making airlines safer.
Yeah, I'm a million-mile flier.
I do lots and lots of flying, and if I was at the FAA, what would I be doing a lot of direct observation of?
It would be their airplane tails.
You know, five fatal wrecks in the last 20 years, the tail either came off, or steering stuff inside the tail broke in some way.
It's tails, pure and simple.
And when the pilots walk around the plane, guess what?
They can't see that stuff inside the tail.
Now as I think about that, I'm pulling up all of that specific information.
It's specific.
I take all the little pieces and I put the pieces together like a puzzle.
Now, here is a horse that was deathly afraid of black cowboy hats.
He'd been abused by somebody with a black cowboy hat.
White cowboy hats, that was absolutely fine.
Now, the thing is, the world is going to need all of the different kinds of minds to work together.
We've got to work on developing all these different kinds of minds.
And one of the things that is driving me really crazy as I travel around and I do autism meetings, is I'm seeing a lot of smart, geeky, nerdy kids, and they just aren't very social, and nobody's working on developing their interest in something like science.
And this brings up the whole thing of my science teacher.
My science teacher is shown absolutely beautifully in the movie.
I was a goofball student when I was in high school.
I just didn't care at all about studying, until I had Mr. Carlock's science class.
He was now Dr. Carlock in the movie.
And he got me challenged to figure out an optical illusion room.
This brings up the whole thing of you've got to show kids interesting stuff.
You know, one of the things that I think maybe TED ought to do is tell all the schools about all the great lectures that are on TED, and there's all kinds of great stuff on the Internet to get these kids turned on.
Because I'm seeing a lot of these geeky, nerdy kids, and the teachers out in the Midwest and other parts of the country when you get away from these tech areas, they don't know what to do with these kids.
And they're not going down the right path.
The thing is, you can make a mind to be more of a thinking and cognitive mind, or your mind can be wired to be more social.
And what some of the research now has shown in autism is there may by extra wiring back here in the really brilliant mind, and we lose a few social circuits here.
And then you can get to the point where it's so severe, you're going to have a person that's going to be non-verbal.
In the normal human mind, language covers up the visual thinking we share with animals.
This is the work of Dr. Bruce Miller.
He studied Alzheimer's patients that had frontal temporal lobe dementia.
And the dementia ate out the language parts of the brain.
And then this artwork came out of somebody who used to install stereos in cars.
Now, Van Gogh doesn't know anything about physics, but I think it's very interesting that there was some work done to show that this eddy pattern in this painting followed a statistical model of turbulence, which brings up the whole interesting idea of maybe some of this mathematical patterns is in our own head.
And the Wolfram stuff -- I was taking notes and writing down all the search words I could use, because I think that's going to go on in my autism lectures.
We've got to show these kids interesting stuff.
And they've taken out the auto-shop class and the drafting class and the art class.
I mean, art was my best subject in school.
We've got to think about all these different kinds of minds, and we've got to absolutely work with these kind of minds, because we absolutely are going to need these kinds of people in the future.
And let's talk about jobs.
OK, my science teacher got me studying, because I was a goofball that didn't want to study.
But you know what? I was getting work experience.
I'm seeing too many of these smart kids who haven't learned basic things, like how to be on time -- I was taught that when I was eight years old.
How to have table manners at granny's Sunday party.
I was taught that when I was very, very young.
And when I was 13, I had a job at a dressmaker's shop sewing clothes.
I did internships in college, I was building things, and I also had to learn how to do assignments.
You know, all I wanted to do was draw pictures of horses when I was little.
My mother said, "Well let's do a picture of something else."
They've got to learn how to do something else.
Let's say the kid is fixated on Legos.
The thing about the autistic mind is it tends to be fixated.
Like if the kid loves race cars, let's use race cars for math.
Let's figure out how long it takes a race car to go a certain distance.
In other words, use that fixation in order to motivate that kid, that's one of the things we need to do.
I really get fed up when the teachers, especially when you get away from this part of the country, they don't know what to do with these smart kids.
It just drives me crazy.
What can visual thinkers do when they grow up?
They can do graphic design, all kinds of stuff with computers, photography, industrial design.
The pattern thinkers -- they're the ones that are going to be your mathematicians, your software engineers, your computer programmers, all of those kinds of jobs.
And then you've got the word minds; they make great journalists, and they also make really, really good stage actors.
Because the thing about being autistic is, I had to learn social skills like being in a play.
You just kind of ... you just have to learn it.
And we need to be working with these students.
And this brings up mentors.
You know, my science teacher was not an accredited teacher.
He was a NASA space scientist.
Some states now are getting it to where, if you have a degree in biology or in chemistry, you can come into the school and teach biology or chemistry.
We need to be doing that.
Because what I'm observing is, the good teachers, for a lot of these kids, are out in the community colleges.
But we need to be getting some of these good teachers into the high schools.
Another thing that can be very, very, very successful is: there's a lot of people that may have retired from working in the software industry, and they can teach your kid.
And it doesn't matter if what they teach them is old, because what you're doing is you're lighting the spark.
You're getting that kid turned on.
And you get him turned on, then you'll learn all the new stuff.
Mentors are just essential.
I cannot emphasize enough what my science teacher did for me.
And we've got to mentor them, hire them.
And if you bring them in for internships in your companies, the thing about the autism, Asperger-y kind of mind, you've got to give them a specific task.
Don't just say, "Design new software."
You've got to tell them something more specific: "We're designing software for a phone and it has to do some specific thing, and it can only use so much memory."
That's the kind of specificity you need.
Well, that's the end of my talk.
And I just want to thank everybody for coming.
It was great to be here.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Oh -- you have a question for me? OK.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you so much for that.
You know, you once wrote -- I like this quote: "If by some magic, autism had been eradicated from the face of the Earth, then men would still be socializing in front of a wood fire at the entrance to a cave."
(Laughter) Temple Grandin: Because who do you think made the first stone spear?
It was the Asperger guy, and if you were to get rid of all the autism genetics, there'd be no more Silicon Valley, and the energy crisis would not be solved.
(Applause) CA: I want to ask you a couple other questions, and if any of these feel inappropriate, it's OK just to say, "Next question."
But if there is someone here who has an autistic child, or knows an autistic child and feels kind of cut off from them, what advice would you give them?
TG: Well, first of all, we've got to look at age.
If you have a two, three or four-year-old, no speech, no social interaction, I can't emphasize enough: Don't wait.
The thing is, autism comes in different degrees.
About half of the people on the spectrum are not going to learn to talk, and they won't be working in Silicon Valley.
That would not be a reasonable thing for them to do.
But then you get these smart, geeky kids with a touch of autism, and that's where you've got to get them turned on with doing interesting things.
I got social interaction through shared interests -- I rode horses with other kids, I made model rockets with other kids, did electronics lab with other kids.
And in the '60s, it was gluing mirrors onto a rubber membrane on a speaker to make a light show.
(Laughter) CA: Is it unrealistic for them to hope or think that that child loves them, as some might, as most, wish?
TG: Well, I tell you, that child will be loyal, and if your house is burning down, they're going to get you out of it.
CA: Wow. So most people, if you ask them what they're most passionate about, they'd say things like, "My kids" or "My lover."
What are you most passionate about?
TG: I'm passionate about that the things I do are going to make the world a better place.
When I have a mother of an autistic child say, "My kid went to college because of your book or one of your lectures," that makes me happy.
You know, the slaughter plants I worked with in the '80s; they were absolutely awful.
I developed a really simple scoring system for slaughter plants, where you just measure outcomes: How many cattle fell down?
How many cattle are mooing their heads off?
You directly observe a few simple things.
It's worked really well.
I get satisfaction out of seeing stuff that makes real change in the real world.
We need a lot more of that, and a lot less abstract stuff.
CA: Totally.
(Applause) CA: When we were talking on the phone, one of the things you said that really astonished me was that one thing you were passionate about was server farms.
Tell me about that.
TG: Well, the reason why I got really excited when I read about that, it contains knowledge.
It's libraries.
And to me, knowledge is something that is extremely valuable.
So, maybe over 10 years ago now, our library got flooded.
This is before the Internet got really big.
And I was really upset about all the books being wrecked, because it was knowledge being destroyed.
And server farms, or data centers, are great libraries of knowledge.
CA: Temple, can I just say, it's an absolute delight to have you at TED.
TG: Well, thank you so much. Thank you.
If you are a blind child in India, you will very likely have to contend with at least two big pieces of bad news.
The first bad news is that the chances of getting treatment are extremely slim to none, and that's because most of the blindness alleviation programs in the country are focused on adults, and there are very, very few hospitals that are actually equipped to treat children.
In fact, if you were to be treated, you might well end up being treated by a person who has no medical credentials as this case from Rajasthan illustrates.
This is a three-year-old orphan girl who had cataracts.
So, her caretakers took her to the village medicine man, and instead of suggesting to the caretakers that the girl be taken to a hospital, the person decided to burn her abdomen with red-hot iron bars to drive out the demons.
The second piece of bad news will be delivered to you by neuroscientists, who will tell you that if you are older than four or five years of age, that even if you have your eye corrected, the chances of your brain learning how to see are very, very slim -- again, slim or none.
So when I heard these two things, it troubled me deeply, both because of personal reasons and scientific reasons.
So let me first start with the personal reason.
It'll sound corny, but it's sincere.
That's my son, Darius.
As a new father, I have a qualitatively different sense of just how delicate babies are, what our obligations are towards them and how much love we can feel towards a child.
I would move heaven and earth in order to get treatment for Darius, and for me to be told that there might be other Dariuses who are not getting treatment, that's just viscerally wrong.
So that's the personal reason.
Scientific reason is that this notion from neuroscience of critical periods -- that if the brain is older than four or five years of age, it loses its ability to learn -- that doesn't sit well with me, because I don't think that idea has been tested adequately.
The birth of the idea is from David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel's work, two researchers who were at Harvard, and they got the Nobel Prize in 1981 for their studies of visual physiology, which are remarkably beautiful studies, but I believe some of their work has been extrapolated into the human domain prematurely.
So, they did their work with kittens, with different kinds of deprivation regiments, and those studies, which date back to the '60s, are now being applied to human children.
So I felt that I needed to do two things.
One: provide care to children who are currently being deprived of treatment.
That's the humanitarian mission.
And the scientific mission would be to test the limits of visual plasticity.
And these two missions, as you can tell, thread together perfectly. One adds to the other; in fact, one would be impossible without the other.
So, to implement these twin missions, a few years ago, I launched Project Prakash.
Prakash, as many of you know, is the Sanskrit word for light, and the idea is that in bringing light into the lives of children, we also have a chance of shedding light on some of the deepest mysteries of neuroscience.
And the logo -- even though it looks extremely Irish, it's actually derived from the Indian symbol of Diya, an earthen lamp.
The Prakash, the overall effort has three components: outreach, to identify children in need of care; medical treatment; and in subsequent study.
And I want to show you a short video clip that illustrates the first two components of this work.
This is an outreach station conducted at a school for the blind.
(Text: Most of the children are profoundly and permanently blind ...) Pawan Sinha: So, because this is a school for the blind, many children have permanent conditions.
That's a case of microphthalmos, which is malformed eyes, and that's a permanent condition; it cannot be treated.
That's an extreme of micropthalmos called enophthalmos.
But, every so often, we come across children who show some residual vision, and that is a very good sign that the condition might actually be treatable.
So, after that screening, we bring the children to the hospital.
That's the hospital we're working with in Delhi, the Schroff Charity Eye Hospital.
It has a very well-equipped pediatric ophthalmic center, which was made possible in part by a gift from the Ronald McDonald charity.
So, eating burgers actually helps.
(Text: Such examinations allow us to improve eye-health in many children, and ...
... help us find children who can participate in Project Prakash.) PS: So, as I zoom in to the eyes of this child, you will see the cause of his blindness.
The whites that you see in the middle of his pupils are congenital cataracts, so opacities of the lens.
In our eyes, the lens is clear, but in this child, the lens has become opaque, and therefore he can't see the world.
So, the child is given treatment. You'll see shots of the eye.
Here's the eye with the opaque lens, the opaque lens extracted and an acrylic lens inserted.
And here's the same child three weeks post-operation, with the right eye open.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, even from that little clip, you can begin to get the sense that recovery is possible, and we have now provided treatment to over 200 children, and the story repeats itself.
After treatment, the child gains significant functionality.
In fact, the story holds true even if you have a person who got sight after several years of deprivation.
We did a paper a few years ago about this woman that you see on the right, SRD, and she got her sight late in life, and her vision is remarkable at this age.
I should add a tragic postscript to this -- she died two years ago in a bus accident.
So, hers is just a truly inspiring story -- unknown, but inspiring story.
So when we started finding these results, as you might imagine, it created quite a bit of stir in the scientific and the popular press.
Here's an article in Nature that profiled this work, and another one in Time.
So, we were fairly convinced -- we are convinced -- that recovery is feasible, despite extended visual deprivation.
The next obvious question to ask: What is the process of recovery?
So, the way we study that is, let's say we find a child who has light sensitivity.
The child is provided treatment, and I want to stress that the treatment is completely unconditional; there is no quid pro quo.
We treat many more children then we actually work with.
Every child who needs treatment is treated.
After treatment, about every week, we run the child on a battery of simple visual tests in order to see how their visual skills are coming on line.
And we try to do this for as long as possible.
This arc of development gives us unprecedented and extremely valuable information about how the scaffolding of vision gets set up.
What might be the causal connections between the early developing skills and the later developing ones?
And we've used this general approach to study many different visual proficiencies, but I want to highlight one particular one, and that is image parsing into objects.
So, any image of the kind that you see on the left, be it a real image or a synthetic image, it's made up of little regions that you see in the middle column, regions of different colors, different luminances.
The brain has this complex task of putting together, integrating, subsets of these regions into something that's more meaningful, into what we would consider to be objects, as you see on the right.
And nobody knows how this integration happens, and that's the question we asked with Project Prakash.
So, here's what happens very soon after the onset of sight.
Here's a person who had gained sight just a couple of weeks ago, and you see Ethan Myers, a graduate student from MIT, running the experiment with him.
His visual-motor coordination is quite poor, but you get a general sense of what are the regions that he's trying to trace out.
If you show him real world images, if you show others like him real world images, they are unable to recognize most of the objects because the world to them is over-fragmented; it's made up of a collage, a patchwork, of regions of different colors and luminances.
And that's what's indicated in the green outlines.
When you ask them, "Even if you can't name the objects, just point to where the objects are," these are the regions that they point to.
So the world is this complex patchwork of regions.
Even the shadow on the ball becomes its own object.
Interestingly enough, you give them a few months, and this is what happens.
Doctor: How many are these?
Patient: These are two things.
Doctor: What are their shapes?
Patient: Their shapes ...
This one is a circle, and this is a square.
PS: A very dramatic transformation has come about.
And the question is: What underlies this transformation?
It's a profound question, and what's even more amazing is how simple the answer is.
The answer lies in motion and that's what I want to show you in the next clip.
Doctor: What shape do you see here?
Patient: I can't make it out.
Doctor: Now?
Patient: Triangle.
Doctor: How many things are these?
Now, how many things are these?
Patient: Two.
Doctor: What are these things?
Patient: A square and a circle.
PS: And we see this pattern over and over again.
The one thing the visual system needs in order to begin parsing the world is dynamic information.
So the inference we are deriving from this, and several such experiments, is that dynamic information processing, or motion processing, serves as the bedrock for building the rest of the complexity of visual processing; it leads to visual integration and eventually to recognition.
This simple idea has far reaching implications.
And let me just quickly mention two, one, drawing from the domain of engineering, and one from the clinic.
So, from the perspective of engineering, we can ask: Goven that we know that motion is so important for the human visual system, can we use this as a recipe for constructing machine-based vision systems that can learn on their own, that don't need to be programmed by a human programmer?
And that's what we're trying to do.
I'm at MIT, at MIT you need to apply whatever basic knowledge you gain.
So we are creating Dylan, which is a computational system with an ambitious goal of taking in visual inputs of the same kind that a human child would receive, and autonomously discovering: What are the objects in this visual input?
So, don't worry about the internals of Dylan.
Here, I'm just going to talk about how we test Dylan.
The way we test Dylan is by giving it inputs, as I said, of the same kind that a baby, or a child in Project Prakash would get.
But for a long time we couldn't quite figure out: Wow can we get these kinds of video inputs?
So, I thought, could we have Darius serve as our babycam carrier, and that way get the inputs that we feed into Dylan?
So that's what we did.
(Laughter) I had to have long conversations with my wife.
(Laughter) In fact, Pam, if you're watching this, please forgive me.
So, we modified the optics of the camera in order to mimic the baby's visual acuity.
As some of you might know, babyies are born pretty much legally blind.
Their acuity -- our acuity is 20/20; babies' acuity is like 20/800, so they are looking at the world in a very, very blurry fashion.
Here's what a baby-cam video looks like.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thankfully, there isn't any audio to go with this.
What's amazing is that working with such highly degraded input, the baby, very quickly, is able to discover meaning in such input.
But then two or three days afterward, babies begin to pay attention to their mother's or their father's face.
How does that happen? We want Dylan to be able to do that, and using this mantra of motion, Dylan actually can do that.
So, given that kind of video input, with just about six or seven minutes worth of video, Dylan can begin to extract patterns that include faces.
So, it's an important demonstration of the power of motion.
The clinical implication, it comes from the domain of autism.
Visual integration has been associated with autism by several researchers.
When we saw that, we asked: Could the impairment in visual integration be the manifestation of something underneath, of dynamic information processing deficiencies in autism?
Because, if that hypothesis were to be true, it would have massive repercussions in our understanding of what's causing the many different aspects of the autism phenotype.
What you're going to see are video clips of two children -- one neurotypical, one with autism, playing Pong.
So, while the child is playing Pong, we are tracking where they're looking.
In red are the eye movement traces.
This is the neurotypical child, and what you see is that the child is able to make cues of the dynamic information to predict where the ball is going to go.
Even before the ball gets to a place, the child is already looking there.
Contrast this with a child with autism playing the same game.
Instead of anticipating, the child always follows where the ball has been.
The efficiency of the use of dynamic information seems to be significantly compromised in autism.
So we are pursuing this line of work and hopefully we'll have more results to report soon.
Looking ahead, if you think of this disk as representing all of the children we've treated so far, this is the magnitude of the problem.
The red dots are the children we have not treated.
So, there are many, many more children who need to be treated, and in order to expand the scope of the project, we are planning on launching The Prakash Center for Children, which will have a dedicated pediatric hospital, a school for the children we are treating and also a cutting-edge research facility.
The Prakash Center will integrate health care, education and research in a way that truly creates the whole to be greater than the sum of the parts.
So, to summarize: Prakash, in its five years of existence, it's had an impact in multiple areas, ranging from basic neuroscience plasticity and learning in the brain, to clinically relevant hypotheses like in autism, the development of autonomous machine vision systems, education of the undergraduate and graduate students, and most importantly in the alleviation of childhood blindness.
And for my students and I, it's been just a phenomenal experience because we have gotten to do interesting research, while at the same time helping the many children that we have worked with.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I think it was in my second grade that I was caught drawing the bust of a nude by Michelangelo.
I was sent straight away to my school principal, and my school principal, a sweet nun, looked at my book with disgust, flipped through the pages, saw all the nudes -- you know, I'd been seeing my mother draw nudes and I'd copy her -- and the nun slapped me on my face and said, "Sweet Jesus, this kid has already begun."
I had no clue what she was talking about, but it was convincing enough for me never to draw again until the ninth grade.
Thanks to a really boring lecture, I started caricaturing my teachers in school.
And, you know, I got a lot of popularity.
I don't play sports. I'm really bad at sports.
I don't have the fanciest gadgets at home.
I'm not on top of the class.
So for me, cartooning gave me a sense of identity.
I got popular, but I was scared I'd get caught again.
So what I did was I quickly put together a collage of all the teachers I had drawn, glorified my school principal, put him right on top, and gifted it to him.
He had a good laugh at the other teachers and put it up on the notice board.
(Laughter) This is a part of that.
And I became a school hero.
All my seniors knew me. I felt really special.
I have to tell you a little bit about my family.
That's my mother. I love her to bits.
She's the one who taught me how to draw and, more importantly, how to love.
She's a bit of a hippie.
She said, "Don't say that," but I'm saying it anyway.
The rest of my family are boring academics, busy collecting Ivy League decals for our classic Ambassador car.
My father's a little different.
My father believed in a holistic approach to living, and, you know, every time he taught us, he'd say, "I hate these books, because these books are hijacked by Industrial Revolution."
While he still held that worldview, I was 16, I got the best lawyer in town, my older brother Karthik, and I sat him down, and I said, "Pa, from today onwards I've decided I'm going to be disciplined, I'm going to be curious, I'm going to learn something new every day, I'm going to be very hard working, and I'm not going to depend on you emotionally or financially."
And he was very impressed. He was all tearing up. Ready to hug me.
And I said, "Hold that thought."
I said, "Can I quit school then?"
But, to cut a long story short, I quit school to pursue a career as a cartoonist.
I must have done about 30,000 caricatures.
I would do birthday parties, weddings, divorces, anything for anyone who wanted to use my services.
But, most importantly, while I was traveling, I taught children cartooning, and in exchange, I learned how to be spontaneous.
And mad and crazy and fun.
When I started teaching them, I said let me start doing this professionally.
When I was 18 I started my own school.
However, an 18 year-old trying to start a school is not easy unless you have a big patron or a big supporter.
So I was flipping through the pages of the Times of India when I saw that the Prime Minister of India was visiting my home town, Bangalore.
And, you know, just like how every cartoonist knows Bush here, and if you had to meet Bush, it would be the funnest thing because his face was a cartoonist's delight.
I had to meet my Prime Minister.
I went to the place where his helicopter was about to land.
I saw layers of security.
I caricatured my way through three layers by just impressing the guards, but I got stuck. I got stuck at the third.
And what happened was, to my luck, I saw a nuclear scientist at whose party I had done cartoons.
I ran up to him, and said, "Hello, sir. How do you do?"
He said, "What are you doing here, Raghava?"
I said, "I'm here to meet the Prime Minister."
He said, "Oh, so am I."
I hopped into his car, and off we went through the remaining layers of security.
(Applause) Thank you.
I sat him down, I caricatured him, and since then I've caricatured hundreds of celebrities.
This is one I remember fondly.
Salman Rushdie was pissed-off I think because I altered the map of New York, if you notice.
(Laughter) Anyway, the next slide I'm about to show you -- (Laughter) Should I just turn that off?
The next slide I'm about to show you, is a little more serious.
I was hesitant to include this in my presentation because this cartoon was published soon after 9/11.
What was, for me, a very naive observation, turned out to be a disaster.
That evening, I came home to hundreds of hate mails, hundreds of people telling me how they could have lived another day without seeing this.
I was also asked to leave the organization, a cartoonists' organization in America, that for me was my lifeline.
That's when I realized, you know, cartoons are really powerful, art comes with responsibility.
Anyway, what I did was I decided that I need to take a break.
I quit my job at the papers, I closed my school, and I wrapped up my pencils and my brushes and inks, and I decided to go traveling.
When I went traveling, I remember, I met this fabulous old man, who I met when I was caricaturing, who turned out to be an artist, in Italy.
He invited me to his studio. He said, "Come and visit."
When I went, I saw the ghastliest thing ever.
I saw this dead, naked effigy of himself hanging from the ceiling.
I said, "Oh, my God. What is that?"
And I asked him, and he said, "Oh, that thing? In the night, I die.
In the morning, I am born again."
I thought he was koo koo, but something about that really stuck.
I loved it. I thought there was something really beautiful about that.
So I said, "I am dead, so I need to be born again."
So, I wanted to be a painter like him, except, I don't know how to paint.
So, I tried going to the art store.
You know, there are a hundred types of brushes.
Forget it, they will confuse you even if you know how to draw.
So I decided, I'm going to learn to paint by myself.
I'm going to show you a very quick clip to show you how I painted and a little bit about my city, Bangalore.
(Music) They had to be larger than life.
Everything had to be larger. The next painting was even bigger.
And even bigger.
And for me it was, I had to dance while I painted.
It was so exciting.
Except, I even started painting dancers.
Here for example is a Flamenco dancer, except there was one problem.
I didn't know the dance form, so I started following them, and I made some money, sold my paintings and would rush off to France or Spain and work with them.
That's Pepe Linares, the renowned Flamenco singer.
But I had one problem, my paintings never danced.
As much energy as I put into them while making them, they never danced.
So I decided -- I had this crazy epiphany at two in the morning.
I called my friends, painted on their bodies, and had them dance in front of a painting.
And, all of a sudden, my paintings came alive.
And then I was fortunate enough to actually perform this in California with Velocity Circus.
And I sat like you guys there in the audience.
And I saw my work come alive.
You know, normally you work in isolation, and you show at a gallery, but here, the work was coming alive, and it had some other artists working with me.
The collaborative effort was fabulous.
I said, I'm going to collaborate with anybody and everybody I meet.
I started doing fashion.
This is a fashion show we held in London.
The best collaboration, of course, is with children.
They are ruthless, they are honest, but they're full of energy and fun.
This is a work, a library I designed for the Robin Hood Foundation.
And I must say, I spent time in the Bronx working with these kids.
And, in exchange for me working with them, they taught me how to be cool.
I don't think I've succeeded, but they've taught me.
They said, "Stop saying sorry. Say, my bad."
(Laughter) Then I said, all this is good, but I want to paint like a real painter.
American education is so expensive.
I was in India, and I was walking down the streets, and I saw a billboard painter.
And these guys paint humongous paintings, and they look really good.
And I wondered how they did it from so close.
So, one day I had the opportunity to meet one of these guys, and I said, "How do you paint like that? Who taught you?"
And he said, "Oh, it's very easy. I can teach you, but we're leaving the city, because billboard painters are a dying, extinct bunch of artists, because digital printing has totally replaced them and hijacked them."
I said, in exchange for education in how to paint, I will support them, and I started a company.
And since then, I've been painting all over the place.
This is a painting I did of my wife in my apartment.
This is another painting.
And, in fact, I started painting on anything, and started sending them around town.
Since I mentioned my wife, the most important collaboration has been with her, Netra.
Netra and I met when she was 18.
I must have been 19 and a half then, and it was love at first sight.
I lived in India. She lived in America.
She'd come every two months to visit me, and then I said I'm the man, I'm the man, and I have to reciprocate.
I have to travel seven oceans, and I have to come and see you.
I did that twice, and I went broke.
So then I said, "Nets, what do I do?"
She said, "Why don't you send me your paintings?
My dad knows a bunch of rich guys.
We'll try and con them into buying it, and then..."
But it turned out, after I sent the works to her, that her dad's friends, like most of you, are geeks.
I'm joking.
(Laughter) No, they were really big geeks, and they didn't know much about art.
So Netra was stuck with 30 paintings of mine.
So what we did was we rented a little van and we drove all over the east coast trying to sell it.
She contacted anyone and everyone who was willing to buy my work.
She made enough money, she sold off the whole collection and made enough money to move me for four years with lawyers, a company, everything, and she became my manager.
That's us in New York.
Notice one thing, we're equal here.
Something happened along the line.
(Laughter) But this brought me -- with Netra managing my career -- it brought me a lot of success.
I was really happy. I thought of myself as a bit of a rockstar.
I loved the attention.
This is all the press we got, and we said, it's time to celebrate.
And I said that the best way to celebrate is to marry Netra.
I said, "Let's get married."
And I said, "Not just married. Let's invite everyone who's helped us, all the people who bought our work."
And you won't believe it, we put together a list of 7,000 people, who had made a difference -- a ridiculous list, but I was determined to bring them to India, so -- a lot of them were in India.
150 artists volunteered to help me with my wedding.
We had fashion designers, installation artists, models, we had makeup artists, jewelry designers, all kinds of people working with me to make my wedding an art installation.
And I had a special installation in tribute to my in-laws.
I had the vegetable carvers work on that for me.
But all this excitement led to the press writing about us.
We were in the papers, we're still in the news three years later, but, unfortunately, something tragic happened right after.
My mother fell very ill.
I love my mother and I was told all of a sudden that she was going to die.
And they said you have to say bye to her, you have to do what you have to do.
And I was devastated.
I had shows booked up for another year.
I was on a high.
And I couldn't. I could not.
My life was not exuberant.
I could not live this larger than life person.
I started exploring the darker abscesses of the human mind.
Of course, my work turned ugly, but another thing happened.
I lost all my audiences.
The Bollywood stars who I would party with and buy my work disappeared.
The collectors, the friends, the press, everyone said, "Nice, but thank you."
"No thank you," was more like it.
But I wanted people to actually feel my work from their gut, because I was painting it from my gut.
If they wanted beauty, I said, this is the beauty I'm willing to give you. It's politicized.
Of course, none of them liked it.
My works also turned autobiographical.
At this point, something else happened.
A very, very dear friend of mine came out of the closet, and in India at that time, it was illegal to be gay, and it's disgusting to see how people respond to a gay person.
I was very upset.
I remember the time when my mother used to dress me up as a little girl -- that's me there -- because she wanted a girl, and she has only boys.
(Laughter) Anyway, I don't know what my friends are going to say after this talk.
It's a secret.
So, after this, my works turned a little violent.
I talked about this masculinity that one need not perform.
And I talked about the weakness of male sexuality.
This time, not only did my collectors disappear, the political activists decided to ban me and to threaten me and to forbid me from showing.
It turned nasty, and I'm a bit of a chicken.
I can't deal with any threat. This was a big threat.
So, I decided it was time to end and go back home.
This time I said let's try something different.
I need to be reborn again.
And I thought the best way, as most of you know who have children, the best way to have a new lease on life, is to have a child.
I decided to have a child, and before I did that, I quickly studied what can go wrong.
How can a family get dysfunctional?
And Rudra was born.
That's my little son.
And two magical things happened after he was born.
My mother miraculously recovered after a serious operation, and this man was elected president of this country.
You know I sat at home and I watched.
I teared up and I said that's where I want to be.
So Netra and I wound up our life, closed up everything we had, and we decided to move to New York.
And this was just eight months ago.
I moved back to New York, my work has changed.
Everything about my work has become more whimsical.
This one is called "What the Fuck Was I Thinking?"
It talks about mental incest.
You know, I may appear to be a very nice, clean, sweet boy.
But I'm not. I'm capable of thinking anything.
But I'm very civil in my action, I assure you.
(Laughter) These are just different cartoons.
And, before I go, I want to tell you a little story.
I was talking to mother and father this morning, and my dad said, "I know you have so much you want to say, but you have to talk about your work with children."
So I said, okay.
I work with children all over the world, and that's an entirely different talk, but I want to leave you with one story that really, really inspired me.
I met Belinda when she was 16.
I was 17.
I was in Australia, and Belinda had cancer, and I was told she's not going to live very long.
They, in fact, told me three weeks.
I walk into her room, and there was a shy girl, and she was bald, and she was trying to hide her baldness.
I whipped out my pen, and I started drawing on her head and I drew a crown for her.
And then, we started talking, and we spent a lovely time -- I told her how I ended up in Australia, how I backpacked and who I conned, and how I got a ticket, and all the stories.
And I drew it out for her.
And then I left.
Belinda died and within a few days of her death, they published a book for her, and she used my cartoon on the cover.
And she wrote a little note, she said, "Hey Rags, thank you for the magic carpet ride around the world."
For me, my art is my magic carpet ride.
I hope you will join me in this magic carpet ride, and touch children and be honest.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Everybody talks about happiness these days.
I had somebody count the number of books with "happiness" in the title published in the last five years and they gave up after about 40, and there were many more.
There is a huge wave of interest in happiness, among researchers.
There is a lot of happiness coaching.
Everybody would like to make people happier.
But in spite of all this flood of work, there are several cognitive traps that sort of make it almost impossible to think straight about happiness.
And my talk today will be mostly about these cognitive traps.
This applies to laypeople thinking about their own happiness, and it applies to scholars thinking about happiness, because it turns out we're just as messed up as anybody else is.
The first of these traps is a reluctance to admit complexity.
It turns out that the word "happiness" is just not a useful word anymore, because we apply it to too many different things.
I think there is one particular meaning to which we might restrict it, but by and large, this is something that we'll have to give up and we'll have to adopt the more complicated view of what well-being is.
The second trap is a confusion between experience and memory; basically, it's between being happy in your life, and being happy about your life or happy with your life.
And those are two very different concepts, and they're both lumped in the notion of happiness.
And the third is the focusing illusion, and it's the unfortunate fact that we can't think about any circumstance that affects well-being without distorting its importance.
I mean, this is a real cognitive trap.
There's just no way of getting it right.
Now, I'd like to start with an example of somebody who had a question-and-answer session after one of my lectures reported a story, and that was a story -- He said he'd been listening to a symphony, and it was absolutely glorious music and at the very end of the recording, there was a dreadful screeching sound.
And then he added, really quite emotionally, it ruined the whole experience.
But it hadn't.
What it had ruined were the memories of the experience.
He had had the experience.
He had had 20 minutes of glorious music.
They counted for nothing because he was left with a memory; the memory was ruined, and the memory was all that he had gotten to keep.
What this is telling us, really, is that we might be thinking of ourselves and of other people in terms of two selves.
There is an experiencing self, who lives in the present and knows the present, is capable of re-living the past, but basically it has only the present.
It's the experiencing self that the doctor approaches -- you know, when the doctor asks, "Does it hurt now when I touch you here?"
And then there is a remembering self, and the remembering self is the one that keeps score, and maintains the story of our life, and it's the one that the doctor approaches in asking the question, "How have you been feeling lately?"
or "How was your trip to Albania?" or something like that.
Those are two very different entities, the experiencing self and the remembering self, and getting confused between them is part of the mess about the notion of happiness.
Now, the remembering self is a storyteller.
And that really starts with a basic response of our memories -- it starts immediately.
We don't only tell stories when we set out to tell stories.
Our memory tells us stories, that is, what we get to keep from our experiences is a story.
And let me begin with one example.
This is an old study.
Those are actual patients undergoing a painful procedure.
I won't go into detail. It's no longer painful these days, but it was painful when this study was run in the 1990s.
They were asked to report on their pain every 60 seconds.
Here are two patients, those are their recordings.
And you are asked, "Who of them suffered more?"
And it's a very easy question.
Clearly, Patient B suffered more -- his colonoscopy was longer, and every minute of pain that Patient A had, Patient B had, and more.
But now there is another question: "How much did these patients think they suffered?"
And here is a surprise.
The surprise is that Patient A had a much worse memory of the colonoscopy than Patient B.
The stories of the colonoscopies were different, and because a very critical part of the story is how it ends.
And neither of these stories is very inspiring or great -- but one of them is this distinct ... (Laughter) but one of them is distinctly worse than the other.
And the one that is worse is the one where pain was at its peak at the very end; it's a bad story.
How do we know that?
Because we asked these people after their colonoscopy, and much later, too, "How bad was the whole thing, in total?"
And it was much worse for A than for B, in memory.
Now this is a direct conflict between the experiencing self and the remembering self.
From the point of view of the experiencing self, clearly, B had a worse time.
Now, what you could do with Patient A, and we actually ran clinical experiments, and it has been done, and it does work -- you could actually extend the colonoscopy of Patient A by just keeping the tube in without jiggling it too much.
That will cause the patient to suffer, but just a little and much less than before.
And if you do that for a couple of minutes, you have made the experiencing self of Patient A worse off, and you have the remembering self of Patient A a lot better off, because now you have endowed Patient A with a better story about his experience.
What defines a story?
And that is true of the stories that memory delivers for us, and it's also true of the stories that we make up.
What defines a story are changes, significant moments and endings.
Endings are very, very important and, in this case, the ending dominated.
Now, the experiencing self lives its life continuously.
It has moments of experience, one after the other.
And you can ask: What happens to these moments?
And the answer is really straightforward: They are lost forever.
I mean, most of the moments of our life -- and I calculated, you know, the psychological present is said to be about three seconds long; that means that, you know, in a life there are about 600 million of them; in a month, there are about 600,000 -- most of them don't leave a trace.
Most of them are completely ignored by the remembering self.
And yet, somehow you get the sense that they should count, that what happens during these moments of experience is our life.
It's the finite resource that we're spending while we're on this earth.
And how to spend it would seem to be relevant, but that is not the story that the remembering self keeps for us.
So we have the remembering self and the experiencing self, and they're really quite distinct.
The biggest difference between them is in the handling of time.
From the point of view of the experiencing self, if you have a vacation, and the second week is just as good as the first, then the two-week vacation is twice as good as the one-week vacation.
That's not the way it works at all for the remembering self.
For the remembering self, a two-week vacation is barely better than the one-week vacation because there are no new memories added.
You have not changed the story.
And in this way, time is actually the critical variable that distinguishes a remembering self from an experiencing self; time has very little impact on the story.
Now, the remembering self does more than remember and tell stories.
It is actually the one that makes decisions because, if you have a patient who has had, say, two colonoscopies with two different surgeons and is deciding which of them to choose, then the one that chooses is the one that has the memory that is less bad, and that's the surgeon that will be chosen.
The experiencing self has no voice in this choice.
We actually don't choose between experiences, we choose between memories of experiences.
And even when we think about the future, we don't think of our future normally as experiences.
We think of our future as anticipated memories.
And basically you can look at this, you know, as a tyranny of the remembering self, and you can think of the remembering self sort of dragging the experiencing self through experiences that the experiencing self doesn't need.
I have that sense that when we go on vacations this is very frequently the case; that is, we go on vacations, to a very large extent, in the service of our remembering self.
And this is a bit hard to justify I think.
I mean, how much do we consume our memories?
That is one of the explanations that is given for the dominance of the remembering self.
And when I think about that, I think about a vacation we had in Antarctica a few years ago, which was clearly the best vacation I've ever had, and I think of it relatively often, relative to how much I think of other vacations.
And I probably have consumed my memories of that three-week trip, I would say, for about 25 minutes in the last four years.
Now, if I had ever opened the folder with the 600 pictures in it, I would have spent another hour.
Now, that is three weeks, and that is at most an hour and a half.
There seems to be a discrepancy.
Now, I may be a bit extreme, you know, in how little appetite I have for consuming memories, but even if you do more of this, there is a genuine question: Why do we put so much weight on memory relative to the weight that we put on experiences?
So I want you to think about a thought experiment.
Imagine that for your next vacation, you know that at the end of the vacation all your pictures will be destroyed, and you'll get an amnesic drug so that you won't remember anything.
Now, would you choose the same vacation? (Laughter) And if you would choose a different vacation, there is a conflict between your two selves, and you need to think about how to adjudicate that conflict, and it's actually not at all obvious, because if you think in terms of time, then you get one answer, and if you think in terms of memories, you might get another answer.
Why do we pick the vacations we do is a problem that confronts us with a choice between the two selves.
Now, the two selves bring up two notions of happiness.
There are really two concepts of happiness that we can apply, one per self.
So you can ask: How happy is the experiencing self?
And then you would ask: How happy are the moments in the experiencing self's life?
And they're all -- happiness for moments is a fairly complicated process.
What are the emotions that can be measured?
And, by the way, now we are capable of getting a pretty good idea of the happiness of the experiencing self over time.
If you ask for the happiness of the remembering self, it's a completely different thing.
This is not about how happily a person lives.
It is about how satisfied or pleased the person is when that person thinks about her life.
Very different notion.
Anyone who doesn't distinguish those notions is going to mess up the study of happiness, and I belong to a crowd of students of well-being, who've been messing up the study of happiness for a long time in precisely this way.
The distinction between the happiness of the experiencing self and the satisfaction of the remembering self has been recognized in recent years, and there are now efforts to measure the two separately.
The Gallup Organization has a world poll where more than half a million people have been asked questions about what they think of their life and about their experiences, and there have been other efforts along those lines.
So in recent years, we have begun to learn about the happiness of the two selves.
And the main lesson I think that we have learned is they are really different.
You can know how satisfied somebody is with their life, and that really doesn't teach you much about how happily they're living their life, and vice versa.
Just to give you a sense of the correlation, the correlation is about .5.
What that means is if you met somebody, and you were told, "Oh his father is six feet tall," how much would you know about his height?
Well, you would know something about his height, but there's a lot of uncertainty.
You have that much uncertainty.
If I tell you that somebody ranked their life eight on a scale of ten, you have a lot of uncertainty about how happy they are with their experiencing self.
So the correlation is low.
We know something about what controls satisfaction of the happiness self.
We know that money is very important, goals are very important.
We know that happiness is mainly being satisfied with people that we like, spending time with people that we like.
There are other pleasures, but this is dominant.
So if you want to maximize the happiness of the two selves, you are going to end up doing very different things.
The bottom line of what I've said here is that we really should not think of happiness as a substitute for well-being.
It is a completely different notion.
Now, very quickly, another reason we cannot think straight about happiness is that we do not attend to the same things when we think about life, and we actually live.
So, if you ask the simple question of how happy people are in California, you are not going to get to the correct answer.
When you ask that question, you think people must be happier in California if, say, you live in Ohio.
(Laughter) And what happens is when you think about living in California, you are thinking of the contrast between California and other places, and that contrast, say, is in climate.
Well, it turns out that climate is not very important to the experiencing self and it's not even very important to the reflective self that decides how happy people are.
But now, because the reflective self is in charge, you may end up -- some people may end up moving to California.
And it's sort of interesting to trace what is going to happen to people who move to California in the hope of getting happier.
Well, their experiencing self is not going to get happier.
We know that.
But one thing will happen: They will think they are happier, because, when they think about it, they'll be reminded of how horrible the weather was in Ohio, and they will feel they made the right decision.
It is very difficult to think straight about well-being, and I hope I have given you a sense of how difficult it is.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you. I've got a question for you.
Thank you so much.
Now, when we were on the phone a few weeks ago, you mentioned to me that there was quite an interesting result came out of that Gallup survey.
Is that something you can share since you do have a few moments left now?
Daniel Kahneman: Sure.
I think the most interesting result that we found in the Gallup survey is a number, which we absolutely did not expect to find.
We found that with respect to the happiness of the experiencing self.
When we looked at how feelings, vary with income.
And it turns out that, below an income of 60,000 dollars a year, for Americans -- and that's a very large sample of Americans, like 600,000, so it's a large representative sample -- below an income of 600,000 dollars a year...
CA: 60,000.
DK: 60,000.
(Laughter) 60,000 dollars a year, people are unhappy, and they get progressively unhappier the poorer they get.
Above that, we get an absolutely flat line.
I mean I've rarely seen lines so flat.
Clearly, what is happening is money does not buy you experiential happiness, but lack of money certainly buys you misery, and we can measure that misery very, very clearly.
In terms of the other self, the remembering self, you get a different story.
The more money you earn, the more satisfied you are.
That does not hold for emotions.
CA: But Danny, the whole American endeavor is about life, liberty, the pursuit of happiness.
If people took seriously that finding, I mean, it seems to turn upside down everything we believe about, like for example, taxation policy and so forth.
Is there any chance that politicians, that the country generally, would take a finding like that seriously and run public policy based on it?
DK: You know I think that there is recognition of the role of happiness research in public policy.
The recognition is going to be slow in the United States, no question about that, but in the U.K., it is happening, and in other countries it is happening.
People are recognizing that they ought to be thinking of happiness when they think of public policy.
It's going to take a while, and people are going to debate whether they want to study experience happiness, or whether they want to study life evaluation, so we need to have that debate fairly soon.
How to enhance happiness goes very different ways depending on how you think, and whether you think of the remembering self or you think of the experiencing self.
This is going to influence policy, I think, in years to come.
In the United States, efforts are being made to measure the experience happiness of the population.
This is going to be, I think, within the next decade or two, part of national statistics.
CA: Well, it seems to me that this issue will -- or at least should be -- the most interesting policy discussion to track over the next few years.
Thank you so much for inventing behavioral economics.
We're going to talk -- my -- a new lecture, just for TED -- and I'm going show you some illusions that we've created for TED, and I'm going to try to relate this to happiness. What I was thinking about with happiness is, what gives happiness -- or happiness, which I equate with joy in my particular area, and I think there's something very fundamental. And I was thinking about this. And it's in terms of both illusions and movies that we go see and jokes and magic shows is that there's something about these things where our expectations are violated in some sort of pleasing way. You go see a movie. And it has an unexpected twist -- something that you didn't expect -- and you find a joyful experience. You look at those sort of illusions in my book and it's not as what you'd expect. And there's something joyful about it. And it's the same thing with jokes and all these sorts of things. So, what I'm going to try and do in my lecture is go a little bit further and see if I can violate your expectations in a pleasing way. I mean, sometimes expectations that are violated are not pleasant, but I'm going to try to do it in a pleasant way, in a very primal way, so I can make the audience here happy.
So I'm going to show you some ways that we can violate your expectations. First of all, I want to show you the particular illusion here. I want you first of all when it pops up on the screen to notice that the two holes are perpendicular to each other. These are all perceptual tricks. These are real objects that I'm going to show you. Now I'm going to show you how it is done. I've looped the film here so you can get a very interesting experience. I want you to see how this illusion is constructed, and it's going to rotate so you see that it's inside out. Now watch, as it rotates back, how quickly your perception snaps. OK now.
Watch it as it rotates back again. And this is a very bright audience, all right? See if you can stop it from happening, even though you know 100 percent it's true that -- bam! You can't undo it. What does that tell you about yourselves? We're going to do it again. No doubt about it. See if you can stop it from happening. No. It's difficult.
And we can violate your expectations in a whole variety of ways about representation, about shape, about color and so forth and it's very primal. And it's an interesting question to ponder, why these things -- we find these things joyful. Why would we find them joyful? So, here's something that Lionel did a while ago. I like these sort of little things like this.
Again, this is not an optical trick. This is what you would see. In other words, it's not a camera cut. It's a perceptual trick.
OK. We can violate your expectations about shape.
We can violate your expectations on representation -- what an image represents. What do you see here?
How many of you here see dolphins? Raise your hand if you see dolphins. OK, those people who raised their hands, afterwards, the rest of the audience, go talk to them, all right? Actually, this is the best example of priming by experience that I know.
If you are a child under the age of 10 who haven't been ruined yet, you will look at this image and see dolphins. Now, some of you adults here are saying, "What dolphins? What dolphins?"
But in fact, if you reversed the figure ground -- in other words, the dark areas here -- I forgot to ask for a pointer -- but if you reverse it, you'll see a whole series of little dolphins. By the way, if you're also a student at CalTech -- they also tend to just see the dolphins. It's based on experience.
Now, something like this can be used because this is after all talk about design, too. This was done by Saatchi and Saatchi, and they actually got away with this ad in Australia. So, if you look at this ad for beer, all those people are in sort of provocative positions. But they got it passed, and actually won the Clio awards, so it's funny how you can do these things.
Remember that sort of, um. This is the joke I did when the Florida ballot was going around. You know, count the dots for Gore; count the dots for Bush; count 'em again ...
You can violate your expectations about experience. Here is an outside water fountain that I created with some friends of mine, but you can stop the water in drops and -- actually make all the drops levitate. This is something we're building for, you know, amusement parks and that kind of stuff.
Now let's take a static image. Can you see this?
Do you see the middle section moving down and the outer sections moving up? It's completely static.
It's a static image. How many people see this illusion? It's completely static.
Right. Now, when -- it's interesting that when we look at an image we see, you know, color, depth, texture. And you can look at this whole scene and analyze it. You can see the woman is in closer than the wall and so forth. But the whole thing is actually flat. It's painted. It's trompe l'oeil.
And it was such a good trompe l'oeil that people got irritated when they tried to talk to the woman and she wouldn't respond.
Now, you can make design mistakes. Like this building in New York. So that when you see it from this side, it looks like the balconies tilt up, and when you walk around to the other side it looks like the balconies go down. So there are cases where you have mistakes in design that incorporate illusions.
Or, you take this particular un-retouched photograph. Now, interestingly enough, I get a lot of emails from people who say, "Is there any perceptual difference between males and females?"
And I really say, "No." I mean, women can navigate through the world just as well as males can -- and why wouldn't they? However, this is the one illusion that women can consistently do better than males: in matching which head because they rely on fashion cues. They can match the hat.
Okay, now getting to a part -- I want to show design in illusions. I believe that the first example of illusions being used purposely was by da Vinci in this anamorphic image of an eye. So that when you saw from one little angle was like this. And this little technique got popular in the 16th century and the 17th century to disguise hidden meanings, where you could flip the image and see it from one little point of view like this.
But these are early incorporations of illusions brought to -- sort of high point with Hans Holbein's "Ambassadors." And Hans Holbein worked for Henry VIII. This was hung on a wall where you could walk down from the stair and you can see this hidden skull.
All right, now I'm going to show you some designers who work with illusions to give that element of surprise. One of my favorites is Scott Kim. I worked with Scott to create some illusions for TED that I hope you will enjoy. We have one here on TED and happiness.
OK now. Arthur [Ganson] hasn't talked yet, but his is going to be a delightful talk and he has some of his really fantastic machines outside. And so, we -- Scott created this wonderful tribute to Arthur Ganson.
Well, there's analog and digital. Thought that was appropriate here.
And figure goes to ground.
And for the musicians.
And of course, since happiness -- we want "joy to the world."
Now, another great designer -- he's very well known in Japan -- Shigeo Fukuda. And he just builds some fantastic things. This is simply amazing. This is a pile of junk that when you view it from one particular angle, you see its reflection in the mirror as a perfect piano.
Pianist transforms to violinist.
This is really wild. This assemblage of forks, knives and spoons and various cutlery, welded together. It gives a shadow of a motorcycle. You learn something in the sort of thing that I do, which is there are people out there with a lot of time on their hands.
Ken Knowlton does wonderful composite images, like creating Jacques Cousteau out of seashells -- un-retouched seashells, but just by rearranging them. He did Einstein out of dice because, after all, Einstein said, "God does not play dice with the universe." Bert Herzog out of un-retouched keyboards. Will Shortz, crossword puzzle. John Cederquist does these wonderful trompe l'oeil cabinets.
Now, I'm going to skip ahead since I'm sort of running [behind]. I want to show you quickly what I've created, some new type of illusions. I've done something with taking the Pixar-type illusions. So you see these kids the same size here, running down the hall. The two table tops of the same size.
They're looking out two directions at once. You have a larger piece fitting in with a smaller. And that's something for you to think about, all right? So you see larger pieces fitting in within smaller pieces here. Does everyone see that? Which is impossible. You can see the two kids are looking out simultaneously out of two different directions at once. Now can you believe these two table tops are the same size and shape? They are.
So, if you measured them, they would be. And as I say, those two figures are identical in size and shape.
And it's interesting, by doing this in this sort of rendered fashion, how much stronger the illusions are. Any case, I hope this has brought you a little joy and happiness, and if you're interested in seeing more cool effects, see me outside. I'd be happy to show you lots of things.
So, what I'm going to do is just give you the latest episode of India's -- maybe the world's -- longest running soap opera, which is cricket.
And may it run forever, because it gives people like me a living.
It's got everything that you'd want a normal soap opera to want: It's got love, joy, happiness, sadness, tears, laughter, lots of deceit, intrigue.
And like all good soaps, it jumps 20 years when the audience interest changes.
And that's exactly what cricket has done.
It's jumped 20 years into 20-over game.
And that's what I'm going to talk about, how a small change leads to a very big revolution.
But it wasn't always like that.
Cricket wasn't always this speed-driven generations game.
There was a time when you played cricket, you played timeless test matches, when you played on till the game got over.
And there was this game in March 1939 that started on the third of March and ended on the 14th of March.
And it only ended because the English cricketers had to go from Durban to Cape Town, which is a two-hour train journey, to catch the ship that left on the 17th, because the next ship wasn't around for a long time.
So, the match was ended in between.
And one of the English batsmen said, "You know what?
Another half an hour and we would have won."
(Laughter) Another half an hour after 12 days.
There were two Sundays in between. But of course, Sundays are church days, so you don't play on Sundays. And one day it rained, so they all sat around making friends with each other.
But there is a reason why India fell in love with cricket: because we had about the same pace of life.
(Laughter) The Mahabharata was like that as well, wasn't it?
You fought by day, then it was sunset, so everyone went back home.
And then you worked out your strategy, and you came and fought the next day, and you went back home again.
The only difference between the Mahabharata and our cricket was that in cricket, everybody was alive to come back and fight the next day.
Princes patronize the game, not because they love the game, but because it was a means of ingratiating themselves to the British rulers.
But there is one other reason why India fell in love with cricket, which was, all you needed was a plank of wood and a rubber ball, and any number of people could play it anywhere.
Take a look: You could play it in the dump with some rocks over there, you could play it in a little alley -- you couldn't hit square anywhere, because the bat hit the wall; don't forget the air conditioning and the cable wires.
(Laughter) You could play it on the banks of the Ganges -- that's as clean as the Ganges has been for a long time.
Or you could play many games in one small patch of land, even if you didn't know which game you were actually in.
(Laughter) As you can see, you can play anywhere.
But slowly the game moved on, you know, finally.
You don't always have five days. So, we moved on, and we started playing 50-over cricket.
And then an enormous accident took place.
In Indian sport we don't make things happen, accidents happen and we're in the right place at the right time, sometimes.
And we won this World Cup in 1983.
And suddenly we fell in love with the 50-over game, and we played it virtually every day.
There was more 50-over cricket than anywhere.
But there was another big date.
1983 was when we won the World Cup.
1991,'92, we found a finance minister and a prime minister willing to let the world look at India, rather than be this great country of intrigue and mystery in this closed country.
And so we allowed multinationals into India.
We cut customs duties, we reduced import duties, and we got all the multinationals coming in, with multinational budgets, who looked at per-capita income and got very excited about the possibilities in India, and were looking for a vehicle to reach every Indian.
And there are only two vehicles in India -- one real, one scripted.
The scripted one is what you see in the movies, the real one was cricket.
And so one of my friends sitting right here in front of me, Ravi Dhariwal from Pepsi, decided he's going to take it all over the world.
And Pepsi was this big revolution, because they started taking cricket all over.
And so cricket started becoming big; cricket started bringing riches in.
Television started covering cricket. For a long time television said, "We won't cover cricket unless you pay us to cover it."
Then they said, "OK, the next rights are sold for 55 million dollars.
The next rights are sold for 612 million dollars."
So, it's a bit of a curve, that.
And then another big accident happened in our cricket.
England invented 20 overs cricket, and said, "The world must play 20 overs cricket."
Just as England invented cricket, and made the rest of the world play it.
Thank God for them.
(Laughter) And so, India had to go and play the T20 World Cup, you see.
India didn't want to play the T20 World Cup.
But we were forced to play it by an 8-1 margin.
And then something very dramatic happened.
We got to the final, and then this moment, that will remain enshrined forever, for everybody, take a look.
(Crowd cheering) The Pakistani batsman trying to clear the fielder.
Announcer: And Zishan takes it! India wins!
What a match for a Twenty20 final.
India, the world champions.
(Cheering) India, T20 champions.
But what a game we had, M. S. Dhoni got it right in the air, but Misbah-ul-Haq, what a player.
A massive, massive success: India, the world TT champions.
Harsha Bhogle: Suddenly India discovered this power of 20-overs cricket.
The accident, of course, there, was that the batsman thought the bowler was bowling fast.
(Laughter) If he had bowled fast, the ball would have gone where it was meant to go, but it didn't go. And we suddenly discovered that we could be good at this game.
And what it also did was it led to a certain pride in the fact that India could be the best in the world.
It was at a time when investment was coming in, India was feeling a little more confident about itself.
And so there was a feeling that there was great pride in what we can do.
And thankfully for all of us, the English are very good at inventing things, and then the gracious people that they are, they let the world become very good at it.
(Laughter) And so England invented T20 cricket, and allowed India to hijack it.
It was not like reengineering that we do in medicine, we just took it straight away, as is.
(Laughter) And so, we launched our own T20 league.
Six weeks, city versus city.
It was a new thing for us. We had only ever supported our country -- the only two areas in which India was very proud about their country, representing itself on the field.
One was war, the Indian army, which we don't like to happen very often.
The other was Indian cricket.
Now, suddenly we had to support city leagues.
But the people getting into these city leagues were people who were taking their cues from the West.
America is a home of leagues. And they said, "Right, we'll build some glitzy leagues here in India."
But was India ready for it?
Because cricket, for a long time in India was always organized.
It was never promoted, it was never sold -- it was organized.
And look what they did with our beautiful, nice, simple family game.
All of a sudden, you had that happening.
(Music) An opening ceremony to match every other.
This was an India that was buying Corvettes. This was an India that was buying Jaguar.
This was an India that was adding more mobile phones per month than New Zealand's population twice over.
So, it was a different India.
But it was also a slightly more orthodox India that was very happy to be modern, but didn't want to say that to people.
And so, they were aghast when the cheerleaders arrived.
Everyone secretly watched them, but everyone claimed not to.
(Music) (Laughter) The new owners of Indian cricket were not the old princes.
They were not bureaucrats who were forced into sport because they didn't actually love it; these were people who ran serious companies.
And so they started promoting cricket big time, started promoting clubs big time.
And they've started promoting them with huge money behind it.
I mean the IPL had 2.3 billion dollars before a ball was bowled, 1.6 billion dollars for television revenue over 10 years, and another 70 million dollars plus from all these franchises that were putting in money. And then they had to appeal to their cities, but they had to do it like the West, right? Because we are setting up leagues.
But what they were very good at doing was making it very localized.
So, just to give you an example of how they did it -- not Manchester United style promotion, but very Mumbai style promotion. Take a look.
(Music) Of course, a lot of people said, "Maybe they dance better than they play."
(Laughter) But that's all right. What it did also is it changed the way we looked at cricket.
All along, if you wanted a young cricketer, you picked him up from the bylanes of your own little locality, your own city, and you were very proud of the system that produced those cricketers.
Now, all of the sudden, if you were to bowl a shot -- if Mumbai were to bowl a shot, for example, they needn't go to Kalbadevi or Shivaji Park or somewhere to source them, they could go to Trinidad.
This was the new India, wasn't it? This was the new world, where you can source from anywhere as long as you get the best product at the best price.
And all of a sudden, Indian sport had awakened to the reality that you can source the best product for the best price anywhere in the world.
So, the Mumbai Indians flew in Dwayne Bravo from Trinidad and Tobago, overnight. And when he had to go back to represent the West Indies, they asked him, "When do you have to reach?"
He said, "I have to be there by a certain time, so I have to leave today."
We said, "No, no, no. It's not about when you have to leave; it's about when do you have to reach there?"
And so he said, "I've got to reach on date X."
And they said, "Fine, you play to date X, minus one."
So, he played in Hyderabad, went, straight after the game, went from the stadium to Hyderabad airport, sat in a private corporate jet -- first refueling in Portugal, second refueling in Brazil; he was in West Indies in time.
(Laughter) Never would India have thought on this scale before.
Never would India have said, "I want a player to play one game for me, and I will use a corporate jet to send him all the way back to Kingston, Jamaica to play a game."
And I just thought to myself, "Wow, we've arrived somewhere in the world, you know?
We have arrived somewhere. We are thinking big."
But what this also did was it started marrying the two most important things in Indian cricket, which is cricket and the movies in Indian entertainment.
There is cricket and the movies.
And they came together because people in the movies now started owning clubs.
And so, people started going to the cricket to watch Preity Zinta.
They started going to the cricket to watch Shah Rukh Khan.
And something very interesting happened.
We started getting song and dance in Indian cricket.
And so it started resembling the Indian movies more and more.
And of course, if you were on Preity Zinta's team -- as you will see on the clip that follows -- if you did well, you got a hug from Preity Zinta.
So that was the ultimate reason to do well. Take a look -- everyone's watching Preity Zinta.
(Music) And then of course there was Shah Rukh playing the Kolkata crowd.
We'd all seen matches in Kolkata, but we'd never seen anything like this: Shah Rukh, with the Bengali song, getting the audiences all worked up for Kolkata -- not for India, but for Kolkata.
But take a look at this.
(Music) An Indian film star hugging a Pakistani cricketer because they'd won in Kolkata.
Can you imagine?
And do you know what the Pakistani cricketer said?
(Applause) "I wish I was playing for Preity Zinta's team."
(Laughter) But I thought I'd take this opportunity -- there's a few people from Pakistan in here.
I'm so happy that you're here because I think we can show that we can both be together and be friends, right?
We can play cricket together, we can be friends.
So thank you very much for coming, all of you from Pakistan.
(Applause) There was criticism too because they said, "Players are being bought and sold?
Are they grain?
Are they cattle?"
Because we had this auction, you see.
How do you fix a price for a player?
And so the auction that followed literally had people saying, "Bang! so many million dollars for so-and-so player."
There it is.
(Music) Auctioneer: Going at 1,500,000 dollars. Chennai.
Shane Warne sold for 450,000 dollars.
HB: Suddenly, a game which earned its players 50 rupees a day -- so 250 rupees for a test match, but if you finish in four days you only got 200.
The best Indian players who played every test match -- every one of the internationals, the top of the line players -- standard contracts are 220,000 dollars in a whole year.
Now they were getting 500,000 for six days' work.
Then Andrew Flintoff came by from England, he got one and a half million dollars, and he went back and said, "For four weeks, I'm earning more than Frank Lampard and Steven Gerrard, and I'm earning more than the footballers, wow."
And where was he earning it from? From a little club in India.
Could you have imagined that day would come?
One and a half million dollars for six weeks' work.
That's not bad, is it?
So, at 2.3 billion dollars before the first ball was bowled.
What India was doing, though, was benchmarking itself against the best in the world, and it became a huge brand.
Lalit Modi was on the cover of Business Today.
IPL became the biggest brand in India and, because our elections, had to be moved to South Africa, and we had to start the tournament in three weeks.
Move a whole tournament to South Africa in three weeks.
But we did it. You know why?
Because no country works as slowly as we do till three weeks before an event, and nobody works fast as we do in the last three weeks.
(Applause) Our population, which for a long time we thought was a problem, suddenly became our biggest asset because there were more people watching -- the huge consuming class -- everybody came to watch the cricket.
We'd also made cricket the only sport in India, which is a pity, but in India every other sport pushes cricket to become big, which is a bit of a tragedy of our times.
Now, this last minute before I go -- there's a couple of side effects of all this.
For a long time, India was this country of poverty, dust, beggars, snake charmers, filth, Delhi belly -- people heard Delhi belly stories before they came.
And, all of a sudden, India was this land of opportunity.
Cricketers all over the world said, "You know, we love India. We love to play in India."
And that felt good, you know?
We said, "The dollar's quite powerful actually."
Can you imagine, you've got the dollar on view and there's no Delhi belly in there anymore.
There's no filth, there's no beggars, all the snake charmers have vanished, everybody's gone. This tells you how the capitalist world rules.
Right so, finally, an English game that India usurped a little bit, but T20 is going to be the next missionary in the world.
If you want to take the game around the world, it's got to be the shortest form of the game.
You can't take a timeless test to China and sit through 14 days with no result in the end, or you can't take it all over the world.
So that's what T20 is doing.
Hopefully, it'll make everyone richer, hopefully it'll make the game bigger and hopefully it'll give cricket commentators more time in the business.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
If I can leave you with one big idea today, it's that the whole of the data in which we consume is greater that the sum of the parts, and instead of thinking about information overload, what I'd like you to think about is how we can use information so that patterns pop and we can see trends that would otherwise be invisible.
So what we're looking at right here is a typical mortality chart organized by age.
This tool that I'm using here is a little experiment.
It's called Pivot, and with Pivot what I can do is I can choose to filter in one particular cause of deaths -- say, accidents.
And, right away, I see there's a different pattern that emerges.
This is because, in the mid-area here, people are at their most active, and over here they're at their most frail.
We can step back out again and then reorganize the data by cause of death, seeing that circulatory diseases and cancer are the usual suspects, but not for everyone.
If we go ahead and we filter by age -- say 40 years or less -- we see that accidents are actually the greatest cause that people have to be worried about.
And if you drill into that, it's especially the case for men.
So you get the idea that viewing information, viewing data in this way, is a lot like swimming in a living information info-graphic.
And if we can do this for raw data, why not do it for content as well?
So what we have right here is the cover of every single Sports Illustrated ever produced.
It's all here; it's all on the web.
You can go back to your rooms and try this after my talk.
With Pivot, you can drill into a decade.
You can drill into a particular year.
You can jump right into a specific issue.
So I'm looking at this; I see the athletes that have appeared in this issue, the sports.
I'm a Lance Armstrong fan, so I'll go ahead and I'll click on that, which reveals, for me, all the issues in which Lance Armstrong's been a part of.
(Applause) Now, if I want to just kind of take a peek at these, I might think, "Well, what about taking a look at all of cycling?"
So I can step back, and expand on that.
And I see Greg LeMond now.
And so you get the idea that when you navigate over information this way -- going narrower, broader, backing in, backing out -- you're not searching, you're not browsing.
You're doing something that's actually a little bit different.
It's in between, and we think it changes the way information can be used.
So I want to extrapolate on this idea a bit with something that's a little bit crazy.
What we're done here is we've taken every single Wikipedia page and we reduced it down to a little summary.
So the summary consists of just a little synopsis and an icon to indicate the topical area that it comes from.
I'm only showing the top 500 most popular Wikipedia pages right here.
But even in this limited view, we can do a lot of things.
Right away, we get a sense of what are the topical domains that are most popular on Wikipedia.
I'm going to go ahead and select government.
Now, having selected government, I can now see that the Wikipedia categories that most frequently correspond to that are Time magazine People of the Year.
So this is really important because this is an insight that was not contained within any one Wikipedia page.
It's only possible to see that insight when you step back and look at all of them.
Looking at one of these particular summaries, I can then drill into the concept of Time magazine Person of the Year, bringing up all of them.
So looking at these people, I can see that the majority come from government; some have come from natural sciences; some, fewer still, have come from business -- there's my boss -- and one has come from music.
And interestingly enough, Bono is also a TED Prize winner.
So we can go, jump, and take a look at all the TED Prize winners.
So you see, we're navigating the web for the first time as if it's actually a web, not from page-to-page, but at a higher level of abstraction.
And so I want to show you one other thing that may catch you a little bit by surprise.
I'm just showing the New York Times website here.
So Pivot, this application -- I don't want to call it a browser; it's really not a browser, but you can view web pages with it -- and we bring that zoomable technology to every single web page like this.
So I can step back, pop right back into a specific section.
Now the reason why this is important is because, by virtue of just viewing web pages in this way, I can look at my entire browsing history in the exact same way.
So I can drill into what I've done over specific time frames.
Here, in fact, is the state of all the demo that I just gave.
And I can sort of replay some stuff that I was looking at earlier today.
And, if I want to step back and look at everything, I can slice and dice my history, perhaps by my search history -- here, I was doing some nepotistic searching, looking for Bing, over here for Live Labs Pivot.
And from these, I can drill into the web page and just launch them again.
It's one metaphor repurposed multiple times, and in each case it makes the whole greater than the sum of the parts with the data.
So right now, in this world, we think about data as being this curse.
We talk about the curse of information overload.
We talk about drowning in data.
What if we can actually turn that upside down and turn the web upside down, so that instead of navigating from one thing to the next, we get used to the habit of being able to go from many things to many things, and then being able to see the patterns that were otherwise hidden?
If we can do that, then instead of being trapped in data, we might actually extract information.
And, instead of dealing just with information, we can tease out knowledge.
And if we get the knowledge, then maybe even there's wisdom to be found.
So with that, I thank you.
(Applause)
I grew up on a steady diet of science fiction.
In high school, I took a bus to school an hour each way every day.
And I was always absorbed in a book, science fiction book, which took my mind to other worlds, and satisfied, in a narrative form, this insatiable sense of curiosity that I had.
And you know, that curiosity also manifested itself in the fact that whenever I wasn't in school I was out in the woods, hiking and taking "samples" -- frogs and snakes and bugs and pond water -- and bringing it back, looking at it under the microscope.
You know, I was a real science geek.
But it was all about trying to understand the world, understand the limits of possibility.
And my love of science fiction actually seemed mirrored in the world around me, because what was happening, this was in the late '60s, we were going to the moon, we were exploring the deep oceans.
Jacques Cousteau was coming into our living rooms with his amazing specials that showed us animals and places and a wondrous world that we could never really have previously imagined.
So, that seemed to resonate with the whole science fiction part of it.
And I was an artist.
I could draw. I could paint.
And I found that because there weren't video games and this saturation of CG movies and all of this imagery in the media landscape, I had to create these images in my head.
You know, we all did, as kids having to read a book, and through the author's description, put something on the movie screen in our heads.
And so, my response to this was to paint, to draw alien creatures, alien worlds, robots, spaceships, all that stuff.
I was endlessly getting busted in math class doodling behind the textbook.
That was -- the creativity had to find its outlet somehow.
And an interesting thing happened: The Jacques Cousteau shows actually got me very excited about the fact that there was an alien world right here on Earth.
I might not really go to an alien world on a spaceship someday -- that seemed pretty darn unlikely.
But that was a world I could really go to, right here on Earth, that was as rich and exotic as anything that I had imagined from reading these books.
So, I decided I was going to become a scuba diver at the age of 15.
And the only problem with that was that I lived in a little village in Canada, 600 miles from the nearest ocean.
But I didn't let that daunt me.
I pestered my father until he finally found a scuba class in Buffalo, New York, right across the border from where we live.
And I actually got certified in a pool at a YMCA in the dead of winter in Buffalo, New York.
And I didn't see the ocean, a real ocean, for another two years, until we moved to California.
Since then, in the intervening 40 years, I've spent about 3,000 hours underwater, and 500 hours of that was in submersibles.
And I've learned that that deep-ocean environment, and even the shallow oceans, are so rich with amazing life that really is beyond our imagination.
Nature's imagination is so boundless compared to our own meager human imagination.
I still, to this day, stand in absolute awe of what I see when I make these dives.
And my love affair with the ocean is ongoing, and just as strong as it ever was.
But when I chose a career as an adult, it was filmmaking.
And that seemed to be the best way to reconcile this urge I had to tell stories with my urges to create images.
And I was, as a kid, constantly drawing comic books, and so on.
So, filmmaking was the way to put pictures and stories together, and that made sense.
And of course the stories that I chose to tell were science fiction stories: "Terminator," "Aliens" and "The Abyss."
And with "The Abyss," I was putting together my love of underwater and diving with filmmaking.
So, you know, merging the two passions.
Something interesting came out of "The Abyss," which was that to solve a specific narrative problem on that film, which was to create this kind of liquid water creature, we actually embraced computer generated animation, CG.
And this resulted in the first soft-surface character, CG animation that was ever in a movie.
And even though the film didn't make any money -- barely broke even, I should say -- I witnessed something amazing, which is that the audience, the global audience, was mesmerized by this apparent magic.
You know, it's Arthur Clarke's law that any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.
They were seeing something magical.
And so that got me very excited.
And I thought, "Wow, this is something that needs to be embraced into the cinematic art."
So, with "Terminator 2," which was my next film, we took that much farther.
Working with ILM, we created the liquid metal dude in that film. The success hung in the balance on whether that effect would work.
And it did, and we created magic again, and we had the same result with an audience -- although we did make a little more money on that one.
So, drawing a line through those two dots of experience came to, "This is going to be a whole new world," this was a whole new world of creativity for film artists.
So, I started a company with Stan Winston, my good friend Stan Winston, who is the premier make-up and creature designer at that time, and it was called Digital Domain.
And the concept of the company was that we would leapfrog past the analog processes of optical printers and so on, and we would go right to digital production.
And we actually did that and it gave us a competitive advantage for a while.
But we found ourselves lagging in the mid '90s in the creature and character design stuff that we had actually founded the company to do.
So, I wrote this piece called "Avatar," which was meant to absolutely push the envelope of visual effects, of CG effects, beyond, with realistic human emotive characters generated in CG, and the main characters would all be in CG, and the world would be in CG.
And the envelope pushed back, and I was told by the folks at my company that we weren't going to be able to do this for a while.
So, I shelved it, and I made this other movie about a big ship that sinks.
(Laughter) You know, I went and pitched it to the studio as "'Romeo and Juliet' on a ship: "It's going to be this epic romance, passionate film."
Secretly, what I wanted to do was I wanted to dive to the real wreck of "Titanic."
And that's why I made the movie.
(Applause) And that's the truth. Now, the studio didn't know that.
But I convinced them. I said, "We're going to dive to the wreck. We're going to film it for real.
We'll be using it in the opening of the film.
It will be really important. It will be a great marketing hook."
And I talked them into funding an expedition.
(Laughter) Sounds crazy. But this goes back to that theme about your imagination creating a reality.
Because we actually created a reality where six months later, I find myself in a Russian submersible two and a half miles down in the north Atlantic, looking at the real Titanic through a view port.
Not a movie, not HD -- for real.
(Applause) Now, that blew my mind.
And it took a lot of preparation, we had to build cameras and lights and all kinds of things.
But, it struck me how much this dive, these deep dives, was like a space mission.
You know, where it was highly technical, and it required enormous planning.
You get in this capsule, you go down to this dark hostile environment where there is no hope of rescue if you can't get back by yourself.
And I thought like, "Wow. I'm like, living in a science fiction movie.
This is really cool."
And so, I really got bitten by the bug of deep-ocean exploration.
Of course, the curiosity, the science component of it -- it was everything. It was adventure, it was curiosity, it was imagination.
And it was an experience that Hollywood couldn't give me.
Because, you know, I could imagine a creature and we could create a visual effect for it. But I couldn't imagine what I was seeing out that window.
As we did some of our subsequent expeditions, I was seeing creatures at hydrothermal vents and sometimes things that I had never seen before, sometimes things that no one had seen before, that actually were not described by science at the time that we saw them and imaged them.
So, I was completely smitten by this, and had to do more.
And so, I actually made a kind of curious decision.
After the success of "Titanic," I said, "OK, I'm going to park my day job as a Hollywood movie maker, and I'm going to go be a full-time explorer for a while."
And so, we started planning these expeditions.
And we wound up going to the Bismark, and exploring it with robotic vehicles.
We went back to the Titanic wreck.
We took little bots that we had created that spooled a fiber optic.
And the idea was to go in and do an interior survey of that ship, which had never been done.
Nobody had ever looked inside the wreck. They didn't have the means to do it, so we created technology to do it.
So, you know, here I am now, on the deck of Titanic, sitting in a submersible, and looking out at planks that look much like this, where I knew that the band had played.
And I'm flying a little robotic vehicle through the corridor of the ship.
When I say, "I'm operating it," but my mind is in the vehicle.
I felt like I was physically present inside the shipwreck of Titanic.
And it was the most surreal kind of deja vu experience I've ever had, because I would know before I turned a corner what was going to be there before the lights of the vehicle actually revealed it, because I had walked the set for months when we were making the movie.
And the set was based as an exact replica on the blueprints of the ship.
So, it was this absolutely remarkable experience.
And it really made me realize that the telepresence experience -- that you actually can have these robotic avatars, then your consciousness is injected into the vehicle, into this other form of existence.
It was really, really quite profound.
And it may be a little bit of a glimpse as to what might be happening some decades out as we start to have cyborg bodies for exploration or for other means in many sort of post-human futures that I can imagine, as a science fiction fan.
So, having done these expeditions, and really beginning to appreciate what was down there, such as at the deep ocean vents where we had these amazing, amazing animals -- they're basically aliens right here on Earth.
They live in an environment of chemosynthesis.
They don't survive on sunlight-based system the way we do.
And so, you're seeing animals that are living next to a 500-degree-Centigrade water plumes.
You think they can't possibly exist.
At the same time I was getting very interested in space science as well -- again, it's the science fiction influence, as a kid.
And I wound up getting involved with the space community, really involved with NASA, sitting on the NASA advisory board, planning actual space missions, going to Russia, going through the pre-cosmonaut biomedical protocols, and all these sorts of things, to actually go and fly to the international space station with our 3D camera systems.
And this was fascinating.
But what I wound up doing was bringing space scientists with us into the deep.
And taking them down so that they had access -- astrobiologists, planetary scientists, people who were interested in these extreme environments -- taking them down to the vents, and letting them see, and take samples and test instruments, and so on.
So, here we were making documentary films, but actually doing science, and actually doing space science.
I'd completely closed the loop between being the science fiction fan, you know, as a kid, and doing this stuff for real.
And you know, along the way in this journey of discovery, I learned a lot.
I learned a lot about science. But I also learned a lot about leadership.
Now you think director has got to be a leader, leader of, captain of the ship, and all that sort of thing.
I didn't really learn about leadership until I did these expeditions.
Because I had to, at a certain point, say, "What am I doing out here?
Why am I doing this? What do I get out of it?"
We don't make money at these damn shows.
We barely break even. There is no fame in it.
People sort of think I went away between "Titanic" and "Avatar" and was buffing my nails someplace, sitting at the beach.
Made all these films, made all these documentary films for a very limited audience.
No fame, no glory, no money. What are you doing?
You're doing it for the task itself, for the challenge -- and the ocean is the most challenging environment there is -- for the thrill of discovery, and for that strange bond that happens when a small group of people form a tightly knit team.
Because we would do these things with 10, 12 people, working for years at a time, sometimes at sea for two, three months at a time.
And in that bond, you realize that the most important thing is the respect that you have for them and that they have for you, that you've done a task that you can't explain to someone else.
When you come back to the shore and you say, "We had to do this, and the fiber optic, and the attentuation, and the this and the that, all the technology of it, and the difficulty, the human-performance aspects of working at sea," you can't explain it to people. It's that thing that maybe cops have, or people in combat that have gone through something together and they know they can never explain it.
Creates a bond, creates a bond of respect.
So, when I came back to make my next movie, which was "Avatar," I tried to apply that same principle of leadership, which is that you respect your team, and you earn their respect in return.
And it really changed the dynamic.
So, here I was again with a small team, in uncharted territory, doing "Avatar," coming up with new technology that didn't exist before.
Tremendously exciting.
Tremendously challenging.
And we became a family, over a four-and-half year period.
And it completely changed how I do movies.
So, people have commented on how, "Well, you know, you brought back the ocean organisms and put them on the planet of Pandora."
To me, it was more of a fundamental way of doing business, the process itself, that changed as a result of that.
So, what can we synthesize out of all this?
You know, what are the lessons learned?
Well, I think number one is curiosity.
It's the most powerful thing you own.
Imagination is a force that can actually manifest a reality.
And the respect of your team is more important than all the laurels in the world.
I have young filmmakers come up to me and say, "Give me some advice for doing this."
And I say, "Don't put limitations on yourself.
Other people will do that for you -- don't do it to yourself, don't bet against yourself, and take risks."
NASA has this phrase that they like: "Failure is not an option."
But failure has to be an option in art and in exploration, because it's a leap of faith.
And no important endeavor that required innovation was done without risk.
You have to be willing to take those risks.
So, that's the thought I would leave you with, is that in whatever you're doing, failure is an option, but fear is not. Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Applause) I'm Jon M. Chu. And I'm not a dancer, I'm not a choreographer -- I'm actually a filmmaker, a storyteller.
I directed a movie two years ago called "Step Up 2: The Streets."
Anybody? Anybody? Yeah!
During that movie I got to meet a ton of hip-hop dancers -- amazing, the best in the world -- and they brought me into a society, the sort of underground street culture that blew my mind.
I mean, this is literally human beings with super-human strength and abilities.
They could fly in the air. They could bend their elbow all the way back.
They could spin on their heads for 80 times in a row.
I'd never seen anything like that.
When I was growing up, my heroes were people like Fred Astaire, Gene Kelly, Michael Jackson.
I grew up in a musical family.
(Laughter) And those guys, those were like, ultimate heroes.
Being a shy, little, skinny Asian kid growing up in the Silicon Valley with low self-esteem, those guys made me believe in something bigger.
Those guys made me want to, like, "I'm going to do that moonwalk at that bar mitzvah tonight for that girl."
(Applause) And it seems like those dance heroes have disappeared, sort of relegated to the background of pop stars and music videos.
But after seeing what I've seen, the truth is, they have not disappeared at all.
They're here, getting better and better every day.
And dance has progressed.
It is insane what dance is right now.
Dance has never had a better friend than technology.
Online videos and social networking ...
dancers have created a whole global laboratory online for dance, where kids in Japan are taking moves from a YouTube video created in Detroit, building on it within days and releasing a new video, while teenagers in California are taking the Japanese video and remixing it with a Philly flair to create a whole new dance style in itself.
And this is happening every day.
And from these bedrooms and living rooms and garages, with cheap webcams, lies the world's great dancers of tomorrow.
Our Fred Astaires, our Gene Kellys our Michael Jacksons are right at our fingertips, and may not have that opportunity, except for us.
So, we created the LXD, sort of a -- the Legion of Extraordinary Dancers, a justice league of dancers that believe that dance can have a transformative effect on the world.
A living, breathing comic book series, but unlike Spiderman and Iron Man, these guys can actually do it.
And we're going to show you some today. So, let me introduce to you, some of our heroes right now.
We got Madd Chadd, Lil' C, Kid David and J Smooth.
Please be excited, have fun, yell, scream.
Ladies and gentlemen: The LXD.
(Applause) (Video): Madd Chadd: When people first see me, I get a lot of different reactions actually.
Sometimes you would think that maybe kids would enjoy it, but sometimes they get a little freaked out.
And, I don't know, I kind of get a kick out of that a little bit.
(Music) (Applause) J Smooth: When I'm in the zone -- I'm dancing and free styling it -- I actually visually kind of picture lines, and moving them.
I think of like, Transformers, like how panels open and then they fold, they fold in, and then you close that panel.
And then another thing opens, you close that.
(Music) (Applause) Kid David: It's kind of like, honestly a lot of times I don't really know what's going on when I'm dancing.
Because at that point it's just really like, it's my body and the music.
It's not really a conscious decision, "I'm going to do this next, I'm going to do this."
It's kind of like this other level where you can't make choices anymore, and it's just your body reacting to certain sounds in the music.
I got my name just because I was so young.
I was young when I started. I was younger than a lot of the people I was dancing with.
So, it was always like, they called me Kid David, because I was the kid.
(Music) (Applause) L'il C: I tell them to create a ball, and then you just use that ball of energy.
And instead of throwing it out, people would think that's a krump move, that's a krump move.
That's not a krump move. You're going to throw it out, you throw it out, and you hold it.
And you let it go, and then right when you see the tail, you grab it by the tail, then you bring it back in.
And you just got this piece of energy and you just, you're manipulating it.
You know, you create power, then you tame it.
(Music) (Applause) (Music) (Applause)
I have a vision for each one of you, and the vision I have for you is that when you wake up in the morning, your blood is singing at the thought of being who you are and doing what you do; that as you go through the day, you can literally sink to your knees in gratitude at the tremendous good fortune that's been bestowed on you; that as you go through the day, you become radiantly alive several times.
And if your life isn't like that, I'd like to humbly suggest that you're wasting your life.
A life is too short to be wasted.
So what I propose to do in the next 17 minutes -- I've used up one minute already -- is to give you a set of powerful tools which can get you started on being there.
Is that of interest to you?
Audience: Yes.
Srikumar Rao: OK.
This is a conference on happiness, but even if it wasn't a conference on happiness, would it be right if I said that in some way, shape, fashion or form, you're devoting your entire life to being happy?
Everything you do -- your job, family, children, relationships, whatever -- is a quest for happiness.
Correct?
I'd like you to think about the following: What do you have to get in order to be happy?
We're just going to spend a minute on this.
What do you have to get in order to be happy?
Anybody, quick?
When I conduct this experiment, a bunch of stuff comes up: vast wealth, trophy spouse, good health, lots of travel, time, etc, etc, etc.
Right now, if you were to think about it, you probably have a list of, "Here's what I need to get in order to be happy."
I would like you to consider this: anything that you can get -- let me repeat that -- anything you can get, you can un-get.
Is that correct?
So, vast wealth can make you happy. Vast wealth can disappear tomorrow.
A number of people in the financial sector have discovered this already.
So whatever you get that can make you happy can go away.
Where does that leave you?
Not a very nice place, right?
I have a different proposition to suggest to you.
What I have to suggest to you is that there is nothing that you have to get, do or be in order to be happy.
Let me repeat that: there is nothing that you have to get, do or be in order to be happy.
In fact, happiness is your innate nature.
It is hardwired into you. It is part of your DNA.
You cannot not be happy.
Now, all of you are very polite, and in some of the other forums I speak in, such as top business schools, they're not so polite.
And invariably, somebody articulates what many of you are thinking, which is: "If happiness is my innate nature, how come I am not experiencing it?
How come I am experiencing my life sucks?"
(Laughter) And the answer to that is actually very simple.
You have spent your entire life learning to be unhappy.
Let me repeat that: you have spent your entire life learning to be unhappy.
And the way we learn to be unhappy is by buying into a particular mental model.
A mental model is a notion we have that this is the way the world works.
All of us have mental models, we've got dozens of mental models.
We've got mental models on how to find a job, how to get ahead at work, how to pick a restaurant to eat at, how to have a movie to go to ... dozens of them.
The problem isn't that we have mental models.
The problem is that we don't know that we have mental models.
We think this is the way the world works.
And the more we invest in a mental model, the more it appears that this, in fact, is the way the world works.
But it isn't: it's just a mental model, and the mental model we have that we buy into so strongly is that we have to get something so we can do something so we can be something.
Like, we have to get a great deal of money so we can travel to exotic places so we can be happy.
We have to be in a relationship so we can have great sex so we can be happy.
All of this is a variation of the if-then model.
And the if-then model is: if this happens, then we will be happy.
If I were to get a better job, if I were to get more money, if my boss would have a heart attack, if only I was married, if only my wife would leave me -- (Laughter) if only I had children, if my children would grow up and go to college ...
It doesn't matter what it is.
The whole notion is if this happens, then I will be happy.
And right now, the only thing that's different between the persons in this audience is what is the particular "if" that you are focusing on?
And the only thing that's different between you now and where you were 10 years ago is what is the particular "if" that you were focusing on?
Think about your life 10 years ago.
Spend a minute doing that.
Ten years ago, if you remember clearly, there were certain things you wanted.
Is that correct?
Odds are pretty good that many of those things you wanted 10 years ago you now have.
Is that correct?
Where has that left you?
In exactly the same place, right?
What we don't realize is the model itself is flawed.
The if-then model -- "If this happens I will be happy" -- the model itself is flawed.
But instead of recognizing that it is the model itself that's flawed, what we do is spend enormous amounts of time changing the "if."
"Oh, well, I thought if I became CEO it would help, but now I realize it's not that I want to become a CEO.
I want to become the billionaire CEO, and then I will be happy."
You've got your own variation on that.
But it's the model itself that's flawed, not what you put on the "if" side of the equation.
I can demonstrate that to you.
Can any of you recall a time when you were confronted with a scene of such spectacular beauty that it took you outside of yourself into a place of great serenity?
Maybe a rainbow, a mountain range, a valley, the sea.
And if you remember that -- raise your hands if you could.
Virtually all of you could, right?
Have you ever wondered why that happened?
The reason that happened is that somehow, for some reason, at that instant, you accepted the universe exactly as it was.
You didn't say, "That's a beautiful rainbow, but it's kind of off to the left, and if I could move it 200 yards to the right, it would be ever so much more beautiful."
(Laughter) You didn't say, "That's a beautiful valley, but the tree in the foreground has too many crooked branches.
So if you gave me a chainsaw and 20 minutes, I'd make it ever so much better."
Oh no, the rainbow off-center was just fine.
The tree with its crooked branches was just fine.
And the moment you accepted the universe just as it was, your habitual-wanting self dropped away, and the happiness which is your innate nature surfaced, and you felt it.
And I know you felt it because now, even now after all those years, you can still remember it.
The problem is that your life right now, with all of the problems that you have -- more precisely, all of the problems that you think you have -- is equally perfect.
But you do not accept it.
In fact, you're spending all your time striving with might and main to make it different.
You are not accepting it.
And when you're not accepting it, you're buying into the if-then model: if this happens, then I will be happy.
And it's the model itself that is flawed.
So let me show you how you can get out of that, or at least you can begin the steps towards getting out of that.
I'd like to share with you that action.
We all live our lives because we want to achieve something, correct?
You know, we are here and we want to have something.
Alex wants to have a successful conference.
You know, many of you want to have great programs for your companies that are very successful.
You want to progress, have more money, all of that, is that correct?
Each of those is an outcome; you would like something to happen.
Now, I'd like you to think about the following: actions are within your control, not entirely, but to a large extent.
The outcome is completely out of your control.
OK?
Actions are within your control.
The outcome is completely outside your control.
Have any of you recognized that when you have a goal and you start to work towards it, some of the time you don't achieve your goal, and some of the time what you get is the exact opposite of what you wanted?
Has that happened to any of you?
Like there was a friend of mine who said, "Gee, you know, I have not been paying a lot of attention to my wife, and this has to change."
So the next time we went on a business trip, he bought a very expensive dress for her.
And this was his way of showing, you know, I care for you, and nice things would happen.
And when he presented the gift to his wife, her immediate reaction was, "After 20 years of marriage, you don't know my size?"
(Laughter) "And furthermore, don't you know I never wear this kind of thing?"
And the next thing you know, he had a full-blown marital spat.
Has that happened to any of you?
You've taken action for a particular outcome and the outcome you got was the exact opposite of what you wanted?
Happens all the time.
Well, we live in a world where what we think of, what we invest in, is the outcome.
We define our life in the following way: here I am, here is where I want to go, these are the steps I have to take in order to get from where I am to where I want to go, and if I succeed, life is wonderful.
And if I don't, then I have failed, life is no good, life sucks.
True? False?
That is how we live.
We invest in the outcome, and as I've just pointed out, the outcome is frequently different from what we would like, and sometimes the diametric opposite of what we would like.
You invest in the outcome and you are guaranteed to have more than your share of frustration, angst and all the rest of the stuff that makes life suck.
There is an alternative.
And the alternative is that you do not invest in the outcome, you invest in the process.
And the best way to describe that is a quote by John Wooden.
I don't know how many of you are familiar with John Wooden.
He's very well-known in the United States and certainly among basketball fans.
He's the only person ever to make the basketball Hall of Fame both as a player and as a coach.
And what he told his entering team -- he led UCLA to an unprecedented number of victories and finals in the NCAA -- and what he used to tell any new team is he never spoke about winning.
He always said, "When it's over and you look in the mirror, did you do the best that you were capable of?
And if you did the best that you were capable of, the score doesn't matter.
But I would suspect that if you did the best that you were capable of, you will find the score to your liking."
That is investing in a process.
What we do is the exact opposite.
We invest in the outcome.
This is what I want -- oh, I want it so desperately, because if I get it I will be happy.
And you try with might and main, to do whatever you can, but you are always focusing on, "This is the outcome."
Now, focusing on the outcome is fine.
It gives you direction.
Investing in the outcome means that you make the achievement of a particular outcome dependent for your well-being.
And that is a surefire recipe for failure.
What you can do is something else.
You can invest in the process.
That is, once you have determined, here is where I am, here is where I want to be, and that's fine, you focus on the outcome only to the extent that it gives you direction, and then you invest yourself completely in the process.
You say, here are the steps you want to take, and you put everything into it.
And if you succeed, wonderful.
And if you don't succeed, still wonderful, because now you have a new starting point, and from that new starting point, you select another outcome and keep going.
And when you do that, you will find that every day is a blast.
Let me give you an example.
And if you have children -- raise your hands if you have children.
Have you ever seen a small child learn to walk?
What happens, and this happens typically between 11 and 13 months, is the child gets up and she sees everybody walking, she wants to walk, she gets up, she falls down, she starts crying and momma runs up and comforts her, kisses the place, makes it well.
She tries again, falls down, mommy runs up again.
After some time, mommy feels tired and no longer runs up and the child stops crying, and then she gets up, takes a step and doesn't fall down, and then she takes another, and a beautiful smile comes on her face.
And very soon, generally within 24 hours, she's walking all over the place, upsetting your living room arrangements.
And you know you've gone to a new stage of parenting.
Right?
Now, imagine what would happen if each time the child fell, she would say, "Oh my God, I failed again.
I'm never going to learn to walk."
And you have to get counseling for her to help her deal with feelings of inadequacy and not being able to achieve and fail yet again.
How long do you think it would take her to learn to walk if you had to do that, if every three times she fell down, you had to get a counselor to counsel her and so on?
Sounds funny, doesn't it?
But that is exactly what we're doing.
What the child is doing is focusing on the process.
She's investing in the process, not in the outcome.
What we do is the exact opposite.
As we grow up, we lose the ability to invest in the process, we start investing in the outcome.
By definition the outcome is outside of our control, and if that's where we spend all of our emotional energy, we are going to get drained as we do.
But if, on the other hand, we said, "Here is the outcome, I am going to invest in the process and give it every single bit I could," every day is a blast, and you're well on your way to achieving the vision that I outlined to you.
The question that I get all the time, is people say, "Professor Rao, but nothing makes me passionate."
So I say, "OK, what would?"
And they invariably come up with, you know, here is a list of things.
Here's my job and here's how much it pays, this is the kind of person my boss is, the kind of people my colleagues are, and here's how my customers are, here's how much I travel, here's how big my office is, how deep the carpeting is, how many windows I have -- a bunch of parameters.
And what I tell them is what I want to share with you, because all of that stuff -- first of all, it doesn't exist.
But second, even if it did and you were plugged into it, it would not take more than six months for you to be the same sorry, miserable self there as you are now, because passion exists inside you.
It does not exist in the job.
And if you don't find a way to ignite it within you right where you are, you are not going to find it outside.
But if you do find a way to ignite it where you are, then you will find that the external world rearranges itself to accommodate the new person that you are becoming.
And as you do that, you will find that miracles happen on a regular basis.
Persons come up whom you're delighted to meet.
New people enter your life.
It's just a breeze, because all you do in your life is you take journeys.
You came here to this conference; you went on a journey.
You hang around the water cooler, talking about how terrible your place of work is; you went on a journey.
You watch "Desperate Housewives," you go on a journey.
You go on a journey where 40-something women are having affairs with 19-something gardeners while the husbands are playing around with models.
All you do is go on journeys.
There's nothing wrong with that, but just ask yourself, "Is this a journey I want to take?
Does this take me to a place I want to spend time?"
And if you start doing that, you will find that your life changes.
The kind of people you meet, the things you talk about, the movies you go to, the books you read -- everything changes.
And you begin all of that by focusing on the process.
Invest in the process, not in the outcome.
Thank you.
Last year here at TED I asked you to give me your data, to put your data on the web, on the basis that if people put data onto the web -- government data, scientific data, community data, whatever it is -- it will be used by other people to do wonderful things, in ways that they never could have imagined.
So, today I'm back just to show you a few things, to show you, in fact, there is an open data movement afoot, now, around the world.
The cry of "Raw data now!"
which I made people make in the auditorium, was heard around the world.
So, let's roll the video.
A classic story, the first one which lots of people picked up, was when in March -- on March 10th in fact, soon after TED -- Paul Clarke, in the U.K. government, blogged, "Oh, I've just got some raw data. Here it is, it's about bicycle accidents."
Two days it took the Times Online to make a map, a mashable map -- we call these things mash-ups -- a mashed-up user interface that allows you to go in there and have a look and find out whether your bicycle route to work was affected.
Here's more data, traffic survey data, again, put out by the U.K. government, and because they put it up using the Linked Data standards, then a user could just make a map, just by clicking.
Does this data affect things? Well, let's get back to 2008.
Look at Zanesville, Ohio.
Here's a map a lawyer made. He put on it the water plant, and which houses are there, which houses have been connected to the water.
And he got, from other data sources, information to show which houses are occupied by white people.
Well, there was too much of a correlation, he felt, between which houses were occupied by white people and which houses had water, and the judge was not impressed either.
The judge was not impressed to the tune of 10.9 million dollars.
That's the power of taking one piece of data, another piece of data, putting it together, and showing the result.
Let's look at some data from the U.K. now.
This is U.K. government data, a completely independent site, Where Does My Money Go.
It allows anybody to go there and burrow down.
You can burrow down by a particular type of spending, or you can go through all the different regions and compare them.
So, that's happening in the U.K. with U.K. government data.
Yes, certainly you can do it over here.
Here's a site which allows you to look at recovery spending in California.
Take an arbitrary example, Long Beach, California, you can go and have a look at what recovery money they've been spending on different things such as energy.
In fact, this is the graph of the number of data sets in the repositories of data.gov, and data.gov.uk.
And I'm delighted to see a great competition between the U.K. in blue, and the U.S. in red.
How can you use this stuff?
Well, for example, if you have lots of data about places you can take, from a postcode -- which is like a zip plus four -- for a specific group of houses, you can make paper, print off a paper which has got very, very specific things about the bus stops, the things specifically near you.
On a larger scale, this is a mash-up of the data which was released about the Afghan elections.
It allows you to set your own criteria for what sort of things you want to look at.
The red circles are polling stations, selected by your criteria.
And then you can select also other things on the map to see what other factors, like the threat level.
So, that was government data.
I also talked about community-generated data -- in fact I edited some.
This is the wiki map, this is the Open Street Map.
"Terrace Theater" I actually put on the map because it wasn't on the map before TED last year.
I was not the only person editing the open street map.
Each flash on this visualization -- put together by ITO World -- shows an edit in 2009 made to the Open Street Map.
Let's now spin the world during the same year.
Every flash is an edit. Somebody somewhere looking at the Open Street Map, and realizing it could be better.
You can see Europe is ablaze with updates.
Some places, perhaps not as much as they should be.
Here focusing in on Haiti.
The map of Port au-Prince at the end of 2009 was not all it could be, not as good as the map of California.
Fortunately, just after the earthquake, GeoEye, a commercial company, released satellite imagery with a license, which allowed the open-source community to use it.
This is January, in time lapse, of people editing ... that's the earthquake.
After the earthquake, immediately, people all over the world, mappers who wanted to help, and could, looked at that imagery, built the map, quickly building it up.
We're focusing now on Port-au-Prince.
The light blue is refugee camps these volunteers had spotted from the [satellite images].
So, now we have, immediately, a real-time map showing where there are refugee camps -- rapidly became the best map to use if you're doing relief work in Port-au-Prince.
Witness the fact that it's here on this Garmin device being used by rescue team in Haiti.
There's the map showing, on the left-hand side, that hospital -- actually that's a hospital ship.
This is a real-time map that shows blocked roads, damaged buildings, refugee camps -- it shows things that are needed [for rescue and relief work].
So, if you've been involved in that at all, I just wanted to say: Whatever you've been doing, whether you've just been chanting, "Raw data now!"
or you've been putting government or scientific data online, I just wanted to take this opportunity to say: Thank you very much, and we have only just started!
(Applause)
I only have three minutes so I'm going to have to talk fast, and it will use up your spare mental cycles, so multitasking may be hard.
So, 27 years ago I got a traffic ticket that got me thinking.
I've had some time to think it over.
And energy efficiency is more than just about the vehicle -- it's also about the road.
Road design makes a difference, particularly intersections, of which there are two types: signalized and unsignalized, which means stop signs.
Fifty percent of crashes happen at intersections.
Roundabouts are much better.
A study of 24 intersections has found crashes drop 40 percent from when you convert a traffic light into a roundabout.
Injury crashes have dropped 76 percent, fatal crashes down 90 percent.
But that's just safety.
What about time and gas?
So, traffic keeps flowing, so that means less braking, which means less accelerating, less gas and less pollution, less time wasted, and that partly accounts for Europe's better efficiency than we have in the United States.
So, unsignalized intersections, meaning stop signs, they save many lives, but there's an excessive proliferation of them.
Small roundabouts are starting to appear.
This is one in my neighborhood. And they are much better -- better than traffic lights, better than four-way stop signs.
They're expensive to install, but they are more expensive not to. So, we should look at that.
But they are not applicable in all situations.
So, take, for example, the three-way intersection.
So, it's logical that you'd have one there, on the minor road entering the major.
But the other two are somewhat questionable.
So, here's one. There's another one which I studied.
Cars rarely appear on that third road.
And so, the question is, what does that cost us?
That intersection I looked at had about 3,000 cars per day in each direction, and so that's two ounces of gas to accelerate out of.
That's five cents each, and times 3,000 cars per day, that's $51,000 per year.
That's just the gasoline cost. There is also pollution, wear on the car, and time.
What's that time worth?
Well, at 10 seconds per 3,000 cars, that's 8.3 hours per day. The average wage in the U.S.
is $20 an hour. That is 60,000 per year.
Add that together with the gas, and it's $112,000 per year, just for that sign in each direction.
Discount that back to the present, at five percent: over two million dollars for a stop sign, in each direction.
Now, if you look at what that adjacent property is worth, you could actually buy the property, cut down the shrubbery to improve the sight line, and then sell it off again.
And you'd still come out ahead.
So, it makes one wonder, "Why is it there?"
I mean, why is there that stop sign in each direction?
Because it is saving lives. So, is there a better way to accomplish that goal?
The answer is to enable cars to come in from that side road safely.
Because there are a lot of people who might live up there and if they're waiting forever a long queue could form because the cars aren't slowing down on the main road.
Can that be accomplished with existing signs?
So, there is a long history of stop signs and yield signs.
Stop signs were invented in 1915, yield signs in 1950. But that's all we got.
So, why not use a yield sign?
Well the meaning of yield is: You must yield the right-of-way.
That means that if there are five cars waiting, you have to wait till they all go, then you go. It lacks the notion of alternating, or taking turns, and it's always on the minor road, allowing the major one to have primacy.
So, it's hard to create a new meaning for the existing sign.
You couldn't suddenly tell everyone, "OK, remember what you used to do at yield signs? Now do something different."
That would not work.
So, what the world needs now is a new type of sign.
(Applause) So, you'd have a little instruction below it, you know, for those who didn't see the public service announcements.
And it merges the stop sign and yield signs.
It's kind of shaped like a T, as in taking turns.
And uncertainty results in caution.
When people come to an unfamiliar situation they don't know how to deal with they slow down.
So, now that you are all "Road Scholars" ...
(Laughter) don't wait for that sign to be adopted, these things don't change quickly.
But you all are members of communities, and you can exercise your community influence to create more sensible traffic flows.
And you can have more impact on the environment just getting your neighborhood to change these things than by changing your vehicle. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'll just take you to Bangladesh for a minute.
Before I tell that story, we should ask ourselves the question: Why does poverty exist?
I mean, there is plenty of knowledge and scientific breakthroughs.
We all live in the same planet, but there's still a great deal of poverty in the world.
And I think -- so I want to throw a perspective that I have, so that we can assess this project, or any other project, for that matter, to see whether it's contributing or -- contributing to poverty or trying to alleviate it.
Rich countries have been sending aid to poor countries for the last 60 years.
And by and large, this has failed.
And you can see this book, written by someone who worked in the World Bank for 20 years, and he finds economic growth in this country to be elusive.
By and large, it did not work.
So the question is, why is that?
In my mind, there is something to learn from the history of Europe.
I mean, even here, yesterday I was walking across the street, and they showed three bishops were executed 500 years ago, right across the street from here.
So my point is, there's a lot of struggle has gone in Europe, where citizens were empowered by technologies.
And they demanded authorities from -- to come down from their high horses.
And in the end, there's better bargaining between the authorities and citizens, and democracies, capitalism -- everything else flourished.
And so you can see, the real process of -- and this is backed up by this 500-page book -- that the authorities came down and citizens got up.
But if you look, if you have that perspective, then you can see what happened in the last 60 years.
Aid actually did the opposite.
It empowered authorities, and, as a result, marginalized citizens.
The authorities did not have the reason to make economic growth happen so that they could tax people and make more money for to run their business.
Because they were getting it from abroad.
And in fact, if you see oil-rich countries, where citizens are not yet empowered, the same thing goes -- Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, all sorts of countries.
Because the aid and oil or mineral money acts the same way.
It empowers authorities, without activating the citizens -- their hands, legs, brains, what have you.
And if you agree with that, then I think the best way to improve these countries is to recognize that economic development is of the people, by the people, for the people.
And that is the real network effect.
If citizens can network and make themselves more organized and productive, so that their voices are heard, so then things would improve.
And to contrast that, you can see the most important institution in the world, the World Bank, is an organization of the government, by the government, for the governments.
Just see the contrast.
And that is the perspective I have, and then I can start my story.
Of course, how would you empower citizens?
There could be all sorts of technologies. And one is cell phones.
Recently "The Economist" recognized this, but I stumbled upon the idea 12 years ago, and that's what I've been working on.
So 12 years ago, I was trying to be an investment banker in New York.
We had -- quite a few our colleagues were connected by a computer network.
And we got more productive because we didn't have to exchange floppy disks; we could update each other more often.
But one time it broke down.
And it reminded me of a day in 1971.
There was a war going on in my country.
And my family moved out of an urban place, where we used to live, to a remote rural area where it was safer.
And one time my mother asked me to get some medicine for a younger sibling.
And I walked 10 miles or so, all morning, to get there, to the medicine man.
And he wasn't there, so I walked all afternoon back.
So I had another unproductive day.
So while I was sitting in a tall building in New York, I put those two experiences together side by side, and basically concluded that connectivity is productivity -- whether it's in a modern office or an underdeveloped village.
So naturally, I -- the implication of that is that the telephone is a weapon against poverty.
And if that's the case, then the question is how many telephones did we have at that time?
And it turns out, that there was one telephone in Bangladesh for every 500 people.
And all those phones were in the few urban places.
The vast rural areas, where 100 million people lived, there were no telephones.
So just imagine how many man-months or man-years are wasted, just like I wasted a day.
If you just multiply by 100 million people, let's say losing one day a month, whatever, and you see a vast amount of resource wasted.
And after all, poor countries, like rich countries, one thing we've got equal, is their days are the same length: 24 hours.
So if you lose that precious resource, where you are somewhat equal to the richer countries, that's a huge waste.
So I started looking for any evidence that -- does connectivity really increase productivity?
And I couldn't find much, really, but I found this graph produced by the ITU, which is the International Telecommunication Union, based in Geneva.
They show an interesting thing.
That you see, the horizontal axis is where you place your country.
So the United States or the UK would be here, outside.
And so the impact of one new telephone, which is on the vertical axis, is very little.
But if you come back to a poorer country, where the GNP per capita is, let's say, 500 dollars, or 300 dollars, then the impact is huge: 6,000 dollars. Or 5,000 dollars.
The question was, how much did it cost to install a new telephone in Bangladesh?
It turns out: 2,000 dollars.
So if you spend 2,000 dollars, and let's say the telephone lasts 10 years, and if 5,000 dollars every year -- so that's 50,000 dollars.
So obviously this was a gadget to have.
And of course, if the cost of installing a telephone is going down, because there's a digital revolution going on, then it would be even more dramatic.
And I knew a little economics by then -- it says Adam Smith taught us that specialization leads to productivity.
But how would you specialize?
Let's say I'm a fisherman and a farmer.
And Chris is a fisherman farmer. Both are generalists.
So the point is that we could only -- the only way we could depend on each other, is if we can connect with each other.
And if we are neighbors, I could just walk over to his house.
But then we are limiting our economic sphere to something very small area.
But in order to expand that, you need a river, or you need a highway, or you need telephone lines.
But in any event, it's connectivity that leads to dependability.
And that leads to specialization.
That leads to productivity.
So the question was, I started looking at this issue, and going back and forth between Bangladesh and New York.
There were a lot of reasons people told me why we don't have enough telephones.
And one of them is the lacking buying power.
Poor people apparently don't have the power to buy.
But the point is, if it's a production tool, why do we have to worry about that?
I mean, in America, people buy cars, and they put very little money down.
They get a car, and they go to work.
The work pays them a salary; the salary allows them to pay for the car over time.
The car pays for itself.
So if the telephone is a production tool, then we don't quite have to worry about the purchasing power.
And of course, even if that's true, then what about initial buying power?
So then the question is, why can't we have some kind of shared access?
In the United States, we have -- everybody needs a banking service, but very few of us are trying to buy a bank.
So it's -- a bank tends to serve a whole community.
So we could do that for telephones.
And also people told me that we have a lot of important primary needs to meet: food, clothing, shelter, whatever.
But again, it's very paternalistic.
You should be raising income and let people decide what they want to do with their money.
But the real problem is the lack of other infrastructures.
See, you need some kind of infrastructure to bring a new thing.
For instance, the Internet was booming in the U.S.
because there were -- there were people who had computers.
They had modems.
They had telephone lines, so it's very easy to bring in a new idea, like the Internet.
But that's what's lacking in a poor country.
So for example, we didn't have ways to have credit checks, few banks to collect bills, etc.
But that's why I noticed Grameen Bank, which is a bank for poor people, and had 1,100 branches, 12,000 employees, 2.3 million borrowers.
And they had these branches.
I thought I could put cell towers and create a network.
And anyway, to cut the time short -- so I started -- I first went to them and said, "You know, perhaps I could connect all your branches and make you more efficient."
But you know, they have, after all, evolved in a country without telephones, so they are decentralized. I mean, of course there might be other good reasons, but this was one of the reasons -- they had to be.
And so they were not that interested to connect all their branches, and then to be -- and rock the boat.
So I started focusing. What is it that they really do?
So what happens is that somebody borrows money from the bank.
She typically buys a cow. The cow gives milk.
And she sells the milk to the villagers, and pays off the loan.
And this is a business for her, but it's milk for everybody else.
And suddenly I realized that a cell phone could be a cow.
Because some way she could borrow 200 dollars from the bank, get a phone and have the phone for everybody.
And it's a business for her.
So I wrote to the bank, and they thought for a while, and they said, "It's a little crazy, but logical.
If you think it can be done, come and make it happen."
So I quit my job; I went back to Bangladesh.
I created a company in America called Gonofone, which in Bengali means "people's phone."
And angel investors in America put in money into that.
I flew around the world.
After about a million -- I mean, I got rejected from lots of places, because I was not only trying to go to a poor country, I was trying to go to the poor of the poor country.
After about a million miles, and a meaningful -- a substantial loss of hair, I eventually put together a consortium, and -- which involved the Norwegian telephone company, which provided the know-how, and the Grameen Bank provided the infrastructure to spread the service.
To make the story short, here is the coverage of the country.
You can see it's pretty much covered.
Even in Bangladesh, there are some empty places.
But we are also investing around another 300 million dollars this year to extend that coverage.
Now, about that cow model I talked about.
There are about 115,000 people who are retailing telephone services in their neighborhoods.
And it's serving 52,000 villages, which represent about 80 million people.
And these phones are generating about 100 million dollars for the company.
And two dollars profit per entrepreneur per day, which is like 700 dollars per year.
And of course, it's very beneficial in a lot of ways.
It increases income, improves welfare, etc.
And the result is, right now, this company is the largest telephone company, with 3.5 million subscribers, 115,000 of these phones I talked about -- that produces about a third of the traffic in the network.
And 2004, the net profit, after taxes -- very serious taxes -- was 120 million dollars.
And the company contributed about 190 million dollars to the government coffers.
And again, here are some of the lessons.
"The government needs to provide economically viable services."
Actually, this is an instance where private companies can provide that.
"Governments need to subsidize private companies."
This is what some people think.
And actually, private companies help governments with taxes.
"Poor people are recipients."
Poor people are a resource.
"Services cost too much for the poor."
Their involvement reduces the cost.
"The poor are uneducated and cannot do much."
They are very eager learners and very capable survivors.
I've been very surprised.
Most of them learn how to operate a telephone within a day.
"Poor countries need aid."
Businesses -- this one company has raised the -- if the ideal figures are even five percent true, this one company is raising the GNP of the country much more than the aid the country receives.
And as I was trying to show you, as far as I'm concerned, aid does damages because it removes the government from its citizens.
And this is a new project I have with Dean Kamen, the famous inventor in America.
He has produced some power generators, which we are now doing an experiment in Bangladesh, in two villages where cow manure is producing biogas, which is running these generators.
And each of these generators is selling electricity to 20 houses each.
It's just an experiment.
We don't know how far it will go, but it's going on.
So, I've known a lot of fish in my life.
I've loved only two.
That first one, it was more like a passionate affair.
It was a beautiful fish: flavorful, textured, meaty, a bestseller on the menu.
What a fish.
(Laughter) Even better, it was farm-raised to the supposed highest standards of sustainability.
So you could feel good about selling it.
I was in a relationship with this beauty for several months.
One day, the head of the company called and asked if I'd speak at an event about the farm's sustainability.
"Absolutely," I said.
Here was a company trying to solve what's become this unimaginable problem for us chefs: How do we keep fish on our menus?
For the past 50 years, we've been fishing the seas like we clear-cut forests.
It's hard to overstate the destruction.
Ninety percent of large fish, the ones we love -- the tunas, the halibuts, the salmons, swordfish -- they've collapsed.
There's almost nothing left.
So, for better or for worse, aquaculture, fish farming, is going to be a part of our future.
A lot of arguments against it: Fish farms pollute -- most of them do anyway -- and they're inefficient. Take tuna, a major drawback.
It's got a feed conversion ratio of 15 to one.
That means it takes fifteen pounds of wild fish to get you one pound of farm tuna.
Not very sustainable.
It doesn't taste very good either.
So here, finally, was a company trying to do it right.
I wanted to support them.
The day before the event, I called the head of P.R. for the company.
Let's call him Don.
"Don," I said, "just to get the facts straight, you guys are famous for farming so far out to sea, you don't pollute."
"That's right," he said. "We're so far out, the waste from our fish gets distributed, not concentrated."
And then he added, "We're basically a world unto ourselves.
That feed conversion ratio? 2.5 to one," he said.
"Best in the business."
2.5 to one, great.
"2.5 what? What are you feeding?"
"Sustainable proteins," he said.
"Great," I said. Got off the phone.
And that night, I was lying in bed, and I thought: What the hell is a sustainable protein?
(Laughter) So the next day, just before the event, I called Don.
I said, "Don, what are some examples of sustainable proteins?"
He said he didn't know. He would ask around.
Well, I got on the phone with a few people in the company; no one could give me a straight answer until finally, I got on the phone with the head biologist.
Let's call him Don too.
(Laughter) "Don," I said, "what are some examples of sustainable proteins?"
Well, he mentioned some algaes and some fish meals, and then he said chicken pellets.
I said, "Chicken pellets?"
He said, "Yeah, feathers, skin, bone meal, scraps, dried and processed into feed."
I said, "What percentage of your feed is chicken?"
Thinking, you know, two percent.
"Well, it's about 30 percent," he said.
I said, "Don, what's sustainable about feeding chicken to fish?"
(Laughter) There was a long pause on the line, and he said, "There's just too much chicken in the world."
(Laughter) I fell out of love with this fish.
(Laughter) No, not because I'm some self-righteous, goody-two shoes foodie.
I actually am.
(Laughter) No, I actually fell out of love with this fish because, I swear to God, after that conversation, the fish tasted like chicken.
(Laughter) This second fish, it's a different kind of love story.
It's the romantic kind, the kind where the more you get to know your fish, you love the fish.
I first ate it at a restaurant in southern Spain.
A journalist friend had been talking about this fish for a long time.
She kind of set us up.
(Laughter) It came to the table a bright, almost shimmering, white color.
The chef had overcooked it.
Like twice over.
Amazingly, it was still delicious.
Who can make a fish taste good after it's been overcooked?
I can't, but this guy can.
Let's call him Miguel -- actually his name is Miguel.
(Laughter) And no, he didn't cook the fish, and he's not a chef, at least in the way that you and I understand it.
He's a biologist at Veta La Palma.
It's a fish farm in the southwestern corner of Spain.
It's at the tip of the Guadalquivir river.
Until the 1980s, the farm was in the hands of the Argentinians.
They raised beef cattle on what was essentially wetlands.
They did it by draining the land.
They built this intricate series of canals, and they pushed water off the land and out into the river.
Well, they couldn't make it work, not economically.
And ecologically, it was a disaster.
It killed like 90 percent of the birds, which, for this place, is a lot of birds.
And so in 1982, a Spanish company with an environmental conscience purchased the land.
What did they do?
They reversed the flow of water.
They literally flipped the switch.
Instead of pushing water out, they used the channels to pull water back in.
They flooded the canals.
They created a 27,000-acre fish farm -- bass, mullet, shrimp, eel -- and in the process, Miguel and this company completely reversed the ecological destruction.
The farm's incredible.
I mean, you've never seen anything like this.
You stare out at a horizon that is a million miles away, and all you see are flooded canals and this thick, rich marshland.
I was there not long ago with Miguel.
He's an amazing guy, like three parts Charles Darwin and one part Crocodile Dundee.
(Laughter) Okay? There we are slogging through the wetlands, and I'm panting and sweating, got mud up to my knees, and Miguel's calmly conducting a biology lecture.
Here, he's pointing out a rare Black-shouldered Kite.
Now, he's mentioning the mineral needs of phytoplankton.
And here, here he sees a grouping pattern that reminds him of the Tanzanian Giraffe.
It turns out, Miguel spent the better part of his career in the Mikumi National Park in Africa.
I asked him how he became such an expert on fish.
He said, "Fish? I didn't know anything about fish.
I'm an expert in relationships."
And then he's off, launching into more talk about rare birds and algaes and strange aquatic plants.
And don't get me wrong, that was really fascinating, you know, the biotic community unplugged, kind of thing.
It's great, but I was in love.
And my head was swooning over that overcooked piece of delicious fish I had the night before.
So I interrupted him. I said, "Miguel, what makes your fish taste so good?"
He pointed at the algae.
"I know, dude, the algae, the phytoplankton, the relationships: It's amazing.
But what are your fish eating?
What's the feed conversion ratio?"
Well, he goes on to tell me it's such a rich system that the fish are eating what they'd be eating in the wild.
The plant biomass, the phytoplankton, the zooplankton, it's what feeds the fish.
The system is so healthy, it's totally self-renewing.
There is no feed.
Ever heard of a farm that doesn't feed its animals?
Later that day, I was driving around this property with Miguel, and I asked him, I said, "For a place that seems so natural, unlike like any farm I'd ever been at, how do you measure success?"
At that moment, it was as if a film director called for a set change.
And we rounded the corner and saw the most amazing sight: thousands and thousands of pink flamingos, a literal pink carpet for as far as you could see.
"That's success," he said.
"Look at their bellies, pink.
They're feasting."
Feasting? I was totally confused.
I said, "Miguel, aren't they feasting on your fish?"
(Laughter) "Yes," he said.
(Laughter) "We lose 20 percent of our fish and fish eggs to birds.
Well, last year, this property had 600,000 birds on it, more than 250 different species.
It's become, today, the largest and one of the most important private bird sanctuaries in all of Europe."
I said, "Miguel, isn't a thriving bird population like the last thing you want on a fish farm?"
(Laughter) He shook his head, no.
He said, "We farm extensively, not intensively.
This is an ecological network.
The flamingos eat the shrimp.
The shrimp eat the phytoplankton.
So the pinker the belly, the better the system."
Okay, so let's review: a farm that doesn't feed its animals, and a farm that measures its success on the health of its predators.
A fish farm, but also a bird sanctuary.
Oh, and by the way, those flamingos, they shouldn't even be there in the first place.
They brood in a town 150 miles away, where the soil conditions are better for building nests.
Every morning, they fly 150 miles into the farm.
And every evening, they fly 150 miles back.
(Laughter) They do that because they're able to follow the broken white line of highway A92.
(Laughter) No kidding.
I was imagining a "March of the Penguins" thing, so I looked at Miguel.
I said, "Miguel, do they fly 150 miles to the farm, and then do they fly 150 miles back at night?
Do they do that for the children?"
He looked at me like I had just quoted a Whitney Houston song.
(Laughter) He said, "No; they do it because the food's better."
(Laughter) I didn't mention the skin of my beloved fish, which was delicious -- and I don't like fish skin; I don't like it seared, I don't like it crispy.
It's that acrid, tar-like flavor.
I almost never cook with it.
Yet, when I tasted it at that restaurant in southern Spain, it tasted not at all like fish skin.
It tasted sweet and clean, like you were taking a bite of the ocean.
I mentioned that to Miguel, and he nodded.
He said, "The skin acts like a sponge.
It's the last defense before anything enters the body.
It evolved to soak up impurities."
And then he added, "But our water has no impurities."
OK. A farm that doesn't feed its fish, a farm that measures its success by the success of its predators.
And then I realized when he says, "A farm that has no impurities," he made a big understatement, because the water that flows through that farm comes in from the Guadalquivir River.
It's a river that carries with it all the things that rivers tend to carry these days: chemical contaminants, pesticide runoff.
And when it works its way through the system and leaves, the water is cleaner than when it entered.
The system is so healthy, it purifies the water.
So, not just a farm that doesn't feed its animals, not just a farm that measures its success by the health of its predators, but a farm that's literally a water purification plant -- and not just for those fish, but for you and me as well.
Because when that water leaves, it dumps out into the Atlantic.
A drop in the ocean, I know, but I'll take it, and so should you, because this love story, however romantic, is also instructive.
You might say it's a recipe for the future of good food, whether we're talking about bass or beef cattle.
What we need now is a radically new conception of agriculture, one in which the food actually tastes good.
(Laughter) (Applause) But for a lot people, that's a bit too radical.
We're not realists, us foodies; we're lovers.
We love farmers' markets, we love small family farms, we talk about local food, we eat organic.
And when you suggest these are the things that will ensure the future of good food, someone, somewhere stands up and says, "Hey guy, I love pink flamingos, but how are you going to feed the world?"
How are you going to feed the world?
Can I be honest?
I don't love that question.
No, not because we already produce enough calories to more than feed the world.
One billion people will go hungry today.
One billion -- that's more than ever before -- because of gross inequalities in distribution, not tonnage.
Now, I don't love this question because it's determined the logic of our food system for the last 50 years.
Feed grain to herbivores, pesticides to monocultures, chemicals to soil, chicken to fish, and all along agribusiness has simply asked, "If we're feeding more people more cheaply, how terrible could that be?"
That's been the motivation, it's been the justification: it's been the business plan of American agriculture.
We should call it what it is: a business in liquidation, a business that's quickly eroding ecological capital that makes that very production possible.
That's not a business, and it isn't agriculture.
Our breadbasket is threatened today, not because of diminishing supply, but because of diminishing resources.
Not by the latest combine and tractor invention, but by fertile land; not by pumps, but by fresh water; not by chainsaws, but by forests; and not by fishing boats and nets, but by fish in the sea.
Want to feed the world?
Let's start by asking: How are we going to feed ourselves?
Or better: How can we create conditions that enable every community to feed itself?
(Applause) To do that, don't look at the agribusiness model for the future.
It's really old, and it's tired.
It's high on capital, chemistry and machines, and it's never produced anything really good to eat.
Instead, let's look to the ecological model.
That's the one that relies on two billion years of on-the-job experience.
Look to Miguel, farmers like Miguel.
Farms that aren't worlds unto themselves; farms that restore instead of deplete; farms that farm extensively instead of just intensively; farmers that are not just producers, but experts in relationships.
Because they're the ones that are experts in flavor, too.
And if I'm going to be really honest, they're a better chef than I'll ever be.
You know, I'm okay with that, because if that's the future of good food, it's going to be delicious.
Thank you.
(Applause)
OK. We've heard a lot of people speak at this conference about the power of the human mind.
And what I'd like to do today is give you a vivid example of how that power can be unleashed when someone is in a survival situation, how the will to survive can bring that out in people.
This is an incident which occurred on Mount Everest; it was the worst disaster in the history of Everest.
And when it occurred, I was the only doctor on the mountain.
So I'll take you through that and we'll see what it's like when someone really summons the will to survive.
OK, this is Mount Everest.
It's 29,035 feet high.
I've been there six times: Four times I did work with National Geographic, making tectonic plate measurements; twice, I went with NASA doing remote sensing devices.
It was on my fourth trip to Everest that a comet passed over the mountain. Hyakutake.
And the Sherpas told us then that was a very bad omen, and we should have listened to them.
Everest is an extreme environment.
There's only one-third as much oxygen at the summit as there is at sea level.
Near the summit, temperatures can be 40 degrees below zero.
You can have winds 20 to 40 miles an hour.
It's actually a wind-chill factor which is lower than a summer day on Mars.
I remember one time being up near the summit, I reached into my down jacket for a drink from my water bottle, inside my down jacket, only to discover that the water was already frozen solid.
That gives you an idea of just how severe things are near the summit.
OK, this is the route up Everest.
It starts at base camp, at 17,500 feet.
Camp One, 2,000 feet higher.
Camp Two, another 2,000 feet higher up, what's called the Western Cwm.
CampThree is at the base of Lhotse, which is the fourth highest mountain in the world, but it's dwarfed by Everest.
And then Camp Four is the highest camp; that's 3,000 feet short of the summit.
This is a view of base camp.
This is pitched on a glacier at 17,500 feet.
It's the highest point you can bring your yaks before you have to unload.
And this is what they unloaded for me: I had four yak loads of medical supplies, which are dumped in a tent, and here I am trying to arrange things.
This was our expedition.
It was a National Geographic expedition, but it was organized by The Explorers Club.
There were three other expeditions on the mountain, an American team, a New Zealand team and an IMAX team.
And, after actually two months of preparation, we built our camps all the way up the mountain.
This is a view looking up the icefall, the first 2,000 feet of the climb up from base camp.
And here's a picture in the icefall; it's a waterfall, but it's frozen, but it moves very slowly, and it actually changes every day.
When you're in it, you're like a rat in a maze; you can't even see over the top.
This is near the top of the icefall.
You want to climb through at night when the ice is frozen.
That way, it's less likely to tumble down on you.
These are some climbers reaching the top of the icefall just at sun-up.
This is me crossing a crevasse.
We cross on aluminum ladders with safety ropes attached.
That's another crevasse.
Some of these things are 10 stories deep or more, and one of my climbing friends says that the reason we actually climb at night is because if we ever saw the bottom of what we're climbing over, we would never do it.
Okay. This is Camp One.
It's the first flat spot you can reach after you get up to the top of the icefall.
And from there we climb up to Camp Two, which is sort of the foreground.
These are climbers moving up the Lhotse face, that mountain toward Camp Three.
They're on fixed ropes here.
A fall here, if you weren't roped in, would be 5,000 feet down.
This is a view taken from camp three.
You can see the Lhotse face is in profile, it's about a 45 degree angle. It takes two days to climb it, so you put the camp halfway through.
If you notice, the summit of Everest is black.
There's no ice over it.
And that's because Everest is so high, it's in the jet stream, and winds are constantly scouring the face, so no snow gets to accumulate.
What looks like a cloud behind the summit ridge is actually snow being blown off the summit.
This is on the way up from Camp Three to Camp Four, moving in, up through the clouds.
And this is at Camp Four.
Once you get to Camp Four, you have maybe 24 hours to decide if you're going to go for the summit or not.
Everybody's on oxygen, your supplies are limited, and you either have to go up or go down, make that decision very quickly.
This is a picture of Rob Hall.
He was the leader of the New Zealand team.
This is a radio he used later to call his wife that I'll tell you about.
These are some climbers waiting to go to the summit.
They're up at Camp Four, and you can see that there's wind blowing off the summit.
This is not good weather to climb in, so the climbers are just waiting, hoping that the wind's going to die down.
And, in fact, the wind does die down at night.
It becomes very calm, there's no wind at all.
This looks like a good chance to go for the summit.
So here are some climbers starting out for the summit on what's called the Triangular Face.
It's the first part of climb.
It's done in the dark, because it's actually less steep than what comes next, and you can gain daylight hours if you do this in the dark.
So that's what happened.
The climbers got on the southeast ridge.
This is the view looking at the southeast ridge.
The summit would be in the foreground.
From here, it's about 1,500 feet up at a 30-degree angle to the summit.
But what happened that year was the wind suddenly and unexpectedly picked up.
A storm blew in that no one was anticipating.
You can see here some ferocious winds blowing snow way high off the summit.
And there were climbers on that summit ridge.
This is a picture of me in that area taken a year before, and you can see I've got an oxygen mask on with a rebreather.
I have an oxygen hose connected here.
You can see on this climber, we have two oxygen tanks in the backpack -- little titanium tanks, very lightweight -- and we're not carrying much else.
This is all you've got. You're very exposed on the summit ridge.
OK, this is a view taken on the summit ridge itself.
This is on the way toward the summit, on that 1,500-foot bridge.
All the climbers here are climbing unroped, and the reason is because the drop off is so sheer on either side that if you were roped to somebody, you'd wind up just pulling them off with you.
So each person climbs individually.
And it's not a straight path at all, it's very difficult climbing, and there's always the risk of falling on either side.
If you fall to your left, you're going to fall 8,000 feet into Nepal; if you fall to your right, you're going to fall 12,000 feet into Tibet.
So it's probably better to fall into Tibet because you'll live longer.
(Laughter) But, either way, you fall for the rest of your life.
OK. Those climbers were up near the summit, along that summit ridge that you see up there, and I was down here in Camp Three.
My expedition was down in Camp Three, while these guys were up there in the storm.
The storm was so fierce that we had to lay, fully dressed, fully equipped, laid out on the tent floor to stop the tent from blowing off the mountain.
It was the worst winds I've ever seen.
And the climbers up on the ridge were that much higher, 2,000 feet higher, and completely exposed to the elements.
We were in radio contact with some of them.
This is a view taken along the summit ridge.
Rob Hall, we heard by radio, was up here, at this point in the storm with Doug Hansen.
And we heard that Rob was OK, but Doug was too weak to come down.
He was exhausted, and Rob was staying with him.
We also got some bad news in the storm that Beck Weathers, another climber, had collapsed in the snow and was dead.
There were still 18 other climbers that we weren't aware of their condition.
They were lost. There was total confusion on the mountain; all the stories were confusing, most of them were conflicting.
We really had no idea what was going on during that storm.
We were just hunkered down in our tents at Camp Three.
Our two strongest climbers, Todd Burleson and Pete Athans, decided to go up to try to rescue who they could even though there was a ferocious storm going.
They tried to radio a message to Rob Hall, who was a superb climber stuck, sort of, with a weak climber up near the summit.
I expected them to say to Rob, "Hold on. We're coming."
But in fact, what they said was, "Leave Doug and come down yourself.
There's no chance of saving him, and just try to save yourself at this point."
And Rob got that message, but his answer was, "We're both listening."
Todd and Pete got up to the summit ridge, up in here, and it was a scene of complete chaos up there.
But they did what they could to stabilize the people.
I gave them radio advice from Camp Three, and we sent down the climbers that could make it down under their own power.
The ones that couldn't we just sort of decided to leave up at Camp Four.
So the climbers were coming down along this route.
This is taken from Camp Three, where I was.
And they all came by me so I could take a look at them and see what I could do for them, which is really not much, because Camp Three is a little notch cut in the ice in the middle of a 45-degree angle.
You can barely stand outside the tent.
It's really cold; it's 24,000 feet.
The only supplies I had at that altitude were two plastic bags with preloaded syringes of painkiller and steroids.
So, as the climbers came by me, I sort of assessed whether or not they were in condition to continue on further down.
The ones that weren't that lucid or were not that well coordinated, I would give an injection of steroids to try to give them some period of lucidity and coordination where they could then work their way further down the mountain.
It's so awkward to work up there that sometimes I even gave the injections right through their clothes.
It was just too hard to maneuver any other way up there.
While I was taking care of them, we got more news about Rob Hall.
There was no way we could get up high enough to rescue him.
He called in to say that he was alone now.
Apparently, Doug had died higher up on the mountain.
But Rob was now too weak to come down himself, and with the fierce winds and up at that altitude, he was just beyond rescue and he knew it.
At that point, he asked to be paged into his wife.
He was carrying a radio.
His wife was home in New Zealand, seven months pregnant with their first child, and Rob asked to be patched into her. That was done, and Rob and his wife had their last conversation.
They picked the name for their baby.
Rob then signed off, and that was the last we ever heard of him.
I was faced with treating a lot of critically ill patients at 24,000 feet, which was an impossibility.
So what we did was, we got the victims down to 21,000 feet, where it was easier for me to treat them.
This was my medical kit.
It's a tackle box filled with medical supplies.
This is what I carried up the mountain.
I had more supplies lower down, which I asked to be brought up to meet me at the lower camp.
And this was scene at the lower camp.
The survivors came in one by one.
Some of them were hypothermic, some of them were frostbitten, some were both.
What we did was try to warm them up as best we could, put oxygen on them and try to revive them, which is difficult to do at 21,000 feet, when the tent is freezing.
This is some severe frostbite on the feet, severe frostbite on the nose.
This climber was snow blind.
As I was taking care of these climbers, we got a startling experience.
Out of nowhere, Beck Weathers, who we had already been told was dead, stumbled into the tent, just like a mummy, he walked into the tent.
I expected him to be incoherent, but, in fact, he walked into the tent and said to me, "Hi, Ken. Where should I sit?"
And then he said, "Do you accept my health insurance?"
(Laughter) He really said that.
(Laughter) So he was completely lucid, but he was very severely frostbitten.
You can see his hand is completely white; his face, his nose, is burned.
First, it turns white, and then when it's completed necrosis, it turns black, and then it falls off.
It's the last stage, just like a scar.
So, as I was taking care of Beck, he related what had been going on up there.
He said he had gotten lost in the storm, collapsed in the snow, and just laid there, unable to move.
Some climbers had come by and looked at him, and he heard them say, "He's dead."
But Beck wasn't dead; he heard that, but he was completely unable to move.
He was in some sort of catatonic state where he could be aware of his surroundings, but couldn't even blink to indicate that he was alive.
So the climbers passed him by, and Beck lay there for a day, a night and another day, in the snow.
And then he said to himself, "I don't want to die.
I have a family to come back to."
And the thoughts of his family, his kids and his wife, generated enough energy, enough motivation in him, so that he actually got up.
After laying in the snow that long a time, he got up and found his way back to the camp.
And Beck told me that story very quietly, but I was absolutely stunned by it.
I couldn't imagine anybody laying in the snow that long a time and then getting up.
He apparently reversed an irreversible hypothermia.
And I can only try to speculate on how he did it.
So, what if we had Beck hooked up to a SPECT scan, something that could actually measure brain function?
Just very simply, the three parts of the brain: the frontal lobe, where you focus your attention and concentration; you have the temporal lobe, where you form images and keep memories; and the posterior part of your brain, which contains the cerebellum, which controls motion; and the brain stem, where you have your basic maintenance functions, like heartbeat and respiration.
So let's take a cut through the brain here, and imagine that Beck was hooked up to a SPECT scan.
This measures dynamic blood flow and therefore energy flow within the brain.
So you have the prefrontal cortex here, lighting up in red.
This is a pretty evenly distributed scan.
You have the middle area, where the temporal lobe might be, in here, and the posterior portion, where the maintenance functions are in the back.
This is a roughly normal scan, showing equal distribution of energy.
Now, you go to this one and you see how much more the frontal lobes are lighting up.
This might be what Beck would be experiencing when he realizes he's in danger.
He's focusing all his attention on getting himself out of trouble.
These parts of the brain are quieting down.
He's not thinking about his family or anybody else at this point, and he's working pretty hard.
He's trying to get his muscles going and get out of this.
OK, but he's losing ground here.
He's running out of energy.
It's too cold; he can't keep his metabolic fires going, and, you see, there's no more red here; his brain is quieting down.
He's collapsed in the snow here. Everything is quiet, there's very little red anywhere.
Beck is powering down.
He's dying.
You go on to the next scan, but, in Beck's case, you can see that the middle part of his brain is beginning to light up again.
He's beginning to think about his family.
He's beginning to have images that are motivating him to get up.
He's developing energy in this area through thought.
And this is how he's going to turn thought back into action.
This part of the brain is called the anterior cingulate gyrus.
It's an area in which a lot of neuroscientists believe the seat of will exists.
This is where people make decisions, where they develop willpower.
And, you can see, there's an energy flow going from the mid portion of his brain, where he's got images of his family, into this area, which is powering his will.
Okay. This is getting stronger and stronger to the point where it's actually going to be a motivating factor.
He's going to develop enough energy in that area -- after a day, a night and a day -- to actually motivate himself to get up.
And you can see here, he's starting to get more energy into the frontal lobe.
He's beginning to focus, he can concentrate now.
He's thinking about what he's got to do to save himself.
So this energy has been transmitted up toward the front of his brain, and it's getting quieter down here, but he's using this energy to think about what he has to do to get himself going.
And then, that energy is sort of spreading throughout his thought areas.
He's not thinking about his family now, and he's getting himself motivated.
This is the posterior part, where his muscles are going to be moving, and he's going to be pacing himself.
His heart and lungs are going to pick up speed.
So this is what I can speculate might have been going on had we been able to do a SPECT scan on Beck during this survival epic.
So here I am taking care of Beck at 21,000 feet, and I felt what I was doing was completely trivial compared to what he had done for himself.
It just shows you what the power of the mind can do.
He was critically ill, there were other critically ill patients; luckily, we were able to get a helicopter in to rescue these guys.
A helicopter came in at 21,000 feet and carried out the highest helicopter rescue in history.
It was able to land on the ice, take away Beck and the other survivors, one by one, and get them off to Kathmandu in a clinic before we even got back to base camp.
This is a scene at base camp, at one of the camps where some of the climbers were lost.
And we had a memorial service there a few days later.
These are Serphas lighting juniper branches.
They believe juniper smoke is holy.
And the climbers stood around on the high rocks and spoke of the climbers who were lost up near the summit, turning to the mountain, actually, to talk to them directly.
There were five climbers lost here.
This was Scott Fischer, Rob Hall, Andy Harris, Doug Hansen and Yasuko Namba.
And one more climber should have died that day, but didn't, and that's Beck Weathers.
He was able to survive because he was able to generate that incredible willpower, he was able to use all the power of his mind to save himself.
These are Tibetan prayer flags.
These Sherpas believe that if you write prayers on these flags, the message will be carried up to the gods, and that year, Beck's message was answered.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For some time I have been interested in the placebo effect, which might seem like an odd thing for a magician to be interested in, unless you think of it in the terms that I do, which is, "Something fake is believed in enough by somebody that it becomes something real."
In other words, sugar pills have a measurable effect in certain kinds of studies, the placebo effect, just because the person thinks that what's happening to them is a pharmaceutical or some sort of a -- for pain management, for example, if they believe it enough there is a measurable effect in the body called the placebo effect.
Something fake becomes something real because of someone's perception of it.
In order for us to understand each other, I want to start by showing you a rudimentary, very simple magic trick.
And I'm going to show you how it works. This is a trick that's been in every children's magic book since at least the 1950s.
I learned it myself from Cub Scout Magic in the 1970s.
I'll do it for you, and then I'll explain it.
And then I'll explain why I explained it.
So, here's what happens.
The knife, which you can examine; my hand, which you could examine.
I'm just going to hold the knife in my fist like this.
I'll get my sleeve back.
And to make sure nothing goes up or down my sleeve I'm just going to squeeze my wrist right here.
That way you can see that at no time can anything travel, as long as I'm squeezing there nothing can go up or down my sleeve.
And the object of this is quite simple.
I'm going to open my hand, and hopefully, if all is well, my pure animal magnetism will hold the knife.
In fact it's held so tightly in place that I can shake it, and the knife does not come off.
Nothing goes up or down my sleeve, no trickery. And you can examine everything.
Ta-da!
(Applause) So, this is a trick that I often teach to young children that are interested in magic, because you can learn a great deal about deception by studying this very -- even though it's a very simple trick methodologically.
Probably many of you in the room know this trick.
What happens is this.
I hold the knife in my hand.
I say I'm going to grab hold of my wrist to make sure nothing goes up or down my sleeve, that is a lie.
The reason I'm holding onto my wrist is because that's actually the secret of the illusion.
In a moment when my hand moves from facing you to being away from you, this finger right here, my index finger is just going to shift from where it is, to a position pointing out like this.
Nice one.
Someone who didn't have a childhood is out there.
(Laughter) So, it goes like this, from here, right.
And as I move around my finger shifts.
And we could talk about why this is deceptive, why you don't notice there are only three fingers down here, because the mind, and the way it processes information, it doesn't count, one, two, three. It groups them.
But that's not really what this is about. Right? And then I open my hand up.
Obviously it's clinging there, not by animal magnetism, but by chicanery, my index finger being there.
And then when I close my finger, same thing, as I move back, this motion kind of covers the moving back of my finger.
I take this hand away. You give the knife out.
There is a trick you can do for your friends and neighbors. Thanks.
Now, (Laughter) what does that have to do with the placebo effect?
I read a study a year or so ago that really blew my mind wide open.
I'm not a doctor or a researcher, so this, to me, was an astonishing thing.
It turns out that if you administer a placebo in the form of a white pill, that's like aspirin shaped -- it's just a round white pill -- it has some certain measurable effect.
But if you change the form that you give the placebo in, like you make a smaller pill, and color it blue, and stamp a letter into it, it is actually measurably more effective.
Even though neither one of these things has any pharmaceutical -- they're sugar pills.
But a white pill is not as good as a blue pill.
What? (Laughter) That really flipped me out.
Turns out though, that that's not even where it stops.
If you have capsules, they're more effective than tablets in any form.
A colored capsule, that's yellow on one end and red on the other is better than a white capsule.
Dosage has something to do with this.
One pill twice a day is not as good at three pills -- I don't remember the statistic now. Sorry.
But the point is ...
(Laughter) ... these dosages have something to do with it.
And the form has something to do with it.
And if you want the ultimate in placebo, you've go to the needle.
Right? A syringe with some inert -- a couple CCs of some inert something, and you inject this into a patient ...
Well this is such a powerful image in their mind, it's so much stronger than the white pill.
It's a really, this graph, well I'll show it to you some other time when we have slides.
The point is the white pill is not as good as the blue pill is not as good as the capsule is not as good as the needle.
And none of it has any real pharmaceutical quality, it's only your belief that makes it real in your body and makes a stronger effect.
I wanted to see if I could take that idea and apply it to a magic trick.
And take something that is obviously a fake trick and make it seem real.
And we know from that study that when you want reality, you go to the needle.
This is a seven-inch hatpin. It's very, very sharp, and I'm going to just sterilize it a tiny bit.
This is really my flesh. This is not Damian's special-grown flesh.
That's my skin right there. This is not a Hollywood special effect.
I'm going to pierce my skin and run this needle through to the other side.
If you're queasy -- (Laughs) if you faint easily -- I was doing this for some friends in the hotel room last night, and some people that I didn't know, and one woman almost passed out.
So, I suggest if you get queasy easy that you look away for about the next 30 -- in fact, you know what, I'll do the first bad part behind it.
You'll get to see, you can look away too if you'd like to.
So, here is what happens, right here, the beginning of my flesh at the lower part of my arm I just make a little pierce.
I'm sorry, man. Am I freaking you out?
OK, and then just through my skin a tiny bit, and then out the other side like this.
Now, essentially we're in the same position we were in with the knife trick.
(Laughter) Sort of.
But you can't count my fingers right now can you?
So, let me show them to you. That's one, two three, four, five.
Yes, well...
I know what people think when they see this.
They go, "Well, he's certainly not dumb enough to stab himself through the skin to entertain us for a few minutes.
So, let me give you a little peek.
How's that look out there? Pretty good.
(Laughs) Yeah, I know. (Laughs) And the people in the back go, "OK, I didn't really see that."
People in the satellite room are starting to move in now.
Let me give you good close look at this.
That really is my skin. That is not a Hollywood special effect.
That's my flesh, and I can twist that around.
I'm sorry. If you're getting queasy, look away, don't look at the thing.
People in the back or people on video years from now watching this will go, "Well yeah, that looks kind of neat in some sort of effect there, but if it were real he would be -- see there's a hole there and a hole there, if it were real he would be bleeding.
Well let me work up some blood for you.
(Laughter) Yes, there it is.
(Applause) (Laughter) Normally now, I would take the needle out.
I would clean off my arm, and I would show you that there are no wounds.
But I think in this context and with the idea of taking something fake and making it into something real, I'm just going to leave it there, and walk off the stage.
(Laughter) I will be seeing you several times over the next few days.
I hope you're looking forward to that. Thank you very much.
(Laughter) (Applause)
I'm going to talk to you today about my work on suspended animation.
Now, usually when I mention suspended animation, people will flash me the Vulcan sign and laugh.
But now, I'm not talking about gorking people out to fly to Mars or even Pandora, as much fun as that may be.
I'm talking about the concept of using suspended animation to help people out in trauma.
So what do I mean when I say "suspended animation"?
It is the process by which animals de-animate, appear dead and then can wake up again without being harmed.
OK, so here is the sort of big idea: If you look out at nature, you find that as you tend to see suspended animation, you tend to see immortality.
And so, what I'm going to tell you about is a way to tell a person who's in trauma -- find a way to de-animate them a bit so they're a little more immortal when they have that heart attack.
An example of an organism or two that happens to be quite immortal would be plant seeds or bacterial spores.
These creatures are some of the most immortal life forms on our planet, and they tend to spend most of their time in suspended animation.
Bacterial spores are thought now by scientists to exist as individual cells that are alive, but in suspended animation for as long as 250 million years.
To suggest that this all, sort of, about little, tiny creatures, I want to bring it close to home.
In the immortal germ line of human beings -- that is, the eggs that sit in the ovaries -- they actually sit there in a state of suspended animation for up to 50 years in the life of each woman.
So then there's also my favorite example of suspended animation.
This is Sea-Monkeys.
Those of you with children, you know about them.
You go to the pet store or the toy store, and you can buy these things.
You just open the bag, and you just dump them into the plastic aquarium, and in about a week or so, you'll have little shrimps swimming around.
Well, I wasn't so interested in the swimming.
I was interested in what was going on in the bag, the bag on the toy store shelf where those shrimp sat in suspended animation indefinitely.
So these ideas of suspended animation are not just about cells and weird, little organisms.
Occasionally, human beings are briefly de-animated, and the stories of people who are briefly de-animated that interest me the most are those having to do with the cold.
Ten years ago, there was a skier in Norway that was trapped in an icy waterfall, and she was there for two hours before they extracted her.
She was extremely cold, and she had no heartbeat -- for all intents and purposes she was dead, frozen.
Seven hours later, still without a heartbeat, they brought her back to life, and she went on to be the head radiologist in the hospital that treated her.
A couple of years later -- so I get really excited about these things -- about a couple of years later, there was a 13-month-old, she was from Canada.
Her father had gone out in the wintertime; he was working night shift, and she followed him outside in nothing but a diaper.
And they found her hours later, frozen, lifeless, and they brought her back to life.
There was a 65-year-old woman in Duluth, Minnesota last year that was found frozen and without a pulse in her front yard one morning in the winter, and they brought her back to life.
The next day, she was doing so well, they wanted to run tests on her.
She got cranky and just went home.
(Laughter) So, these are miracles, right?
These are truly miraculous things that happen.
Doctors have a saying that, in fact, "You're not dead until you're warm and dead."
And it's true. It's true.
In the New England Journal of Medicine, there was a study published that showed that with appropriate rewarming, people who had suffered without a heartbeat for three hours could be brought back to life without any neurologic problems.
That's over 50 percent.
So what I was trying to do is think of a way that we could study suspended animation to think about a way to reproduce, maybe, what happened to the skier.
Well, I have to tell you something very odd, and that is that being exposed to low oxygen does not always kill.
So, in this room, there's 20 percent oxygen or so, and if we reduce the oxygen concentration, we will all be dead.
And, in fact, the animals we were working with in the lab -- these little garden worms, nematodes -- they were also dead when we exposed them to low oxygen.
And here's the thing that should freak you out.
And that is that, when we lower the oxygen concentration further by 100 times, to 10 parts per million, they were not dead, they were in suspended animation, and we could bring them back to life without any harm.
And this precise oxygen concentration, 10 parts per million, that caused suspended animation, is conserved.
We can see it in a variety of different organisms.
One of the creatures we see it in is a fish.
And we can turn its heartbeat on and off by going in and out of suspended animation like you would a light switch.
So this was pretty shocking to me, that we could do this.
And so I was wondering, when we were trying to reproduce the work with the skier, that we noticed that, of course, she had no oxygen consumption, and so maybe she was in a similar state of suspended animation.
But, of course, she was also extremely cold.
So we wondered what would happen if we took our suspended animals and exposed them to the cold.
And so, what we found out was that, if you take animals that are animated like you and I, and you make them cold -- that is, these were the garden worms -- now they're dead.
But if you have them in suspended animation, and move them into the cold, they're all alive.
And there's the very important thing there: If you want to survive the cold, you ought to be suspended. Right?
It's a really good thing.
And so, we were thinking about that, about this relationship between these things, and thinking about whether or not that's what happened to the skier.
And so we wondered: Might there be some agent that is in us, something that we make ourselves, that we might be able to regulate our own metabolic flexibility in such a way as to be able to survive when we got extremely cold, and might otherwise pass away?
I thought it might be interesting to sort of hunt for such things.
You know?
I should mention briefly here that physiology textbooks that you can read about will tell you that this is a kind of heretical thing to suggest.
We have, from the time we are slapped on the butt until we take our last dying breath -- that's when we're newborn to when we're dead -- we cannot reduce our metabolic rate below what's called a standard, or basal metabolic rate.
But I knew that there were examples of creatures, also mammals, that do reduce their metabolic rate such as ground squirrels and bears, they reduce their metabolic rate in the wintertime when they hibernate.
So I wondered: Might we be able to find some agent or trigger that might induce such a state in us?
And so, we went looking for such things.
And this was a period of time when we failed tremendously.
Ken Robinson is here. He talked about the glories of failure.
Well, we had a lot of them.
We tried many different chemicals and agents, and we failed over and over again.
So, one time, I was at home watching television on the couch while my wife was putting our child to bed, and I was watching a television show.
It was a television show -- it was a NOVA show on PBS -- about caves in New Mexico.
And this particular cave was Lechuguilla, and this cave is incredibly toxic to humans.
The researchers had to suit up just to enter it.
It's filled with this toxic gas, hydrogen sulfide.
Now, hydrogen sulfide is curiously present in us.
We make it ourselves.
The highest concentration is in our brains.
Yet, it was used as a chemical warfare agent in World War I.
It's an extraordinarily toxic thing.
In fact, in chemical accidents, hydrogen sulfide is known to -- if you breathe too much of it, you collapse to the ground, you appear dead, but if you were brought out into room air, you can be reanimated without harm, if they do that quickly.
So, I thought, "Wow, I have to get some of this."
(Laughter) Now, it's post-9/11 America, and when you go into the research institute, and you say, "Hi.
I'd like to buy some concentrated, compressed gas cylinders of a lethal gas because I have these ideas, see, about wanting to suspend people.
It's really going to be OK."
So that's kind of a tough day, but I said, "There really is some basis for thinking why you might want to do this."
As I said, this agent is in us, and, in fact, here's a curious thing, it binds to the very place inside of your cells where oxygen binds, and where you burn it, and that you do this burning to live.
And so we thought, like in a game of musical chairs, might we be able to give a person some hydrogen sulfide, and might it be able to occupy that place like in a game of musical chairs where oxygen might bind?
And because you can't bind the oxygen, maybe you wouldn't consume it, and then maybe it would reduce your demand for oxygen.
I mean, who knows?
So -- (Laughter) So, there's the bit about the dopamine and being a little bit, what do you call it, delusional, and you might suggest that was it.
And so, we wanted to find out might we be able to use hydrogen sulfide in the presence of cold, and we wanted to see whether we could reproduce this skier in a mammal.
Now, mammals are warm-blooded creatures, and when we get cold, we shake and we shiver, right?
We try to keep our core temperature at 37 degrees by actually burning more oxygen.
So, it was interesting for us when we applied hydrogen sulfide to a mouse when it was also cold because what happened is the core temperature of the mouse got cold.
It stopped moving.
It appeared dead.
Its oxygen consumption rate fell by tenfold.
And here's the really important point.
I told you hydrogen sulfide is in us.
It's rapidly metabolized, and all you have to do after six hours of being in this state of de-animation is simply put the thing out in room air, and it warms up, and it's none the worse for wear.
Now, this was cosmic.
Really. Because we had found a way to de-animate a mammal, and it didn't hurt it.
Now, we'd found a way to reduce its oxygen consumption to rock-bottom levels, and it was fine.
Now, in this state of de-animation, it could not go out dancing, but it was not dead, and it was not harmed.
So we started to think: Is this the agent that might have been present in the skier, and might have she had more of it than someone else, and might that have been able to reduce her demand for oxygen before she got so cold that she otherwise would have died, as we found out with our worm experiments?
So, we wondered: Can we do anything useful with this capacity to control metabolic flexibility?
And one of the things we wondered -- I'm sure some of you out there are economists, and you know all about supply and demand.
And when supply is equal to demand, everything's fine, but when supply falls, in this case of oxygen, and demand stays high, you're dead.
So, what I just told you is we can now reduce demand.
We ought to be able to lower supply to unprecedented low levels without killing the animal.
And with money we got from DARPA, we could show just that.
If you give mice hydrogen sulfide, you can lower their demand for oxygen, and you can put them into oxygen concentrations that are as low as 5,000 feet above the top of Mt. Everest, and they can sit there for hours, and there's no problem.
Well this was really cool.
We also found out that we could subject animals to otherwise lethal blood loss, and we could save them if we gave them hydrogen sulfide.
So these proof of concept experiments led me to say "I should found a company, and we should take this out to a wider playing field."
I founded a company called Ikaria with others' help.
And this company, the first thing it did was make a liquid formulation of hydrogen sulfide an injectable form that we could put in and send it out to physician scientists all over the world who work on models of critical care medicine, and the results are incredibly positive.
In one model of heart attack, animals given hydrogen sulfide showed a 70 percent reduction in heart damage compared to those who got the standard of care that you and I would receive if we were to have a heart attack here today.
Same is true for organ failure, when you have loss of function owing to poor perfusion of kidney, of liver, acute respiratory distress syndrome and damage suffered in cardiac-bypass surgery.
So, these are the thought leaders in trauma medicine all over the world saying this is true, so it seems that exposure to hydrogen sulfide decreases damage that you receive from being exposed to otherwise lethal-low oxygen.
And I should say that the concentrations of hydrogen sulfide required to get this benefit are low, incredibly low.
In fact, so low that physicians will not have to lower or dim the metabolism of people much at all to see the benefit I just mentioned, which is a wonderful thing, if you're thinking about adopting this.
You don't want to be gorking people out just to save them, it's really confusing.
(Laughter) So, I want to say that we're in human trials.
Now, and so -- (Applause) Thank you. The Phase 1 safety studies are over, and we're doing fine, we're now moved on.
We have to get to Phase 2 and Phase 3. It's going to take us a few years.
This has all moved very quickly, and the mouse experiments of hibernating mice happened in 2005; the first human studies were done in 2008, and we should know in a couple of years whether it works or not.
And this all happened really quickly because of a lot of help from a lot of people.
I want to mention that, first of all, my wife, without whom this talk and my work would not be possible, so thank you very much.
Also, the brilliant scientists who work at my lab and also others on staff, the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle, Washington -- wonderful place to work.
And also the wonderful scientists and businesspeople at Ikaria.
One thing those people did out there was take this technology of hydrogen sulfide, which is this start-up company that's burning venture capital very quickly, and they fused it with another company that sells another toxic gas that's more toxic than hydrogen sulfide, and they give it to newborn babies who would otherwise die from a failure to be able to oxygenate their tissues properly.
And this gas that is delivered in over a thousand critical care hospitals worldwide, now is approved, on label, and saves thousands of babies a year from certain death.
(Applause) So it's really incredible for me to be a part of this.
And I want to say that I think we're on the path of understanding metabolic flexibility in a fundamental way, and that in the not too distant future, an EMT might give an injection of hydrogen sulfide, or some related compound, to a person suffering severe injuries, and that person might de-animate a bit, they might become a little more immortal.
Their metabolism will fall as though you were dimming a switch on a lamp at home.
And then, they will have the time, that will buy them the time, to be transported to the hospital to get the care they need.
And then, after they get that care -- like the mouse, like the skier, like the 65-year-old woman -- they'll wake up.
A miracle?
We hope not, or maybe we just hope to make miracles a little more common.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
If you think about the phone -- and Intel has tested a lot of the things I'm going to show you, over the last 10 years, in about 600 elderly households -- 300 in Ireland, and 300 in Portland -- trying to understand: How do we measure and monitor behavior in a medically meaningful way?
And if you think about the phone, right, it's something that we can use for some incredible ways to help people actually take the right medication at the right time.
We're testing these kinds of simple sensor-network technologies in the home so that any phone that a senior is already comfortable with can help them deal with their medications.
And a lot of what they do is they pick up the phone, and it's our system whispering to them which pill they need to take, and they fake like they're having a conversation with a friend.
And they're not embarrassed by a meds caddy that's ugly, that sits on their kitchen table and says, "I'm old. I'm frail."
It's surreptitious technology that's helping them do a simple task of taking the right pill at the right time.
Now, we also do some pretty amazing things with these phones.
Because that moment when you answer the phone is a cognitive test every time that you do it.
Think about it, all right? I'm going to answer the phone three different times.
"Hello? Hey."
All right? That's the first time.
"Hello? Uh, hey."
"Hello? Uh, who?
Oh, hey."
All right? Very big differences between the way I answered the phone the three times.
And as we monitor phone usage by seniors over a long period of time, down to the tenths of a microsecond, that recognition moment of whether they can figure out that person on the other end is a friend and we start talking to them immediately, or they do a lot of what's called trouble talk, where they're like, "Wait, who is this? Oh." Right?
Waiting for that recognition moment may be the best early indicator of the onset of dementia than anything that shows up clinically today.
We call these behavioral markers.
There's lots of others. Is the person going to the phone as quickly, when it rings, as they used to?
Is it a hearing problem or is it a physicality problem?
Has their voice gotten more quiet? We're doing a lot of work with people with Alzheimer's and particularly with Parkinson's, where that quiet voice that sometimes shows up with Parkinson's patients may be the best early indicator of Parkinson's five to 10 years before it shows up clinically.
But those subtle changes in your voice over a long period of time are hard for you or your spouse to notice until it becomes so extreme and your voice has become so quiet.
So, sensors are looking at that kind of voice.
When you pick up the phone, how much tremor are you having, and what is that like, and what is that trend like over a period of time?
Are you having more trouble dialing the phone than you used to?
Is it a dexterity problem? Is it the onset of arthritis?
Are you using the phone? Are you socializing less than you used to?
And looking at that pattern. And what does that decline in social health mean, as a kind of a vital sign of the future?
And then wow, what a radical idea, we -- except in the United States -- might be able to use this newfangled technology to actually interact with a nurse or a doctor on the other end of the line.
Wow, what a great day that will be once we're allowed to actually do those kinds of things.
So, these are what I would call behavioral markers.
And it's the whole field that we've been trying to work on for the last 10 years at Intel.
How do you put simple disruptive technologies, and the first of five phrases that I'm going to talk about in this talk?
Behavioral markers matter.
How do we change behavior?
How do we measure changes in behavior in a meaningful way that's going to help us with prevention of disease, early onset of disease, and tracking the progression of disease over a long period of time?
Now, why would Intel let me spend a lot of time and money, over the last 10 years, trying to understand the needs of seniors and start thinking about these kinds of behavioral markers?
This is some of the field work that we've done.
We have now lived with 1,000 elderly households in 20 countries over the last 10 years.
We study people in Rochester, New York.
We go live with them in the winter because what they do in the winter, and their access to healthcare, and how much they socialize, is very different than in the summer.
If they have a hip fracture we go with them and we study their entire discharge experience.
If they have a family member who is a key part of their care network, we fly and study them as well.
So, we study the holistic health experience of 1,000 seniors over the last 10 years in 20 different countries.
Why is Intel willing to fund that?
It's because of the second slogan that I want to talk about.
Ten years ago, when I started trying to convince Intel to let me go start looking at disruptive technologies that could help with independent living, this is what I called it: "Y2K + 10."
You know, back in 2000, we were all so obsessed with paying attention to the aging of our computers, and whether or not they were going to survive the tick of the clock from 1999 to 2000, that we missed a moment that only demographers were paying attention to.
It was right around New Years.
And that switchover, when we had the larger number of older people on the planet, for the first time than younger people.
For the first time in human history -- and barring aliens landing or some major other pandemic, that's the expectation from demographers, going forward.
And 10 years ago it seemed like I had a lot of time to convince Intel to work on this. Right?
Y2K + 10 was coming, the baby boomers starting to retire.
Well folks, it's like we know these demographics here.
This is a map of the entire world.
It's like the lights are on, but nobody's home on this demographic Y2K + 10 problem. Right?
I mean we sort of get it here, but we don't get it here, and we're not doing anything about it.
The health reform bill is largely ignoring the realities of the age wave that's coming, and the implications for what we need to do to change not only how we pay for care, but deliver care in some radically different ways.
And in fact, it's upon us.
I mean you probably saw these headlines. This is Catherine Casey who is the first boomer to actually get Social Security.
That actually occurred this year. She took early retirement.
She was born one second after midnight in 1946.
A retired school teacher, there she is with a Social Security administrator.
The first boomer actually, we didn't even wait till 2011, next year.
We're already starting to see early retirement occur this year.
All right, so it's here. This Y2K + 10 problem is at our door.
This is 50 tsunamis scheduled on the calendar, but somehow we can't sort of marshal our government and innovative forces to sort of get out in front of it and do something about it. We'll wait until it's more of a catastrophe, and react, as opposed to prepare for it.
So, one of the reasons it's so challenging to prepare for this Y2K problem is, I want to argue, we have what I would call mainframe poisoning.
Andy Grove, about six or seven years ago, he doesn't even know or remember this, in a Fortune Magazine article he used the phrase "mainframe healthcare," and I've been extending and expanding this.
He saw it written down somewhere. He's like, "Eric that's a really cool concept."
I was like, "Actually it was your idea. You said it in a Fortune Magazine article.
I just extended it."
You know, this is the mainframe.
This mentality of traveling to and timesharing large, expensive healthcare systems actually began in 1787.
This is the first general hospital in Vienna.
And actually the second general hospital in Vienna, in about 1850, was where we started to build out an entire curriculum for teaching med students specialties.
And it's a place in which we started developing architecture that literally divided the body, and divided care into departments and compartments.
And it was reflected in our architecture, it was reflected in the way that we taught students, and this mainframe mentality persists today.
Now, I'm not anti-hospital.
With my own healthcare problems, I've taken drug therapies, I've traveled to this hospital and others, many, many times.
But we worship the high hospital on a hill. Right?
And this is mainframe healthcare.
And just as 30 years ago we couldn't conceive that we would have the power of a mainframe computer that took up a room this size in our purses and on our belts, that we're carrying around in our cell phone today, and suddenly, computing, that used to be an expert driven system, it was a personal system that we all owned as part of our daily lives -- that shift from mainframe to personal computing is what we have to do for healthcare.
We have to shift from this mainframe mentality of healthcare to a personal model of healthcare.
We are obsessed with this way of thinking.
When Intel does surveys all around the world and we say, "Quick response: healthcare."
The first word that comes up is "doctor."
The second that comes up is "hospital." And the third is "illness" or "sickness." Right?
We are wired, in our imagination, to think about healthcare and healthcare innovation as something that goes into that place.
Our entire health reform discussion right now, health I.T., when we talk with policy makers, equals "How are we going to get doctors using electronic medical records in the mainframe?"
We're not thinking about how do we shift from the mainframe to the home.
And the problem with this is the way we conceive healthcare. Right?
This is a very reactive, crisis-driven system.
We're doing 15-minute exams with patients.
It's population-based.
We collect a bunch of biological information in this artificial setting, and we fix them up, like Humpty-Dumpty all over again, and send them home, and hope -- we might hand them a brochure, maybe an interactive website -- that they do as asked and don't come back into the mainframe.
And the problem is we can't afford it today, folks.
We can't afford mainframe healthcare today to include the uninsured.
And now we want to do a double-double of the age wave coming through?
Business as usual in healthcare is broken and we've got to do something different.
We've got to focus on the home.
We've got to focus on a personal healthcare paradigm that moves care to the home. How do we be more proactive, prevention-driven?
How do we collect vital signs and other kinds of information 24 by 7?
How do we get a personal baseline about what's going to work for you?
How do we collect not just biological data but behavioral data, psychological data, relational data, in and on and around the home?
And how do we drive compliance to be a customized care plan that uses all this great technology that's around us to change our behavior?
That's what we need to do for our personal health model.
I want to give you a couple of examples. This is Mimi from one of our studies -- in her 90s, had to move out of her home because her family was worried about falls.
Raise your hand if you had a serious fall in your household, or any of your loved ones, your parents or so forth. Right?
Classic. Hip fracture often leads to institutionalization of a senior.
This is what was happening to Mimi; the family was worried about it, moved her out of her own home into an assisted living facility.
She tripped over her oxygen tank.
Many people in this generation won't press the button, even if they have an alert call system, because they don't want to bother anybody, even though they've been paying 30 dollars a month.
Boomers will press the button. Trust me.
They're going to be pressing that button non-stop. Right?
Mimi broke her pelvis, lay all night, all morning, finally somebody came in and found her, sent her to the hospital.
They fixed her back up. She was never going to be able to move back into the assisted living. They put her into the nursing home unit.
First night in the nursing home unit where she had been in the same assisted living facility, moved her from one bed to another, kind of threw her, rebroke her pelvis, sent her back to the hospital that she had just come from, no one read the chart, put her on Tylenol, which she is allergic to, broke out, got bedsores, basically, had heart problems, and died from the fall and the complications and the errors that were there.
Now, the most frightening thing about this is this is my wife's grandmother.
Now, I'm Eric Dishman. I speak English, I work for Intel, I make a good salary, I'm smart about falls and fall-related injuries -- it's an area of research that I work on.
I have access to senators and CEOs.
I can't stop this from happening.
What happens if you don't have money, you don't speak English or don't have the kind of access to deal with these kinds of problems that inevitably occur?
How do we actually prevent the vast majority of falls from ever occurring in the first place?
Let me give you a quick example of work that we're doing to try to do exactly that.
I've been wearing a little technology that we call Shimmer.
It's a research platform.
It has accelerometry. You can plug in a three-lead ECG.
There is all kinds of sort of plug-and-play kind of Legos that you can do to capture, in the wild, in the real world, things like tremor, gait, stride length and those kinds of things.
The problem is, our understanding of falls today, like Mimi, is get a survey in the mail three months after you fell, from the State, saying, "What were you doing when you fell?"
That's sort of the state of the art.
But with something like Shimmer, or we have something called the Magic Carpet, embedded sensors in carpet, or camera-based systems that we borrowed from sports medicine, we're starting for the first time in those 600 elderly households to collect actual kinematic motion data to understand: What are the subtle changes that are occurring that can show us that mom has become risk at falls?
And most often we can do two interventions, fix the meds mix.
I'm a qualitative researcher, but when I look at these data streams coming in from these homes, I can look at the data and tell you the day that some doctor prescribed them something that nobody else knew that they were on, because we see the changes in their patterns in the household. Right?
These discoveries of behavioral markers, and behavioral changes are game changing, and like the discovery of the microscope because of our collecting data streams that we've actually never done before.
This is an example in our TRIL Clinic in Ireland of -- actually what you're seeing is she's looking at data, in this picture, from the Magic Carpet.
So, we have a little carpet that you can look at your amount of postural sway, and look at the changes in your postural sway over many months.
Here's what some of this data might look like.
This is actually sensor firings.
These are two different subjects in our study.
It's about a year's worth of data.
The color represents different rooms they are in the house.
This person on the left is living in their own home.
This person on the right is actually living in an assisted living facility.
I know this because look at how punctuated meal time is when they are no longer in their particular rooms here. Right?
Now, this doesn't mean that much to you.
But when we look at these cycles of data over a longer period of time -- and we're looking at everything from motion around different rooms in the house, to sort of micro-motions that Shimmer picks up, about gait and stride length -- these streams of data are starting to tell us things about behavioral patterns that we've never understood before.
You can go to ORCATech.org -- it has nothing to do with whales, it's the Oregon Center for Aging and Technology -- to see more about that.
The problem is, Intel is still one of the largest funders in the world of independent living technology research.
I'm not bragging about how much we fund; it's how little anyone else actually pays attention to aging and funds innovation on aging, chronic disease management and independent living in the home.
So, my mantra here, my fourth slogan is: 10,000 households or bust.
We need to drive a national, if not international, Framingham-type heart study of independent living technologies, where we have 10,000 elderly connected households with broadband, full medical characterization, and a platform by which we can start to experiment and turn these from 20-household anecdotal studies that the universities fund, to large clinical trials that prove out the value of these technologies.
So, 10,000 households or bust.
These are just some of the households that we've done in the Intel studies.
My fifth and final phrase: I have tried for two years, and there were moments when we were quite close, to make this healthcare reform bill be about reform from something and to something, from a mainframe model to a personal health model, or to mean something more than just a debate about the public option and how we're going to finance.
It doesn't matter how we finance healthcare.
We're going to figure something out for the next 10 years, and try it.
No matter who pays for it, we better start doing care in a fundamentally different way and treating the home and the patient and the family member and the caregivers as part of these coordinated care teams and using disruptive technologies that are already here to do care in some pretty fundamental different ways.
The president needs to stand up and say, at the end of a healthcare reform debate, "Our goal as a country is to move 50 percent of care out of institutions, clinics, hospitals and nursing homes, to the home, in 10 years."
It's achievable. We should do it economically, we should do it morally, and we should do it for quality of life.
But there is no goal within this health reform.
It's just a mess today.
So, you know, that's my last message to you.
How do we set a going-to-the-moon goal of dealing with the Y2K +10 problem that's coming?
It's not that innovation and technology is going to be the magic pill that cures all, but it's going to be part of the solution.
And if we don't create a personal health movement, something that we're all aiming towards in reform, then we're going to move nowhere.
So, I hope you'll turn this conference into that kind of movement forward.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
I'm Jane McGonigal. I'm a game designer.
I've been making games online now for 10 years, and my goal for the next decade is to try to make it as easy to save the world in real life as it is to save the world in online games.
Now, I have a plan for this, and it entails convincing more people, including all of you, to spend more time playing bigger and better games.
Right now we spend three billion hours a week playing online games.
Some of you might be thinking, "That's a lot of time to spend playing games.
Maybe too much time, considering how many urgent problems we have to solve in the real world."
But actually, according to my research at the Institute for the Future, actually the opposite is true.
Three billion hours a week is not nearly enough game play to solve the world's most urgent problems.
In fact, I believe that if we want to survive the next century on this planet, we need to increase that total dramatically.
I've calculated the total we need at 21 billion hours of game play every week.
So, that's probably a bit of a counter-intuitive idea, so I'll say it again, let it sink in: If we want to solve problems like hunger, poverty, climate change, global conflict, obesity, I believe that we need to aspire to play games online for at least 21 billion hours a week, by the end of the next decade.
(Laughter) No. I'm serious. I am.
Here's why.
This picture pretty much sums up why I think games are so essential to the future survival of the human species.
(Laughter) Truly.
He wanted to capture the emotion of gaming, so he set up a camera in front of gamers while they were playing.
And this is a classic gaming emotion.
Now, if you're not a gamer, you might miss some of the nuance in this photo.
You probably see the sense of urgency, a little bit of fear, but intense concentration, deep, deep focus on tackling a really difficult problem.
If you are a gamer, you will notice a few nuances here: the crinkle of the eyes up, and around the mouth is a sign of optimism, and the eyebrows up is surprise.
This is a gamer who's on the verge of something called an "epic win."
(Laughter) Oh, you've heard of that.
OK, good, so we have some gamers among us.
An epic win is an outcome that is so extraordinarily positive, you had no idea it was even possible until you achieved it.
It was almost beyond the threshold of imagination, and when you get there, you're shocked to discover what you're truly capable of.
This is a gamer on the verge of an epic win.
And this is the face that we need to see on millions of problem-solvers all over the world as we try to tackle the obstacles of the next century -- the face of someone who, against all odds, is on the verge of an epic win.
Now, unfortunately this is more of the face that we see in everyday life now as we try to tackle urgent problems.
This is what I call the "I'm Not Good At Life" face.
This is actually me making it.
This is me making the "I'm Not Good At Life" face.
This is a piece of graffiti in my old neighborhood in Berkeley, California, where I did my PhD on why we're better in games than we are in real life.
And this is a problem that a lot of gamers have.
We feel that we are not as good in reality as we are in games.
I don't mean just good as in successful, although that's part of it.
We do achieve more in game worlds.
But I also mean good as in motivated to do something that matters -- inspired to collaborate and to cooperate.
And when we're in game worlds, I believe that many of us become the best version of ourselves -- the most likely to help at a moment's notice, the most likely to stick with a problem as long at it takes, to get up after failure and try again.
And in real life, when we face failure, when we confront obstacles, we often don't feel that way.
We feel overcome, we feel overwhelmed, we feel anxious, maybe depressed, frustrated or cynical.
We never have those feelings when we're playing games, they just don't exist in games.
So that's what I wanted to study when I was a graduate student.
What about games makes it impossible to feel that we can't achieve everything?
How can we take those feelings from games and apply them to real-world work?
So I looked at games like World of Warcraft, which is really the ideal collaborative problem-solving environment.
And I started to notice a few things that make epic wins so possible in online worlds.
The first thing is whenever you show up in one of these online games, especially in World of Warcraft, there are lots and lots of different characters who are willing to trust you with a world-saving mission, right away.
But not just any mission, it's a mission that is perfectly matched with your current level in the game.
Right? So you can do it.
They never give you a challenge you can't achieve.
But it is on the verge of what you're capable of, so you have to try hard.
But there's no unemployment in World of Warcraft; no sitting around, wringing your hands -- there's always something specific and important to be done.
There are also tons of collaborators.
Everywhere you go, hundreds of thousands of people ready to work with you to achieve your epic mission.
That's not something we have in real life that easily, this sense that at our fingertips are tons of collaborators.
And there's this epic story, this inspiring story of why we're there, and what we're doing, and we get all this positive feedback.
You guys have heard of leveling up, +1 strength, +1 intelligence.
We don't get that kind of constant feedback in real life.
When I get off this stage, I'm not going to have +1 speaking, and +1 crazy idea, +20 crazy idea.
I don't get that feedback in real life.
Now, the problem with collaborative online environments like World of Warcraft is that it's so satisfying to be on the verge of an epic win all the time, we decide to spend all our time in these game worlds.
It's just better than reality.
So, so far, collectively all the World of Warcraft gamers have spent 5.93 million years solving the virtual problems of Azeroth.
Now, that's not necessarily a bad thing.
It might sound like it's a bad thing.
But to put that in context: 5.93 million years ago was when our earliest primate human ancestors stood up.
That was the first upright primate.
So when we talk about how much time we're currently investing in playing games, the only way it makes sense to even think about it is to talk about time at the magnitude of human evolution, which is an extraordinary thing.
But it's also apt, because it turns out that by spending all this time playing games, we're actually changing what we are capable of as human beings.
We're evolving to be a more collaborative and hearty species.
This is true. I believe this.
So, consider this really interesting statistic; it was recently published by a researcher at Carnegie Mellon University: The average young person today in a country with a strong gamer culture will have spent 10,000 hours playing online games by the age of 21.
Now 10,000 hours is a really interesting number for two reasons.
First of all, for children in the United States, 10,080 hours is the exact amount of time you will spend in school, from fifth grade to high school graduation, if you have perfect attendance.
(Laughter) So, we have an entire parallel track of education going on, where young people are learning as much about what it takes to be a good gamer as they're learning about everything else in school.
Some of you have probably read Malcolm Gladwell's new book "Outliers," so you would have heard of his theory of success, the "10,000 hours" theory of success.
It's based on this great cognitive-science research that says if we can master 10,000 hours of effortful study at anything by the age of 21, we will be virtuosos at it.
We will be as good at whatever we do as the greatest people in the world.
And so, now what we're looking at is an entire generation of young people who are virtuoso gamers.
So, the big question is, "What exactly are gamers getting so good at?"
Because if we could figure that out, we would have a virtually unprecedented human resource on our hands.
This is how many people we now have in the world who spend at least an hour a day playing online games.
These are our virtuoso gamers, 500 million people who are extraordinarily good at something.
And in the next decade, we're going to have another billion gamers who are extraordinarily good at whatever that is.
If you don't know it already, this is coming.
The game industry is developing consoles that are low-energy and that work with the wireless phone networks instead of broadband Internet, so that gamers all over the world, particularly in India, China, Brazil, can get online.
They expect one billion more gamers in the next decade.
It will bring us up to 1.5 billion gamers.
So I've started to think about what these games are making us virtuosos at.
Here are the four things I came up with.
OK, think of this as extreme self-motivation.
Urgent optimism is the desire to act immediately to tackle an obstacle, combined with the belief that we have a reasonable hope of success.
Gamers always believe that an epic win is possible, and that it's always worth trying, and trying now.
Gamers don't sit around.
Gamers are virtuosos at weaving a tight social fabric.
There's a lot of interesting research that shows we like people better after we play a game with them, even if they've beaten us badly.
And the reason is, it takes a lot of trust to play a game with someone.
We trust that they will spend their time with us, that they will play by the same rules, value the same goal, stay with the game until it's over.
And so, playing a game together actually builds up bonds and trust and cooperation.
And we actually build stronger social relationships as a result.
Blissful productivity. I love it.
You know, there's a reason why the average World of Warcraft gamer plays for 22 hours a week -- kind of a half-time job.
It's because we know, when we're playing a game, that we're actually happier working hard than we are relaxing, or hanging out.
We know that we are optimized as human beings, to do hard and meaningful work.
And gamers are willing to work hard all the time, if they're given the right work.
Finally: epic meaning.
Gamers love to be attached to awe-inspiring missions to human planetary-scale stories.
So, just one bit of trivia that helps put that into perspective: So, you all know Wikipedia, biggest wiki in the world.
Second biggest wiki in the world, with nearly 80,000 articles, is the World of Warcraft wiki.
Five million people use it every month.
They have compiled more information about World of Warcraft on the Internet than any other topic covered on any other wiki in the world.
They are building an epic story.
They are building an epic knowledge resource about the World of Warcraft.
Okay, so these are four superpowers that add up to one thing: Gamers are super-empowered hopeful individuals.
These are people who believe that they are individually capable of changing the world.
And the only problem is, they believe that they are capable of changing virtual worlds and not the real world.
That's the problem that I'm trying to solve.
There's an economist named Edward Castronova.
His work is brilliant.
He looks at why people are investing so much time and energy and money in online worlds.
And he says, "We're witnessing what amounts to no less than a mass exodus to virtual worlds and online game environments."
And he's an economist, so he's rational.
And he says -- (Laughter) Not like me, I'm a game designer; I'm exuberant.
But he says that this makes perfect sense, because gamers can achieve more in online worlds than they can in real life.
They can have stronger social relationships in games than they can have in real life; they get better feedback and feel more rewarded in games than they do in real life.
So he says, for now it makes perfect sense for gamers to spend more time in virtual worlds than the real world.
Now, I also agree that that is rational, for now.
But it is not, by any means, an optimal situation.
We have to start making the real world work more like a game.
I take my inspiration from something that happened 2,500 years ago.
These are ancient dice, made out of sheep's knuckles.
Before we had awesome game controllers, we had sheep's knuckles.
And these represent the first game equipment designed by human beings, and if you're familiar with the work of the ancient Greek historian Herodotus, you might know this history, which is the history of who invented games and why.
Herodotus says that games, particularly dice games, were invented in the kingdom of Lydia, during a time of famine.
Apparently, there was such a severe famine that the king of Lydia decided they had to do something crazy.
People were suffering. People were fighting.
It was an extreme situation, they needed an extreme solution.
So, according to Herodotus, they invented dice games, and they set up a kingdom-wide policy: On one day, everybody would eat, and on the next day, everybody would play games.
And they would be so immersed in playing the dice games, because games are so engaging, and immerse us in such satisfying, blissful productivity, they would ignore the fact that they had no food to eat.
And then on the next day, they would play games; and on the next day, they would eat.
And according to Herodotus, they passed 18 years this way, surviving through a famine, by eating on one day, and playing games on the next.
Now, this is exactly, I think, how we're using games today.
We're using games to escape real-world suffering -- we're using games to get away from everything that's broken in the real environment, everything that's not satisfying about real life, and we're getting what we need from games.
But it doesn't have to end there.
This is really exciting.
According to Herodotus, after 18 years the famine wasn't getting better, so the king decided they would play one final dice game.
They divided the entire kingdom in half.
They played one dice game, and the winners of that game got to go on an epic adventure.
They would leave Lydia, and they would go out in search of a new place to live, leaving behind just enough people to survive on the resources that were available, and hopefully to take their civilization somewhere else where they could thrive.
Now, this sounds crazy, right?
But recently, DNA evidence has shown that the Etruscans, who then led to the Roman Empire, actually share the same DNA as the ancient Lydians.
And so, recently, scientists have suggested that Herodotus' crazy story is actually true.
And geologists have found evidence of a global cooling that lasted for nearly 20 years, that could have explained the famine.
So this crazy story might be true.
They might have actually saved their culture by playing games, escaping to games for 18 years, and then been so inspired, and knew so much about how to come together with games, that they actually saved the entire civilization that way.
Okay, we can do that.
(Laughter) We've been playing Warcraft since 1994.
That was the first real-time strategy game from the World of Warcraft series.
That was 16 years ago.
They played dice games for 18 years, we've been playing Warcraft for 16 years.
I say we are ready for our own epic game.
Now, they had half the civilization go off in search of a new world, so that's where I get my 21 billion hours a week of game-play from.
Let's get half of us to agree to spend an hour a day playing games, until we solve real-world problems.
Now, I know you're asking, "How are we going to solve real-world problems in games?"
Well, that's what I've devoted my work to over the past few years, at the Institute for the Future.
We have this banner in our offices in Palo Alto, and it expresses our view of how we should try to relate to the future.
We do not want to try to predict the future.
What we want to do is make the future.
We want to imagine the best-case scenario outcome, and then we want to empower people to make that outcome a reality.
We want to imagine epic wins, and then give people the means to achieve the epic win.
I'm just going to very briefly show you three games that I've made that are an attempt to give people the means to create epic wins in their own futures.
We made this game in 2007.
This is an online game in which you try to survive an oil shortage.
The oil shortage is fictional, but we put enough online content out there for you to believe that it's real, and to live your real life as if we've run out of oil.
So when you come to the game, you sign up, tell us where you live, and then we give you real-time news videos, data feeds that show you exactly how much oil costs, what's not available, how food supply is being affected, how transportation is being affected, if schools are closed, if there's rioting, and you have to figure out how you would live your real life as if this were true.
And then we ask you to blog about it, to post videos, to post photos.
We piloted this game with 1,700 players in 2007, and we've tracked them for the three years since.
And I can tell you that this is a transformative experience.
Nobody wants to change how they live, just because it's good for the world, or because we're supposed to.
But if you immerse them in an epic adventure and tell them, "We've run out of oil.
This is an amazing story and adventure for you to go on.
Challenge yourself to see how you would survive," most of our players have kept up the habits that they learned in this game.
So for the next world-saving game, we decided to aim higher -- bigger problem than just peak oil.
We did a game called Superstruct at the Institute for the Future.
And the premise was, a supercomputer has calculated that humans have only 23 years left on the planet.
This supercomputer was called the Global Extinction Awareness System, of course.
We asked people to come online -- almost like a Jerry Bruckheimer movie.
You know Jerry Bruckheimer movies, you form a dream team -- you've got the astronaut, the scientist, the ex-convict, and they all have something to do to save the world.
(Laughter) But in our game, instead of just having five people on the dream team, we said, "Everybody's on the dream team, and it's your job to invent the future of energy, the future of food, the future of health, the future of security and the future of the social safety net."
We had 8,000 people play that game for eight weeks.
They came up with 500 insanely creative solutions that you can go online, Google "Superstruct," and see.
So, finally, the last game, we're launching it March 3rd.
If you complete the game, you will be certified by the World Bank Institute as a Social Innovator, class of 2010.
Working with universities all over sub-Saharan Africa, and we are inviting them to learn social innovation skills.
We've got a graphic novel, we've got leveling up in skills like local insight, knowledge networking, sustainability, vision and resourcefulness.
I would like to invite all of you to please share this game with young people, anywhere in the world, particularly in developing areas, who might benefit from coming together to try to start to imagine their own social enterprises to save the world.
So, I'm going to wrap up now.
I want to ask a question.
What do you think happens next?
We've got all these amazing gamers, we've got these games that are kind of pilots of what we might do, but none of them have saved the real world yet.
Well I hope you will agree with me that gamers are a human resource that we can use to do real-world work, that games are a powerful platform for change.
We have all these amazing superpowers: blissful productivity, the ability to weave a tight social fabric, this feeling of urgent optimism and the desire for epic meaning.
I really hope that we can come together to play games that matter, to survive on this planet for another century.
That's my hope, that you will join me in making and playing games like this.
When I look forward to the next decade, I know two things for sure: that we can make any future we can imagine, and we can play any games we want, so I say: Let the world-changing games begin.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Kurt Andersen: Like many architects, David is a hog for the limelight but is sufficiently reticent -- or at least pretends to be -- that he asked me to question him rather than speaking.
In fact what we're going to talk about, I think, is in fact a subject that is probably better served by a conversation than an address.
And I guess we have a bit of news clip to precede.
Dan Rather: Since the September 11th attack on the World Trade Center, many people have flocked to downtown New York to see and pay respects at what amounts to the 16-acre burial ground.
Now, as CBS's Jim Axelrod reports, they're putting the finishing touches on a new way for people to visit and view the scene.
Jim Axelrod: Forget the Empire State Building or the Statue of Liberty.
There's a new place in New York where the crowds are thickest -- Ground Zero.
Tourist: I've taken my step-daughter here from Indianapolis.
This was -- out of all the tourist sites in New York City -- this was her number-one pick.
JA: Thousands now line up on lower Broadway.
Tourist: I've been wanting to come down here since this happened.
JA: Even on the coldest winter days.
To honor and remember.
Tourist: It's reality, it's us. It happened here.
This is ours.
JA: So many, in fact, that seeing has become a bit of a problem.
Tourist: I think that people are very frustrated that they're not able to get closer to see what's going on.
JA: But that is about to change.
In record time, a team of architects and construction workers designed and built a viewing platform to ease the frustration and bring people closer.
Man: They'll get an incredible panorama and understand, I think more completely, the sheer totality of the destruction of the place.
JA: If you think about it, Ground Zero is unlike most any other tourist site in America.
Unlike the Grand Canyon or the Washington Monument, people come here to see what's no longer there.
David Rockwell: The first experience people will have here when they see this is not as a construction site but as this incredibly moving burial ground.
JA: The walls are bare by design, so people can fill them with their own memorials the way they already have along the current perimeter.
Tourist: From our hearts, it affected us just as much.
JA: The ramps are made of simple material -- the kind of plywood you see at construction sites -- which is really the whole point.
In the face of America's worst destruction people are building again.
Jim Axelrod, CBS News, New York.
KA: This is not an obvious subject to be in the sensuality segment, but certainly David you are known as -- I know, a phrase you hate -- an entertainment architect.
Your work is highly sensual, even hedonistic.
DR: I like that word.
KA: It's about pleasure -- casinos and hotels and restaurants.
How did the shock that all of us -- and especially all of us in New York -- felt on the 11th of September transmute into your desire to do this thing?
DR: Well the truth of the matter is, post-September 11th, I felt myself in the role originally -- first of all as someone who lives in Tribeca and whose neighborhood was devastated, and as someone who works less than a mile from there -- that I was in the role of forcing 100 people who work with me in my firm, to continue to have the same level of enthusiasm about creating the places we had been creating.
In fact we're finishing a book which is called "Pleasure," which is about sensual pleasure in spaces.
But I've got to tell you -- it became impossible to do that.
We were really paralyzed.
And I found myself the Friday after September 11th -- two days afterwards -- literally unable to motivate anyone to do anything.
We gave the office a few days off.
And in discussing this with other architects, we had seen people saying in the press that they should rebuild the towers as they were -- they should rebuild them 50 stories taller.
And I thought it was astonishing to speculate, as if this were a competition, on something that was such a fresh wound.
And I had a series of discussions -- first with Rick Scofidio and Liz Diller, who collaborated with us on this, and several other people -- and really felt like we had to find relevance in doing something.
And that as people who create places, the ultimate way to help wasn't to pontificate or to make up scenarios, but to help right now.
So we tried to come up with a way, as a group, to have a kind of design SWAT team.
And that was the mission that we came up with.
KA: Were you conscious of suddenly -- as a designer whose work is all about fulfilling wants -- suddenly fulfilling needs?
DR: Well what I was aware of was, there was this overwhelming need to act now.
And we were asked to participate in a few projects before this.
There was a school, PS 234, that had been evacuated down at Ground Zero.
They moved to an abandoned school.
We took about 20 or 30 architects and designers and artists, and over four days -- it was like this urban barn-raising -- to renovate it, and everyone wanted to help.
It was just extraordinary.
Tom Otterness contributed, Maira Kalman contributed and it became this cathartic experience for us.
KA: And that was done, effectively, by October 8 or something?
DR: Yeah.
KA: Obviously, what you faced in trying to do something as substantial as this project -- and this is only one of four that you've designed to surround the site -- you must have run up against the incredibly byzantine, entrenched bureaucracy and powers that be in New York real estate and New York politics.
DR: Well, it's a funny thing.
We finished PS 234, and had dinner with a small group.
I was actually asked to be a committee chair on an AIA committee to rebuild.
And I sat in on several meetings.
And there were the most circuitous grand plans that had to do with long-term infrastructure and rebuilding the entire city.
And the fact is that there were immediate wounds and needs that needed to be filled, and there was talk about inclusion and wanting it to be an inclusive process.
And it wasn't an inclusive group.
So we said, what is -- KA: It was not an inclusive group?
DR: It was not an inclusive group.
It was predominantly a white, rich, corporate group that was not representative of the city.
KA: Shocking.
DR: Yeah, surprising.
So Rick and Liz and Kevin and I came up with the idea.
The city actually approached us.
We first approached the city about Pier 94.
We saw how PS 234 worked.
The families -- the victims of the families -- were going to this pier that was incredibly dehumanizing.
KA: On the Hudson River?
DR: Yeah. And the city actually -- through Tim Zagat initially, and then through Christyne Nicholas, then we got to Giuliani -- said, "You know we don't want to do anything with Pier 94 right now, but we have an observation platform for the families down at Ground Zero that we'd like to be a more dignified experience for the families, and a way to protect it from the weather."
So I went down there with Rick and Liz and Kevin, and I've got to say, it was the most moving experience of my life.
It was devastating to see the simple plywood platform with a rail around it, where the families of the victims had left notes to them.
And there was no mediation between us and the experience.
There was no filter.
And I remembered on September 11th, on 14th Street, the roof of our building -- we can see the World Trade Towers prominently -- and I saw the first building collapse from a conference room on the eighth floor on a TV that we had set up.
And then everyone was up on the roof, so I ran up there.
And it was amazing how much harder it was to believe in real life than it was on TV.
There was something about the comfort of the filter and how much information was between us and the experience.
So seeing this in a very simple, dignified way was a very powerful experience.
So we went back to the city and said we're not particularly interested in the upgrade of this as a VIP platform, but we've spent some time down there.
At the same time the city had this need.
They were looking for a solution to deal with 30 or 40 thousand people a day who were going down there, that had nowhere to go.
And there was no way to deal with the traffic around the site.
So dealing with it is just an immediate master plan.
There was a way -- there had to be a way -- to get people to move around the site.
KA: But then you've got to figure out a way -- we will skip over the insanely tedious process of getting permits and getting everybody on board -- but simply funding this thing.
It looks like a fairly simple thing, but this was a half a million dollar project?
DR: Well, we knew that if it wasn't privately funded, it wasn't going to happen.
And we also, frankly, knew that if it didn't happen by the end of the Giuliani administration, then everyone who we were dealing with at the DOT and the Police Department and all of the -- we were meeting with 20 or 30 people with the city at a time, and it was set up by the Office of Emergency Management.
This incredible act on their part, because they really wanted this, and they sensed that this needed to happen.
KA: And there was therefore this ticking clock, because Giuliani was obviously out three months after that.
DR: Yeah. So the first thing we had to do was find a way to get this -- we had to work with the families of the victims, through the city, to make sure that they knew this was happening.
Because this didn't want to be a surprise.
And we also had to be as under the radar screen as we could be in New York, because the key was not raising a lot of objection and sort of working as quietly as possible.
We came up with the idea of setting up a foundation, mainly because when we found a contractor who would build this, he would not agree to do this, even if we would pay him the money.
There needed to be a foundation in place.
So we came up with a foundation, and actually what happened was one major developer in New York -- KA: Who shall remain nameless, I guess?
DR: Yeah. His initials are JS, and he owns Rockefeller Center, if that helps anyone -- volunteered to help.
And we met with him.
The prices from the contractors were between five to 700,000 dollars.
And Atlantic-Heydt, who's the largest scaffolding contractor in the country, volunteered to do it at cost.
So this developer said, "You know what, we'll underwrite the entire expense."
And we said, "That's incredible!"
And I think this was the 21st, and we knew this had to be built and up by the 28th.
And we had to start construction the next day.
We had a meeting that evening with his contractor of choice, and the contractor showed up with the drawings of the platform about half the size that we had drawn it.
KA: Sort of like the Spinal Tap scene where you get the tiny little Stonehenge, I guess?
(Laughter) DR: In fact, it was as if this was going to be window-washing scaffolding.
There was no sense of the fact that this is next to Saint Paul -- that this is really a place that needs to be kind of dignified, and a place to reflect and remember.
And I've got to say that we spent a lot of time in putting this together, watching the crowds that gathered at Saint Paul -- which is just to the right -- and moving around the site.
And I live down there, so we spent a lot of time looking at the need.
And I think people were amazed at two things -- I think they were amazed at the destruction, but I think there was a sense of disbelief about the heroics of New Yorkers that I found very moving.
Just the sort of everyday heroics of New Yorkers.
So we were in this meeting and the contractor literally said, "I'm going to lock the door, because this developer will not agree to have you leave till you've signed off on this."
And we said, "Well, this is half the size, it doesn't have any of the design features that have been agreed upon by everyone -- everyone in the city.
We'd have to go back to the beginning to do this."
And I convinced him that we should leave the room with the agreement to build it as designed.
The next day I got an email from the developer saying that he was withdrawing all funding.
So we didn't know what to do, but we decided to cast a very wide net.
We emailed out letters to as many people as we could -- several people in the audience here -- who were very helpful.
KA: There was no thought of abandoning ship at that point?
DR: No. In fact I told the contractor to go ahead.
He had already ordered materials based on my go-ahead.
We knew that one way or another this was going to happen.
And we just felt it had to happen.
KA: You were funding it yourself and with contributions and this foundation.
Richard, I think very correctly, made the point at the beginning -- before all the chair designers came out -- about the history of chair designers imposing aesthetic solutions on this kind of universal, banal, common problem of sitting.
It seems to me with this, that it was the opposite of that.
This was an unprecedented, singular design problem.
DR: Well here's the issue: we knew that this was not in the sense of -- we think about the site, and think about the need for a memorial.
It was important that this not be categorized as a memorial.
That this was a place for people to reflect, to remember -- a kind of quiet place.
So it led us to using design solutions that created as few filters between the viewer -- as we said about the families' platform -- and the experience as possible.
It's all incredibly humble material.
It's scaffolding and plywood.
And it allows -- by sort of the procession of the movement, up by Saint Paul's and down the other side -- it gives you about 300 feet to go up 13 feet from the ground to where you get the 360 degree view.
But the design was driven by a need to be quick, cheap, safe, respectful, flexible.
One of the other things is this is designed to be moveable.
Because when we looked at the four platforms around the site, one of which is an upgrade of the families' platform, we knew that these had to be moveable to respond to changing conditions, and the changing definition of what Ground Zero is.
KA: Your work -- I mean, we've talked about this before -- a lot of your work, I think, is informed by your belief in, or your focus on the temporariness of all things and the evanescence of things, and a kind of "Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow we die," sort of sense of existence.
This is clearly not a work for the ages.
You know, a couple of years this thing isn't going to be here.
Did that require, as an architect, a new way of thinking about what you were doing?
To think of it as this purely temporary installation?
DR: No, I don't think so.
I think this is, obviously, substantially different from anything we'd ever thought about doing before, just by the nature of it.
Where it overlaps with thoughts about our work in general is, number one -- the notion of collaboration as a sort of way to get things done.
And Kevin Kennon, Rick Scofidio, Liz Diller and all the people within the city -- Norman Lear, who I spoke to four hours before our deadline for funding, offered to give us a bridge loan to help us get through it.
So the notion of collaboration -- I think this reinforces how important that is.
And in terms of the temporary nature of it, our goal was not to create something that would be there longer than it needed to be.
I think what we were most interested in was promoting a kind of dialogue that we felt may not have been happening enough in this city, about what's really happening there.
And a day or two before it opened was Giuliani's farewell address, where he proposed the idea of all of Ground Zero being a memorial.
Which was very controversial, but it resonated with a lot of people.
And I think regardless of what the position is about how this sacred piece of land is to be used, having it come out of actually seeing it in a real encounter, I think makes it a more powerful dialogue.
And that's what we were interested in.
So that, very much, is in the realm of things I've been interested in before.
KA: It seems to me, among other things, a lovely piece of civic infrastructure.
It enables that conversation to get serious.
And six months after the fact -- and only a few months away from the site being cleaned -- we are very quickly, now, getting to the point where those conversations about what should go there are getting serious.
Do you have -- having been as physically involved in the site as you have been doing this project -- have any ideas about what should or shouldn't be done?
DR: Well, I think one thing that shouldn't be done is evaluate -- I think right now the discussion is a very closed discussion on the master plan.
The Protetch Gallery recently had a show on ideas for buildings, which had some sort of inventive ideas of buildings.
KA: But it had some really terrible ideas.
DR: And it also felt a little bit like a kind of competition of ideas, where I think the focus of ideas should be on master planning and uses.
And I think there should be a broader -- which there's starting to be -- the dialogue is really opening up to, what does this site really want to be?
And I truly believe until the issue of memorial is sorted out, that it's going to be very hard to have an intelligent discussion.
There's a few discussions right now that I think are very positive, about depressing the West Side Highway and connecting this over, so that there's one uninterrupted piece of land.
KA: Well, I think that's interesting.
And it gets to another issue that was probably inappropriate to discuss six months ago, but perhaps isn't now, which is, not many of us love the World Trade Center as a piece of architecture, as what it had done to this city and that huge plaza.
Is this an opportunity, is the silver lining -- a silver lining, here -- to rebuild some more traditional city grid, or not?
DR: I think there's a real opportunity to engage in a discussion of why we live in cities.
And why do we live in places where such dissimilar people collide up against us each day?
I don't think it has much to do with 50 or 60 or 70 or 80 thousand new office spaces, regardless of what the number is.
So yeah, I think there is a chance to re-look at how we think about cities.
And in fact, there's a proposal on the table now for building number seven.
KA: Which was the building just north of the Towers?
DR: Right, which the towers fell into.
And the reason that's been held up is essentially by community outrage that they're not re-opening the street to connect that back to the rest of the city.
I think a public dialogue -- I think, you know, I'd like to see an international competition, and a call for ideas for uses.
KA: Whether it's arts, whether it's housing, whether it's what amount of shopping?
DR: Right. And we're looking for other things.
This small foundation we put together is looking for other ways to help.
Including taking a small piece adjacent to the site and inviting 10 architects who currently don't have a voice in New York to do artist housing.
And find other ways to encourage the discussion to be against sort of monolithic, single solutions, and more about a multiplicity of things.
KA: Before we end, I know you have a piece of digital video of the experience of being on this platform?
DR: John Kamen -- who's here, actually -- put together a two and a half minute piece that shows the platform in use.
So I thought that would be good to end with.
DR: We're looking from Fulton Street, west.
One of the tricky issues we had with the Giuliani administration was I had forgotten how anti-graffiti he was.
And essentially our structure was designed to be written on.
KA: As you say, it's not a memorial.
But were you conscious of memorials? The Vietnam Memorial?
Those kinds of forms?
DR: We certainly did as much research as we could, and we were conscious of other memorials.
And also the complexity and length of time they really take to do.
It's 350 people on the committee for Oklahoma City, which is why we thought of this as a sort of ad-hoc, spontaneous solution that expanded on Union Square and the places that were ad-hoc memorials in the city already.
The scaffolding you can see built up over the street is de-mountable.
What's interesting now is the nature of the site has totally changed, so that what you're aware of is not just the destruction of the buildings in Ground Zero, but all of the buildings around it -- and the scars on the building around it, which are enormous.
This shows Saint Paul's on the left.
KA: I just want to thank you on behalf of New Yorkers for making this happen and getting this done.
But the kind of virtually instantaneous nature of its erection, and its being there, almost before you could believe that a response of this magnitude could be accomplished, is part of its extraordinary -- I don't know if beauty is the word -- but presence.
DR: It was an honor to do.
And we were thrilled to be able to show it here.
I'm supposed to scare you, because it's about fear, right?
And you should be really afraid, but not for the reasons why you think you should be.
You should be really afraid that -- if we stick up the first slide on this thing -- there we go -- that you're missing out.
Because if you spend this week thinking about Iraq and thinking about Bush and thinking about the stock market, you're going to miss one of the greatest adventures that we've ever been on.
And this is what this adventure's really about.
This is crystallized DNA.
Every life form on this planet -- every insect, every bacteria, every plant, every animal, every human, every politician -- (Laughter) is coded in that stuff.
And if you want to take a single crystal of DNA, it looks like that.
And we're just beginning to understand this stuff.
And this is the single most exciting adventure that we have ever been on.
It's the single greatest mapping project we've ever been on.
If you think that the mapping of America's made a difference, or landing on the moon, or this other stuff, it's the map of ourselves and the map of every plant and every insect and every bacteria that really makes a difference.
And it's beginning to tell us a lot about evolution.
(Laughter) It turns out that what this stuff is -- and Richard Dawkins has written about this -- is, this is really a river out of Eden.
So, the 3.2 billion base pairs inside each of your cells is really a history of where you've been for the past billion years.
And we could start dating things, and we could start changing medicine and archeology.
It turns out that if you take the human species about 700 years ago, white Europeans diverged from black Africans in a very significant way.
White Europeans were subject to the plague.
And when they were subject to the plague, most people didn't survive, but those who survived had a mutation on the CCR5 receptor.
And that mutation was passed on to their kids because they're the ones that survived, so there was a great deal of population pressure.
In Africa, because you didn't have these cities, you didn't have that CCR5 population pressure mutation.
We can date it to 700 years ago.
That is one of the reasons why AIDS is raging across Africa as fast as it is, and not as fast across Europe.
And we're beginning to find these little things for malaria, for sickle cell, for cancers.
And in the measure that we map ourselves, this is the single greatest adventure that we'll ever be on.
And this Friday, I want you to pull out a really good bottle of wine, and I want you to toast these two people.
Because this Friday, 50 years ago, Watson and Crick found the structure of DNA, and that is almost as important a date as the 12th of February when we first mapped ourselves, but anyway, we'll get to that.
I thought we'd talk about the new zoo.
So, all you guys have heard about DNA, all the stuff that DNA does, but some of the stuff we're discovering is kind of nifty because this turns out to be the single most abundant species on the planet.
If you think you're successful or cockroaches are successful, it turns out that there's ten trillion trillion Pleurococcus sitting out there.
And we didn't know that Pleurococcus was out there, which is part of the reason why this whole species-mapping project is so important.
Because we're just beginning to learn where we came from and what we are.
And we're finding amoebas like this. This is the amoeba dubia.
And the amoeba dubia doesn't look like much, except that each of you has about 3.2 billion letters, which is what makes you you, as far as gene code inside each of your cells, and this little amoeba which, you know, sits in water in hundreds and millions and billions, turns out to have 620 billion base pairs of gene code inside.
So, this little thingamajig has a genome that's 200 times the size of yours.
And if you're thinking of efficient information storage mechanisms, it may not turn out to be chips.
It may turn out to be something that looks a little like that amoeba.
And, again, we're learning from life and how life works.
This funky little thing: people didn't used to think that it was worth taking samples out of nuclear reactors because it was dangerous and, of course, nothing lived there.
And then finally somebody picked up a microscope and looked at the water that was sitting next to the cores.
And sitting next to that water in the cores was this little Deinococcus radiodurans, doing a backstroke, having its chromosomes blown apart every day, six, seven times, restitching them, living in about 200 times the radiation that would kill you.
And by now you should be getting a hint as to how diverse and how important and how interesting this journey into life is, and how many different life forms there are, and how there can be different life forms living in very different places, maybe even outside of this planet.
Because if you can live in radiation that looks like this, that brings up a whole series of interesting questions.
This little thingamajig: we didn't know this thingamajig existed.
We should have known that this existed because this is the only bacteria that you can see to the naked eye.
So, this thing is 0.75 millimeters.
It lives in a deep trench off the coast of Namibia.
And what you're looking at with this namibiensis is the biggest bacteria we've ever seen.
So, it's about the size of a little period on a sentence.
Again, we didn't know this thing was there three years ago.
We're just beginning this journey of life in the new zoo.
This is a really odd one. This is Ferroplasma.
The reason why Ferroplasma is interesting is because it eats iron, lives inside the equivalent of battery acid, and excretes sulfuric acid.
So, when you think of odd life forms, when you think of what it takes to live, it turns out this is a very efficient life form, and they call it an archaea. Archaea means "the ancient ones."
And the reason why they're ancient is because this thing came up when this planet was covered by things like sulfuric acid in batteries, and it was eating iron when the earth was part of a melted core.
So, it's not just dogs and cats and whales and dolphins that you should be aware of and interested in on this little journey.
Your fear should be that you are not, that you're paying attention to stuff which is temporal.
I mean, George Bush -- he's going to be gone, alright? Life isn't.
Whether the humans survive or don't survive, these things are going to be living on this planet or other planets.
And it's just beginning to understand this code of DNA that's really the most exciting intellectual adventure that we've ever been on.
And you can do strange things with this stuff. This is a baby gaur.
Conservation group gets together, tries to figure out how to breed an animal that's almost extinct.
They can't do it naturally, so what they do with this thing is they take a spoon, take some cells out of an adult gaur's mouth, code, take the cells from that and insert it into a fertilized cow's egg, reprogram cow's egg -- different gene code.
When you do that, the cow gives birth to a gaur.
We are now experimenting with bongos, pandas, elands, Sumatran tigers, and the Australians -- bless their hearts -- are playing with these things.
Now, the last of these things died in September 1936.
These are Tasmanian tigers. The last known one died at the Hobart Zoo.
But it turns out that as we learn more about gene code and how to reprogram species, we may be able to close the gene gaps in deteriorate DNA.
And when we learn how to close the gene gaps, then we can put a full string of DNA together.
And if we do that, and insert this into a fertilized wolf's egg, we may give birth to an animal that hasn't walked the earth since 1936.
And then you can start going back further, and you can start thinking about dodos, and you can think about other species.
And in other places, like Maryland, they're trying to figure out what the primordial ancestor is.
Because each of us contains our entire gene code of where we've been for the past billion years, because we've evolved from that stuff, you can take that tree of life and collapse it back, and in the measure that you learn to reprogram, maybe we'll give birth to something that is very close to the first primordial ooze.
And it's all coming out of things that look like this.
These are companies that didn't exist five years ago.
Huge gene sequencing facilities the size of football fields.
Some are public. Some are private.
It takes about 5 billion dollars to sequence a human being the first time.
Takes about 3 million dollars the second time.
We will have a 1,000-dollar genome within the next five to eight years.
That means each of you will contain on a CD your entire gene code.
And it will be really boring. It will read like this.
(Laughter) The really neat thing about this stuff is that's life.
And Laurie's going to talk about this one a little bit.
Because if you happen to find this one inside your body, you're in big trouble, because that's the source code for Ebola.
That's one of the deadliest diseases known to humans.
But plants work the same way and insects work the same way, and this apple works the same way.
This apple is the same thing as this floppy disk.
Because this thing codes ones and zeros, and this thing codes A, T, C, Gs, and it sits up there, absorbing energy on a tree, and one fine day it has enough energy to say, execute, and it goes [thump]. Right?
(Laughter) And when it does that, pushes a .EXE, what it does is, it executes the first line of code, which reads just like that, AATCAGGGACCC, and that means: make a root.
Next line of code: make a stem.
Next line of code, TACGGGG: make a flower that's white, that blooms in the spring, that smells like this.
In the measure that you have the code and the measure that you read it -- and, by the way, the first plant was read two years ago; the first human was read two years ago; the first insect was read two years ago.
The first thing that we ever read was in 1995: a little bacteria called Haemophilus influenzae.
In the measure that you have the source code, as all of you know, you can change the source code, and you can reprogram life forms so that this little thingy becomes a vaccine, or this little thingy starts producing biomaterials, which is why DuPont is now growing a form of polyester that feels like silk in corn.
This changes all rules. This is life, but we're reprogramming it.
This is what you look like. This is one of your chromosomes.
And what you can do now is, you can outlay exactly what your chromosome is, and what the gene code on that chromosome is right here, and what those genes code for, and what animals they code against, and then you can tie it to the literature.
And in the measure that you can do that, you can go home today, and get on the Internet, and access the world's biggest public library, which is a library of life.
And you can do some pretty strange things because in the same way as you can reprogram this apple, if you go to Cliff Tabin's lab at the Harvard Medical School, he's reprogramming chicken embryos to grow more wings.
Why would Cliff be doing that? He doesn't have a restaurant.
(Laughter) The reason why he's reprogramming that animal to have more wings is because when you used to play with lizards as a little child, and you picked up the lizard, sometimes the tail fell off, but it regrew.
Not so in human beings: you cut off an arm, you cut off a leg -- it doesn't regrow.
But because each of your cells contains your entire gene code, each cell can be reprogrammed, if we don't stop stem cell research and if we don't stop genomic research, to express different body functions.
And in the measure that we learn how chickens grow wings, and what the program is for those cells to differentiate, one of the things we're going to be able to do is to stop undifferentiated cells, which you know as cancer, and one of the things we're going to learn how to do is how to reprogram cells like stem cells in such a way that they express bone, stomach, skin, pancreas.
And you are likely to be wandering around -- and your children -- on regrown body parts in a reasonable period of time, in some places in the world where they don't stop the research.
How's this stuff work? If each of you differs from the person next to you by one in a thousand, but only three percent codes, which means it's only one in a thousand times three percent, very small differences in expression and punctuation can make a significant difference. Take a simple declarative sentence.
(Laughter) Right?
That's perfectly clear. So, men read that sentence, and they look at that sentence, and they read this.
Okay?
Now, women look at that sentence and they say, uh-uh, wrong.
This is the way it should be seen.
(Laughter) That's what your genes are doing.
That's why you differ from this person over here by one in a thousand.
Right? But, you know, he's reasonably good looking, but...
I won't go there.
You can do this stuff even without changing the punctuation.
You can look at this, right?
And they look at the world a little differently.
They look at the same world and they say...
(Laughter) That's how the same gene code -- that's why you have 30,000 genes, mice have 30,000 genes, husbands have 30,000 genes.
Mice and men are the same. Wives know that, but anyway.
You can make very small changes in gene code and get really different outcomes, even with the same string of letters.
That's what your genes are doing every day.
That's why sometimes a person's genes don't have to change a lot to get cancer.
These little chippies, these things are the size of a credit card.
They will test any one of you for 60,000 genetic conditions.
That brings up questions of privacy and insurability and all kinds of stuff, but it also allows us to start going after diseases, because if you run a person who has leukemia through something like this, it turns out that three diseases with completely similar clinical syndromes are completely different diseases.
Because in ALL leukemia, that set of genes over there over-expresses.
In MLL, it's the middle set of genes, and in AML, it's the bottom set of genes.
And if one of those particular things is expressing in your body, then you take Gleevec and you're cured.
If it is not expressing in your body, if you don't have one of those types -- a particular one of those types -- don't take Gleevec.
It won't do anything for you.
Same thing with Receptin if you've got breast cancer.
Don't have an HER-2 receptor? Don't take Receptin.
Changes the nature of medicine. Changes the predictions of medicine.
Changes the way medicine works.
The greatest repository of knowledge when most of us went to college was this thing, and it turns out that this is not so important any more.
The U.S. Library of Congress, in terms of its printed volume of data, contains less data than is coming out of a good genomics company every month on a compound basis.
Let me say that again: A single genomics company generates more data in a month, on a compound basis, than is in the printed collections of the Library of Congress.
This is what's been powering the U.S. economy. It's Moore's Law.
So, all of you know that the price of computers halves every 18 months and the power doubles, right?
Except that when you lay that side by side with the speed with which gene data's being deposited in GenBank, Moore's Law is right here: it's the blue line.
This is on a log scale, and that's what superexponential growth means.
This is going to push computers to have to grow faster than they've been growing, because so far, there haven't been applications that have been required that need to go faster than Moore's Law. This stuff does.
And here's an interesting map.
This is a map which was finished at the Harvard Business School.
One of the really interesting questions is, if all this data's free, who's using it? This is the greatest public library in the world.
Well, it turns out that there's about 27 trillion bits moving inside from the United States to the United States; about 4.6 trillion is going over to those European countries; about 5.5's going to Japan; there's almost no communication between Japan, and nobody else is literate in this stuff.
It's free. No one's reading it. They're focusing on the war; they're focusing on Bush; they're not interested in life.
So, this is what a new map of the world looks like.
That is the genomically literate world. And that is a problem.
In fact, it's not a genomically literate world.
You can break this out by states.
And you can watch states rise and fall depending on their ability to speak a language of life, and you can watch New York fall off a cliff, and you can watch New Jersey fall off a cliff, and you can watch the rise of the new empires of intelligence.
And you can break it out by counties, because it's specific counties.
And if you want to get more specific, it's actually specific zip codes.
(Laughter) So, you want to know where life is happening?
Well, in Southern California it's happening in 92121. And that's it.
And that's the triangle between Salk, Scripps, UCSD, and it's called Torrey Pines Road.
That means you don't need to be a big nation to be successful; it means you don't need a lot of people to be successful; and it means you can move most of the wealth of a country in about three or four carefully picked 747s.
Same thing in Massachusetts. Looks more spread out but -- oh, by the way, the ones that are the same color are contiguous.
What's the net effect of this?
In an agricultural society, the difference between the richest and the poorest, the most productive and the least productive, was five to one. Why?
Because in agriculture, if you had 10 kids and you grow up a little bit earlier and you work a little bit harder, you could produce about five times more wealth, on average, than your neighbor.
In a knowledge society, that number is now 427 to 1.
It really matters if you're literate, not just in reading and writing in English and French and German, but in Microsoft and Linux and Apple.
And very soon it's going to matter if you're literate in life code.
So, if there is something you should fear, it's that you're not keeping your eye on the ball.
Because it really matters who speaks life.
That's why nations rise and fall.
And it turns out that if you went back to the 1870s, the most productive nation on earth was Australia, per person.
And New Zealand was way up there. And then the U.S. came in about 1950, and then Switzerland about 1973, and then the U.S. got back on top -- beat up their chocolates and cuckoo clocks.
And today, of course, you all know that the most productive nation on earth is Luxembourg, producing about one third more wealth per person per year than America.
Tiny landlocked state. No oil. No diamonds. No natural resources.
Just smart people moving bits. Different rules.
Here's differential productivity rates.
Here's how many people it takes to produce a single U.S. patent.
So, about 3,000 Americans, 6,000 Koreans, 14,000 Brits, 790,000 Argentines. You want to know why Argentina's crashing?
It's got nothing to do with inflation.
It's got nothing to do with privatization.
You can take a Harvard-educated Ivy League economist, stick him in charge of Argentina. He still crashes the country because he doesn't understand how the rules have changed.
Oh, yeah, and it takes about 5.6 million Indians.
Well, watch what happens to India.
India and China used to be 40 percent of the global economy just at the Industrial Revolution, and they are now about 4.8 percent.
Two billion people. One third of the global population producing 5 percent of the wealth because they didn't get this change, because they kept treating their people like serfs instead of like shareholders of a common project.
They didn't keep the people who were educated.
They didn't foment the businesses. They didn't do the IPOs.
Silicon Valley did. And that's why they say that Silicon Valley has been powered by ICs.
Not integrated circuits: Indians and Chinese.
(Laughter) Here's what's happening in the world.
It turns out that if you'd gone to the U.N. in 1950, when it was founded, there were 50 countries in this world.
It turns out there's now about 192.
Country after country is splitting, seceding, succeeding, failing -- and it's all getting very fragmented. And this has not stopped.
In the 1990s, these are sovereign states that did not exist before 1990.
And this doesn't include fusions or name changes or changes in flags.
We're generating about 3.12 states per year.
People are taking control of their own states, sometimes for the better and sometimes for the worse.
And the really interesting thing is, you and your kids are empowered to build great empires, and you don't need a lot to do it.
(Music) And, given that the music is over, I was going to talk about how you can use this to generate a lot of wealth, and how code works.
Moderator: Two minutes.
(Laughter) Juan Enriquez: No, I'm going to stop there and we'll do it next year because I don't want to take any of Laurie's time.
But thank you very much.
So, I was just asked to go and shoot this film called "Elizabeth."
And we're all talking about this great English icon and saying, "She's a fantastic woman, she does everything.
How are we going to introduce her?"
So we went around the table with the studio and the producers and the writer, and they came to me and said, "Shekhar, what do you think?"
And I said, "I think she's dancing."
And I could see everybody looked at me, somebody said, "Bollywood."
The other said, "How much did we hire him for?"
And the third said, "Let's find another director."
I thought I had better change.
So we had a lot of discussion on how to introduce Elizabeth, and I said, "OK, maybe I am too Bollywood.
Maybe Elizabeth, this great icon, dancing?
What are you talking about?"
So I rethought the whole thing, and then we all came to a consensus.
And here was the introduction of this great British icon called "Elizabeth."
Leicester: May I join you, my lady?
Elizabeth: If it please you, sir.
(Music) Shekhar Kapur: So she was dancing.
So how many people who saw the film did not get that here was a woman in love, that she was completely innocent and saw great joy in her life, and she was youthful?
And how many of you did not get that?
That's the power of visual storytelling, that's the power of dance, that's the power of music: the power of not knowing.
When I go out to direct a film, every day we prepare too much, we think too much.
Knowledge becomes a weight upon wisdom.
You know, simple words lost in the quicksand of experience.
So I come up, and I say, "What am I going to do today?" I'm not going to do what I planned to do, and I put myself into absolute panic.
It's my one way of getting rid of my mind, getting rid of this mind that says, "Hey, you know what you're doing. You know exactly what you're doing.
You're a director, you've done it for years."
So I've got to get there and be in complete panic.
It's a symbolic gesture. I tear up the script, I go and I panic myself, I get scared.
I'm doing it right now; you can watch me. I'm getting nervous, I don't know what to say, I don't know what I'm doing, I don't want to go there.
And as I go there, of course, my A.D. says, "You know what you're going to do, sir." I say, "Of course I do."
And the studio executives, they would say, "Hey, look at Shekhar. He's so prepared."
And inside I've just been listening to Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan because he's chaotic.
I'm allowing myself to go into chaos because out of chaos, I'm hoping some moments of truth will come.
All preparation is preparation.
I don't even know if it's honest.
I don't even know if it's truthful.
The truth of it all comes on the moment, organically, and if you get five great moments of great, organic stuff in your storytelling, in your film, your film, audiences will get it.
So I'm looking for those moments, and I'm standing there and saying, "I don't know what to say."
So, ultimately, everybody's looking at you, 200 people at seven in the morning who got there at quarter to seven, and you arrived at seven, and everybody's saying, "Hey. What's the first thing? What's going to happen?"
And you put yourself into a state of panic where you don't know, and so you don't know.
And so, because you don't know, you're praying to the universe because you're praying to the universe that something -- I'm going to try and access the universe the way Einstein -- say a prayer -- accessed his equations, the same source. I'm looking for the same source because creativity comes from absolutely the same source that you meditate somewhere outside yourself, outside the universe.
You're looking for something that comes and hits you.
Until that hits you, you're not going to do the first shot.
So what do you do?
So Cate says, "Shekhar, what do you want me to do?"
And I say, "Cate, what do you want to do?" (Laughter) "You're a great actor, and I like to give to my actors -- why don't you show me what you want to do?"
(Laughter) What am I doing? I'm trying to buy time.
I'm trying to buy time.
So the first thing about storytelling that I learned, and I follow all the time is: Panic.
Panic is the great access of creativity because that's the only way to get rid of your mind.
Get rid of your mind.
Get out of it, get it out.
And let's go to the universe because there's something out there that is more truthful than your mind, that is more truthful than your universe.
[unclear], you said that yesterday. I'm just repeating it because that's what I follow constantly to find the shunyata somewhere, the emptiness.
Out of the emptiness comes a moment of creativity.
So that's what I do.
When I was a kid -- I was about eight years old.
You remember how India was. There was no pollution.
In Delhi, we used to live -- we used to call it a chhat or the khota.
Khota's now become a bad word. It means their terrace -- and we used to sleep out at night.
At school I was being just taught about physics, and I was told that if there is something that exists, then it is measurable.
If it is not measurable, it does not exist.
And at night I would lie out, looking at the unpolluted sky, as Delhi used to be at that time when I was a kid, and I used to stare at the universe and say, "How far does this universe go?"
My father was a doctor.
And I would think, "Daddy, how far does the universe go?"
And he said, "Son, it goes on forever."
So I said, "Please measure forever because in school they're teaching me that if I cannot measure it, it does not exist.
It doesn't come into my frame of reference."
So, how far does eternity go?
What does forever mean?
And I would lie there crying at night because my imagination could not touch creativity.
So what did I do?
At that time, at the tender age of seven, I created a story.
What was my story?
And I don't know why, but I remember the story.
There was a woodcutter who's about to take his ax and chop a piece of wood, and the whole galaxy is one atom of that ax.
And when that ax hits that piece of wood, that's when everything will destroy and the Big Bang will happen again.
But all before that there was a woodcutter.
And then when I would run out of that story, I would imagine that woodcutter's universe is one atom in the ax of another woodcutter.
So every time, I could tell my story again and again and get over this problem, and so I got over the problem.
How did I do it? Tell a story.
So what is a story?
A story is our -- all of us -- we are the stories we tell ourselves.
In this universe, and this existence, where we live with this duality of whether we exist or not and who are we, the stories we tell ourselves are the stories that define the potentialities of our existence.
We are the stories we tell ourselves.
So that's as wide as we look at stories.
A story is the relationship that you develop between who you are, or who you potentially are, and the infinite world, and that's our mythology.
We tell our stories, and a person without a story does not exist.
So Einstein told a story and followed his stories and came up with theories and came up with theories and then came up with his equations.
Alexander had a story that his mother used to tell him, and he went out to conquer the world.
We all, everybody, has a story that they follow.
We tell ourselves stories.
So, I will go further, and I say, "I tell a story, and therefore I exist."
I exist because there are stories, and if there are no stories, we don't exist.
We create stories to define our existence.
If we do not create the stories, we probably go mad.
I don't know; I'm not sure, but that's what I've done all the time.
Now, a film.
A film tells a story.
I often wonder when I make a film -- I'm thinking of making a film of the Buddha -- and I often wonder: If Buddha had all the elements that are given to a director -- if he had music, if he had visuals, if he had a video camera -- would we get Buddhism better?
But that puts some kind of burden on me.
I have to tell a story in a much more elaborate way, but I have the potential.
It's called subtext.
When I first went to Hollywood, they said -- I used to talk about subtext, and my agent came to me, "Would you kindly not talk about subtext?"
And I said, "Why?" He said, "Because nobody is going to give you a film if you talk about subtext.
Just talk about plot and say how wonderful you'll shoot the film, what the visuals will be."
So when I look at a film, here's what we look for: We look for a story on the plot level, then we look for a story on the psychological level, then we look for a story on the political level, then we look at a story on a mythological level.
And I look for stories on each level.
Now, it is not necessary that these stories agree with each other.
What is wonderful is, at many times, the stories will contradict with each other.
So when I work with Rahman who's a great musician, I often tell him, "Don't follow what the script already says.
Find that which is not.
Find the truth for yourself, and when you find the truth for yourself, there will be a truth in it, but it may contradict the plot, but don't worry about it."
So, the sequel to "Elizabeth," "Golden Age."
When I made the sequel to "Elizabeth," here was a story that the writer was telling: A woman who was threatened by Philip II and was going to war, and was going to war, fell in love with Walter Raleigh.
Because she fell in love with Walter Raleigh, she was giving up the reasons she was a queen, and then Walter Raleigh fell in love with her lady in waiting, and she had to decide whether she was a queen going to war or she wanted...
Here's the story I was telling: The gods up there, there were two people.
There was Philip II, who was divine because he was always praying, and there was Elizabeth, who was divine, but not quite divine because she thought she was divine, but the blood of being mortal flowed in her.
But the divine one was unjust, so the gods said, "OK, what we need to do is help the just one."
And so they helped the just one.
And what they did was, they sent Walter Raleigh down to physically separate her mortal self from her spirit self.
And the mortal self was the girl that Walter Raleigh was sent, and gradually he separated her so she was free to be divine.
And the two divine people fought, and the gods were on the side of divinity.
Of course, all the British press got really upset.
They said, "We won the Armada."
But I said, "But the storm won the Armada.
The gods sent the storm."
So what was I doing?
I was trying to find a mythic reason to make the film.
Of course, when I asked Cate Blanchett, I said, "What's the film about?"
She said, "The film's about a woman coming to terms with growing older."
Psychological.
The writer said "It's about history, plot."
I said "It's about mythology, the gods."
So let me show you a film -- a piece from that film -- and how a camera also -- so this is a scene, where in my mind, she was at the depths of mortality.
She was discovering what mortality actually means, and if she is at the depths of mortality, what really happens.
And she's recognizing the dangers of mortality and why she should break away from mortality.
Remember, in the film, to me, both her and her lady in waiting were parts of the same body, one the mortal self and one the spirit self.
So can we have that second?
(Music) Elizabeth: Bess?
Bess?
Bess Throckmorton?
Bess: Here, my lady.
Elizabeth: Tell me, is it true?
Are you with child?
Are you with child?
Bess: Yes, my lady.
Elizabeth: Traitorous.
You dare to keep secrets from me?
You ask my permission before you rut, before you breed.
My bitches wear my collars.
Do you hear me? Do you hear me?
Walsingham: Majesty. Please, dignity. Mercy.
Elizabeth: This is no time for mercy, Walsingham.
You go to your traitor brother and leave me to my business.
Is it his?
Tell me. Say it. Is the child his? Is it his?
Bess: Yes.
My lady, it is my husband's child.
Elizabeth: Bitch! (Cries) Raleigh: Majesty.
This is not the queen I love and serve.
Elizabeth: This man has seduced a ward of the queen, and she has married without royal consent.
These offenses are punishable by law. Arrest him.
Go.
You no longer have the queen's protection.
Bess: As you wish, Majesty.
Elizabeth: Get out! Get out! Get out!
Get out.
(Music) Shekhar Kapur: So, what am I trying to do here?
Elizabeth has realized, and she's coming face-to-face with her own sense of jealousy, her own sense of mortality.
What am I doing with the architecture?
The architecture is telling a story.
The architecture is telling a story about how, even though she's the most powerful woman in the world at that time, there is the other, the architecture's bigger.
The stone is bigger than her because stone is an organic.
It'll survive her.
So it's telling you, to me, stone is part of her destiny.
Not only that, why is the camera looking down?
The camera's looking down at her because she's in the well.
She's in the absolute well of her own sense of being mortal.
That's where she has to pull herself out from the depths of mortality, come in, release her spirit.
And that's the moment where, in my mind, both Elizabeth and Bess are the same person.
But that's the moment she's surgically removing herself from that.
So the film is operating on many many levels in that scene.
And how we tell stories visually, with music, with actors, and at each level it's a different sense and sometimes contradictory to each other.
So how do I start all this?
What's the process of telling a story?
About ten years ago, I heard this little thing from a politician, not a politician that was very well respected in India.
And he said that these people in the cities, in one flush, expend as much water as you people in the rural areas don't get for your family for two days.
That struck a chord, and I said, "That's true."
I went to see a friend of mine, and he made me wait in his apartment in Malabar Hill on the twentieth floor, which is a really, really upmarket area in Mumbai.
And he was having a shower for 20 minutes.
I got bored and left, and as I drove out, I drove past the slums of Bombay, as you always do, and I saw lines and lines in the hot midday sun of women and children with buckets waiting for a tanker to come and give them water.
And an idea started to develop.
So how does that become a story?
I suddenly realized that we are heading towards disaster.
So my next film is called "Paani" which means water.
And now, out of the mythology of that, I'm starting to create a world.
What kind of world do I create, and where does the idea, the design of that come?
So, in my mind, in the future, they started to build flyovers.
You understand flyovers? Yeah?
They started to build flyovers to get from A to B faster, but they effectively went from one area of relative wealth to another area of relative wealth.
And then what they did was they created a city above the flyovers.
And the rich people moved to the upper city and left the poorer people in the lower cities, about 10 to 12 percent of the people have moved to the upper city.
Now, where does this upper city and lower city come?
There's a mythology in India about -- where they say, and I'll say it in Hindi, [Hindi] Right. What does that mean?
It says that the rich are always sitting on the shoulders and survive on the shoulders of the poor.
So, from that mythology, the upper city and lower city come.
So the design has a story.
And now, what happens is that the people of the upper city, they suck up all the water.
Remember the word I said, suck up.
They suck up all the water, keep to themselves, and they drip feed the lower city.
And if there's any revolution, they cut off the water.
And, because democracy still exists, there's a democratic way in which you say "Well, if you give us what [we want], we'll give you water."
So, okay my time is up.
But I can go on about telling you how we evolve stories, and how stories effectively are who we are and how these get translated into the particular discipline that I am in, which is film.
But ultimately, what is a story? It's a contradiction.
Everything's a contradiction.
The universe is a contradiction.
And all of us are constantly looking for harmony.
When you get up, the night and day is a contradiction.
But you get up at 4 a.m.
That first blush of blue is where the night and day are trying to find harmony with each other.
Harmony is the notes that Mozart didn't give you, but somehow the contradiction of his notes suggest that.
All contradictions of his notes suggest the harmony.
It's the effect of looking for harmony in the contradiction that exists in a poet's mind, a contradiction that exists in a storyteller's mind.
In a storyteller's mind, it's a contradiction of moralities.
In a poet's mind, it's a conflict of words, in the universe's mind, between day and night.
In the mind of a man and a woman, we're looking constantly at the contradiction between male and female, we're looking for harmony within each other.
The whole idea of contradiction, but the acceptance of contradiction is the telling of a story, not the resolution.
The problem with a lot of the storytelling in Hollywood and many films, and as [unclear] was saying in his, that we try to resolve the contradiction.
Harmony is not resolution.
Harmony is the suggestion of a thing that is much larger than resolution.
Harmony is the suggestion of something that is embracing and universal and of eternity and of the moment.
Resolution is something that is far more limited.
It is finite; harmony is infinite.
So that storytelling, like all other contradictions in the universe, is looking for harmony and infinity in moral resolutions, resolving one, but letting another go, letting another go and creating a question that is really important.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to speak today about the relationship between science and human values.
Now, it's generally understood that questions of morality -- questions of good and evil and right and wrong -- are questions about which science officially has no opinion.
It's thought that science can help us get what we value, but it can never tell us what we ought to value.
And, consequently, most people -- I think most people probably here -- think that science will never answer the most important questions in human life: questions like, "What is worth living for?"
"What is worth dying for?"
"What constitutes a good life?"
So, I'm going to argue that this is an illusion -- that the separation between science and human values is an illusion -- and actually quite a dangerous one at this point in human history.
Now, it's often said that science cannot give us a foundation for morality and human values, because science deals with facts, and facts and values seem to belong to different spheres.
It's often thought that there's no description of the way the world is that can tell us how the world ought to be.
But I think this is quite clearly untrue.
Values are a certain kind of fact.
They are facts about the well-being of conscious creatures.
Why is it that we don't have ethical obligations toward rocks?
Why don't we feel compassion for rocks?
It's because we don't think rocks can suffer. And if we're more concerned about our fellow primates than we are about insects, as indeed we are, it's because we think they're exposed to a greater range of potential happiness and suffering.
Now, the crucial thing to notice here is that this is a factual claim: This is something that we could be right or wrong about. And if we have misconstrued the relationship between biological complexity and the possibilities of experience well then we could be wrong about the inner lives of insects.
And there's no notion, no version of human morality and human values that I've ever come across that is not at some point reducible to a concern about conscious experience and its possible changes.
Even if you get your values from religion, even if you think that good and evil ultimately relate to conditions after death -- either to an eternity of happiness with God or an eternity of suffering in hell -- you are still concerned about consciousness and its changes.
And to say that such changes can persist after death is itself a factual claim, which, of course, may or may not be true.
Now, to speak about the conditions of well-being in this life, for human beings, we know that there is a continuum of such facts.
We know that it's possible to live in a failed state, where everything that can go wrong does go wrong -- where mothers cannot feed their children, where strangers cannot find the basis for peaceful collaboration, where people are murdered indiscriminately.
And we know that it's possible to move along this continuum towards something quite a bit more idyllic, to a place where a conference like this is even conceivable.
And we know -- we know -- that there are right and wrong answers to how to move in this space.
Would adding cholera to the water be a good idea?
Probably not.
Would it be a good idea for everyone to believe in the evil eye, so that when bad things happened to them they immediately blame their neighbors? Probably not.
There are truths to be known about how human communities flourish, whether or not we understand these truths.
And morality relates to these truths.
So, in talking about values we are talking about facts.
Now, of course our situation in the world can be understood at many levels -- from the level of the genome on up to the level of economic systems and political arrangements.
But if we're going to talk about human well-being we are, of necessity, talking about the human brain.
Because we know that our experience of the world and of ourselves within it is realized in the brain -- whatever happens after death.
Even if the suicide bomber does get 72 virgins in the afterlife, in this life, his personality -- his rather unfortunate personality -- is the product of his brain.
So the contributions of culture -- if culture changes us, as indeed it does, it changes us by changing our brains.
And so therefore whatever cultural variation there is in how human beings flourish can, at least in principle, be understood in the context of a maturing science of the mind -- neuroscience, psychology, etc.
So, what I'm arguing is that value's reduced to facts -- to facts about the conscious experience of conscious beings.
And we can therefore visualize a space of possible changes in the experience of these beings.
And I think of this as kind of a moral landscape, with peaks and valleys that correspond to differences in the well-being of conscious creatures, both personal and collective.
And one thing to notice is that perhaps there are states of human well-being that we rarely access, that few people access.
And these await our discovery.
Perhaps some of these states can be appropriately called mystical or spiritual.
Perhaps there are other states that we can't access because of how our minds are structured but other minds possibly could access them.
Now, let me be clear about what I'm not saying. I'm not saying that science is guaranteed to map this space, or that we will have scientific answers to every conceivable moral question.
I don't think, for instance, that you will one day consult a supercomputer to learn whether you should have a second child, or whether we should bomb Iran's nuclear facilities, or whether you can deduct the full cost of TED as a business expense.
(Laughter) But if questions affect human well-being then they do have answers, whether or not we can find them.
And just admitting this -- just admitting that there are right and wrong answers to the question of how humans flourish -- will change the way we talk about morality, and will change our expectations of human cooperation in the future.
For instance, there are 21 states in our country where corporal punishment in the classroom is legal, where it is legal for a teacher to beat a child with a wooden board, hard, and raising large bruises and blisters and even breaking the skin.
And hundreds of thousands of children, incidentally, are subjected to this every year.
The locations of these enlightened districts, I think, will fail to surprise you.
We're not talking about Connecticut.
And the rationale for this behavior is explicitly religious.
The creator of the universe himself has told us not to spare the rod, lest we spoil the child -- this is in Proverbs 13 and 20, and I believe, 23.
But we can ask the obvious question: Is it a good idea, generally speaking, to subject children to pain and violence and public humiliation as a way of encouraging healthy emotional development and good behavior?
(Laughter) Is there any doubt that this question has an answer, and that it matters?
Now, many of you might worry that the notion of well-being is truly undefined, and seemingly perpetually open to be re-construed.
And so, how therefore can there be an objective notion of well-being?
Well, consider by analogy, the concept of physical health.
The concept of physical health is undefined.
As we just heard from Michael Specter, it has changed over the years.
When this statue was carved the average life expectancy was probably 30.
It's now around 80 in the developed world.
There may come a time when we meddle with our genomes in such a way that not being able to run a marathon at age 200 will be considered a profound disability.
People will send you donations when you're in that condition.
(Laughter) Notice that the fact that the concept of health is open, genuinely open for revision, does not make it vacuous.
The distinction between a healthy person and a dead one is about as clear and consequential as any we make in science.
Another thing to notice is there may be many peaks on the moral landscape: There may be equivalent ways to thrive; there may be equivalent ways to organize a human society so as to maximize human flourishing.
Now, why wouldn't this undermine an objective morality?
Well think of how we talk about food: I would never be tempted to argue to you that there must be one right food to eat.
There is clearly a range of materials that constitute healthy food.
But there's nevertheless a clear distinction between food and poison.
The fact that there are many right answers to the question, "What is food?"
does not tempt us to say that there are no truths to be known about human nutrition.
Many people worry that a universal morality would require moral precepts that admit of no exceptions.
So, for instance, if it's really wrong to lie, it must always be wrong to lie, and if you can find an exception, well then there's no such thing as moral truth.
Why would we think this?
Consider, by analogy, the game of chess.
Now, if you're going to play good chess, a principle like, "Don't lose your Queen," is very good to follow.
But it clearly admits some exceptions.
There are moments when losing your Queen is a brilliant thing to do.
There are moments when it is the only good thing you can do.
And yet, chess is a domain of perfect objectivity.
The fact that there are exceptions here does not change that at all.
Now, this brings us to the sorts of moves that people are apt to make in the moral sphere.
Consider the great problem of women's bodies: What to do about them?
Well this is one thing you can do about them: You can cover them up.
Now, it is the position, generally speaking, of our intellectual community that while we may not like this, we might think of this as "wrong" in Boston or Palo Alto, who are we to say that the proud denizens of an ancient culture are wrong to force their wives and daughters to live in cloth bags?
And who are we to say, even, that they're wrong to beat them with lengths of steel cable, or throw battery acid in their faces if they decline the privilege of being smothered in this way?
Well, who are we not to say this?
Who are we to pretend that we know so little about human well-being that we have to be non-judgmental about a practice like this?
I'm not talking about voluntary wearing of a veil -- women should be able to wear whatever they want, as far as I'm concerned.
But what does voluntary mean in a community where, when a girl gets raped, her father's first impulse, rather often, is to murder her out of shame?
Just let that fact detonate in your brain for a minute: Your daughter gets raped, and what you want to do is kill her.
What are the chances that represents a peak of human flourishing?
Now, to say this is not to say that we have got the perfect solution in our own society.
For instance, this is what it's like to go to a newsstand almost anywhere in the civilized world.
Now, granted, for many men it may require a degree in philosophy to see something wrong with these images.
(Laughter) But if we are in a reflective mood, we can ask, "Is this the perfect expression of psychological balance with respect to variables like youth and beauty and women's bodies?"
I mean, is this the optimal environment in which to raise our children?
Probably not. OK, so perhaps there's some place on the spectrum between these two extremes that represents a place of better balance.
(Applause) Perhaps there are many such places -- again, given other changes in human culture there may be many peaks on the moral landscape.
But the thing to notice is that there will be many more ways not to be on a peak.
Now the irony, from my perspective, is that the only people who seem to generally agree with me and who think that there are right and wrong answers to moral questions are religious demagogues of one form or another.
And of course they think they have right answers to moral questions because they got these answers from a voice in a whirlwind, not because they made an intelligent analysis of the causes and condition of human and animal well-being.
In fact, the endurance of religion as a lens through which most people view moral questions has separated most moral talk from real questions of human and animal suffering.
This is why we spend our time talking about things like gay marriage and not about genocide or nuclear proliferation or poverty or any other hugely consequential issue.
But the demagogues are right about one thing: We need a universal conception of human values.
Now, what stands in the way of this?
Well, one thing to notice is that we do something different when talking about morality -- especially secular, academic, scientist types.
When talking about morality we value differences of opinion in a way that we don't in any other area of our lives.
So, for instance the Dalai Lama gets up every morning meditating on compassion, and he thinks that helping other human beings is an integral component of human happiness.
On the other hand, we have someone like Ted Bundy; Ted Bundy was very fond of abducting and raping and torturing and killing young women.
So, we appear to have a genuine difference of opinion about how to profitably use one's time.
(Laughter) Most Western intellectuals look at this situation and say, "Well, there's nothing for the Dalai Lama to be really right about -- really right about -- or for Ted Bundy to be really wrong about that admits of a real argument that potentially falls within the purview of science.
He likes chocolate, he likes vanilla.
There's nothing that one should be able to say to the other that should persuade the other."
Notice that we don't do this in science.
On the left you have Edward Witten.
He's a string theorist.
If you ask the smartest physicists around who is the smartest physicist around, in my experience half of them will say Ed Witten.
The other half will tell you they don't like the question.
(Laughter) So, what would happen if I showed up at a physics conference and said,"String theory is bogus.
It doesn't resonate with me. It's not how I chose to view the universe at a small scale.
I'm not a fan."
(Laughter) Well, nothing would happen because I'm not a physicist; I don't understand string theory.
I'm the Ted Bundy of string theory.
(Laughter) I wouldn't want to belong to any string theory club that would have me as a member.
But this is just the point.
Whenever we are talking about facts certain opinions must be excluded.
That is what it is to have a domain of expertise.
That is what it is for knowledge to count.
How have we convinced ourselves that in the moral sphere there is no such thing as moral expertise, or moral talent, or moral genius even?
How have we convinced ourselves that every opinion has to count?
How have we convinced ourselves that every culture has a point of view on these subjects worth considering?
Does the Taliban have a point of view on physics that is worth considering? No.
(Laughter) How is their ignorance any less obvious on the subject of human well-being?
(Applause) So, this, I think, is what the world needs now.
It needs people like ourselves to admit that there are right and wrong answers to questions of human flourishing, and morality relates to that domain of facts.
It is possible for individuals, and even for whole cultures, to care about the wrong things, which is to say that it's possible for them to have beliefs and desires that reliably lead to needless human suffering.
Just admitting this will transform our discourse about morality.
We live in a world in which the boundaries between nations mean less and less, and they will one day mean nothing.
We live in a world filled with destructive technology, and this technology cannot be uninvented; it will always be easier to break things than to fix them.
It seems to me, therefore, patently obvious that we can no more respect and tolerate vast differences in notions of human well-being than we can respect or tolerate vast differences in the notions about how disease spreads, or in the safety standards of buildings and airplanes.
We simply must converge on the answers we give to the most important questions in human life.
And to do that, we have to admit that these questions have answers.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So, some combustible material there.
Whether in this audience or people elsewhere in the world, hearing some of this, may well be doing the screaming-with-rage thing, after as well, some of them.
Language seems to be really important here.
When you're talking about the veil, you're talking about women dressed in cloth bags.
I've lived in the Muslim world, spoken with a lot of Muslim women.
And some of them would say something else. They would say, "No, you know, this is a celebration of female specialness, it helps build that and it's a result of the fact that" -- and this is arguably a sophisticated psychological view -- "that male lust is not to be trusted."
I mean, can you engage in a conversation with that kind of woman without seeming kind of cultural imperialist?
Sam Harris: Yeah, well I think I tried to broach this in a sentence, watching the clock ticking, but the question is: What is voluntary in a context where men have certain expectations, and you're guaranteed to be treated in a certain way if you don't veil yourself?
And so, if anyone in this room wanted to wear a veil, or a very funny hat, or tattoo their face -- I think we should be free to voluntarily do whatever we want, but we have to be honest about the constraints that these women are placed under.
And so I think we shouldn't be so eager to always take their word for it, especially when it's 120 degrees out and you're wearing a full burqa.
CA: A lot of people want to believe in this concept of moral progress.
But can you reconcile that?
I think I understood you to say that you could reconcile that with a world that doesn't become one dimensional, where we all have to think the same.
Paint your picture of what rolling the clock 50 years forward, 100 years forward, how you would like to think of the world, balancing moral progress with richness.
SH: Well, I think once you admit that we are on the path toward understanding our minds at the level of the brain in some important detail, then you have to admit that we are going to understand all of the positive and negative qualities of ourselves in much greater detail.
So, we're going to understand positive social emotion like empathy and compassion, and we're going to understand the factors that encourage it -- whether they're genetic, whether they're how people talk to one another, whether they're economic systems, and insofar as we begin to shine light on that we are inevitably going to converge on that fact space.
So, everything is not going to be up for grabs.
It's not going to be like veiling my daughter from birth is just as good as teaching her to be confident and well-educated in the context of men who do desire women.
I mean I don't think we need an NSF grant to know that compulsory veiling is a bad idea -- but at a certain point we're going to be able to scan the brains of everyone involved and actually interrogate them.
Do people love their daughters just as much in these systems?
And I think there are clearly right answers to that.
CA: And if the results come out that actually they do, are you prepared to shift your instinctive current judgment on some of these issues?
SH: Well yeah, modulo one obvious fact, that you can love someone in the context of a truly delusional belief system.
So, you can say like, "Because I knew my gay son was going to go to hell if he found a boyfriend, I chopped his head off. And that was the most compassionate thing I could do."
If you get all those parts aligned, yes I think you could probably be feeling the emotion of love.
But again, then we have to talk about well-being in a larger context.
It's all of us in this together, not one man feeling ecstasy and then blowing himself up on a bus.
CA: Sam, this is a conversation I would actually love to continue for hours.
We don't have that, but maybe another time. Thank you for coming to TED.
SH: Really an honor. Thank you.
(Applause)
Illegal wildlife trade in Brazil is one of the major threats against our fauna, especially birds, and mainly to supply the pet market with thousands of animals taken from nature every month, and transported far from their origins, to be sold mainly in Rio de Janeiro and So Paulo.
It is estimated that all kinds of illegal wildlife trade in Brazil withdraw from nature almost 38 million animals every year, a business worth almost two billion dollars.
The police intercepts these huge cargos with live animals, intended to supply the pet market, or they seize the animals directly from the people's houses, and this is how we end up, every month, with thousands of seized animals.
And for us to understand what happens with them, we're going to follow Brad.
In the eyes of many people, after the animals are seized, they say, "Yay, justice has been served.
The good guys arrived, took the cute, mistreated animals from the hands of the evil traffickers, and everyone lived happily ever after."
But did they? Actually, no, and this is where many of our problems begin.
Because we have to figure out what to do with all these animals.
In Brazil, they are usually first sent to governmental triage facilities, in which most of the cases, the conditions are as bad as with the traffickers.
In 2002, these centers received 45,000 animals, of which 37,000 were birds.
And the police estimates that we seize only five percent of what's being trafficked.
Some lucky ones -- and among them, Brad -- go to serious rehabilitation centers after that.
And in these places they are cared for.
They train their flying, they learn how to recognize the food they will find in nature, and they are able to socialize with others from the same species.
(Laughter) But then what?
The Brazil Ornithological Society -- so now we're talking only birds -- claims that we have too little knowledge about the species in nature.
Therefore, it would be too risky to release these animals, both for the released and for the natural populations.
They also claim that we spend too many resources in their rehabilitation.
Following this argument, they suggest that all the birds seized from non-threatened species should be euthanized.
However, this would mean having killed 26,267 birds, only in the state of So Paulo, only in 2006.
But, some researchers, myself included -- some NGOs and some people from the Brazilian government -- believe there is an alternative.
We think that if and when the animals meet certain criteria concerning their health, behavior, inferred origin and whatever we know about the natural populations, then technically responsible releases are possible, both for the well-being of the individual, and for the conservation of the species and their ecosystems, because we will be returning genes for these populations -- which could be important for them in facing environmental challenges -- and also we could be returning potential seed dispersers, predators, preys, etc.
All of these were released by us.
On the top, the turtles are just enjoying freedom.
(Laughter) On the middle, this guy nested a couple of weeks after the release.
And on the bottom, my personal favorite, the little male over there, four hours after his release he was together with a wild female.
So, this is not new, people have been doing this around the world.
But it's still a big issue in Brazil.
We believe we have performed responsible releases.
We've registered released animals mating in nature and having chicks.
So, these genes are indeed going back to the populations.
However this is still a minority for the very lack of knowledge.
So, I say, "Let's study more, let's shed light on this issue, let's do whatever we can."
I'm devoting my career to that.
And I'm here to urge each and every one of you to do whatever is in your reach: Talk to your neighbor, teach your children, make sure your pet is from a legal breeder.
We need to act, and act now, before these ones are the only ones left.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, basically we have public leaders, public officials who are out of control; they are writing bills that are unintelligible, and out of these bills are going to come maybe 40,000 pages of regulations, total complexity, which has a dramatically negative impact on our life.
If you're a veteran coming back from Iraq or Vietnam you face a blizzard of paperwork to get your benefits; if you're trying to get a small business loan, you face a blizzard of paperwork.
What are we going to do about it? I define simplicity as a means to achieving clarity, transparency and empathy, building humanity into communications.
I've been simplifying things for 30 years.
I come out of the advertising and design business.
My focus is understanding you people, and how you interact with the government to get your benefits, how you interact with corporations to decide whom you're going to do business with, and how you view brands.
So, very quickly, when President Obama said, "I don't see why we can't have a one-page, plain English consumer credit agreement."
So, I locked myself in a room, figured out the content, organized the document, and wrote it in plain English.
I've had this checked by the two top consumer credit lawyers in the country.
This is a real thing.
Now, I went one step further and said, "Why do we have to stick with the stodgy lawyers and just have a paper document? Let's go online."
And many people might need help in computation.
Working with the Harvard Business School, you'll see this example when you talk about minimum payment: If you spent 62 dollars for a meal, the longer you take to pay out that loan, you see, over a period of time using the minimum payment it's 99 dollars and 17 cents.
How about that? Do you think your bank is going to show that to people?
But it's going to work. It's more effective than just computational aids.
And what about terms like "over the limit"?
Perhaps a stealth thing.
Define it in context. Tell people what it means.
When you put it in plain English, you almost force the institution to give the people a way, a default out of that, and not put themselves at risk.
Plain English is about changing the content.
And one of the things I'm most proud of is this agreement for IBM.
It's a grid, it's a calendar.
At such and such a date, IBM has responsibilities, you have responsibilities.
Received very favorably by business.
And there is some good news to report today.
Each year, one in 10 taxpayers receives a notice from the IRS.
There are 200 million letters that go out.
Running through this typical letter that they had, I ran it through my simplicity lab, it's pretty unintelligible.
All the parts of the document in red are not intelligible.
We looked at doing over 1,000 letters that cover 70 percent of their transactions in plain English.
They have been tested in the laboratory.
When I run it through my lab, this heat-mapping shows everything is intelligible.
And the IRS has introduced the program.
(Applause) There are a couple of things going on right now that I want to bring to your attention.
There is a lot of discussion now about a consumer financial protection agency, how to mandate simplicity.
We see all this complexity.
It's incumbent upon us, and this organization, I believe, to make clarity, transparency and empathy a national priority.
There is no way that we should allow government to communicate the way they communicate.
There is no way we should do business with companies that have agreements with stealth provisions and that are unintelligible.
So, how are we going to change the world?
Make clarity, transparency and simplicity a national priority.
I thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk about 4.6 billion years of history in 18 minutes.
That's 300 million years per minute.
Let's start with the first photograph NASA obtained of planet Mars.
This is fly-by, Mariner IV.
It was taken in 1965.
When this picture appeared, that well-known scientific journal, The New York Times, wrote in its editorial, "Mars is uninteresting.
It's a dead world. NASA should not spend any time or effort studying Mars anymore."
Fortunately, our leaders in Washington at NASA headquarters knew better and we began a very extensive study of the red planet.
One of the key questions in all of science, "Is there life outside of Earth?"
I believe that Mars is the most likely target for life outside the Earth.
I'm going to show you in a few minutes some amazing measurements that suggest there may be life on Mars.
But let me start with a Viking photograph.
This is a composite taken by Viking in 1976.
Viking was developed and managed at the NASA Langley Research Center.
We sent two orbiters and two landers in the summer of 1976.
We had four spacecraft, two around Mars, two on the surface -- an amazing accomplishment.
This is the first photograph taken from the surface of any planet.
This is a Viking Lander photograph of the surface of Mars.
And yes, the red planet is red.
Mars is half the size of the Earth, but because two-thirds of the Earth is covered by water, the land area on Mars is comparable to the land area on Earth.
So, Mars is a pretty big place even though it's half the size.
We have obtained topographic measurements of the surface of Mars. We understand the elevation differences.
We know a lot about Mars.
Mars has the largest volcano in the solar system, Olympus Mons.
Mars has the Grand Canyon of the solar system, Valles Marineris.
Very, very interesting planet.
Mars has the largest impact crater in the solar system, Hellas Basin.
This is 2,000 miles across.
If you happened to be on Mars when this impactor hit, it was a really bad day on Mars.
(Laughter) This is Olympus Mons.
This is bigger than the state of Arizona.
Volcanoes are important, because volcanoes produce atmospheres and they produce oceans.
We're looking at Valles Marineris, the largest canyon in the solar system, superimposed on a map of the United States, 3,000 miles across.
One of the most intriguing features about Mars, the National Academy of Science says one of the 10 major mysteries of the space age, is why certain areas of Mars are so highly magnetized.
We call this crustal magnetism.
There are regions on Mars, where, for some reason -- we don't understand why at this point -- the surface is very, very highly magnetized.
Is there water on Mars?
The answer is no, there is no liquid water on the surface of Mars today.
But there is intriguing evidence that suggests that the early history of Mars there may have been rivers and fast flowing water.
Today Mars is very very dry.
We believe there's some water in the polar caps, there are polar caps of North Pole and South Pole.
Here are some recent images.
This is from Spirit and Opportunity.
These images that show at one time, there was very fast flowing water on the surface of Mars.
Why is water important? Water is important because if you want life you have to have water.
Water is the key ingredient in the evolution, the origin of life on a planet.
Here is some picture of Antarctica and a picture of Olympus Mons, very similar features, glaciers.
So, this is frozen water.
This is ice water on Mars.
This is my favorite picture. This was just taken a few weeks ago.
It has not been seen publicly.
This is European space agency Mars Express, image of a crater on Mars and in the middle of the crater we have liquid water, we have ice.
Very intriguing photograph.
We now believe that in the early history of Mars, which is 4.6 billion years ago, 4.6 billion years ago, Mars was very Earth-like.
Mars had rivers, Mars had lakes, but more important Mars had planetary-scale oceans.
We believe that the oceans were in the northern hemisphere, and this area in blue, which shows a depression of about four miles, was the ancient ocean area on the surface of Mars.
Where did the ocean's worth of water on Mars go?
Well, we have an idea.
This is a measurement we obtained a few years ago from a Mars-orbiting satellite called Odyssey.
Sub-surface water on Mars, frozen in the form of ice.
And this shows the percent. If it's a blueish color, it means 16 percent by weight.
Sixteen percent, by weight, of the interior contains frozen water, or ice.
So, there is a lot of water below the surface.
The most intriguing and puzzling measurement, in my opinion, we've obtained of Mars, was released earlier this year in the magazine Science.
And what we're looking at is the presence of the gas methane, CH4, in the atmosphere of Mars.
And you can see there are three distinct regions of methane.
Why is methane important?
Because on Earth, almost all -- 99.9 percent -- of the methane is produced by living systems, not little green men, but microscopic life below the surface or at the surface.
We now have evidence that methane is in the atmosphere of Mars, a gas that, on Earth, is biogenic in origin, produced by living systems.
These are the three plumes: A, B1, B2.
And this is the terrain it appears over, and we know from geological studies that these regions are the oldest regions on Mars.
In fact, the Earth and Mars are both 4.6 billion years old.
The oldest rock on Earth is only 3.6 billion.
The reason there is a billion-year gap in our geological understanding is because of plate tectonics, The crust of the Earth has been recycled.
We have no geological record prior for the first billion years.
That record exists on Mars.
And this terrain that we're looking at dates back to 4.6 billion years when Earth and Mars were formed.
It was a Tuesday.
(Laughter) This is a map that shows where we've put our spacecraft on the surface of Mars.
Here is Viking I, Viking II.
This is Opportunity. This is Spirit.
This is Mars Pathfinder. This is Phoenix, we just put two years ago.
Notice all of our rovers and all of our landers have gone to the northern hemisphere.
That's because the northern hemisphere is the region of the ancient ocean basin.
There aren't many craters.
And that's because the water protected the basin from being impacted by asteroids and meteorites.
But look in the southern hemisphere.
In the southern hemisphere there are impact craters, there are volcanic craters.
Here's Hellas Basin, a very very different place, geologically.
Look where the methane is, the methane is in a very rough terrain area.
What is the best way to unravel the mysteries on Mars that exist?
We asked this question 10 years ago.
We invited 10 of the top Mars scientists to the Langley Research Center for two days.
We addressed on the board the major questions that have not been answered.
And we spent two days deciding how to best answer this question.
And the result of our meeting was a robotic rocket-powered airplane we call ARES.
It's an Aerial Regional-scale Environmental Surveyor.
There's a model of ARES here.
This is a 20-percent scale model.
This airplane was designed at the Langley Research Center.
If any place in the world can build an airplane to fly on Mars, it's the Langley Research Center, for almost 100 years a leading center of aeronautics in the world.
We fly about a mile above the surface.
We cover hundreds of miles, and we fly about 450 miles an hour.
We can do things that rovers can't do and landers can't do: We can fly above mountains, volcanoes, impact craters; we fly over valleys; we can fly over surface magnetism, the polar caps, subsurface water; and we can search for life on Mars.
But, of equal importance, as we fly through the atmosphere of Mars, we transmit that journey, the first flight of an airplane outside of the Earth, we transmit those images back to Earth.
And our goal is to inspire the American public who is paying for this mission through tax dollars.
But more important we will inspire the next generation of scientists, technologists, engineers and mathematicians.
And that's a critical area of national security and economic vitality, to make sure we produce the next generation of scientists, engineers, mathematicians and technologists.
This is what ARES looks like as it flies over Mars.
We preprogram it.
We will fly where the methane is.
We will have instruments aboard the plane that will sample, every three minutes, the atmosphere of Mars.
We will look for methane as well as other gasses produced by living systems.
We will pinpoint where these gases emanate from, because we can measure the gradient where it comes from, and there, we can direct the next mission to land right in that area.
How do we transport an airplane to Mars?
In two words, very carefully.
The problem is we don't fly it to Mars, we put it in a spacecraft and we send it to Mars.
The problem is the spacecraft's largest diameter is nine feet; ARES is 21-foot wingspan, 17 feet long.
How do we get it to Mars?
We fold it, and we transport it in a spacecraft.
And we have it in something called an aeroshell.
This is how we do it.
And we have a little video that describes the sequence.
Video: Seven, six. Green board. Five, four, three, two, one.
Main engine start, and liftoff.
Joel Levine: This is a launch from the Kennedy Space Center in Florida.
This is the spacecraft taking nine months to get to Mars.
It enters the atmosphere of Mars.
A lot of heating, frictional heating. It's going 18 thousand miles an hour.
A parachute opens up to slow it down.
The thermal tiles fall off.
The airplane is exposed to the atmosphere for the first time.
It unfolds.
The rocket engine begins.
We believe that in a one-hour flight we can rewrite the textbook on Mars by making high-resolution measurements of the atmosphere, looking for gases of biogenic origin, looking for gases of volcanic origin, studying the surface, studying the magnetism on the surface, which we don't understand, as well as about a dozen other areas.
Practice makes perfect.
How do we know we can do it?
Because we have tested ARES model, several models in a half a dozen wind tunnels at the NASA Langley Research Center for eight years, under Mars conditions.
And, of equal importance is, we test ARES in the Earth's atmosphere, at 100,000 feet, which is comparable to the density and pressure of the atmosphere on Mars where we'll fly.
Now, 100,000 feet, if you fly cross-country to Los Angeles, you fly 37,000 feet.
We do our tests at 100,000 feet.
And I want to show you one of our tests.
This is a half-scale model.
This is a high-altitude helium balloon.
This is over Tilamook, Oregon.
We put the folded airplane on the balloon -- it took about three hours to get up there -- and then we released it on command at 103,000 feet, and we deploy the airplane and everything works perfectly.
And we've done high-altitude and low-altitude tests, just to perfect this technique.
We're ready to go.
I have a scale model here.
But we have a full-scale model in storage at the NASA Langley Research Center.
We're ready to go. All we need is a check from NASA headquarters (Laughter) to cover the costs.
I'm prepared to donate my honorarium for today's talk for this mission.
There's actually no honorarium for anyone for this thing.
This is the ARES team; we have about 150 scientists, engineers; where we're working with Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Goddard Space Flight Center, Ames Research Center and half a dozen major universities and corporations in developing this.
It's a large effort. It's all at NASA Langley Research Center.
And let me conclude by saying not too far from here, right down the road in Kittyhawk, North Carolina, a little more than 100 years ago history was made when we had the first powered flight of an airplane on Earth.
We are on the verge right now to make the first flight of an airplane outside the Earth's atmosphere.
We are prepared to fly this on Mars, rewrite the textbook about Mars.
If you're interested in more information, we have a website that describes this exciting and intriguing mission, and why we want to do it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One day, Los Angeles Times columnist Steve Lopez was walking along the streets of downtown Los Angeles when he heard beautiful music.
And the source was a man, an African-American man, charming, rugged, homeless, playing a violin that only had two strings.
And I'm telling a story that many of you know, because Steve's columns became the basis for a book, which was turned into a movie, with Robert Downey Jr. acting as Steve Lopez, and Jamie Foxx as Nathaniel Anthony Ayers, the Juilliard-trained double bassist whose promising career was cut short by a tragic affliction with paranoid schizophrenia.
Nathaniel dropped out of Juilliard, he suffered a complete breakdown, and 30 years later he was living homeless on the streets of Skid Row in downtown Los Angeles.
I encourage all of you to read Steve's book or to watch the movie to understand not only the beautiful bond that formed between these two men, but how music helped shape that bond, and ultimately was instrumental -- if you'll pardon the pun -- in helping Nathaniel get off the streets.
I met Mr. Ayers in 2008, two years ago, at Walt Disney Concert Hall.
He had just heard a performance of Beethoven's First and Fourth symphonies, and came backstage and introduced himself.
He was speaking in a very jovial and gregarious way about Yo-Yo Ma and Hillary Clinton and how the Dodgers were never going to make the World Series, all because of the treacherous first violin passage work in the last movement of Beethoven's Fourth Symphony.
And we got talking about music, and I got an email from Steve a few days later saying that Nathaniel was interested in a violin lesson with me.
Now, I should mention that Nathaniel refuses treatment because when he was treated it was with shock therapy and Thorazine and handcuffs, and that scar has stayed with him for his entire life.
But as a result now, he is prone to these schizophrenic episodes, the worst of which can manifest themselves as him exploding and then disappearing for days, wandering the streets of Skid Row, exposed to its horrors, with the torment of his own mind unleashed upon him.
And Nathaniel was in such a state of agitation when we started our first lesson at Walt Disney Concert Hall -- he had a kind of manic glint in his eyes, he was lost.
And he was talking about invisible demons and smoke, and how someone was poisoning him in his sleep.
And I was afraid, not for myself, but I was afraid that I was going to lose him, that he was going to sink into one of his states, and that I would ruin his relationship with the violin if I started talking about scales and arpeggios and other exciting forms of didactic violin pedagogy.
(Laughter) So, I just started playing.
And I played the first movement of the Beethoven Violin Concerto.
And as I played, I understood that there was a profound change occurring in Nathaniel's eyes.
It was as if he was in the grip of some invisible pharmaceutical, a chemical reaction, for which my playing the music was its catalyst.
And Nathaniel's manic rage was transformed into understanding, a quiet curiosity and grace.
And in a miracle, he lifted his own violin and he started playing, by ear, certain snippets of violin concertos which he then asked me to complete -- Mendelssohn, Tchaikovsky, Sibelius.
And we started talking about music, from Bach to Beethoven and Brahms, Bruckner, all the B's, from Bartk, all the way up to Esa-Pekka Salonen.
And I understood that he not only had an encyclopedic knowledge of music, but he related to this music at a personal level.
He spoke about it with the kind of passion and understanding that I share with my colleagues in the Los Angeles Philharmonic.
And through playing music and talking about music, this man had transformed from the paranoid, disturbed man that had just come from walking the streets of downtown Los Angeles to the charming, erudite, brilliant, Juilliard-trained musician.
Music is medicine. Music changes us.
And for Nathaniel, music is sanity.
Because music allows him to take his thoughts and delusions and shape them through his imagination and his creativity, into reality.
And that is an escape from his tormented state.
And I understood that this was the very essence of art.
This was the very reason why we made music, that we take something that exists within all of us at our very fundamental core, our emotions, and through our artistic lens, through our creativity, we're able to shape those emotions into reality.
And the reality of that expression reaches all of us and moves us, inspires and unites us.
And for Nathaniel, music brought him back into a fold of friends.
The redemptive power of music brought him back into a family of musicians that understood him, that recognized his talents and respected him.
And I will always make music with Nathaniel, whether we're at Walt Disney Concert Hall or on Skid Row, because he reminds me why I became a musician.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you. Thanks.
Robert Gupta.
(Applause) Robert Gupta: I'm going to play something that I shamelessly stole from cellists.
So, please forgive me.
(Laughter) (Music) (Applause)
You know for me, the interest in contemporary forms of slavery started with a leaflet that I picked up in London.
It was the early '90s, and I was at a public event.
I saw this leaflet and it said, "There are millions of slaves in the world today."
And I thought, "No way, no way."
And I'm going to admit to hubris.
Because I also, I'm going to admit to you, I also thought, "How can I be like a hot-shot young full professor who teaches human rights and not know this?
So it can't be true."
Well, if you teach, if you worship in the temple of learning, do not mock the gods, because they will take you, fill you with curiosity and desire, and drive you. Drive you with a passion to change things.
I went out and did a lit review, 3,000 articles on the key word "slavery."
Two turned out to be about contemporary -- only two.
All the rest were historical.
They were press pieces and they were full of outrage, they were full of speculation, they were anecdotal -- no solid information.
So, I began to do a research project of my own.
I went to five countries around the world.
I looked at slaves. I met slaveholders, and I looked very deeply into slave-based businesses because this is an economic crime.
People do not enslave people to be mean to them.
They do it to make a profit.
And I've got to tell you, what I found out in the world in four different continents, was depressingly familiar.
Like this: Agricultural workers in Africa, whipped and beaten, showing us how they were beaten in the fields before they escaped from slavery and met up with our film crew.
It was mind-blowing.
And I want to be very clear.
I'm talking about real slavery.
This is not about lousy marriages, this is not about jobs that suck.
This is about people who can not walk away, people who are forced to work without pay, people who are operating 24/7 under a threat of violence and have no pay.
It's real slavery in exactly the same way that slavery would be recognized throughout all of human history.
Now, where is it?
Well, this map in the sort of redder, yellower colors are the places with the highest densities of slavery.
But in fact that kind of bluey color are the countries where we can't find any cases of slavery.
And you might notice that it's only Iceland and Greenland where we can't find any cases of enslavement around the world.
We're also particularly interested and looking very carefully at places where slaves are being used to perpetrate extreme environmental destruction.
Around the world, slaves are used to destroy the environment, cutting down trees in the Amazon; destroying forest areas in West Africa; mining and spreading mercury around in places like Ghana and the Congo; destroying the coastal ecosystems in South Asia.
It's a pretty harrowing linkage between what's happening to our environment and what's happening to our human rights.
Now, how on Earth did we get to a situation like this, where we have 27 million people in slavery in the year 2010?
That's double the number that came out of Africa in the entire transatlantic slave trade.
Well, it builds up with these factors.
They are not causal, they are actually supporting factors.
One we all know about, the population explosion: the world goes from two billion people to almost seven billion people in the last 50 years.
Being numerous does not make you a slave.
Add in the increased vulnerability of very large numbers of people in the developing world, caused by civil wars, ethnic conflicts, kleptocratic governments, disease ... you name it, you know it.
We understand how that works. In some countries all of those things happen at once, like Sierra Leone a few years ago, and push enormous parts ... about a billion people in the world, in fact, as we know, live on the edge, live in situations where they don't have any opportunity and are usually even destitute.
But that doesn't make you a slave either.
What it takes to turn a person who is destitute and vulnerable into a slave, is the absence of the rule of law.
If the rule of law is sound, it protects the poor and it protects the vulnerable.
But if corruption creeps in and people don't have the opportunity to have that protection of the rule of law, then if you can use violence, if you can use violence with impunity, you can reach out and harvest the vulnerable into slavery.
Well, that is precisely what has happened around the world.
Though, for a lot of people, the people who step into slavery today don't usually get kidnapped or knocked over the head.
They come into slavery because someone has asked them this question.
All around the world I've been told an almost identical story.
People say, "I was home, someone came into our village, they stood up in the back of a truck, they said, 'I've got jobs, who needs a job?'" And they did exactly what you or I would do in the same situation.
They said, "That guy looked sketchy. I was suspicious, but my children were hungry.
We needed medicine.
I knew I had to do anything I could to earn some money to support the people I care about."
They climb into the back of the truck. They go off with the person who recruits them.
Ten miles, 100 miles, 1,000 miles later, they find themselves in dirty, dangerous, demeaning work.
They take it for a little while, but when they try to leave, bang!, the hammer comes down, and they discover they're enslaved.
Now, that kind of slavery is, again, pretty much what slavery has been all through human history.
But there is one thing that is particularly remarkable and novel about slavery today, and that is a complete collapse in the price of human beings -- expensive in the past, dirt cheap now.
Even the business programs have started picking up on this.
I just want to share a little clip for you.
Daphne: OK. Llively discussion guaranteed here, as always, as we get macro and talk commodities.
Continuing here in the studio with our guest Michael O'Donohue, head of commodities at Four Continents Capital Management.
And we're also joined by Brent Lawson from Lawson Frisk Securities.
Brent Lawson: Happy to be here.
D: Good to have you with us, Brent.
Now, gentlemen ... Brent, where is your money going this year?
BL: Well Daphne, we've been going short on gas and oil recently and casting our net just a little bit wider.
We really like the human being story a lot.
If you look at a long-term chart, prices are at historical lows and yet global demand for forced labor is still real strong.
So, that's a scenario that we think we should be capitalizing on.
D: Michael, what's your take on the people story? Are you interested?
Michael O'Donoghue: Oh definitely. Non-voluntary labor's greatest advantage as an asset is the endless supply.
We're not about to run out of people. No other commodity has that.
BL: Daphne, if I may draw your attention to one thing.
That is that private equity has been sniffing around, and that tells me that this market is about to explode.
Africans and Indians, as usual, South Americans, and Eastern Europeans in particular are on our buy list.
D: Interesting. Micheal, bottom line, what do you recommend?
MO: We're recommending to our clients a buy and hold strategy.
There's no need to play the market.
There's a lot of vulnerable people out there. It's very exciting.
D: Exciting stuff indeed. Gentlemen, thank you very much.
Kevin Bales: Okay, you figured it out. That's a spoof.
Though I enjoyed watching your jaws drop, drop, drop, until you got it.
MTV Europe worked with us and made that spoof, and they've been slipping it in between music videos without any introduction, which I think is kind of fun.
Here's the reality.
The price of human beings across the last 4,000 years in today's money has averaged about 40,000 dollars.
Capital purchase items.
You can see that the lines cross when the population explodes.
The average price of a human being today, around the world, is about 90 dollars.
They are more expensive in places like North America.
Slaves cost between 3,000 to 8,000 dollars in North America, but I could take you places in India or Nepal where human beings can be acquired for five or 10 dollars.
They key here is that people have ceased to be that capital purchase item and become like Styrofoam cups.
You buy them cheaply, you use them, you crumple them up, and then when you're done with them you just throw them away.
These young boys are in Nepal.
They are basically the transport system on a quarry run by a slaveholder.
There are no roads there, so they carry loads of stone on their backs, often of their own weight, up and down the Himalaya Mountains.
One of their mothers said to us, "You know, we can't survive here, but we can't even seem to die either."
It's a horrible situation.
And if there is anything that makes me feel very positive about this, it's that there are also -- in addition to young men like this who are still enslaved -- there are ex-slaves who are now working to free others.
Or, we say, Frederick Douglass is in the house.
I don't know if you've ever had a daydream about, "Wow. What would it be like to meet Harriet Tubman?
What would it be like to meet Frederick Douglass?"
I've got to say, one of the most exciting parts about my job is that I get to, and I want to introduce you to one of those.
His name is James Kofi Annan. He was a slave child in Ghana enslaved in the fishing industry, and he now, after escape and building a new life, has formed an organization that we work closely with to go back and get people out of slavery.
This is not James, this is one of the kids that he works with.
James Kofi Annan (Video): He was hit with a paddle in the head. And this reminds me of my childhood when I used to work here.
KB: James and our country director in Ghana, Emmanuel Otoo are now receiving regular death threats because the two of them managed to get convictions and imprisonment for three human traffickers for the very first time in Ghana for enslaving people, from the fishing industry, for enslaving children.
Now, everything I've been telling you, I admit, is pretty disheartening.
But there is actually a very positive side to this, and that is this: The 27 million people who are in slavery today, that's a lot of people, but it's also the smallest fraction of the global population to ever be in slavery.
And likewise, the 40 billion dollars that they generate into the global economy each year is the tiniest proportion of the global economy to ever be represented by slave labor.
Slavery, illegal in every country has been pushed to the edges of our global society.
And in a way, without us even noticing, has ended up standing on the precipice of its own extinction, waiting for us to give it a big boot and knock it over. And get rid of it.
And it can be done.
Now, if we do that, if we put the resources and the focus to it, what does it actually cost to get people out of slavery?
Well, first, before I even tell you the cost I've got to be absolutely clear.
We do not buy people out of slavery.
Buying people out of slavery is like paying a burglar to get your television back; it's abetting a crime.
Liberation, however, costs some money.
Liberation, and more importantly all the work that comes after liberation.
It's not an event, it's a process.
It's about helping people to build lives of dignity, stability, economic autonomy, citizenship.
Well, amazingly, in places like India where costs are very low, that family, that three-generation family that you see there who were in hereditary slavery -- so, that granddad there, was born a baby into slavery -- but the total cost, amortized across the rest of the work, was about 150 dollars to bring that family out of slavery and then take them through a two year process to build a stable life of citizenship and education.
A boy in Ghana rescued from fishing slavery, about 400 dollars.
In the United States, North America, much more expensive. Legal costs, medical costs ...
we understand that it's expensive here: about 30,000 dollars.
But most of the people in the world in slavery live in those places where the costs are lowest.
And in fact, the global average is about what it is for Ghana.
And that means, when you multiply it up, the estimated cost of not just freedom but sustainable freedom for the entire 27 million people on the planet in slavery is something like 10.8 billion dollars -- what Americans spend on potato chips and pretzels, what Seattle is going to spend on its light rail system: usually the annual expenditure in this country on blue jeans, or in the last holiday period when we bought GameBoys and iPods and other tech gifts for people, we spent 10.8 billion dollars.
Intel's fourth quarter earnings: 10.8 billion.
It's not a lot of money at the global level.
In fact, it's peanuts.
And the great thing about it is that it's not money down a hole, there is a freedom dividend. When you let people out of slavery to work for themselves, are they motivated?
They take their kids out of the workplace, they build a school, they say, "We're going to have stuff we've never had before like three squares, medicine when we're sick, clothing when we're cold."
They become consumers and producers and local economies begin to spiral up very rapidly.
That's important, all of that about how we rebuild sustainable freedom, because we'd never want to repeat what happened in this country in 1865.
Four million people were lifted up out of slavery and then dumped.
Dumped without political participation, decent education, any kind of real opportunity in terms of economic lives, and then sentenced to generations of violence and prejudice and discrimination.
And America is still paying the price for the botched emancipation of 1865.
We have made a commitment that we will never let people come out of slavery on our watch, and end up as second class citizens.
It's just not going to happen.
This is what liberation really looks like.
Children rescued from slavery in the fishing industry in Ghana, reunited with their parents, and then taken with their parents back to their villages to rebuild their economic well-being so that they become slave-proof -- absolutely unenslaveable.
Now, this woman lived in a village in Nepal.
We'd been working there about a month.
They had just begun to come out of a hereditary kind of slavery.
They'd just begun to light up a little bit, open up a little bit.
But when we went to speak with her, when we took this photograph, the slaveholders were still menacing us from the sidelines. They hadn't been really pushed back.
I was frightened. We were frightened.
We said to her, "Are you worried? Are you upset?"
She said, "No, because we've got hope now.
How could we not succeed," she said, "when people like you from the other side of the world are coming here to stand beside us?"
Okay, we have to ask ourselves, are we willing to live in a world with slavery?
If we don't take action, we just leave ourselves open to have someone else jerk the strings that tie us to slavery in the products we buy, and in our government policies.
And yet, if there's one thing that every human being can agree on, I think it's that slavery should end.
And if there is a fundamental violation of our human dignity that we would all say is horrific, it's slavery.
And we've got to say, what good is all of our intellectual and political and economic power -- and I'm really thinking intellectual power in this room -- if we can't use it to bring slavery to an end?
I think there is enough intellectual power in this room to bring slavery to an end.
And you know what? If we can't do that, if we can't use our intellectual power to end slavery, there is one last question: Are we truly free?
Okay, thank you so much.
(Applause)
I'm standing in front of you today in all humility, wanting to share with you my journey of the last six years in the field of service and education.
And I'm not a trained academic.
Neither am I a veteran social worker.
I was 26 years in the corporate world, trying to make organizations profitable.
And then in 2003 I started Parikrma Humanity Foundation from my kitchen table.
The first thing that we did was walk through the slums.
You know, by the way, there are two million people in Bangalore, who live in 800 slums.
We couldn't go to all the slums, but we tried to cover as much as we could.
We walked through these slums, identified houses where children would never go to school.
We talked to the parents, tried to convince them about sending their children to school.
We played with the children, and came back home really tired, exhausted, but with images of bright faces, twinkling eyes, and went to sleep.
We were all excited to start, but the numbers hit us then: 200 million children between four to 14 that should be going to school, but do not; 100 million children who go to school but cannot read; 125 million who cannot do basic maths.
We also heard that 250 billion Indian rupees was dedicated for government schooling.
Ninety percent of it was spent on teachers' salary and administrators' salary.
And yet, India has nearly the highest teacher absenteeism in the world, with one out of four teachers not going to school at all the entire academic year.
Those numbers were absolutely mind-boggling, overwhelming, and we were constantly asked, "When will you start? How many schools will you start?
How many children will you get?
How are you going to scale?
How are you going to replicate?"
It was very difficult not to get scared, not to get daunted.
But we dug our heels and said, "We're not in the number game.
We want to take one child at a time and take the child right through school, sent to college, and get them prepared for better living, a high value job."
So, we started Parikrma.
The first Parikrma school started in a slum where there were 70,000 people living below the poverty line.
Our first school was on a rooftop of a building inside the slums, a second story building, the only second story building inside the slums.
And that rooftop did not have any ceiling, only half a tin sheet.
That was our first school. One hundred sixty-five children.
Indian academic year begins in June.
So, June it rains, so many a times all of us would be huddled under the tin roof, waiting for the rain to stop.
My God! What a bonding exercise that was.
And all of us that were under that roof are still here together today.
Then came the second school, the third school, the fourth school and a junior college.
In six years now, we have four schools, one junior college, 1,100 children coming from 28 slums and four orphanages.
(Applause) Our dream is very simple: to send each of these kids, get them prepared to be educated but also to live peacefully, contented in this conflict-ridden chaotic globalized world.
Now, when you talk global you have to talk English.
And so all our schools are English medium schools.
But they know there is this myth that children from the slums cannot speak English well.
No one in their family has spoken English.
No one in their generation has spoken English.
But how wrong it is.
Girl: I like adventurous books, and some of my favorites are Alfred Hitchcock and [unclear] and Hardy Boys.
Although they are like in different contexts, one is magical, the other two are like investigation, I like those books because they have something special in them.
The vocabulary used in those books and the style of writing.
I mean like once I pick up one book I cannot put it down until I finish the whole book.
Even if it takes me four and a half hours, or three and half hours to finish my book, I do it.
Boy: I did good research and I got the information [on the] world's fastest cars.
I like Ducati ZZ143, because it is the fastest, the world's fastest bike, and I like Pulsar 220 DTSI because it is India's fastest bike. (Laughter) Shukla Bose: Well, that girl that you saw, her father sells flowers on the roadside.
And this little boy has been coming to school for five years.
But isn't it strange that little boys all over the world love fast bikes? (Laughter) He hasn't seen one, he hasn't ridden one, of course, but he has done a lot of research through Google search.
You know, when we started with our English medium schools we also decided to adopt the best curriculum possible, the ICSE curriculum.
And again, there were people who laughed at me and said, "Don't be crazy choosing such a tough curriculum for these students.
They'll never be able to cope."
Not only do our children cope very well, but they excel in it.
You should just come across to see how well our children do.
There is also this myth that parents from the slums are not interested in their children going to school; they'd much rather put them to work.
That's absolute hogwash.
All parents all over the world want their children to lead a better life than themselves, but they need to believe that change is possible.
Video: (Hindi) SB: We have 80 percent attendance for all our parents-teachers meeting.
Sometimes it's even 100 percent, much more than many privileged schools.
Fathers have started to attend.
It's very interesting. When we started our school the parents would give thumbprints in the attendance register.
Now they have started writing their signature.
The children have taught them.
It's amazing how much children can teach.
We have, a few months ago, actually late last year, we had a few mothers who came to us and said, "You know, we want to learn how to read and write.
Can you teach us?" So, we started an afterschool for our parents, for our mothers.
We had 25 mothers who came regularly after school to study.
We want to continue with this program and extend it to all our other schools.
Ninety-eight percent of our fathers are alcoholics.
So, you can imagine how traumatized and how dysfunctional the houses are where our children come from.
We have to send the fathers to de-addiction labs and when they come back, most times sober, we have to find a job for them so that they don't regress.
We have about three fathers who have been trained to cook.
We have taught them nutrition, hygiene.
We have helped them set up the kitchen and now they are supplying food to all our children.
They do a very good job because their children are eating their food, but most importantly this is the first time they have got respect, and they feel that they are doing something worthwhile.
More than 90 percent of our non-teaching staff are all parents and extended families.
We've started many programs just to make sure that the child comes to school.
Vocational skill program for the older siblings so the younger ones are not stopped from coming to school.
There is also this myth that children from the slums cannot integrate with mainstream.
Take a look at this little girl who was one of the 28 children from all privileged schools, best schools in the country that was selected for the Duke University talent identification program and was sent to IIM Ahmedabad.
Video: Girl: Duke IIMA Camp. Whenever we see that IIMA, it was such a pride for us to go to that camp.
Everybody was very friendly, especially I got a lot of friends.
And I felt that my English has improved a lot going there and chatting with friends.
There they met children who are with a different standard and a different mindset, a totally different society.
I mingled with almost everyone.
They were very friendly.
I had very good friends there, who are from Delhi, who are from Mumbai.
Even now we are in touch through Facebook.
After this Ahmedabad trip I've been like a totally different mingling with people and all of those.
Before that I feel like I wasn't like this.
I don't even mingle, or start speaking with someone so quickly.
My accent with English improved a lot.
And I learned football, volleyball, Frisbee, lots of games.
And I wouldn't want to go to Bangalore. Let me stay here.
Such beautiful food, I enjoyed it. It was so beautiful.
I enjoyed eating food like [unclear] would come and ask me, "Yes ma'am, what you want?" It was so good to hear!
(Laughter) (Applause) SB: This girl was working as a maid before she came to school.
And today she wants to be a neurologist.
Our children are doing brilliantly in sports.
They are really excelling.
There is an inter-school athletic competition that is held every year in Bangalore, where 5,000 children participate from 140 best schools in the city.
We've got the best school award for three years successively.
And our children are coming back home with bags full of medals, with lots of admirers and friends.
Last year there were a couple of kids from elite schools that came to ask for admissions in our school.
We also have our very own dream team.
Why is this happening? Why this confidence?
Is it the exposure? We have professors from MIT, Berkeley, Stanford, Indian Institute of Science who come and teach our children lots of scientific formulas, experiments, much beyond the classroom.
Art, music are considered therapy and mediums of expression.
We also believe that it's the content that is more important.
It is not the infrastructure, not the toilets, not the libraries, but it is what actually happens in this school that is more important.
Creating an environment of learning, of inquiry, of exploration is what is true education.
When we started Parikrma we had no idea which direction we were taking.
We didn't hire McKinsey to do a business plan.
But we know for sure that what we want to do today is take one child at a time, not get bogged with numbers, and actually see the child complete the circle of life, and unleash his total potential.
We do not believe in scale because we believe in quality, and scale and numbers will automatically happen.
We have corporates that have stood behind us, and we are able to, now, open more schools.
But we began with the idea of one child at a time.
This is five-year-old Parusharam.
He was begging by a bus stop a few years ago, got picked up and is now in an orphanage, has been coming to school for the last four and a half months.
He's in kindergarten.
He has learned how to speak English.
We have a model by which kids can speak English and understand English in three month's time.
He can tell you stories in English of the thirsty crow, of the crocodile and of the giraffe.
And if you ask him what he likes to do he will say, "I like sleeping.
I like eating. I like playing."
And if you ask him what he wants to do, he will say, "I want to horsing."
Now, "horsing" is going for a horse ride.
So, Parusharam comes to my office every day.
He comes for a tummy rub, because he believes that will give me luck. (Laughter) When I started Parikrma I began with a great deal of arrogance of transforming the world.
But today I have been transformed.
I have been changed with my children.
I've learned so much from them: love, compassion, imagination and such creativity.
Parusharam is Parikrma with a simple beginning but a long way to go.
I promise you, Parusharam will speak in the TED conference a few years from now.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to begin this song I wrote about ceaseless yearning and never-ending want with a poem of popular Petrarchan paradoxes by Sir Thomas Wyatt the Elder: "I find no peace, and all my war is done; I fear and hope, I burn and freeze like ice; I fly above the wind, and yet I cannot arise; And naught I have, and all the world I seize upon."
 I want what I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have   It feels like all I got is loss on a bad back   Gone with the last train, honey don't you fret   Every cloud has a silver lining   Just a little rain, just a little rain, just a little rain   I want what I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have   My mind won't stop, and my heart says go   Nobody knows how to hold me   My mind won't stop, and my heart says,   "Good things come to those who wait"   And I can't stand in ...   I can't stand in line forever   Stand the cold air   Glad-handed   Sick and tired of the "Later, maybe"   Take it, fake it, take it, take-it-or-leave-it life   And I gotta just tame it   I gotta just name it   I gotta just seize, so please, oh please, oh please, oh please   Oh please me right, 'cause   My mind won't stop   And my heart says go   Nobody knows how to hold me   My mind won't stop -- and my heart says go-ooooo ...   Good things must be here -- yes, right here   Here, right here, right here   I won't live this life forever   One time round is all the offer is   Sick and tired of the "Later, maybe"   Take it, fake it, make it, leave it life   And I gotta just name it, I gotta just claim it   I gotta just seize   Oh please, oh please, oh please me right   I want what I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have -- you know that   My mind won't stop, and my heart says go   Nobody knows how to hold me, no   My mind won't stop, and my heart says go   'Cause I want what I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I -- have what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have what I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have, what I want   What I can't have, need what I can't want   Have but I don't have what I want  (Applause)
We are drowning in news.
Reuters alone puts out three and a half million news stories a year.
That's just one source.
My question is: How many of those stories are actually going to matter in the long run?
That's the idea behind The Long News.
It's a project by The Long Now Foundation, which was founded by TEDsters including Kevin Kelly and Stewart Brand.
And what we're looking for is news stories that might still matter 50 or 100 or 10,000 years from now.
And when you look at the news through that filter, a lot falls by the wayside.
To take the top stories from the A.P. this last year, is this going to matter in a decade?
Or this?
Or this?
Really?
Is this going to matter in 50 or 100 years?
Okay, that was kind of cool.
(Laughter) But the top story of this past year was the economy, and I'm just betting that, sooner or later, this particular recession is going to be old news.
So, what kind of stories might make a difference for the future?
Well, let's take science.
Someday, little robots will go through our bloodstreams fixing things.
That someday is already here if you're a mouse.
Some recent stories: nanobees zap tumors with real bee venom; they're sending genes into the brain; a robot they built that can crawl through the human body.
What about resources? How are we going to feed nine billion people?
We're having trouble feeding six billion today.
As we heard yesterday, there's over a billion people hungry.
Britain will starve without genetically modified crops.
Bill Gates, fortunately, has bet a billion on [agricultural] research.
What about global politics?
The world's going to be very different when and if China sets the agenda, and they may.
They've overtaken the U.S. as the world's biggest car market, they've overtaken Germany as the largest exporter, and they've started doing DNA tests on kids to choose their careers.
We're finding all kinds of ways to push back the limits of what we know.
Some recent discoveries: There's an ant colony from Argentina that has now spread to every continent but Antarctica; there's a self-directed robot scientist that's made a discovery -- soon, science may no longer need us, and life may no longer need us either; a microbe wakes up after 120,000 years.
It seems that with or without us, life will go on.
But my pick for the top Long News story of this past year was this one: water found on the moon.
Makes it a lot easier to put a colony up there.
And if NASA doesn't do it, China might, or somebody in this room might write a big check.
My point is this: In the long run, some news stories are more important than others.
(Applause)
Ladies and gentlemen, at TED we talk a lot about leadership and how to make a movement.
So let's watch a movement happen, start to finish, in under three minutes and dissect some lessons from it.
First, of course you know, a leader needs the guts to stand out and be ridiculed.
What he's doing is so easy to follow.
Here's his first follower with a crucial role; he's going to show everyone else how to follow.
Now, notice that the leader embraces him as an equal.
Now it's not about the leader anymore; it's about them, plural.
Now, there he is calling to his friends.
Now, if you notice that the first follower is actually an underestimated form of leadership in itself.
It takes guts to stand out like that.
The first follower is what transforms a lone nut into a leader.
(Laughter) (Applause) And here comes a second follower.
Now it's not a lone nut, it's not two nuts -- three is a crowd, and a crowd is news.
So a movement must be public.
It's important to show not just the leader, but the followers, because you find that new followers emulate the followers, not the leader.
Now, here come two more people, and immediately after, three more people.
Now we've got momentum. This is the tipping point.
(Laughter) So, notice that, as more people join in, it's less risky.
So those that were sitting on the fence before now have no reason not to.
They won't stand out, they won't be ridiculed, but they will be part of the in-crowd if they hurry.
(Laughter) So, over the next minute, you'll see all of those that prefer to stick with the crowd because eventually they would be ridiculed for not joining in.
And that's how you make a movement.
But let's recap some lessons from this.
So first, if you are the type, like the shirtless dancing guy that is standing alone, remember the importance of nurturing your first few followers as equals so it's clearly about the movement, not you.
(Laughter) Okay, but we might have missed the real lesson here.
The biggest lesson, if you noticed -- did you catch it? -- is that leadership is over-glorified.
Yes, it was the shirtless guy who was first, and he'll get all the credit, but it was really the first follower that transformed the lone nut into a leader.
So, as we're told that we should all be leaders, that would be really ineffective.
If you really care about starting a movement, have the courage to follow and show others how to follow.
And when you find a lone nut doing something great, have the guts to be the first one to stand up and join in.
And what a perfect place to do that, at TED.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Now, I want to start with a question: When was the last time you were called "childish"?
For kids like me, being called childish can be a frequent occurrence.
Every time we make irrational demands, exhibit irresponsible behavior, or display any other signs of being normal American citizens, we are called childish.
Which really bothers me.
After all, take a look at these events: Imperialism and colonization, world wars, George W. Bush.
Ask yourself, who's responsible? Adults.
Now, what have kids done?
Well, Anne Frank touched millions with her powerful account of the Holocaust.
Ruby Bridges helped to end segregation in the United States.
And, most recently, Charlie Simpson helped to raise 120,000 pounds for Haiti, on his little bike.
So as you can see evidenced by such examples, age has absolutely nothing to do with it.
The traits the word "childish" addresses are seen so often in adults, that we should abolish this age-discriminatory word, when it comes to criticizing behavior associated with irresponsibility and irrational thinking.
(Applause) Thank you.
Then again, who's to say that certain types of irrational thinking aren't exactly what the world needs?
Maybe you've had grand plans before, but stopped yourself, thinking, "That's impossible," or "That costs too much," or "That won't benefit me."
For better or worse, we kids aren't hampered as much when it comes to thinking about reasons why not to do things.
Kids can be full of inspiring aspirations and hopeful thinking, like my wish that no one went hungry, or that everything were free, a kind of utopia.
How many of you still dream like that, and believe in the possibilities?
Sometimes a knowledge of history and the past failures of Utopian ideals can be a burden, because you know that if everything were free, then the food stocks would become depleted and scarce and lead to chaos.
On the other hand, we kids still dream about perfection.
And that's a good thing, because in order to make anything a reality, you have to dream about it first.
In many ways, our audacity to imagine helps push the boundaries of possibility.
For instance, the Museum of Glass in Tacoma, Washington, my home state -- yoohoo, Washington!
(Applause) has a program called Kids Design Glass, and kids draw their own ideas for glass art.
The resident artist said they got some of their best ideas from the program, because kids don't think about the limitations of how hard it can be to blow glass into certain shapes, they just think of good ideas.
Now, when you think of glass, you might think of colorful Chihuly designs, or maybe Italian vases, but kids challenge glass artists to go beyond that, into the realm of brokenhearted snakes and bacon boys, who you can see has meat vision.
(Laughter) Now, our inherent wisdom doesn't have to be insider's knowledge.
Kids already do a lot of learning from adults, and we have a lot to share.
I think that adults should start learning from kids.
Now, I do most of my speaking in front of an education crowd -- teachers and students, and I like this analogy: It shouldn't be a teacher at the head of the class, telling students, "Do this, do that."
The students should teach their teachers.
Learning between grown-ups and kids should be reciprocal.
The reality, unfortunately, is a little different, and it has a lot to do with trust, or a lack of it.
Now, if you don't trust someone, you place restrictions on them, right?
If I doubt my older sister's ability to pay back the 10 percent interest I established on her last loan, I'm going to withhold her ability to get more money from me, until she pays it back.
(Laughter) True story, by the way.
Now, adults seem to have a prevalently restrictive attitude towards kids, from every "Don't do that, don't do this" in the school handbook, to restrictions on school Internet use.
As history points out, regimes become oppressive when they're fearful about keeping control.
And although adults may not be quite at the level of totalitarian regimes, kids have no or very little say in making the rules, when really, the attitude should be reciprocal, meaning that the adult population should learn and take into account the wishes of the younger population.
Now, what's even worse than restriction, is that adults often underestimate kids' abilities.
We love challenges, but when expectations are low, trust me, we will sink to them.
My own parents had anything but low expectations for me and my sister.
Okay, so they didn't tell us to become doctors or lawyers or anything like that, but my dad did read to us about Aristotle and pioneer germ-fighters, when lots of other kids were hearing "The Wheels on the Bus Go Round and Round."
Well, we heard that one too, but "Pioneer Germ Fighters" totally rules.
(Laughter) I loved to write from the age of four, and when I was six, my mom bought me my own laptop equipped with Microsoft Word.
Thank you, Bill Gates, and thank you, Ma.
I wrote over 300 short stories on that little laptop, and I wanted to get published.
Instead of just scoffing at this heresy that a kid wanted to get published, or saying wait until you're older, my parents were really supportive.
Many publishers were not quite so encouraging.
One large children's publisher ironically said that they didn't work with children.
Children's publisher not working with children?
I don't know, you're kind of alienating a large client there.
(Laughter) One publisher, Action Publishing, was willing to take that leap and trust me, and to listen to what I had to say.
They published my first book, "Flying Fingers," you see it here.
And from there on, it's gone to speaking at hundreds of schools, keynoting to thousands of educators, and finally, today, speaking to you.
I appreciate your attention today, because to show that you truly care, you listen.
But there's a problem with this rosy picture of kids being so much better than adults.
Kids grow up and become adults just like you.
(Laughter) Or just like you? Really?
The goal is not to turn kids into your kind of adult, but rather, better adults than you have been, which may be a little challenging, considering your guys' credentials.
(Laughter) But the way progress happens, is because new generations and new eras grow and develop and become better than the previous ones.
It's the reason we're not in the Dark Ages anymore.
No matter your position or place in life, it is imperative to create opportunities for children, so that we can grow up to blow you away.
(Laughter) Adults and fellow TEDsters, you need to listen and learn from kids, and trust us and expect more from us.
You must lend an ear today, because we are the leaders of tomorrow, which means we're going to take care of you when you're old and senile.
(Laughter) No, really, we are going to be the next generation, the ones who will bring this world forward.
And in case you don't think that this really has meaning for you, remember that cloning is possible, and that involves going through childhood again, in which case you'll want to be heard, just like my generation.
Now, the world needs opportunities for new leaders and new ideas.
Kids need opportunities to lead and succeed.
Are you ready to make the match?
Because the world's problems shouldn't be the human family's heirloom.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
"People do stupid things.
That's what spreads HIV."
This was a headline in a U.K. newspaper, The Guardian, not that long ago.
I'm curious, show of hands, who agrees with it?
Well, one or two brave souls.
This is actually a direct quote from an epidemiologist who's been in field of HIV for 15 years, worked on four continents, and you're looking at her.
And I am now going to argue that this is only half true.
People do get HIV because they do stupid things, but most of them are doing stupid things for perfectly rational reasons.
Now, "rational" is the dominant paradigm in public health, and if you put your public health nerd glasses on, you'll see that if we give people the information that they need about what's good for them and what's bad for them, if you give them the services that they can use to act on that information, and a little bit of motivation, people will make rational decisions and live long and healthy lives.
Wonderful.
That's slightly problematic for me because I work in HIV, and although I'm sure you all know that HIV is about poverty and gender inequality, and if you were at TED '07 it's about coffee prices ...
Actually, HIV's about sex and drugs, and if there are two things that make human beings a little bit irrational, they are erections and addiction.
(Laughter) So, let's start with what's rational for an addict.
Now, I remember speaking to an Indonesian friend of mine, Frankie.
We were having lunch and he was telling me about when he was in jail in Bali for a drug injection.
It was someone's birthday, and they had very kindly smuggled some heroin into jail, and he was very generously sharing it out with all of his colleagues.
And so everyone lined up, all the smackheads in a row, and the guy whose birthday it was filled up the fit, and he went down and started injecting people.
So he injects the first guy, and then he's wiping the needle on his shirt, and he injects the next guy.
And Frankie says, "I'm number 22 in line, and I can see the needle coming down towards me, and there is blood all over the place.
It's getting blunter and blunter.
And a small part of my brain is thinking, 'That is so gross and really dangerous,' but most of my brain is thinking, 'Please let there be some smack left by the time it gets to me.
Please let there be some left.'" And then, telling me this story, Frankie said, "You know ... God, drugs really make you stupid."
And, you know, you can't fault him for accuracy.
But, actually, Frankie, at that time, was a heroin addict and he was in jail.
So his choice was either to accept that dirty needle or not to get high.
And if there's one place you really want to get high, it's when you're in jail.
But I'm a scientist and I don't like to make data out of anecdotes, so let's look at some data.
We talked to 600 drug addicts in three cities in Indonesia, and we said, "Well, do you know how you get HIV?"
"Oh yeah, by sharing needles."
I mean, nearly 100 percent. Yeah, by sharing needles.
And, "Do you know where you can get a clean needle at a price you can afford to avoid that?"
"Oh yeah." Hundred percent.
"We're smackheads; we know where to get clean needles."
"So are you carrying a needle?"
We're actually interviewing people on the street, in the places where they're hanging out and taking drugs.
"Are you carrying clean needles?"
One in four, maximum.
So no surprises then that the proportion that actually used clean needles every time they injected in the last week is just about one in 10, and the other nine in 10 are sharing.
So you've got this massive mismatch; everyone knows that if they share they're going to get HIV, but they're all sharing anyway.
So what's that about? Is it like you get a better high if you share or something?
We asked that to a junkie and they're like, "Are you nuts?"
You don't want to share a needle anymore than you want to share a toothbrush even with someone you're sleeping with.
There's just kind of an ick factor there.
"No, no. We share needles because we don't want to go to jail."
So, in Indonesia at this time, if you were carrying a needle and the cops rounded you up, they could put you into jail.
And that changes the equation slightly, doesn't it?
Because your choice now is either I use my own needle now, or I could share a needle now and get a disease that's going to possibly kill me 10 years from now, or I could use my own needle now and go to jail tomorrow.
And while junkies think that it's a really bad idea to expose themselves to HIV, they think it's a much worse idea to spend the next year in jail where they'll probably end up in Frankie's situation and expose themselves to HIV anyway.
So, suddenly it becomes perfectly rational to share needles.
Now, let's look at it from a policy maker's point of view.
This is a really easy problem.
For once, your incentives are aligned.
We've got what's rational for public health.
You want people to use clean needles -- and junkies want to use clean needles.
So we could make this problem go away simply by making clean needles universally available and taking away the fear of arrest.
Now, the first person to figure that out and do something about it on a national scale was that well-known, bleeding heart liberal Margaret Thatcher.
And she put in the world's first national needle exchange program, and other countries followed suit: Australia, The Netherlands and few others.
And in all of those countries, you can see, not more than four percent of injectors ever became infected with HIV.
Now, places that didn't do this -- New York City for example, Moscow, Jakarta -- we're talking, at its peak, one in two injectors infected with this fatal disease.
Now, Margaret Thatcher didn't do this because she has any great love for junkies.
She did it because she ran a country that had a national health service.
So, if she didn't invest in effective prevention, she was going to have pick up the costs of treatment later on, and obviously those are much higher.
So she was making a politically rational decision.
Now, if I take out my public health nerd glasses here and look at these data, it seems like a no-brainer, doesn't it?
But in this country, where the government apparently does not feel compelled to provide health care for citizens, (Laughter) we've taken a very different approach.
So what we've been doing in the United States is reviewing the data -- endlessly reviewing the data.
So, these are reviews of hundreds of studies by all the big muckety-mucks of the scientific pantheon in the United States, and these are the studies that show needle programs are effective -- quite a lot of them.
Now, the ones that show that needle programs aren't effective -- you think that's one of these annoying dynamic slides and I'm going to press my dongle and the rest of it's going to come up, but no -- that's the whole slide.
(Laughter) There is nothing on the other side.
So, completely irrational, you would think.
Except that, wait a minute, politicians are rational, too, and they're responding to what they think the voters want.
So what we see is that voters respond very well to things like this and not quite so well to things like this.
(Laughter) So it becomes quite rational to deny services to injectors.
Now let's talk about sex.
Are we any more rational about sex?
Well, I'm not even going to address the clearly irrational positions of people like the Catholic Church, who think somehow that if you give out condoms, everyone's going to run out and have sex.
I don't know if Pope Benedict watches TEDTalks online, but if you do, I've got news for you Benedict -- I carry condoms all the time and I never get laid.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's not that easy!
Here, maybe you'll have better luck.
(Applause) Okay, seriously, HIV is actually not that easy to transmit sexually.
So, it depends on how much virus there is in your blood and in your body fluids.
And what we've got is a very, very high level of virus right at the beginning when you're first infected, then you start making antibodies, and then it bumps along at quite low levels for a long time -- 10 or 12 years -- you have spikes if you get another sexually transmitted infection.
But basically, nothing much is going on until you start to get symptomatic AIDS, and by that stage, you're not looking great, you're not feeling great, you're not having that much sex.
So the sexual transmission of HIV is essentially determined by how many partners you have in these very short spaces of time when you have peak viremia.
Now, this makes people crazy because it means that you have to talk about some groups having more sexual partners in shorter spaces of time than other groups, and that's considered stigmatizing.
I've always been a bit curious about that because I think stigma is a bad thing, whereas lots of sex is quite a good thing, but we'll leave that be.
The truth is that 20 years of very good research have shown us that there are groups that are more likely to turnover large numbers of partners in a short space of time.
And those groups are, globally, people who sell sex and their more regular partners.
They are gay men on the party scene who have, on average, three times more partners than straight people on the party scene.
And they are heterosexuals who come from countries that have traditions of polygamy and relatively high levels of female autonomy, and almost all of those countries are in east or southern Africa.
And that is reflected in the epidemic that we have today.
You can see these horrifying figures from Africa.
These are all countries in southern Africa where between one in seven, and one in three of all adults, are infected with HIV.
Now, in the rest of the world, we've got basically nothing going on in the general population -- very, very low levels -- but we have extraordinarily high levels of HIV in these other populations who are at highest risk: drug injectors, sex workers and gay men.
And you'll note, that's the local data from Los Angeles: 25 percent prevalence among gay men.
Of course, you can't get HIV just by having unprotected sex.
You can only HIV by having unprotected sex with a positive person.
In most of the world, these few prevention failures notwithstanding, we are actually doing quite well these days in commercial sex: condom use rates are between 80 and 100 percent in commercial sex in most countries.
And, again, it's because of an alignment of the incentives.
What's rational for public health is also rational for individual sex workers because it's really bad for business to have another STI.
No one wants it.
And, actually, clients don't want to go home with a drip either.
So essentially, you're able to achieve quite high rates of condom use in commercial sex.
But in "intimate" relations it's much more difficult because, with your wife or your boyfriend or someone that you hope might turn into one of those things, we have this illusion of romance and trust and intimacy, and nothing is quite so unromantic as the, "My condom or yours, darling?" question.
So in the face of that, you really need quite a strong incentive to use condoms.
This, for example, this gentleman is called Joseph.
He's from Haiti and he has AIDS.
And he's probably not having a lot of sex right now, but he is a reminder in the population, of why you might want to be using condoms.
This is also in Haiti and is a reminder of why you might want to be having sex, perhaps.
Now, funnily enough, this is also Joseph after six months on antiretroviral treatment.
Not for nothing do we call it the Lazarus Effect.
But it is changing the equation of what's rational in sexual decision-making.
So, what we've got -- some people say, "Oh, it doesn't matter very much because, actually, treatment is effective prevention because it lowers your viral load and therefore makes it more difficult to transmit HIV."
So, if you look at the viremia thing again, if you do start treatment when you're sick, well, what happens? Your viral load comes down.
But compared to what? What happens if you're not on treatment?
Well, you die, so your viral load goes to zero.
And all of this green stuff here, including the spikes -- which are because you couldn't get to the pharmacy, or you ran out of drugs, or you went on a three day party binge and forgot to take your drugs, or because you've started to get resistance, or whatever -- all of that is virus that wouldn't be out there, except for treatment.
Now, am I saying, "Oh, well, great prevention strategy.
Let's just stop treating people."
Of course not, of course not.
We need to expand antiretroviral treatment as much as we can.
But what I am doing is calling into question those people who say that more treatment is all the prevention we need.
That's simply not necessarily true, and I think we can learn a lot from the experience of gay men in rich countries where treatment has been widely available for going on 15 years now.
And what we've seen is that, actually, condom use rates, which were very, very high -- the gay community responded very rapidly to HIV, with extremely little help from public health nerds, I would say -- that condom use rate has come down dramatically since treatment for two reasons really: One is the assumption of, "Oh well, if he's infected, he's probably on meds, and his viral load's going to be low, so I'm pretty safe."
And the other thing is that people are simply not as scared of HIV as they were of AIDS, and rightly so.
AIDS was a disfiguring disease that killed you, and HIV is an invisible virus that makes you take a pill every day.
And that's boring, but is it as boring as having to use a condom every time you have sex, no matter how drunk you are, no matter how many poppers you've taken, whatever?
If we look at the data, we can see that the answer to that question is, mmm.
So these are data from Scotland.
You see the peak in drug injectors before they started the national needle exchange program.
Then it came way down.
And both in heterosexuals -- mostly in commercial sex -- and in drug users, you've really got nothing much going on after treatment begins, and that's because of that alignment of incentives that I talked about earlier.
But in gay men, you've got quite a dramatic rise starting three or four years after treatment became widely available.
This is of new infections.
What does that mean?
It means that the combined effect of being less worried and having more virus out there in the population -- more people living longer, healthier lives, more likely to be getting laid with HIV -- is outweighing the effects of lower viral load, and that's a very worrisome thing.
What does it mean?
It means we need to be doing more prevention the more treatment we have.
Is that what's happening?
No, and I call it the "compassion conundrum."
We've talked a lot about compassion the last couple of days, and what's happening really is that people are unable quite to bring themselves to put in good sexual and reproductive health services for sex workers, unable quite to be giving out needles to junkies.
But once they've gone from being transgressive people whose behaviors we don't want to condone to being AIDS victims, we come over all compassionate and buy them incredibly expensive drugs for the rest of their lives.
It doesn't make any sense from a public health point of view.
I want to give what's very nearly the last word to Ines.
Ines is a a transgender hooker on the streets of Jakarta; she's a chick with a dick.
Why does she do that job?
Well, of course, because she's forced into it because she doesn't have any better option, etc., etc.
And if we could just teach her to sew and get her a nice job in a factory, all would be well.
This is what factory workers earn in an hour in Indonesia: on average, 20 cents.
It varies a bit province to province.
I do speak to sex workers, 15,000 of them for this particular slide, and this is what sex workers say they earn in an hour.
So it's not a great job, but for a lot of people it really is quite a rational choice.
Okay, Ines.
We've got the tools, the knowledge and the cash, and commitment to preventing HIV too.
Ines: So why is prevalence still rising?
It's all politics.
When you get to politics, nothing makes sense.
Elizabeth Pisani: "When you get to politics, nothing makes sense."
So, from the point of view of a sex worker, politicians are making no sense.
From the point of view of a public health nerd, junkies are doing dumb things.
The truth is that everyone has a different rationale.
There are as many different ways of being rational as there are human beings on the planet, and that's one of the glories of human existence.
But those ways of being rational are not independent of one another, so it's rational for a drug injector to share needles because of a stupid decision that's made by a politician, and it's rational for a politician to make that stupid decision because they're responding to what they think the voters want.
But here's the thing: we are the voters.
We're not all of them, of course, but TED is a community of opinion leaders.
And everyone who's in this room, and everyone who's watching this out there on the web, I think, has a duty to demand of their politicians that we make policy based on scientific evidence and on common sense.
It's going to be really hard for us to individually affect what's rational for every Frankie and every Ines out there, but you can at least use your vote to stop politicians doing stupid things that spread HIV.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's not about technology, it's about people and stories.
I could show you what recently was on television as a high quality video: 60 Minutes, many of you may have seen it.
And it was the now director of the entire piece of the veteran's administration -- who, himself, had lost an arm 39 years ago in Vietnam -- who was adamantly opposed to these crazy devices that don't work.
And it turns out that with 60 Minutes cameras rolling in the background, after he pretty much made his position clear on this -- he had his hook and he had his -- he wore this arm for less than two hours and was able to pour himself a drink and got quite emotional over the fact that, quote -- his quote -- it's the first time he's felt like he's had an arm in 39 years.
But that would sort of be jumping to the middle of the story, and I'm not going to show you that polished video.
I'm going to, instead, in a minute or two, show you an early, crude video because I think it's a better way to tell a story.
A few years ago I was visited by the guy that runs DARPA, the people that fund all the advanced technologies that businesses and universities probably wouldn't take the risk of doing.
They have a particular interest in ones that will help our soldiers.
I get this sort of unrequested -- by me anyway -- visit, and sitting in my conference room is a very senior surgeon from the military and the guy that runs DARPA.
They proceed to tell me a story which comes down to basically the following. We have used such advanced technologies now and made them available in the most remote places that we put soldiers: hills of Afghanistan, Iraq ...
They were quite proud of the fact that you know, before the dust clears, if some soldier has been hurt they will have collected him or her, they will have brought him back, they will be getting world-class triage emergency care faster than you and I would be getting it if we were hurt in a car accident in a major city in the United States.
That's the good news.
The bad news is if they've collected this person and he or she is missing an arm or leg, part of the face, it's probably not coming back.
So, they started giving me the statistics on how many of these kids had lost an arm.
And then the surgeon pointed out, with a lot of anger, he said, "Why is it? At the end of the Civil War, they were shooting each other with muskets. If somebody lost an arm, we gave them a wooden stick with a hook on it.
Now we've got F18s and F22s, and if somebody loses an arm, we give them a plastic stick with a hook on it."
And they basically said, "This is unacceptable," and then the punchline: "So, Dean, we're here because you make medical stuff.
You're going to give us an arm."
And I was waiting for the 500 pages of bureaucracy, paperwork and DODs.
No, the guy says, "We're going to bring a guy into this conference room, and wearing the arm you're going to give us, he or she is going to pick up a raisin or a grape off this table.
If it's the grape, they won't break it."
Great he needs efferent, afferent, haptic response sensors.
"If it's the raisin, they won't drop it."
So he wants fine motor control: flex at the wrist, flex at the elbow, abduct and flex at the shoulder.
Either way they were going to eat it.
"Oh, by the way Dean. It's going to fit on a 50th percentile female frame -- namely 32 inches from the long finger -- and weigh less than nine pounds."
50th percentile female frame.
"And it's going to be completely self contained including all its power."
So, they finished that. And I, as you can tell, am a bashful guy.
I told them they're nuts.
(Laughter) They've been watching too much "Terminator."
(Laughter) Then, the surgeon says to me, "Dean, you need to know more than two dozen of these kids have come back bilateral."
Now, I cannot imagine -- I'm sorry, you may have a better imagination than I do -- I can't imagine losing my arm, and typically at 22 years old.
But compared to that, losing two?
Seems like that would be an inconvenience.
Anyway, I went home that night. I thought about it.
I literally could not sleep thinking about, "I wonder how you'd roll over with no shoulders."
So, I decided we've got to do this.
And trust me, I've got a day job, I've got a lot of day jobs.
Most of my day job keeps me busy funding my fantasies like FIRST and water and power ....
And I've got a lot of day jobs.
But I figured I gotta do this.
Did a little investigation, went down to Washington, told them I still think they're nuts but we're going to do it.
And I told them I'd build them an arm.
I told them it would probably take five years to get through the FDA, and probably 10 years to be reasonably functional.
Look what it takes to make things like iPods.
"Great," he said, "You got two years."
(Laughter) I said, "I'll tell you what. I'll build you an arm that's under nine pounds that has all that capability in one year.
It will take the other nine to make it functional and useful."
We sort of agreed to disagree.
I went back and I started putting a team together, the best guys I could find with a passion to do this.
At the end of exactly one year we had a device with 14 degrees of freedom, all the sensors, all the microprocessors, all the stuff inside.
I could show you it with a cosmesis on it that's so real it's eerie, but then you wouldn't see all this cool stuff.
I then thought it would be years before we'd be able to make it really, really useful.
It turned out, as I think you could see in Aimee's capabilities and attitudes, people with a desire to do something are quite remarkable and nature is quite adaptable.
Anyway, with less than 10 hours of use, two guys -- one that's bilateral.
He's literally, he's got no shoulder on one side, and he's high trans-humeral on the other.
And that's Chuck and Randy together, after 10 hours -- were playing in our office.
And we took some pretty cruddy home movies.
At the end of the one I'm going to show, it's only about a minute and a couple of seconds long, Chuck does something that to this day I'm jealous of, I can't do it.
He picks up a spoon, picks it up, scoops out some Shredded Wheat and milk, holds the spoon level as he translates it, moving all these joints simultaneously, to his mouth, and he doesn't drop any milk.
(Laughter) I cannot do that.
(Laughter) His wife was standing behind me.
She's standing behind me at the time and she says, "Dean, Chuck hasn't fed himself in 19 years.
So, you've got a choice: We keep the arm, or you keep Chuck."
(Laughter) (Applause) So, can we see that?
This is Chuck showing simultaneous control of all the joints.
He's punching our controls guy. The guy behind him is our engineer/surgeon, which is a convenient guy to have around.
There's Randy, these guys are passing a rubber little puck between them.
And just as in the spirit of FIRST, gracious professionalism, they are quite proud of this, so they decide to share a drink.
This is a non-trivial thing to do, by the way.
Imagine doing that with a wooden stick and a hook on the end of it, doing either of those.
Now Chuck is doing something quite extraordinary, at least for my limited physical skill.
And now he's going to do what DARPA asked me for.
He's going to pick up a grape -- he didn't drop it, he didn't break it -- and he's going to eat it.
So, that's where we were at the end of about 15 months.
(Applause) But, as I've learned from Richard, the technology, the processors, the sensors, the motors, is not the story.
I hadn't dealt with this kind of problem or frankly, this whole segment of the medical world.
I'll give you some astounding things that have happened as we started this.
After we were pretty much convinced we had a good design, and we'd have to make all the standard engineering trade-offs you always make -- you can always get three out of four of anything you want; the weight, the size, the cost, the functionality -- I put a bunch of guys in my plane and I said, "We're flying down to Walter Reed, and we're going talk to these kids, because frankly it doesn't matter whether we like this arm.
It doesn't matter whether the Department of Defense likes this arm."
When I told them that they weren't entirely enthusiastic, but I told them, "It really doesn't matter what their opinion is.
There is only one opinion that matters, the kids that are either going to use it or not."
I told a bunch of my engineers, "Look we're going to walk into Walter Reed, and you're going to see people, lots of them, missing major body parts.
They're probably going to be angry, depressed, frustrated.
We're probably going to have to give them support, encouragement.
But we've got to extract from them enough information to make sure we're doing the right thing."
We walked into Walter Reed and I could not have been more wrong.
We did see a bunch of people, a lot of them missing a lot of body parts, and parts they had left were burned; half a face gone, an ear burned off.
They were sitting at a table. They were brought together for us.
And we started asking them all questions.
"Look," I'd say to them, "We're not quite as good as nature yet.
I could give you fine motor control, or I could let you curl 40 pounds; I probably can't do both.
I can give you fast control with low reduction ratios in these gears, or I can give you power; I can't give you both.
And we were trying to get them to all help us know what to give them.
Not only were they enthusiastic, they kept thinking they're there to help us.
"Well, would it help if I ..."
"Guys, and woman, you've given enough.
We're here to help you. We need data. We need to know what you need."
After a half an hour, maybe, there was one guy at the far end of the table who wasn't saying much.
You could see he was missing an arm.
He was leaning on his other arm.
I called down to the end, "Hey, you haven't said much.
If we needed this or this, what would you want?"
And he said, "You know, I'm the lucky guy at this table.
I lost my right arm, but I'm a lefty."
(Laughter) So, he wouldn't say much.
He had a great spirit, like all the rest of them had great spirits.
And he made a few comments.
And then the meeting ended. We said goodbye to all these guys.
And that guy pushed himself back from the table ...
he has no legs.
So, we left.
And I was thinking, "We didn't give them support and encouragement; they gave it to us.
They're not finished giving yet."
It was astounding.
So, we went back.
And I started working harder, faster.
Then we went out to Brooke Army Medical Center.
And we saw lots of these kids, lots of them.
And it was astounding how positive they are.
So, we went back, and we've been working harder yet.
We're in clinical trials, we've got five of them on people.
We're screaming along.
And I get a call and we go back to Washington.
We go back to Walter Reed, and a kid, literally, 20 some-odd days before that was blown up.
And they shipped him to Germany and 24 hours later they shipped him from Germany to Walter Reed.
And he was there, and they said we needed to come.
And I went down and they rolled him into a room.
He's got no legs.
He's got no arms.
He's got a small residual limb on one side.
Half of his face is gone, but they said his vision is coming back.
He had one good eye.
His name is Brandon Marrocco.
And he said, "I need your arms, but I need two of them."
"You'll get them."
This kid was from Staten Island.
And he said, "I had a truck, before I went over there, and it had a stick.
You think I'll be able to drive it?"
"Sure."
And I turned around and went, "How are we going to do this?"
(Laughter) Anyway, he was just like all the rest of them.
He doesn't really want a lot.
He wants to help. He told me that he wanted to go back to help his buddies.
So, I was on my way out here.
I was asked to stop at Texas.
There were 3,500 people, the Veteran's Administration, U.S. ... just 3,500 at this huge event to help the families of all the kids -- some that have died, some that are like Brandon -- and they wanted me to speak.
I said, "What am I going to say?
This is not a happy thing. Look, if this happens to you, I can give you ... This stuff is still not as good at the original equipment."
"You need to come."
So, I went.
And, as I think you get the point, there were a lot people there recovering.
Some further along than others.
But universally, these people that had been through this had astounding attitudes, and just the fact that people care makes a huge difference to them.
I'll shut up, except one message or concern I have.
I don't think anybody does it intentionally, but there were people there literally talking about, "Well, how much will they get?"
You know, this country is involved as we've all heard, in this great healthcare debate.
"Who is entitled to what?
Who is entitled to how much?
Who is going to pay for it?"
Those are tough questions.
I don't have an answer to that. Not everybody can be entitled to everything simply because you were born here.
It's not possible. It would be nice but let's be realistic.
They were tough questions. There's polarized groups down there.
I don't know the answers.
There are other questions that are tough.
"Should we be there?
How do we get out?
What do we need to do?" There's very polarized answers to that question too, and I don't have any answers to that.
Those are political questions, economic questions, strategic questions.
I don't have the answer. But let me give you a simple concern or maybe statement, then.
It is an easy answer.
I know what these kids deserve on the healthcare side.
I was talking to one of them, and he was really liking this arm -- it's way, way, way better than a plastic stick with a hook on it -- but there's nobody in this room that would rather have that than the one you got.
But I was saying to him, "You know, the first airplane went 100 feet in 1903.
Wilbur and Orville.
But you know what? It wouldn't have made an old pigeon jealous.
But now we got Eagles out there, F15s, even that Bald Eagle.
I've never seen a bird flying around at Mach 2.
I think eventually we'll make these things extraordinary."
And I said to that kid, "I'll stop when your buddies are envious of your Luke arm because of what it can do, and how it does it.
And we'll keep working. And I'm not going to stop working until we do that."
And I think this country ought to continue its great debate, whining and complaining, "I'm entitled." "You're a victim."
And whining and complaining about what our foreign policy ought to be.
But while we have the luxury of whining and complaining about who's paying for what and how much we get, the people that are out there giving us that great privilege of whining and complaining, I know what they deserve: everything humanly possible.
And we ought to give it to them.
(Applause)
I got a visit almost exactly a year ago, a little over a year ago, from a very senior person at the Department of Defense.
Came to see me and said, "1,600 of the kids that we've sent out have come back missing at least one full arm.
Whole arm. Shoulder disarticulation.
And we're doing the same thing we did for -- more or less, that we've done since the Civil War, a stick and a hook.
And they deserve more than that."
And literally, this guy sat in my office in New Hampshire and said, "I want you to give me something that we can put on these kids that'll pick up a raisin or a grape off a table, they'll be able to put it in their mouth without destroying either one, and they'll be able to know the difference without looking at it."
You know, had efferent, afferent, and haptic response.
He finishes explaining that, and I'm waiting for the big 300 pound paper proposal, and he said, "That's what I want from you."
I said, "Look, you're nuts. That technology's just not available right now.
And it can't be done.
Not in an envelope of a human arm, with 21 degrees of freedom, from your shoulder to your fingertips."
He said, "About two dozen of these 1,600 kids have come back bilateral.
You think it's bad to lose one arm?
That's an inconvenience compared to having both of them gone."
I got a day job, and my nights and weekends are already filled up with things like, let's supply water to the world, and power to the world, and educate all the kids, which, Chris, I will not talk about. I don't need another mission.
I keep thinking about these kids with no arms.
He says to me, "We've done some work around the country.
We've got some pretty amazing neurology and other people."
I said, "I'll take a field trip, I'll go see what you got."
Over the next month I visited lots of places, some out here, around the country, found the best of the best.
I went down to Washington. I saw these guys, and said, "I did what you asked me. I looked at what's out there.
I still think you're nuts. But not as nuts as I thought."
I put a team together, a little over 13 months ago, got up to 20 some-odd people.
We said, we're going to build a device that does what he wants.
We have 14 out of the 21 degrees of freedom; you don't need the ones in the last two fingers.
We put this thing together.
A couple of weeks ago we took it down to Walter Reed, which is unfortunately more in the news these days.
We showed it to a bunch of guys.
One guy who described himself as being lucky, because he lost his left arm, and he's a righty.
He sat at a table with seven or eight of these other guys.
Said he was lucky, because he had his good arm, and then he pushed himself back from the table. He had no legs.
These kids have attitudes that you just can't believe.
So I'm going to show you now, without the skin on it, a 30-second piece, and then I'm done.
But understand what you're looking at we made small enough to fit on a 50th percentile female, so that we could put it in any of these people.
It's going to go inside something that we use in CAT scans and MRIs of whatever is their good arm, to make silicon rubber, then coat it, and paint it in 3D -- exact mirror image of their other limb.
So, you won't see all the really cool stuff that's in this series elastic set of 14 actuators, each one which has its own capability to sense temperature and pressure.
It also has a pneumatic cuff that holds it on, so the more they put themselves under load, the more it attaches.
They take the load off, and it becomes, again, compliant.
I'm going to show you a guy doing a couple of simple things with this that we demonstrated in Washington. Can we look at this thing?
Watch the fingers grab. The thumb comes up. Wrist.
This weighs 6.9 pounds.
Going to scratch his nose.
It's got 14 active degrees of freedom.
Now he's going to pick up a pen with his opposed thumb and index finger.
Now he's going to put that down, pick up a piece of paper, rotate all the degrees of freedom in his hand and wrist, and read it.
(Applause)
So the first robot to talk about is called STriDER.
It stands for Self-excited Tripedal Dynamic Experimental Robot.
It's a robot that has three legs, which is inspired by nature.
But have you seen anything in nature, an animal that has three legs?
Probably not. So why do I call this a biologically inspired robot?
How would it work?
So, you know H.G. Wells's "War of the Worlds," novel and movie.
And what you see over here is a very popular video game, and in this fiction, they describe these alien creatures and robots that have three legs that terrorize Earth.
This is an actual dynamic simulation animation.
I'm going to show you how the robot works.
It flips its body 180 degrees and it swings its leg between the two legs and catches the fall.
So that's how it walks.
But when you look at us human beings, bipedal walking, what you're doing is, you're not really using muscle to lift your leg and walk like a robot.
What you're doing is, you swing your leg and catch the fall, stand up again, swing your leg and catch the fall.
You're using your built-in dynamics, the physics of your body, just like a pendulum.
We call that the concept of passive dynamic locomotion.
What you're doing is, when you stand up, potential energy to kinetic energy, potential energy to kinetic energy.
It's a constantly falling process.
So even though there is nothing in nature that looks like this, really, we're inspired by biology and applying the principles of walking to this robot.
What you see here, this is what we want to do next.
We want to fold up the legs and shoot it up for long-range motion.
And it deploys legs -- it looks almost like "Star Wars" -- so when it lands, it absorbs the shock and starts walking.
What you see over here, this yellow thing, this is not a death ray.
(Laughter) This is just to show you that if you have cameras or different types of sensors, because it's 1.8 meters tall, you can see over obstacles like bushes and those kinds of things.
So we have two prototypes.
The first version, in the back, that's STriDER I.
The one in front, the smaller, is STriDER II.
The problem we had with STriDER I is, it was just too heavy in the body.
We had so many motors aligning the joints and those kinds of things.
So we decided to synthesize a mechanical mechanism so we could get rid of all the motors, and with a single motor, we can coordinate all the motions.
It's a mechanical solution to a problem, instead of using mechatronics.
So with this, now the top body is lighted up; it's walking in our lab.
This was the very first successful step.
It's still not perfected, its coffee falls down, so we still have a lot of work to do.
The second robot I want to talk about is called IMPASS.
It stands for Intelligent Mobility Platform with Actuated Spoke System.
It's a wheel-leg hybrid robot.
So think of a rimless wheel or a spoke wheel, but the spokes individually move in and out of the hub; so, it's a wheel-leg hybrid.
We're literally reinventing the wheel here.
Let me demonstrate how it works.
So in this video we're using an approach called the reactive approach.
Just simply using the tactile sensors on the feet, it's trying to walk over a changing terrain, a soft terrain where it pushes down and changes.
And just by the tactile information, it successfully crosses over these types of terrains.
But, when it encounters a very extreme terrain -- in this case, this obstacle is more than three times the height of the robot -- then it switches to a deliberate mode, where it uses a laser range finder and camera systems to identify the obstacle and the size.
And it carefully plans the motion of the spokes and coordinates it so it can show this very impressive mobility.
You probably haven't seen anything like this out there.
This is a very high-mobility robot that we developed called IMPASS.
Ah, isn't that cool?
When you drive your car, when you steer your car, you use a method called Ackermann steering.
The front wheels rotate like this.
For most small-wheeled robots, they use a method called differential steering where the left and right wheel turn the opposite direction.
For IMPASS, we can do many, many different types of motion.
For example, in this case, even though the left and right wheels are connected with a single axle rotating at the same angle of velocity, we simply change the length of the spoke, it affects the diameter, then can turn to the left and to the right.
These are just some examples of the neat things we can do with IMPASS.
This robot is called CLIMBeR: Cable-suspended Limbed Intelligent Matching Behavior Robot.
I've been talking to a lot of NASA JPL scientists -- at JPL, they are famous for the Mars rovers -- and the scientists, geologists always tell me that the real interesting science, the science-rich sites, are always at the cliffs.
But the current rovers cannot get there.
So, inspired by that, we wanted to build a robot that can climb a structured cliff environment.
So this is CLIMBeR.
It has three legs.
It's probably difficult to see, but it has a winch and a cable at the top.
It tries to figure out the best place to put its foot.
And then once it figures that out, in real time, it calculates the force distribution: how much force it needs to exert to the surface so it doesn't tip and doesn't slip.
Once it stabilizes that, it lifts a foot, and then with the winch, it can climb up these kinds of cliffs.
Also for search and rescue applications as well.
Five years ago, I actually worked at NASA JPL during the summer as a faculty fellow.
And they already had a six-legged robot called LEMUR.
So this is actually based on that.
This robot is called MARS: Multi-Appendage Robotic System.
We developed our adaptive gait planner.
We actually have a very interesting payload on there.
The students like to have fun.
And here you can see that it's walking over unstructured terrain.
(Motor sound) It's trying to walk on the coastal terrain, a sandy area, but depending on the moisture content or the grain size of the sand, the foot's soil sinkage model changes, so it tries to adapt its gait to successfully cross over these kind of things.
It also does some fun stuff.
As you can imagine, we get so many visitors visiting our lab.
So when the visitors come, MARS walks up to the computer, starts typing, "Hello, my name is MARS.
Welcome to RoMeLa, the Robotics Mechanisms Laboratory at Virginia Tech."
(Laughter) This robot is an amoeba robot.
Now, we don't have enough time to go into technical details, I'll just show you some of the experiments.
These are some of the early feasibility experiments.
We store potential energy to the elastic skin to make it move, or use active tension cords to make it move forward and backward.
We also have been working with some scientists and engineers from UPenn to come up with a chemically actuated version of this amoeba robot.
We do something to something, and just like magic, it moves.
This robot is a very recent project.
It's called RAPHaEL: Robotic Air-Powered Hand with Elastic Ligaments.
There are a lot of really neat, very good robotic hands out there on the market.
So for prosthesis applications it's probably not too practical, because it's not affordable.
Instead of using electrical motors, electromechanical actuators, we're using compressed air.
We developed these novel actuators for the joints, so it's compliant.
You can actually change the force, simply just changing the air pressure.
And it can actually crush an empty soda can.
It can pick up very delicate objects like a raw egg, or in this case, a lightbulb.
The best part: it took only 200 dollars to make the first prototype.
This robot is actually a family of snake robots that we call HyDRAS, Hyper Degrees-of-freedom Robotic Articulated Serpentine.
This is a robot that can climb structures.
This is a HyDRAS's arm.
It's a 12-degrees-of-freedom robotic arm.
But the cool part is the user interface.
The cable over there, that's an optical fiber.
This student, it's probably her first time using it, but she can articulate it in many different ways.
So, for example, in Iraq, the war zone, there are roadside bombs.
Currently, you send these remotely controlled vehicles that are armed.
It takes really a lot of time and it's expensive to train the operator to operate this complex arm.
In this case, it's very intuitive; this student, probably his first time using it, is doing very complex manipulation tasks, picking up objects and doing manipulation, just like that.
Now, this robot is currently our star robot.
We actually have a fan club for the robot, DARwIn: Dynamic Anthropomorphic Robot with Intelligence.
As you know, we're very interested in human walking, so we decided to build a small humanoid robot.
This was in 2004; at that time, this was something really, really revolutionary.
This was more of a feasibility study: What kind of motors should we use? Is it even possible?
What kinds of controls should we do?
This does not have any sensors, so it's an open-loop control.
For those who probably know, if you don't have any sensors and there's any disturbances, you know what happens.
(Laughter) Based on that success, the following year we did the proper mechanical design, starting from kinematics.
And thus, DARwIn I was born in 2005.
It stands up, it walks -- very impressive.
However, still, as you can see, it has a cord, an umbilical cord.
So we're still using an external power source and external computation.
So in 2006, now it's really time to have fun.
Let's give it intelligence.
We give it all the computing power it needs: a 1.5 gigahertz Pentium M chip, two FireWire cameras, rate gyros, accelerometers, four forced sensors on the foot, lithium polymer batteries -- and now DARwIn II is completely autonomous.
It is not remote controlled. There's no tethers.
It looks around, searches for the ball ... looks around, searches for the ball, and it tries to play a game of soccer autonomously -- artificial intelligence.
Let's see how it does.
(Video) Spectators: Goal!
Dennis Hong: There is actually a competition called RoboCup.
I don't know how many of you have heard about RoboCup.
It's an international autonomous robot soccer competition.
And the actual goal of RoboCup is, by the year 2050, we want to have full-size, autonomous humanoid robots play soccer against the human World Cup champions and win.
(Laughter) It's a true, actual goal.
It's a very ambitious goal, but we truly believe we can do it.
This is last year in China.
We were the very first team in the United States that qualified in the humanoid RoboCup competition.
You're going to see the action is three against three, completely autonomous.
(Video) (Crowd groans) DH: There you go. Yes!
The robots track and they team-play amongst themselves.
It's very impressive.
It's really a research event, packaged in a more exciting competition event.
What you see here is the beautiful Louis Vuitton Cup trophy.
This is for the best humanoid.
We'd like to bring this, for the first time, to the United States next year, so wish us luck.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) DARwIn also has a lot of other talents.
Last year, it actually conducted the Roanoke Symphony Orchestra for the holiday concert.
This is the next generation robot, DARwIn IV, much smarter, faster, stronger.
And it's trying to show off its ability: "I'm macho, I'm strong."
(Laughter) "I can also do some Jackie Chan-motion, martial art movements."
(Laughter) And it walks away. So this is DARwIn IV.
Again, you'll be able to see it in the lobby.
We truly believe this will be the very first running humanoid robot in the United States.
So stay tuned.
So, what is the secret of our success?
Where do we come up with these ideas?
How do we develop these kinds of ideas?
We have a fully autonomous vehicle that can drive into urban environments.
We won a half a million dollars in the DARPA Urban Challenge.
We also have the world's very first vehicle that can be driven by the blind.
We call it the Blind Driver Challenge, very exciting.
And many, many other robotics projects I want to talk about.
These are just the awards that we won in 2007 fall from robotics competitions and those kinds of things.
So really, we have five secrets.
First is: Where do we get inspiration?
Where do we get this spark of imagination?
At night, when I go to bed, at three, four in the morning, I lie down, close my eyes, and I see these lines and circles and different shapes floating around.
And they assemble, and they form these kinds of mechanisms.
And I think, "Ah, this is cool."
So right next to my bed I keep a notebook, a journal, with a special pen that has an LED light on it, because I don't want to turn on the light and wake up my wife.
So I see this, scribble everything down, draw things, and go to bed.
Every day in the morning, the first thing I do, before my first cup of coffee, before I brush my teeth, I open my notebook.
Many times it's empty; sometimes I have something there.
If something's there, sometimes it's junk.
Four in the morning -- what do you expect, right?
So I need to decipher what I wrote.
But sometimes I see this ingenious idea in there, and I have this eureka moment.
I directly run to my home office, sit at my computer, I type in the ideas, I sketch things out and I keep a database of ideas.
So when we have these calls for proposals, I try to find a match between my potential ideas and the problem.
If there's a match, we write a research proposal, get the research funding in, and that's how we start our research programs.
How do we develop these kinds of ideas?
At our lab RoMeLa, the Robotics and Mechanisms Laboratory, we have these fantastic brainstorming sessions.
So we gather around, we discuss problems and solutions and talk about it.
But before we start, we set this golden rule.
The rule is: nobody criticizes anybody's ideas.
Nobody criticizes any opinion.
This is important, because many times, students fear or feel uncomfortable about how others might think about their opinions and thoughts.
So once you do this, it is amazing how the students open up.
They have these wacky, cool, crazy, brilliant ideas, and the whole room is just electrified with creative energy.
And this is how we develop our ideas.
Well, we're running out of time.
One more thing I want to talk about is, you know, just a spark of idea and development is not good enough.
There was a great TED moment -- I think it was Sir Ken Robinson, was it?
He gave a talk about how education and school kill creativity.
Well, actually, there's two sides to the story.
So there is only so much one can do with just ingenious ideas and creativity and good engineering intuition.
If you want to go beyond a tinkering, if you want to go beyond a hobby of robotics and really tackle the grand challenges of robotics through rigorous research, we need more than that.
Batman, fighting against the bad guys, he has his utility belt, he has his grappling hook, he has all different kinds of gadgets.
For us roboticists, engineers and scientists, these tools are the courses and classes you take in class.
Math, differential equations.
I have linear algebra, science, physics -- even, nowadays, chemistry and biology, as you've seen.
These are all the tools we need.
So the more tools you have, for Batman, more effective at fighting the bad guys, for us, more tools to attack these kinds of big problems.
So education is very important.
Also -- it's not only about that.
You also have to work really, really hard.
So I always tell my students, "Work smart, then work hard."
I guarantee if you come to our lab at 3, 4am, we have students working there, not because I tell them to, but because we are having too much fun.
Which leads to the last topic: do not forget to have fun.
That's really the secret of our success, we're having too much fun.
I truly believe that highest productivity comes when you're having fun, and that's what we're doing.
And there you go.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. I have two missions here today.
The first is to tell you something about pollen, I hope, and to convince you that it's more than just something that gets up your nose.
And, secondly, to convince you that every home really ought to have a scanning electron microscope.
(Laughter) Pollen is a flower's way of making more flowers.
It carries male sex cells from one flower to another.
This gives us genetic diversity, or at least it gives the plants genetic diversity.
And it's really rather better not to mate with yourself.
That's probably true of humans as well, mostly.
Pollen is produced by the anthers of flowers.
Each anther can carry up to 100,000 grains of pollen, so, it's quite prolific stuff.
And it isn't just bright flowers that have pollen; it's also trees and grasses.
And remember that all our cereal crops are grasses as well.
Here is a scanning electron micrograph of a grain of pollen.
The little hole in the middle, we'll come to a bit later, but that's for the pollen tube to come out later on. A very tiny tube.
So, that's 20 micrometers across, that pollen grain there.
That's about a 50th of a millimeter.
But not all pollen is quite so simple looking.
This is Morina. This is a plant -- which I've always thought to be rather tedious -- named after Morin, who was an enterprising French gardener, who issued the first seed catalog in 1621.
But anyway, take a look at its pollen.
This is amazing, I think.
That little hole in the middle there is for the pollen tube, and when the pollen finds its special female spot in another Morina flower, just on the right species, what happens?
Like I said, pollen carries the male sex cells.
If you actually didn't realize that plants have sex, they have rampant, promiscuous and really quite interesting and curious sex. Really.
(Laughter) A lot.
My story is actually not about plant propagation, but about pollen itself.
"So, what are pollen's properties?" I hear you ask.
First of all, pollen is tiny. Yes we know that.
It's also very biologically active, as anyone with hay fever will understand.
Now, pollen from plants, which are wind-dispersed -- like trees and grasses and so on -- tend to cause the most hay fever.
And the reason for that is they've got to chuck out masses and masses of pollen to have any chance of the pollen reaching another plant of the same species.
Here are some examples -- they're very smooth if you look at them -- of tree pollen that is meant to be carried by the wind.
Again -- this time, sycamore -- wind-dispersed.
So, trees: very boring flowers, not really trying to attract insects.
Cool pollen, though.
This one I particularly like.
This is the Monterey Pine, which has little air sacks to make the pollen carry even further.
Remember, that thing is just about 30 micrometers across.
Now, it's much more efficient if you can get insects to do your bidding.
This is a bee's leg with the pollen glommed onto it from a mallow plant.
And this is the outrageous and beautiful flower of the mangrove palm.
Very showy, to attract lots of insects to do its bidding.
The pollen has little barbs on it, if we look.
Now, those little barbs obviously stick to the insects well, but there is something else that we can tell from this photograph, and that is that you might be able to see a fracture line across what would be the equator of this, if it was the Earth.
That tells me that it's actually been fossilized, this pollen.
And I'm rather proud to say that this was found just near London, and that 55 million years ago London was full of mangroves.
Isn't that cool?
(Laughter) Okay, so this is another species evolved to be dispersed by insects.
You can tell that from the little barbs on there.
All these pictures were taken with a scanning electron microscope, actually in the lab at Kew Laboratories.
No coincidence that these were taken by Rob Kesseler, who is an artist, and I think it's someone with a design and artistic eye like him that has managed to bring out the best in pollen.
(Laughter) Now, all this diversity means that you can look at a pollen grain and tell what species it came from, and that's actually quite handy if you maybe have a sample and you want to see where it came from.
So, different species of plants grow in different places, and some pollen carries further than others.
So, if you have a pollen sample, then in principle, you should be able to tell where that sample came from.
And this is where it gets interesting for forensics.
Pollen is tiny. It gets on to things, and it sticks to them.
So, not only does each type of pollen look different, but each habitat has a different combination of plants.
A different pollen signature, if you like, or a different pollen fingerprint.
By looking at the proportions and combinations of different kinds of pollen in a sample, you can tell very precisely where it came from.
This is some pollen embedded in a cotton shirt, similar to the one that I'm wearing now.
Now, much of the pollen will still be there after repeated washings.
Where has it been?
Four very different habitats might look similar, but they've got very different pollen signatures.
Actually this one is particularly easy, these pictures were all taken in different countries.
But pollen forensics can be very subtle.
It's being used now to track where counterfeit drugs have been made, where banknotes have come from, to look at the provenance of antiques and see that they really did come from the place the seller said they did.
And murder suspects have been tracked using their clothing, certainly in the U.K., to within an area that's small enough that you can send in tracker dogs to find the murder victim.
So, you can tell from a piece of clothing to within about a kilometer or so, where that piece of clothing has been recently and then send in dogs.
And finally, in a rather grizzly way, the Bosnia war crimes; some of the people brought to trial were brought to trial because of the evidence from pollen, which showed that bodies had been buried, exhumed and then reburied somewhere else.
I hope I've opened your eyes, if you'll excuse the visual pun, (Laughter) to some of pollen's secrets.
This is a horse chestnut.
There is an invisible beauty all around us, each grain with a story to tell ...
each of us, in fact, with a story to tell from the pollen fingerprint that's upon us.
Thank you to the colleagues at Kew, and thank you to palynologists everywhere.
(Applause)
(Music)  My age is three hundred   and seventy-two   I think with the deepest regret   How I used to pick up and voraciously chew   the dear little boys that I met   I've eaten them raw in their holiday suits,   Eaten them curried with rice,   I've eaten them baked in their jackets and boots,   And found them exceedingly nice.   But now that my jaws are too weak for such fare,   I think it's increasingly rude   To do such a thing when I'm quite well aware   Little boys do not like being chewed.   Little boys do not like being chewed.  (Music)  So now I contentedly live upon eels,   And try to do nothing amiss   And pass all the time I can spare from my meals   In innocent slumber like this,   Innocent slumber like this.  (Applause) I suppose I owe you an explanation.
I've been working on a project for the last six years adapting children's poetry to music.
And that's a poem by Charles Edward Carryl, who was a stockbroker in New York City for 45 years, but in the evenings, he wrote nonsense for his children.
And this book was one of the most famous books in America for about 35 years.
"The Sleepy Giant," which is the song that I just sang, is one of his poems.
Now, we're going to do other poems for you, and here's a preview of some of the poets.
This is Rachel Field, Robert Graves -- a very young Robert Graves -- Christina Rossetti.
Ghosts, right?
Have nothing to say to us, obsolete, gone -- not so.
What I really enjoyed about this project is reviving these people's words.
Taking them off the dead, flat pages.
Bringing them to life, bringing them to light.
So, what we're going to do next is a poem that was written by Nathalia Crane.
Nathalia Crane was a little girl from Brooklyn.
When she was 10 years old in 1927, she published her first book of poems called "The Janitor's Boy."
Here she is.
And here's her poem.
(Music)  Oh, I'm in love with the janitor's boy,   And the janitor's boy is in love with me.   Oh, I'm in love with the janitor's boy,   And the janitor's boy is in love with me.   He's going to hunt for a desert isle   In our geography.   A desert isle with spicy trees   Somewhere in Sheepshead Bay;   A right nice place, just fit for two   Where we can live always.   Oh, I'm in love with the janitor's boy,   And the janitor's boy,  he's busy as can be;   Down in the cellar he's making a raft   Out of an old settee.   He'll carry me off, I know that he will,   For his hair is exceedingly red;   And the only thing that occurs to me   Is to dutifully shiver in bed.   And on the day that we sail, I will leave a little note   For my parents I hate to annoy:   "I have flown to an island in the bay   With my janitor's red haired-boy."   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy   I'm going to sail away   Gone to Sheepshead Bay   With my janitor's red-haired boy.   On an old settee   My red-haired boy and me   The janitor's red-haired boy.   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy   The janitor's red-haired boy  (Applause) The next poem is by E.E. Cummings, "Maggie and Milly and Molly and May."
(Music)  Maggie and Milly, Molly and May   They went down to the beach one day to play   And Maggie discovered a shell that sang   So sweetly she couldn't remember her troubles   Maggie and Milly, Molly and May   Maggie and Milly, Molly and May   Milly befriended a stranded star   Whose rays, whose rays   Five languid fingers were  (Music)  Maggie and Milly, Molly and May   Maggie and Milly, Molly and May  (Music)  Molly was chased by a horrible thing   Which raced sideways blowing   Blowing   Blowing   May came home with a smooth, round stone   Small as a world and as large as alone  (Music)  For whatever we lose like a you or a me   Always ourselves that we find at the sea  (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) The next poem is "If No One Ever Marries Me."
It was written by Laurence Alma-Tadema.
She was the daughter of a very, very famous Dutch painter who had made his fame in England.
He went there after the death of his wife of smallpox and brought his two young children.
One was his daughter, Laurence.
She wrote this poem when she was 18 years old in 1888, and I look at it as kind of a very sweet feminist manifesto tinged with a little bit of defiance and a little bit of resignation and regret.
(Music)  Well, if no one ever marries me   And I don't see why they should,   Nurse says I'm not pretty,   And you know I'm seldom good, seldom good --   Well, if no one ever marries me   I shan't mind very much;   Buy a squirrel in a cage   And a little rabbit-hutch.   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   I'll have a cottage near a wood   And a pony all my own   A little lamb quite clean and tame   That I can take to town.   And when I'm really getting old --   And 28 or nine --   Buy myself a little orphan girl   And bring her up as mine.   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   If no one marries me   Well, if no one marries me   Marries me   Well, if no one marries me   Marries me   Well, if no one marries me  Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
I became very curious about the poets after spending six years with them, and started to research their lives, and then decided to write a book about it.
And the burning question about Alma-Tadema was: Did she marry?
And the answer was no, which I found in the London Times archive.
She died alone in 1940 in the company of her books and her dear friends.
Gerard Manley Hopkins, a saintly man.
He became a Jesuit.
He converted from his Anglican faith.
He was moved to by the Tractarian Movement, the Oxford Movement, otherwise known as -- and he became a Jesuit priest.
He burned all his poetry at the age of 24 and then did not write another poem for at least seven years because he couldn't rectify the life of a poet with the life of a priest.
He died typhoid fever at the age of 44, I believe, 43 or 44.
At the time, he was teaching classics at Trinity College in Dublin.
A few years before he died, after he had resumed writing poetry, but in secret, he confessed to a friend in a letter that I found when I was doing my research: "I've written a verse.
It is to explain death to a child, and it deserves a piece of plain-song music."
And my blood froze when I read that because I had written the plain-song music 130 years after he'd written the letter.
And the poem is called, "Spring and Fall."
 Margaret, are you grieving   Over Goldengrove unleaving, by and by?   Leaves, like the things of man, you   With your fresh thoughts care for, can you?   But as the heart grows older   It will come to such sights much colder   By and by, nor spare a sigh   Though worlds of wanwood leafmeal lie;   And yet you will weep and you'll know why.   No matter child, the name:   Sorrow's springs are all the same   They're all the same.   Nor mouth had nor no mind expressed   What heart heard of, ghost had guessed:   It's the blight man was born for,   It is Margaret that you mourn for  Thank you so much.
(Applause) (Music) I'd like to thank everybody, all the scientists, the philosophers, the architects, the inventors, the biologists, the botanists, the artists ...
everyone that blew my mind this week.
Thank you.
(Applause)  Oh, a li la li la la la   La li la la li la la la la la la  (Applause)  La li la la la   La li la la la la   La li la la la la la la   La la la li la la la la la   You've been so kind and generous   I don't know how you keep on giving.   And for your kindness, I'm in debt to you.   And for your selflessness, my admiration.   And for everything you've done, you know I'm bound;   I'm bound to thank for it   La li la li la la la   La li la la li la li la la la  (Clapping)  La li la la la   La li la la la la   La li la li la la la   La li la la li la li la la   And you   Now you've been so kind and ...  Curb the enthusiasm, just a little bit.
Just bring it down a little. (Laughter) It's my turn.
I still have two minutes.
(Laughter) Okay, we're going to start that verse again.
 Well, you've been so ...  That's innovative, don't you think?
Calming the audience down; I'm supposed to be whipping you into a frenzy, and I, "That's enough. Sh." (Laughter)  Now, you've been kind and ...  I'm going to sing this to Bill Gates. (Laughter) I have so much admiration for him.
 Now, you've been so kind and generous,   I don't know how you keep on giving.   And for your kindness I'm in debt to you.   And I never could have come this far without you.   So for everything you've done, you know I'm bound   I'm bound to thank you for it  (Clapping)  La li la la li la la la   La li la la li la la la   La li la la la   La li la la la la   La li la la li la la la   La li la la li la li la la la   La li la la la   Oh, I want to thank you for so many gifts   You gave in love with tenderness   Thank you   I want to thank you for your generosity   the love and the honesty that you gave me   I want to thank you show my gratitude,  My love and my respect for you   I want to thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   I want to thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you  You know what?
I'll show you how to clap to this song. (Laughter) (Clapping)  I want to thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   Thank you, thank you   I want to thank you, thank you  It works better, right?
 I want to thank you, thank you   I want to thank you   Ooh hoo   Ooh hoo   Ooh hoo   Ooh hoo  Let's bring it down.
Decrescendo.
Gradually, bringing it down, bringing it down.
 I want to thank you, thank you  Finger popping, ain't no stopping.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Let's pretend right here we have a machine.
A big machine, a cool, TED-ish machine, and it's a time machine.
And everyone in this room has to get into it.
And you can go backwards, you can go forwards; you cannot stay where you are.
And I wonder what you'd choose, because I've been asking my friends this question a lot lately and they all want to go back.
I don't know. They want to go back before there were automobiles or Twitter or "American Idol."
I don't know.
I'm convinced that there's some sort of pull to nostalgia, to wishful thinking.
And I understand that.
I'm not part of that crowd, I have to say.
I don't want to go back, and it's not because I'm adventurous.
It's because possibilities on this planet, they don't go back, they go forward.
So I want to get in the machine, and I want to go forward.
This is the greatest time there's ever been on this planet by any measure that you wish to choose: health, wealth, mobility, opportunity, declining rates of disease ...
There's never been a time like this.
My great-grandparents died, all of them, by the time they were 60.
My grandparents pushed that number to 70.
My parents are closing in on 80.
So there better be a nine at the beginning of my death number.
But it's not even about people like us, because this is a bigger deal than that.
A kid born in New Delhi today can expect to live as long as the richest man in the world did 100 years ago.
Think about that, it's an incredible fact.
And why is it true?
Smallpox. Smallpox killed billions of people on this planet.
It reshaped the demography of the globe in a way that no war ever has.
It's gone. It's vanished.
We vanquished it. Puff.
In the rich world, diseases that threatened millions of us just a generation ago no longer exist, hardly.
Diphtheria, rubella, polio ...
does anyone even know what those things are?
Vaccines, modern medicine, our ability to feed billions of people, those are triumphs of the scientific method.
And to my mind, the scientific method -- trying stuff out, seeing if it works, changing it when it doesn't -- is one of the great accomplishments of humanity.
So that's the good news.
Unfortunately, that's all the good news because there are some other problems, and they've been mentioned many times.
And one of them is that despite all our accomplishments, a billion people go to bed hungry in this world every day.
That number's rising, and it's rising really rapidly, and it's disgraceful.
And not only that, we've used our imagination to thoroughly trash this globe.
Potable water, arable land, rainforests, oil, gas: they're going away, and they're going away soon, and unless we innovate our way out of this mess, we're going away too.
So the question is: Can we do that? And I think we can.
I think it's clear that we can make food that will feed billions of people without raping the land that they live on.
I think we can power this world with energy that doesn't also destroy it.
I really do believe that, and, no, it ain't wishful thinking.
But here's the thing that keeps me up at night -- one of the things that keeps me up at night: We've never needed progress in science more than we need it right now. Never.
And we've also never been in a position to deploy it properly in the way that we can today.
We're on the verge of amazing, amazing events in many fields, and yet I actually think we'd have to go back hundreds, 300 years, before the Enlightenment, to find a time when we battled progress, when we fought about these things more vigorously, on more fronts, than we do now.
People wrap themselves in their beliefs, and they do it so tightly that you can't set them free.
Not even the truth will set them free.
And, listen, everyone's entitled to their opinion; they're even entitled to their opinion about progress.
But you know what you're not entitled to?
You're not entitled to your own facts. Sorry, you're not.
And this took me awhile to figure out.
About a decade ago, I wrote a story about vaccines for The New Yorker. A little story.
And I was amazed to find opposition: opposition to what is, after all, the most effective public health measure in human history.
I didn't know what to do, so I just did what I do: I wrote a story and I moved on.
And soon after that, I wrote a story about genetically engineered food.
Same thing, only bigger.
People were going crazy.
So I wrote a story about that too, and I couldn't understand why people thought this was "Frankenfoods," why they thought moving molecules around in a specific, rather than a haphazard way, was trespassing on nature's ground.
But, you know, I do what I do. I wrote the story, I moved on.
I mean, I'm a journalist.
We type, we file, we go to dinner. It's fine.
(Laughter) But these stories bothered me, and I couldn't figure out why, and eventually I did.
And that's because those fanatics that were driving me crazy weren't actually fanatics at all.
They were thoughtful people, educated people, decent people.
They were exactly like the people in this room.
And it just disturbed me so much.
But then I thought, you know, let's be honest.
We're at a point in this world where we don't have the same relationship to progress that we used to.
We talk about it ambivalently.
We talk about it in ironic terms with little quotes around it: "progress."
Okay, there are reasons for that, and I think we know what those reasons are.
We've lost faith in institutions, in authority, and sometimes in science itself, and there's no reason we shouldn't have.
You can just say a few names and people will understand.
Chernobyl, Bhopal, the Challenger, Vioxx, weapons of mass destruction, hanging chads.
You know, you can choose your list.
There are questions and problems with the people we used to believe were always right, so be skeptical.
Ask questions, demand proof, demand evidence.
Don't take anything for granted.
But here's the thing: When you get proof, you need to accept the proof, and we're not that good at doing that.
And the reason that I can say that is because we're now in an epidemic of fear like one I've never seen and hope never to see again.
About 12 years ago, there was a story published, a horrible story, that linked the epidemic of autism to the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine shot.
Very scary.
Tons of studies were done to see if this was true.
Tons of studies should have been done; it's a serious issue.
The data came back.
The data came back from the United States, from England, from Sweden, from Canada, and it was all the same: no correlation, no connection, none at all.
It doesn't matter. It doesn't matter because we believe anecdotes, we believe what we see, what we think we see, what makes us feel real.
We don't believe a bunch of documents from a government official giving us data, and I do understand that, I think we all do.
But you know what?
The result of that has been disastrous.
Disastrous because here's a fact: The United States is one of the only countries in the world where the vaccine rate for measles is going down.
That is disgraceful, and we should be ashamed of ourselves.
It's horrible.
What kind of a thing happened that we could do that?
Now, I understand it. I do understand it.
Because, did anyone have measles here?
Has one person in this audience ever seen someone die of measles?
Doesn't happen very much.
Doesn't happen in this country at all, but it happened 160,000 times in the world last year.
That's a lot of death of measles -- 20 an hour.
But since it didn't happen here, we can put it out of our minds, and people like Jenny McCarthy can go around preaching messages of fear and illiteracy from platforms like "Oprah" and "Larry King Live."
And they can do it because they don't link causation and correlation.
They don't understand that these things seem the same, but they're almost never the same.
And it's something we need to learn, and we need to learn it really soon.
This guy was a hero, Jonas Salk.
He took one of the worst scourges of mankind away from us.
No fear, no agony. Polio -- puff, gone.
That guy in the middle, not so much.
His name is Paul Offit.
He just developed a rotavirus vaccine with a bunch of other people.
It'll save the lives of 400 to 500,000 kids in the developing world every year.
Pretty good, right?
Well, it's good, except that Paul goes around talking about vaccines and says how valuable they are and that people ought to just stop the whining.
And he actually says it that way.
So, Paul's a terrorist.
When Paul speaks in a public hearing, he can't testify without armed guards.
He gets called at home because people like to tell him that they remember where his kids go to school.
And why? Because Paul made a vaccine.
I don't need to say this, but vaccines are essential.
You take them away, disease comes back, horrible diseases. And that's happening.
We have measles in this country now.
And it's getting worse, and pretty soon kids are going to die of it again because it's just a numbers game.
And they're not just going to die of measles.
What about polio? Let's have that. Why not?
A college classmate of mine wrote me a couple weeks ago and said she thought I was a little strident.
No one's ever said that before.
She wasn't going to vaccinate her kid against polio, no way.
Fine.
Why? Because we don't have polio. And you know what?
We didn't have polio in this country yesterday.
Today, I don't know, maybe a guy got on a plane in Lagos this morning, and he's flying to LAX, right now he's over Ohio.
And he's going to land in a couple of hours, he's going to rent a car, and he's going to come to Long Beach, and he's going to attend one of these fabulous TED dinners tonight.
And he doesn't know that he's infected with a paralytic disease, and we don't either because that's the way the world works.
That's the planet we live on. Don't pretend it isn't.
Now, we love to wrap ourselves in lies. We love to do it.
Everyone take their vitamins this morning?
Echinacea, a little antioxidant to get you going.
I know you did because half of Americans do every day.
They take the stuff, and they take alternative medicines, and it doesn't matter how often we find out that they're useless.
The data says it all the time.
They darken your urine. They almost never do more than that.
(Laughter) It's okay, you want to pay 28 billion dollars for dark urine?
I'm totally with you.
(Laughter) Dark urine. Dark.
Why do we do that? Why do we do that?
Well, I think I understand, we hate Big Pharma.
We hate Big Government. We don't trust the Man.
And we shouldn't: Our health care system sucks.
It's cruel to millions of people.
It's absolutely astonishingly cold and soul-bending to those of us who can even afford it.
So we run away from it, and where do we run?
We leap into the arms of Big Placebo.
(Laughter) That's fantastic. I love Big Placebo.
(Applause) But, you know, it's really a serious thing because this stuff is crap, and we spend billions of dollars on it.
And I have all sorts of little props here.
None of it ... ginkgo, fraud; echinacea, fraud; acai -- I don't even know what that is but we're spending billions of dollars on it -- it's fraud.
And you know what? When I say this stuff, people scream at me, and they say, "What do you care? Let people do what they want to do.
It makes them feel good."
And you know what? You're wrong.
Because I don't care if it's the secretary of HHS who's saying, "Hmm, I'm not going to take the evidence of my experts on mammograms," or some cancer quack who wants to treat his patient with coffee enemas.
When you start down the road where belief and magic replace evidence and science, you end up in a place you don't want to be.
You end up in Thabo Mbeki South Africa.
He killed 400,000 of his people by insisting that beetroot, garlic and lemon oil were much more effective than the antiretroviral drugs we know can slow the course of AIDS.
Hundreds of thousands of needless deaths in a country that has been plagued worse than any other by this disease.
Please, don't tell me there are no consequences to these things.
There are. There always are.
Now, the most mindless epidemic we're in the middle of right now is this absurd battle between proponents of genetically engineered food and the organic elite.
It's an idiotic debate. It has to stop.
It's a debate about words, about metaphors.
It's ideology, it's not science.
Every single thing we eat, every grain of rice, every sprig of parsley, every Brussels sprout has been modified by man.
You know, there weren't tangerines in the garden of Eden.
There wasn't any cantaloupe. (Laughter) There weren't Christmas trees. We made it all.
We made it over the last 11,000 years.
And some of it worked, and some of it didn't.
We got rid of the stuff that didn't.
Now we can do it in a more precise way -- and there are risks, absolutely -- but we can put something like vitamin A into rice, and that stuff can help millions of people, millions of people, prolong their lives.
You don't want to do that?
I have to say, I don't understand it.
We object to genetically engineered food.
Why do we do that?
Well, the things I constantly hear are: Too many chemicals, pesticides, hormones, monoculture, we don't want giant fields of the same thing, that's wrong.
We don't companies patenting life.
We don't want companies owning seeds.
And you know what my response to all of that is?
Yes, you're right. Let's fix it.
It's true, we've got a huge food problem, but this isn't science.
This has nothing to do with science.
It's law, it's morality, it's patent stuff.
You know science isn't a company.
It's not a country.
It's not even an idea; it's a process.
It's a process, and sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't, but the idea that we should not allow science to do its job because we're afraid, is really very deadening, and it's preventing millions of people from prospering.
You know, in the next 50 years we're going to have to grow 70 percent more food than we do right now, 70 percent.
This investment in Africa over the last 30 years.
Disgraceful. Disgraceful.
They need it, and we're not giving it to them.
And why? Genetically engineered food.
We don't want to encourage people to eat that rotten stuff, like cassava for instance.
Cassava's something that half a billion people eat.
It's kind of like a potato.
It's just a bunch of calories. It sucks.
It doesn't have nutrients, it doesn't have protein, and scientists are engineering all of that into it right now.
And then people would be able to eat it and they'd be able to not go blind.
They wouldn't starve, and you know what?
That would be nice. It wouldn't be Chez Panisse, but it would be nice.
And all I can say about this is: Why are we fighting it?
I mean, let's ask ourselves: Why are we fighting it?
Because we don't want to move genes around?
This is about moving genes around. It's not about chemicals.
It's not about our ridiculous passion for hormones, our insistence on having bigger food, better food, singular food.
This isn't about Rice Krispies, this is about keeping people alive, and it's about time we started to understand what that meant.
Because, you know something?
If we don't, if we continue to act the way we're acting, we're guilty of something that I don't think we want to be guilty of: high-tech colonialism.
There's no other way to describe what's going on here.
It's selfish, it's ugly, it's beneath us, and we really have to stop it.
So after this amazingly fun conversation, (Laughter) you might want to say, "So, you still want to get in this ridiculous time machine and go forward?"
Absolutely. Absolutely, I do.
It's stuck in the present right now, but we have an amazing opportunity.
We can set that time machine on anything we want.
We can move it where we want to move it, and we're going to move it where we want to move it.
We have to have these conversations and we have to think, but when we get in the time machine and we go ahead, we're going to be happy we do.
I know that we can, and as far as I'm concerned, that's something the world needs right now.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
In my industry, we believe that images can change the world.
Okay, we're naive, we're bright-eyed and bushy-tailed.
The truth is that we know that the images themselves don't change the world, but we're also aware that, since the beginning of photography, images have provoked reactions in people, and those reactions have caused change to happen.
So let's begin with a group of images.
I'd be extremely surprised if you didn't recognize many or most of them.
They're best described as iconic: so iconic, perhaps, they're cliches.
In fact, they're so well-known that you might even recognize them in a slightly or somewhat different form.
(Laughter) But I think we're looking for something more.
We're looking for something more.
We're looking for images that shine an uncompromising light on crucial issues, images that transcend borders, that transcend religions, images that provoke us to step up and do something -- in other words, to act.
Well, this image you've all seen.
It changed our view of the physical world.
We had never seen our planet from this perspective before.
Many people credit a lot of the birth of the environmental movement to our seeing the planet like this for the first time -- its smallness, its fragility.
Forty years later, this group, more than most, are well aware of the destructive power that our species can wield over our environment.
And at last, we appear to be doing something about it.
This destructive power takes many different forms.
For example, these images taken by Brent Stirton in the Congo.
These gorillas were murdered, some would even say crucified, and unsurprisingly, they sparked international outrage.
Most recently, we've been tragically reminded of the destructive power of nature itself with the recent earthquake in Haiti.
Well, I think what is far worse is man's destructive power over man.
Samuel Pisar, an Auschwitz survivor, said, and I'll quote him, "The Holocaust teaches us that nature, even in its cruelest moments, is benign in comparison with man, when he loses his moral compass and his reason."
There's another kind of crucifixion.
The horrifying images from Abu Ghraib as well as the images from Guantanamo had a profound impact.
The publication of those images, as opposed to the images themselves, caused a government to change its policies.
Some would argue that it is those images that did more to fuel the insurgency in Iraq than virtually any other single act.
Furthermore, those images forever removed the so-called moral high ground of the occupying forces.
Let's go back a little.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the Vietnam War was basically shown in America's living rooms day in, day out.
News photos brought people face to face with the victims of the war: a little girl burned by napalm, a student killed by the National Guard at Kent State University in Ohio during a protest.
In fact, these images became the voices of protest themselves.
Now, images have power to shed light of understanding on suspicion, ignorance, and in particular -- I've given a lot of talks on this but I'll just show one image -- the issue of HIV/AIDS.
In the 1980s, the stigmatization of people with the disease was an enormous barrier to even discussing or addressing it.
A simple act, in 1987, of the most famous woman in the world, the Princess of Wales, touching an HIV/AIDS infected baby did a great deal, especially in Europe, to stop that.
She, better than most, knew the power of an image.
So when we are confronted by a powerful image, we all have a choice: We can look away, or we can address the image.
Thankfully, when these photos appeared in The Guardian in 1998, they put a lot of focus and attention and, in the end, a lot of money towards the Sudan famine relief efforts.
Did the images change the world?
No, but they had a major impact.
Images often push us to question our core beliefs and our responsibilities to each other.
We all saw those images after Katrina, and I think for millions of people they had a very strong impact.
And I think it's very unlikely that they were far from the minds of Americans when they went to vote in November 2008.
Unfortunately, some very important images are deemed too graphic or disturbing for us to see them.
I'll show you one photo here, and it's a photo by Eugene Richards of an Iraq War veteran from an extraordinary piece of work, which has never been published, called War Is Personal.
But images don't need to be graphic in order to remind us of the tragedy of war.
John Moore set up this photo at Arlington Cemetery.
After all the tense moments of conflict in all the conflict zones of the world, there's one photograph from a much quieter place that haunts me still, much more than the others.
Ansel Adams said, and I'm going to disagree with him, "You don't take a photograph, you make it."
In my view, it's not the photographer who makes the photo, it's you.
We bring to each image our own values, our own belief systems, and as a result of that, the image resonates with us.
My company has 70 million images.
I have one image in my office.
Here it is.
I hope that the next time you see an image that sparks something in you, you'll better understand why, and I know that speaking to this audience, you'll definitely do something about it.
And thank you to all the photographers.
(Applause)
First of all, I'm a geek.
I'm an organic food-eating, carbon footprint-minimizing, robotic surgery geek.
And I really want to build green, but I'm very suspicious of all of these well-meaning articles, people long on moral authority and short on data, telling me how to do these kinds of things.
And so I have to figure this out for myself.
For example: Is this evil?
I have dropped a blob of organic yogurt from happy self-actualized local cows on my counter top, and I grab a paper towel and I want to wipe it up.
But can I use a paper towel? (Laughter) The answer to this can be found in embodied energy.
This is the amount of energy that goes into any paper towel or embodied water, and every time I use a paper towel, I am using this much virtual energy and water.
Wipe it up, throw it away.
Now, if I compare that to a cotton towel that I can use a thousand times, I don't have a whole lot of embodied energy until I wash that yogurty towel.
This is now operating energy.
So if I throw my towel in the washing machine, I've now put energy and water back into that towel ...
unless I use a front-loading, high-efficiency washing machine, (Laughter) and then it looks a little bit better.
But what about a recycled paper towel that comes in those little half sheets?
Well, now a paper towel looks better.
Screw the paper towels. Let's go to a sponge.
I wipe it up with a sponge, and I put it under the running water, and I have a lot less energy and a lot more water.
Unless you're like me and you leave the handle in the position of hot even when you turn it on, and then you start to use more energy.
Or worse, you let it run until it's warm to rinse out your towel.
And now all bets are off.
(Laughter) So what this says is that sometimes the things that you least expect -- the position in which you put the handle -- have a bigger effect than any of those other things that you were trying to optimize.
Now imagine someone as twisted as me trying to build a house.
(Laughter) That's what my husband and I are doing right now.
And so, we wanted to know, how green could we be?
And there's a thousand and one articles out there telling us how to make all these green trade-offs.
And they are just as suspect in telling us to optimize these little things around the edges and missing the elephant in the living room.
Now, the average house has about 300 megawatt hours of embodied energy in it; this is the energy it takes to make it -- millions and millions of paper towels.
We wanted to know how much better we could do.
And so, like many people, we start with a house on a lot, and I'm going to show you a typical construction on the top and what we're doing on the bottom.
So first, we demolish it.
It takes some energy, but if you deconstruct it -- you take it all apart, you use the bits -- you can get some of that energy back.
We then dug a big hole to put in a rainwater catchment tank to take our yard water independent.
And then we poured a big foundation for passive solar.
Now, you can reduce the embodied energy by about 25 percent by using high fly ash concrete.
We then put in framing.
And so this is framing -- lumber, composite materials -- and it's kind of hard to get the embodied energy out of that, but it can be a sustainable resource if you use FSC-certified lumber.
We then go on to the first thing that was very surprising.
If we put aluminum windows in this house, we would double the energy use right there.
Now, PVC is a little bit better, but still not as good as the wood that we chose.
We then put in plumbing, electrical and HVAC, and insulate.
Now, spray foam is an excellent insulator -- it fills in all the cracks -- but it is pretty high embodied energy, and, sprayed-in cellulose or blue jeans is a much lower energy alternative to that.
We also used straw bale infill for our library, which has zero embodied energy.
When it comes time to sheetrock, if you use EcoRock it's about a quarter of the embodied energy of standard sheetrock.
And then you get to the finishes, the subject of all of those "go green" articles, and on the scale of a house they almost make no difference at all.
And yet, all the press is focused on that.
Except for flooring.
If you put carpeting in your house, it's about a tenth of the embodied energy of the entire house, unless you use concrete or wood for a much lower embodied energy.
So now we add in the final construction energy, we add it all up, and we've built a house for less than half of the typical embodied energy for building a house like this.
But before we pat ourselves too much on the back, we have poured 151 megawatt hours of energy into constructing this house when there was a house there before.
And so the question is: How could we make that back?
And so if I run my new energy-efficient house forward, compared with the old, non-energy-efficient house, we make it back in about six years.
Now, I probably would have upgraded the old house to be more energy-efficient, and in that case, it would take me more about 20 years to break even.
Now, if I hadn't paid attention to embodied energy, it would have taken us over 50 years to break even compared to the upgraded house.
So what does this mean?
On the scale of my portion of the house, this is equivalent to about as much as I drive in a year, it's about five times as much as if I went entirely vegetarian.
But my elephant in the living room flies.
Clearly, I need to walk home from TED.
But all the calculations for embodied energy are on the blog.
And, remember, it's sometimes the things that you are not expecting to be the biggest changes that are.
Thank you. (Applause)
My journey away from violent extremism began 22 years ago, when I denounced racism and left the American white supremacist skinhead movement that I had helped build.
(Cheers and applause) I was just 22 years old at the time, but I had already spent eight years, from the time I was 14 years old, as one of the earliest and youngest members and an eventual leader within America's most violent hate movement.
But I wasn't born into hate; in fact, it was quite the opposite.
I had a relatively normal childhood.
My parents are Italian immigrants who came to the United States in the mid-1960s and settled on the South Side of Chicago, where they eventually met, and opened a small beauty shop.
Right after I was born, things got a little bit more difficult.
They struggled to survive with raising a young family and a new business, often working seven days a week, 14 hours a day, taking on second and third jobs just to earn a meager living.
And quality time with my parents was pretty nonexistent.
Even though I knew they loved me very much, growing up, I felt abandoned.
I was lonely, and I started to withdraw, and then I started to resent my parents and become very angry.
And as I was growing up, through my teenage years, I started to act out to try and get attention from my parents.
And one day, when I was 14, I was standing in an alley, and I was smoking a joint, and a man who was twice my age, with a shaved head and tall black boots, came up to me, and he snatched the joint from my lips.
Then he put his hand on my shoulder and he looked me in the eyes, and he said, "That's what the communists and the Jews want you to do to keep you docile."
I was 14 years old, I'd been trading baseball cards and watching "Happy Days" -- I didn't really know what a Jew was.
(Laughter) It's true.
And the only communist that I knew was the bad Russian guy in my favorite Rocky movie.
(Laughter) And since I'm here baring my soul with you, I can reveal that I did not even know what the word "docile" meant.
(Laughter) Dead serious.
But it was as if this man in this alley had offered me a lifeline.
For 14 years, I'd felt marginalized and bullied.
I had low self-esteem.
And frankly, I didn't know who I was, where I belonged, or what my purpose was.
I was lost.
And overnight, because this man had pulled me in, and I had grabbed onto that lifeline with every fiber of my being, I had gone from "Joanie Loves Chachi" to full-blown Nazi.
Overnight.
I started to listen to the rhetoric and believe it.
I started to watch very closely as the leaders of this organization would target vulnerable young people who felt marginalized and then draw them in with promises of paradise that were broken.
And then I started to recruit myself.
I started to do that by making white-power music.
And soon, I became the leader of that infamous organization that was led by that man in that alley who recruited me that day, who was America's first neo-Nazi skinhead and who had radicalized me.
For the next eight years, I believed the lies that I had been fed.
And though I saw no evidence of it whatsoever, I didn't hesitate to blame every Jewish person in the world for what I thought was a white, European genocide being promoted by them through a multiculturalist agenda.
I blamed people of color for the crime and violence and the drugs in the city, completely neglecting the fact that I was committing acts of violence on a daily basis, and that in many cases, it was white supremacists who were funneling drugs into the inner cities.
And I blamed immigrants for taking jobs from white Americans, completely neglecting the fact that my parents were hardworking immigrants who struggled to survive, despite not getting help from anybody else.
For the next eight years, I saw friends die, I saw others go to prison and inflict untold pain on countless victims and their families' lives.
I heard horrific stories from young women in the movement, who'd been brutally raped by the very men they were conditioned to trust, and I myself committed acts of violence against people, solely for the color of their skin, who they loved, or the god that they prayed to.
I stockpiled weapons for what I thought was an upcoming race war.
I went to six high schools; I was kicked out of four of them, one of them, twice.
And 25 years ago, I wrote and performed racist music that found its way to the internet decades later and partially inspired a young white nationalist to walk into a sacred Charleston, South Carolina, church and senselessly massacre nine innocent people.
But then my life changed.
At 19 years old, I met a girl who was not in the movement, who didn't have a racist bone in her body, and I fell in love with her.
And at 19, we got married, and we had our first son.
And when I held my son in my arms in the delivery room that day, not only did I reconnect with some of the innocence that I had lost at 14 years old, but it also began to challenge the very important things that drew me to the movement to begin with: identity, community and purpose -- things that I had been struggling with as a young boy.
And now, I struggled with the concept of who I was again.
Was I this neo-Nazi hatemonger, or was I a caring father and husband?
Was my community the one that I had manufactured around me to boost my own ego, because I felt self-hatred for myself and I wanted to project it onto others, or was it the one that I had physically given life to?
Was my purpose to scorch the earth or was it to make it a better place for my family?
And suddenly, like a ton of bricks hit me, I became very confused with who I'd been for the last eight years.
And if only I'd been brave enough to walk away at that moment, to understand what the struggle was that was happening inside of me, then maybe tragedy could have been averted.
Instead, I did compromise.
I took myself off the streets for the benefit of my family, because I was nervous that maybe I could go to jail or end up dead, and they would have to fend for themselves.
So I stepped back as a leader, and instead I opened a record store that I was going to sell white-power music in, of course, because I was importing it in from Europe.
But I knew that if I was just a racist store selling racist music the community would not allow me to be there.
So I decided I was going to also stock the shelves with other music, like punk rock and heavy metal and hip-hop.
And while the white-power music that I was selling was 75 percent of my gross revenue, because people were driving in from all over the country to buy it from the only store that was selling it, I also had customers come in to buy the other music.
And eventually, they started to talk to me.
One day, a young black teen came in, and he was visibly upset.
And I decided to ask him what was wrong.
And he told me that his mother had been diagnosed with breast cancer.
And suddenly, this young black teenager, who I'd never had a meaningful conversation or interaction with, I was able to connect with, because my own mother had been diagnosed with breast cancer, and I could feel his pain.
On another occasion, a gay couple came in with their son, and it was undeniable to me that they loved their son in the same profound ways that I loved mine.
And suddenly, I couldn't rationalize or justify the prejudice that I had in my head.
I decided to pull the white-power music from the inventory when I became too embarrassed to sell it in front of my new friends.
And of course, the store couldn't sustain itself, so I had to close it.
At that same time, I lost nearly everything in my life.
I used it as an opportunity to walk away from the movement that I'd been a part of for eight years, the only identity, community and purpose that I'd really known for most of my life.
So I had nobody.
I lost my livelihood because I closed the store.
I didn't have a great relationship with my parents, even though they tried.
And my wife and children left me, because I hadn't left the movement and disengaged quickly enough.
And suddenly, I didn't know who I was again, or where I fit in or what my purpose was supposed to be.
I was miserable inside, and I often woke up in the morning wishing that I hadn't.
About five years in, one of the few friends that I had was concerned about my well-being, and she came to me and she said, "You need to do something, because I don't want to see you die."
And she suggested that I go apply for a job where she worked, at a company called IBM.
Yeah, I thought she was crazy, too.
(Laughter) Here I was, a closeted ex-Nazi covered in hate tattoos.
I didn't go to college.
I'd been kicked out of multiple high schools multiple times.
I didn't even own a computer.
But I went in, and somehow, miraculously, I got the job.
I was thrilled.
And then I became terrified to learn that they'd actually be putting me back at my old high school, the same one I got kicked out of twice, to install their computers.
This was a high school where I had committed acts of violence against students, against faculty; where I had protested out in front of the school for equal rights for whites and even had a sit-in in the cafeteria to try and demand a white student union.
And of course, as karma would have it, within the first couple of hours, who walks right by me but Mr. Johnny Holmes, the tough black security guard I had gotten in a fistfight with, that got me kicked out the second time and led out in handcuffs from the school.
He didn't recognize me, but I saw him, and I didn't know what to do.
I was frozen; I was this grown man now, years out of the movement, and I was sweating and I was trembling.
But I decided I had to do something.
And I decided I needed to suffer under the weight of my past, because for five years I had tried to outrun it.
I'd tried to make new friends and cover my tattoos with long sleeves, and I wouldn't admit it because I was afraid of being judged the same way I had judged other people.
Well, I decided I was going to chase Mr. Holmes out to the parking lot -- probably not the smartest decision that I made.
(Laughter) But when I found him, he was getting into his car, and I tapped him on the shoulder.
And when he turned around and he recognized me, he took a step back because he was afraid.
And I didn't know what to say.
Finally, the words came out of my mouth, and all I could think to say was, "I'm sorry."
And he embraced me, and he forgave me.
And he encouraged me to forgive myself.
He recognized that it wasn't the story of some broken go-nowhere kid who was going to just join a gang and go to prison.
He knew that this was the story of every young person who was vulnerable, who was searching for identity, community and purpose, and then hit a wall and was unable to find it and went down a dark path.
And he made me promise one thing, that I would tell my story to whoever would listen.
That was 18 years ago, and I've been doing it ever since.
(Applause) You might be asking yourself right now: How does a good kid from a hardworking immigrant family end up going down such a dark path?
One word: potholes.
That's right. Potholes.
I had a lot of potholes when I was kid.
We all had them -- you know, the things in life that we hit that invariably just kind of nudge us off our path, and if they remain unresolved or untreated or not dealt with, sometimes we can get dangerously lost down pretty dark corridors.
Potholes can be things like trauma, abuse, unemployment, neglect, untreated mental health conditions, even privilege.
And if we hit enough potholes on our journey in life, and we don't have the resources or the help to navigate around them or to pull us out, well, sometimes good people end up doing bad things.
One such person who had potholes is Darrell.
Darrell is from upstate New York.
He had read my memoir, and he was really upset about the ending.
You see, I'd gotten out of the movement and he was still in.
And he emailed me and he said, "I didn't really like the way that turned out."
And I said, "Well, I'm sorry."
(Laughter) "But if you want to talk about it, we could certainly do that."
And after a couple of weeks of going back and forth with Darrell, I learned he was a 31-year-old military veteran who had been injured and was really angry about not being able to go to Afghanistan to kill Muslims.
And one day on the phone, he told me that he had seen a Muslim man in the park praying, and that all he wanted to do was kick him in the face.
I flew to Buffalo the next day, and I sat down with Darrell, and I asked him, "Have you ever met a Muslim person before?"
And he said, "No!
Why the hell would I want to do that?
They're evil. I don't want anything to do with them."
I said, "OK."
So I excused myself, and I went into the bathroom and I took my phone out in the bathroom, and I Googled the local mosque, and I called them very quietly from the bathroom, and I said, "Excuse me, imam, I need a favor.
I have a Christian man who would really love to learn more about your religion."
(Laughter) "Do you mind if we stop by?"
Well, it took some convincing for Darrell to go, but finally we got there, and when I knocked on the door, the imam said he only had 15 minutes left for us, because he was preparing for a prayer service.
I said, "We'll take it."
We went in, and two and a half hours later, we came out after hugging and crying and, very strangely, bonding over Chuck Norris for some reason.
(Laughter) I don't know what it was about that, but that's what happened.
And I'm happy to say now that Darrell and the imam, you can often find them at the local falafel stand, having lunch together.
(Applause) You see, it's our disconnection from each other.
Hatred is born of ignorance.
Fear is its father, and isolation is its mother.
When we don't understand something, we tend to be afraid of it, and if we keep ourselves from it, that fear grows, and sometimes, it turns into hatred.
Since I've left the movement, I've helped over a hundred people disengage from extremist movements, from white supremacist groups -- (Applause) to even jihadist groups.
And the way I do that is not by arguing with them, not by debating them, not by even telling them they're wrong, even though, boy, I want to sometimes.
I don't do that.
Instead, I don't push them away.
I draw them in closer, and I listen very closely for their potholes, and then I begin to fill them in.
I try to make people more resilient, more self-confident, more able to have skills to compete in the marketplace so that they don't have to blame the other, the other that they've never met.
I'd like to just leave you with one last thing before I go.
Of all the people I've worked with, they will all tell you the same thing.
One, they became extremists because they wanted to belong, not because of ideology or dogma.
And second, what brought them out was receiving compassion from the people they least deserved it from, when they least deserved it.
(Applause) So I would like to leave you with a challenge: go out there today, tomorrow -- hopefully every day -- find somebody that you think is undeserving of your compassion and give it to them, because I guarantee you, they're the ones who need it the most.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I have all my life wondered what "mind-boggling" meant.
After two days here, I declare myself boggled, and enormously impressed, and feel that you are one of the great hopes -- not just for American achievement in science and technology, but for the whole world.
I've come, however, on a special mission on behalf of my constituency, which are the 10-to-the-18th-power -- that's a million trillion -- insects and other small creatures, and to make a plea for them.
If we were to wipe out insects alone, just that group alone, on this planet -- which we are trying hard to do -- the rest of life and humanity with it would mostly disappear from the land.
And within a few months.
Now, how did I come to this particular position of advocacy?
As a little boy, and through my teenage years, I became increasingly fascinated by the diversity of life.
I had a butterfly period, a snake period, a bird period, a fish period, a cave period and finally and definitively, an ant period.
By my college years, I was a devoted myrmecologist, a specialist on the biology of ants, but my attention and research continued to make journeys across the great variety of life on Earth in general -- including all that it means to us as a species, how little we understand it and how pressing a danger that our activities have created for it.
Out of that broader study has emerged a concern and an ambition, crystallized in the wish that I'm about to make to you.
My choice is the culmination of a lifetime commitment that began with growing up on the Gulf Coast of Alabama, on the Florida peninsula.
As far back as I can remember, I was enchanted by the natural beauty of that region and the almost tropical exuberance of the plants and animals that grow there.
One day when I was only seven years old and fishing, I pulled a "pinfish," they're called, with sharp dorsal spines, up too hard and fast, and I blinded myself in one eye.
I later discovered I was also hard of hearing, possibly congenitally, in the upper registers.
So in planning to be a professional naturalist -- I never considered anything else in my entire life -- I found that I was lousy at bird watching and couldn't track frog calls either.
So I turned to the teeming small creatures that can be held between the thumb and forefinger: the little things that compose the foundation of our ecosystems, the little things, as I like to say, who run the world.
In so doing, I reached a frontier of biology so strange, so rich, that it seemed as though it exists on another planet.
In fact, we live on a mostly unexplored planet.
The great majority of organisms on Earth remain unknown to science.
In the last 30 years, thanks to explorations in remote parts of the world and advances in technology, biologists have, for example, added a full one-third of the known frog and other amphibian species, to bring the current total to 5,400, and more continue to pour in.
Two new kinds of whales have been discovered, along with two new antelopes, dozens of monkey species and a new kind of elephant -- and even a distinct kind of gorilla.
At the extreme opposite end of the size scale, the class of marine bacteria, the Prochlorococci -- that will be on the final exam -- although discovered only in 1988, are now recognized as likely the most abundant organisms on Earth, and moreover, responsible for a large part of the photosynthesis that occurs in the ocean.
These bacteria were not uncovered sooner because they are also among the smallest of all Earth's organisms -- so minute that they cannot be seen with conventional optical microscopy.
Yet life in the sea may depend on these tiny creatures.
These examples are just the first glimpse of our ignorance of life on this planet.
Consider the fungi -- including mushrooms, rusts, molds and many disease-causing organisms.
60,000 species are known to science, but more than 1.5 million have been estimated to exist.
Consider the nematode roundworm, the most abundant of all animals.
Four out of five animals on Earth are nematode worms -- if all solid materials except nematode worms were to be eliminated, you could still see the ghostly outline of most of it in nematode worms.
About 16,000 species of nematode worms have been discovered and diagnosed by scientists; there could be hundreds of thousands of them, even millions, still unknown.
This vast domain of hidden biodiversity is increased still further by the dark matter of the biological world of bacteria, which within just the last several years still were known from only about 6,000 species of bacteria worldwide.
But that number of bacteria species can be found in one gram of soil, just a little handful of soil, in the 10 billion bacteria that would be there.
It's been estimated that a single ton of soil -- fertile soil -- contains approximately four million species of bacteria, all unknown.
So the question is: what are they all doing?
The fact is, we don't know.
We are living on a planet with a lot of activities, with reference to our living environment, done by faith and guess alone.
Our lives depend upon these creatures.
To take an example close to home: there are over 500 species of bacteria now known -- friendly bacteria -- living symbiotically in your mouth and throat probably necessary to your health for holding off pathogenic bacteria.
At this point I think we have a little impressionistic film that was made especially for this occasion.
And I'd like to show it.
Assisted in this by Billie Holiday.
(Video) And that may be just the beginning!
The viruses, those quasi-organisms among which are the prophages, the gene weavers that promote the continued evolution in the lives of the bacteria, are a virtually unknown frontier of modern biology, a world unto themselves.
What constitutes a viral species is still unresolved, although they're obviously of enormous importance to us.
But this much we can say: the variety of genes on the planet in viruses exceeds, or is likely to exceed, that in all of the rest of life combined.
Nowadays, in addressing microbial biodiversity, scientists are like explorers in a rowboat launched onto the Pacific Ocean.
But that is changing rapidly with the aid of new genomic technology.
Already it is possible to sequence the entire genetic code of a bacterium in under four hours.
Soon we will be in a position to go forth in the field with sequencers on our backs -- to hunt bacteria in tiny crevices of the habitat's surface in the way you go watching for birds with binoculars.
What will we find as we map the living world, as, finally, we get this underway seriously?
As we move past the relatively gigantic mammals, birds, frogs and plants to the more elusive insects and other small invertebrates and then beyond to the countless millions of organisms in the invisible living world enveloped and living within humanity?
Already what were thought to be bacteria for generations have been found to compose, instead, two great domains of microorganisms: true bacteria and one-celled organisms the archaea, which are closer than other bacteria to the eukaryota, the group that we belong to.
Some serious biologists, and I count myself among them, have begun to wonder that among the enormous and still unknown diversity of microorganisms, one might -- just might -- find aliens among them.
True aliens, stocks that arrived from outer space.
They've had billions of years to do it, but especially during the earliest period of biological evolution on this planet.
We do know that some bacterial species that have earthly origin are capable of almost unimaginable extremes of temperature and other harsh changes in environment, including hard radiation strong enough and maintained long enough to crack the Pyrex vessels around the growing population of bacteria.
There may be a temptation to treat the biosphere holistically and the species that compose it as a great flux of entities hardly worth distinguishing one from the other.
But each of these species, even the tiniest Prochlorococci, are masterpieces of evolution.
Each has persisted for thousands to millions of years.
Each is exquisitely adapted to the environment in which it lives, interlocked with other species to form ecosystems upon which our own lives depend in ways we have not begun even to imagine.
We will destroy these ecosystems and the species composing them at the peril of our own existence -- and unfortunately we are destroying them with ingenuity and ceaseless energy.
My own epiphany as a conservationist came in 1953, while a Harvard graduate student, searching for rare ants found in the mountain forests of Cuba, ants that shine in the sunlight -- metallic green or metallic blue, according to species, and one species, I discovered, metallic gold.
I found my magical ants, but only after a tough climb into the mountains where the last of the native Cuban forests hung on, and were then -- and still are -- being cut back.
I realized then that these species and a large part of the other unique, marvelous animals and plants on that island -- and this is true of practically every part of the world -- which took millions of years to evolve, are in the process of disappearing forever.
And so it is everywhere one looks.
The human juggernaut is permanently eroding Earth's ancient biosphere by a combination of forces that can be summarized by the acronym "HIPPO," the animal hippo.
H is for habitat destruction, including climate change forced by greenhouse gases.
I is for the invasive species like the fire ants, the zebra mussels, broom grasses and pathogenic bacteria and viruses that are flooding every country, and at an exponential rate -- that's the I.
The P, the first one in "HIPPO," is for pollution.
The second is for continued population, human population expansion.
And the final letter is O, for over-harvesting -- driving species into extinction by excessive hunting and fishing.
The HIPPO juggernaut we have created, if unabated, is destined -- according to the best estimates of ongoing biodiversity research -- to reduce half of Earth's still surviving animal and plant species to extinction or critical endangerment by the end of the century.
Human-forced climate change alone -- again, if unabated -- could eliminate a quarter of surviving species during the next five decades.
What will we and all future generations lose if much of the living environment is thus degraded?
Huge potential sources of scientific information yet to be gathered, much of our environmental stability and new kinds of pharmaceuticals and new products of unimaginable strength and value -- all thrown away.
The loss will inflict a heavy price in wealth, security and yes, spirituality for all time to come, because previous cataclysms of this kind -- the last one, that ended the age of dinosaurs -- took, normally, five to 10 million years to repair.
Sadly, our knowledge of biodiversity is so incomplete that we are at risk of losing a great deal of it before it is even discovered.
For example, even in the United States, the 200,000 species known currently actually has been found to be only partial in coverage; it is mostly unknown to us in basic biology.
Only about 15 percent of the known species have been studied well enough to evaluate their status.
Of the 15 percent evaluated, 20 percent are classified as "in peril," that is, in danger of extinction.
That's in the United States.
We are, in short, flying blind into our environmental future.
We urgently need to change this.
We need to have the biosphere properly explored so that we can understand and competently manage it.
We need to settle down before we wreck the planet.
And we need that knowledge.
This should be a big science project equivalent to the Human Genome Project.
It should be thought of as a biological moonshot with a timetable.
So this brings me to my wish for TEDsters, and to anyone else around the world who hears this talk.
I wish we will work together to help create the key tools that we need to inspire preservation of Earth's biodiversity.
And let us call it the "Encyclopedia of Life."
What is the "Encyclopedia of Life?" A concept that has already taken hold and is beginning to spread and be looked at seriously?
It is an encyclopedia that lives on the Internet and is contributed to by thousands of scientists around the world.
Amateurs can do it also.
It has an indefinitely expandable page for each species.
It makes all key information about life on Earth accessible to anyone, on demand, anywhere in the world.
I've written about this idea before, and I know there are people in this room who have expended significant effort on it in the past.
But what excites me is that since I first put forward this particular idea in that form, science has advanced.
Technology has moved forward.
Today, the practicalities of making such an encyclopedia, regardless of the magnitude of the information put into it, are within reach.
Indeed, in the past year, a group of influential scientific institutions have begun mobilizing to realize this dream.
I wish you would help them.
Working together, we can make this real.
The encyclopedia will quickly pay for itself in practical applications.
It will address transcendent qualities in the human consciousness, and sense of human need.
It will transform the science of biology in ways of obvious benefit to humanity.
And most of all, it can inspire a new generation of biologists to continue the quest that started, for me personally, 60 years ago: to search for life, to understand it and finally, above all, to preserve it.
That is my wish. Thank you.
I first became fascinated with octopus at an early age.
I grew up in Mobile, Alabama -- somebody's got to be from Mobile, right? -- and Mobile sits at the confluence of five rivers, forming this beautiful delta.
And the delta has alligators crawling in and out of rivers filled with fish and cypress trees dripping with snakes, birds of every flavor.
It's an absolute magical wonderland to live in -- if you're a kid interested in animals, to grow up in.
And this delta water flows to Mobile Bay, and finally into the Gulf of Mexico.
And I remember my first real contact with octopus was probably at age five or six.
I was in the gulf, and I was swimming around and saw a little octopus on the bottom.
And I reached down and picked him up, and immediately became fascinated and impressed by its speed and its strength and agility.
It was prying my fingers apart and moving to the back of my hand.
It was all I could do to hold onto this amazing creature.
Then it sort of calmed down in the palms of my hands and started flashing colors, just pulsing all of these colors.
And as I looked at it, it kind of tucked its arms under it, raised into a spherical shape and turned chocolate brown with two white stripes.
I'm going, "My gosh!" I had never seen anything like this in my life!
So I marveled for a moment, and then decided it was time to release him, so I put him down.
The octopus left my hands and then did the damnedest thing: It landed on the bottom in the rubble and -- fwoosh! -- vanished right before my eyes.
And I knew, right then, at age six, that is an animal that I want to learn more about. So I did.
And I went off to college and got a degree in marine zoology, and then moved to Hawaii and entered graduate school at the University of Hawaii.
And while a student at Hawaii, I worked at the Waikiki Aquarium.
And the aquarium had a lot of big fish tanks but not a lot of invertebrate displays, and being the spineless guy, I thought, well I'll just go out in the field and collect these wonderful animals I had been learning about as a student and bring them in, and I built these elaborate sets and put them on display.
Now, the fish in the tanks were gorgeous to look at, but they didn't really interact with people.
But the octopus did.
If you walked up to an octopus tank, especially early in the morning before anyone arrived, the octopus would rise up and look at you and you're thinking, "Is that guy really looking at me? He is looking at me!"
And you walk up to the front of the tank. Then you realize that these animals all have different personalities: Some of them would hold their ground, others would slink into the back of the tank and disappear in the rocks, and one in particular, this amazing animal ...
I went up to the front of the tank, and he's just staring at me, and he had little horns come up above his eyes.
So I went right up to the front of the tank -- I was three or four inches from the front glass -- and the octopus was sitting on a perch, a little rock, and he came off the rock and he also came down right to the front of the glass.
So I was staring at this animal about six or seven inches away, and at that time I could actually focus that close; now as I look at my fuzzy fingers I realize those days are long gone.
Anyway, there we were, staring at each other, and he reaches down and grabs an armful of gravel and releases it in the jet of water entering the tank from the filtration system, and -- chk chk chk chk chk! -- this gravel hits the front of the glass and falls down.
He reaches up, takes another armful of gravel, releases it -- chk chk chk chk chk! -- same thing.
Then he lifts another arm and I lift an arm.
Then he lifts another arm and I lift another arm.
And then I realize the octopus won the arms race, because I was out and he had six left. (Laughter) But the only way I can describe what I was seeing that day was that this octopus was playing, which is a pretty sophisticated behavior for a mere invertebrate.
So, about three years into my degree, a funny thing happened on the way to the office, which actually changed the course of my life.
A man came into the aquarium. It's a long story, but essentially he sent me and a couple of friends of mine to the South Pacific to collect animals for him, and as we left, he gave us two 16-millimeter movie cameras.
He said, "Make a movie about this expedition."
"OK, a couple of biologists making a movie -- this'll be interesting," and off we went. And we did, we made a movie, which had to be the worst movie ever made in the history of movie making, but it was a blast. I had so much fun.
And I remember that proverbial light going off in my head, thinking, "Wait a minute.
Maybe I can do this all the time.
Yeah, I'll be a filmmaker."
So I literally came back from that job, quit school, hung my filmmaking shingle and just never told anyone that I didn't know what I was doing.
It's been a good ride.
And what I learned in school though was really beneficial.
If you're a wildlife filmmaker and you're going out into the field to film animals, especially behavior, it helps to have a fundamental background on who these animals are, how they work and, you know, a bit about their behaviors.
But where I really learned about octopus was in the field, as a filmmaker making films with them, where you're allowed to spend large periods of time with the animals, seeing octopus being octopus in their ocean homes.
I remember I took a trip to Australia, went to an island called One Tree Island.
And apparently, evolution had occurred at a pretty rapid rate on One Tree, between the time they named it and the time I arrived, because I'm sure there were at least three trees on that island when we were there.
Anyway, one tree is situated right next to a beautiful coral reef.
In fact, there's a surge channel where the tide is moving back and forth, twice a day, pretty rapidly.
And there's a beautiful reef, very complex reef, with lots of animals, including a lot of octopus.
And not uniquely but certainly, the octopus in Australia are masters at camouflage.
As a matter of fact, there's one right there.
So our first challenge was to find these things, and that was a challenge, indeed.
But the idea is, we were there for a month and I wanted to acclimate the animals to us so that we could see behaviors without disturbing them.
So the first week was pretty much spent just getting as close as we could, every day a little closer, a little closer, a little closer.
And you knew what the limit was: they would start getting twitchy and you'd back up, come back in a few hours.
And after the first week, they ignored us.
It was like, "I don't know what that thing is, but he's no threat to me."
So they went on about their business and from a foot away, we're watching mating and courting and fighting and it is just an unbelievable experience.
And one of the most fantastic displays that I remember, or at least visually, was a foraging behavior.
And they had a lot of different techniques that they would use for foraging, but this particular one used vision.
And they would see a coral head, maybe 10 feet away, and start moving over toward that coral head.
And I don't know whether they actually saw crab in it, or imagined that one might be, but whatever the case, they would leap off the bottom and go through the water and land right on top of this coral head, and then the web between the arms would completely engulf the coral head, and they would fish out, swim for crabs.
And as soon as the crabs touched the arm, it was lights out.
And I always wondered what happened under that web.
So we created a way to find out, (Laughter) and I got my first look at that famous beak in action.
It was fantastic.
If you're going to make a lot of films about a particular group of animals, you might as well pick one that's fairly common.
And octopus are, they live in all the oceans.
They also live deep.
And I can't say octopus are responsible for my really strong interest in getting in subs and going deep, but whatever the case, I like that.
It's like nothing you've ever done.
If you ever really want to get away from it all and see something that you have never seen, and have an excellent chance of seeing something no one has ever seen, get in a sub.
You climb in, seal the hatch, turn on a little oxygen, turn on the scrubber, which removes the CO2 in the air you breathe, and they chuck you overboard.
Down you go. There's no connection to the surface apart from a pretty funky radio.
And as you go down, the washing machine at the surface calms down.
And it gets quiet.
And it starts getting really nice.
And as you go deeper, that lovely, blue water you were launched in gives way to darker and darker blue.
And finally, it's a rich lavender, and after a couple of thousand feet, it's ink black.
And now you've entered the realm of the mid-water community.
You could give an entire talk about the creatures that live in the mid-water.
Suffice to say though, as far as I'm concerned, without question, the most bizarre designs and outrageous behaviors are in the animals that live in the mid-water community.
But we're just going to zip right past this area, this area that includes about 95 percent of the living space on our planet and go to the mid-ocean ridge, which I think is even more extraordinary.
The mid-ocean ridge is a huge mountain range, 40,000 miles long, snaking around the entire globe.
And they're big mountains, thousands of feet tall, some of which are tens of thousands of feet and bust through the surface, creating islands like Hawaii.
And the top of this mountain range is splitting apart, creating a rift valley.
And when you dive into that rift valley, that's where the action is because literally thousands of active volcanoes are going off at any point in time all along this 40,000 mile range.
And as these tectonic plates are spreading apart, magma, lava is coming up and filling those gaps, and you're looking land -- new land -- being created right before your eyes.
And over the tops of them is 3,000 to 4,000 meters of water creating enormous pressure, forcing water down through the cracks toward the center of the earth, until it hits a magma chamber where it becomes superheated and supersaturated with minerals, reverses its flow and starts shooting back to the surface and is ejected out of the earth like a geyser at Yellowstone.
In fact, this whole area is like a Yellowstone National Park with all of the trimmings.
And this vent fluid is about 600 or 700 degrees F.
The surrounding water is just a couple of degrees above freezing.
So it immediately cools, and it can no longer hold in suspension all of the material that it's dissolved, and it precipitates out, forming black smoke.
And it forms these towers, these chimneys that are 10, 20, 30 feet tall.
And all along the sides of these chimneys is shimmering with heat and loaded with life.
You've got black smokers going all over the place and chimneys that have tube worms that might be eight to 10 feet long.
And out of the tops of these tube worms are these beautiful red plumes.
And living amongst the tangle of tube worms is an entire community of animals: shrimp, fish, lobsters, crab, clams and swarms of arthropods that are playing that dangerous game between over here is scalding hot and freezing cold.
And this whole ecosystem wasn't even known about until 33 years ago.
And it completely threw science on its head.
It made scientists rethink where life on Earth might have actually begun.
And before the discovery of these vents, all life on Earth, the key to life on Earth, was believed to be the sun and photosynthesis.
But down there, there is no sun, there is no photosynthesis; it's chemosynthetic environment down there driving it, and it's all so ephemeral.
You might film this unbelievable hydrothermal vent, which you think at the time has to be on another planet.
It's amazing to think that this is actually on earth; it looks like aliens in an alien environment.
But you go back to the same vent eight years later and it can be completely dead.
There's no hot water.
All of the animals are gone, they're dead, and the chimneys are still there creating a really nice ghost town, an eerie, spooky ghost town, but essentially devoid of animals, of course.
But 10 miles down the ridge...
pshhh! There's another volcano going.
And there's a whole new hydrothermal vent community that has been formed.
And this kind of life and death of hydrothermal vent communities is going on every 30 or 40 years all along the ridge.
And that ephemeral nature of the hydrothermal vent community isn't really different from some of the areas that I've seen in 35 years of traveling around, making films.
Where you go and film a really nice sequence at a bay.
And you go back, and I'm at home, and I'm thinking, "Okay, what can I shoot ...
Ah! I know where I can shoot that.
There's this beautiful bay, lots of soft corals and stomatopods."
And you show up, and it's dead.
There's no coral, algae growing on it, and the water's pea soup.
You think, "Well, what happened?"
And you turn around, and there's a hillside behind you with a neighborhood going in, and bulldozers are pushing piles of soil back and forth.
And over here there's a golf course going in.
And this is the tropics.
It's raining like crazy here.
So this rainwater is flooding down the hillside, carrying with it sediments from the construction site, smothering the coral and killing it.
And fertilizers and pesticides are flowing into the bay from the golf course -- the pesticides killing all the larvae and little animals, fertilizer creating this beautiful plankton bloom -- and there's your pea soup.
But, encouragingly, I've seen just the opposite.
I've been to a place that was a pretty trashed bay.
And I looked at it, just said, "Yuck," and go and work on the other side of the island.
Five years later, come back, and that same bay is now gorgeous. It's beautiful.
It's got living coral, fish all over the place, crystal clear water, and you go, "How did that happen?"
Well, how it happened is the local community galvanized.
They recognized what was happening on the hillside and put a stop to it; enacted laws and made permits required to do responsible construction and golf course maintenance and stopped the sediments flowing into the bay, and stopped the chemicals flowing into the bay, and the bay recovered.
The ocean has an amazing ability to recover, if we'll just leave it alone.
I think Margaret Mead said it best.
She said that a small group of thoughtful people could change the world.
Indeed, it's the only thing that ever has.
And a small group of thoughtful people changed that bay.
I'm a big fan of grassroots organizations.
I've been to a lot of lectures where, at the end of it, inevitably, one of the first questions that comes up is, "But, but what can I do?
I'm an individual. I'm one person.
And these problems are so large and global, and it's just overwhelming."
Fair enough question.
My answer to that is don't look at the big, overwhelming issues of the world.
Look in your own backyard.
Look in your heart, actually.
What do you really care about that isn't right where you live?
And fix it.
Create a healing zone in your neighborhood and encourage others to do the same.
And maybe these healing zones can sprinkle a map, little dots on a map.
And in fact, the way that we can communicate today -- where Alaska is instantly knowing what's going on in China, and the Kiwis did this, and then over in England they tried to ...
and everybody is talking to everyone else -- it's not isolated points on a map anymore, it's a network we've created.
And maybe these healing zones can start growing, and possibly even overlap, and good things can happen.
So that's how I answer that question.
Look in your own backyard, in fact, look in the mirror.
What can you do that is more responsible than what you're doing now?
And do that, and spread the word.
The vent community animals can't really do much about the life and death that's going on where they live, but up here we can.
In theory, we're thinking, rational human beings.
And we can make changes to our behavior that will influence and affect the environment, like those people changed the health of that bay.
Now, Sylvia's TED Prize wish was to beseech us to do anything we could, everything we could, to set aside not pin pricks, but significant expanses of the ocean for preservation, "hope spots," she calls them.
And I applaud that. I loudly applaud that.
And it's my hope that some of these "hope spots" can be in the deep ocean, an area that has historically been seriously neglected, if not abused.
The term "deep six" comes to mind: "If it's too big or too toxic for a landfill, deep six it!"
So, I hope that we can also keep some of these "hope spots" in the deep sea.
Now, I don't get a wish, but I certainly can say that I will do anything I can to support Sylvia Earle's wish.
And that I do.
Thank you very much. (Applause)
The brilliant playwright, Adrienne Kennedy, wrote a volume called "People Who Led to My Plays."
And if I were to write a volume, it would be called, "Artists Who Have Led My Exhibitions" because my work, in understanding art and in understanding culture, has come by following artists, by looking at what artists mean and what they do and who they are.
J.J. from "Good Times," (Applause) significant to many people of course because of "Dy-no-mite," but perhaps more significant as the first, really, black artist on primetime TV.
Jean-Michel Basquiat, important to me because [he was] the first black artist in real time that showed me the possibility of who and what I was about to enter into.
My overall project is about art -- specifically, about black artists -- very generally about the way in which art can change the way we think about culture and ourselves.
My interest is in artists who understand and rewrite history, who think about themselves within the narrative of the larger world of art, but who have created new places for us to see and understand.
I'm showing two artists here, Glenn Ligon and Kara Walker, two of many who really form for me the essential questions that I wanted to bring as a curator to the world.
I was interested in the idea of why and how I could create a new story, a new narrative in art history and a new narrative in the world.
And to do this, I knew that I had to see the way in which artists work, understand the artist's studio as a laboratory, imagine, then, reinventing the museum as a think tank and looking at the exhibition as the ultimate white paper -- asking questions, providing the space to look and to think about answers.
In 1994, when I was a curator at the Whitney Museum, I made an exhibition called Black Male.
It looked at the intersection of race and gender in contemporary American art.
It sought to express the ways in which art could provide a space for dialogue -- complicated dialogue, dialogue with many, many points of entry -- and how the museum could be the space for this contest of ideas.
This exhibition included over 20 artists of various ages and races, but all looking at black masculinity from a very particular point of view.
What was significant about this exhibition is the way in which it engaged me in my role as a curator, as a catalyst, for this dialogue.
One of the things that happened very distinctly in the course of this exhibition is I was confronted with the idea of how powerful images can be in people's understanding of themselves and each other.
I'm showing you two works, one on the right by Leon Golub, one on the left by Robert Colescott.
And in the course of the exhibition -- which was contentious, controversial and ultimately, for me, life-changing in my sense of what art could be -- a woman came up to me on the gallery floor to express her concern about the nature of how powerful images could be and how we understood each other.
And she pointed to the work on the left to tell me how problematic this image was, as it related, for her, to the idea of how black people had been represented.
And she pointed to the image on the right as an example, to me, of the kind of dignity that needed to be portrayed to work against those images in the media.
She then assigned these works racial identities, basically saying to me that the work on the right, clearly, was made by a black artist, the work on the left, clearly, by a white artist, when, in effect, that was the opposite case: Bob Colescott, African-American artist; Leon Golub, a white artist.
The point of that for me was to say -- in that space, in that moment -- that I really, more than anything, wanted to understand how images could work, how images did work, and how artists provided a space bigger than one that we could imagine in our day-to-day lives to work through these images.
Fast-forward and I end up in Harlem; home for many of black America, very much the psychic heart of the black experience, really the place where the Harlem Renaissance existed.
Harlem now, sort of explaining and thinking of itself in this part of the century, looking both backwards and forwards ...
I always say Harlem is an interesting community because, unlike many other places, it thinks of itself in the past, present and the future simultaneously; no one speaks of it just in the now.
It's always what it was and what it can be.
And, in thinking about that, then my second project, the second question I ask is: Can a museum be a catalyst in a community?
Can a museum house artists and allow them to be change agents as communities rethink themselves?
This is Harlem, actually, on January 20th, thinking about itself in a very wonderful way.
So I work now at The Studio Museum in Harlem, thinking about exhibitions there, thinking about what it means to discover art's possibility.
Now, what does this mean to some of you?
In some cases, I know that many of you are involved in cross-cultural dialogues, you're involved in ideas of creativity and innovation.
Think about the place that artists can play in that -- that is the kind of incubation and advocacy that I work towards, in working with young, black artists.
Think about artists, not as content providers, though they can be brilliant at that, but, again, as real catalysts.
The Studio Museum was founded in the late 60s.
And I bring this up because it's important to locate this practice in history.
To look at 1968, in the incredible historic moment that it is, and think of the arc that has happened since then, to think of the possibilities that we are all privileged to stand in today and imagine that this museum that came out of a moment of great protest and one that was so much about examining the history and the legacy of important African-American artists to the history of art in this country like Jacob Lawrence, Norman Lewis, Romare Bearden.
And then, of course, to bring us to today.
In 1975, Muhammad Ali gave a lecture at Harvard University.
After his lecture, a student got up and said to him, "Give us a poem."
And Mohammed Ali said, "Me, we."
A profound statement about the individual and the community.
The space in which now, in my project of discovery, of thinking about artists, of trying to define what might be black art cultural movement of the 21st century.
What that might mean for cultural movements all over this moment, the "me, we" seems incredibly prescient totally important.
To this end, the specific project that has made this possible for me is a series of exhibitions, all titled with an F -- Freestyle, Frequency and Flow -- which have set out to discover and define the young, black artists working in this moment who I feel strongly will continue to work over the next many years.
This series of exhibitions was made specifically to try and question the idea of what it would mean now, at this point in history, to see art as a catalyst; what it means now, at this point in history, as we define and redefine culture, black culture specifically in my case, but culture generally.
I named this group of artists around an idea, which I put out there called post-black, really meant to define them as artists who came and start their work now, looking back at history but start in this moment, historically.
It is really in this sense of discovery that I have a new set of questions that I'm asking.
This new set of questions is: What does it mean, right now, to be African-American in America?
What can artwork say about this?
Where can a museum exist as the place for us all to have this conversation?
Really, most exciting about this is thinking about the energy and the excitement that young artists can bring.
Their works for me are about, not always just simply about the aesthetic innovation that their minds imagine, that their visions create and put out there in the world, but more, perhaps, importantly, through the excitement of the community that they create as important voices that would allow us right now to understand our situation, as well as in the future.
I am continually amazed by the way in which the subject of race can take itself in many places that we don't imagine it should be.
I am always amazed by the way in which artists are willing to do that in their work.
It is why I look to art.
