Specifically, it feels like little bits of my time get slipped away to various things like this, like technology -- I check things.
I'll give you an example.
If this email shows up -- how many of you have gotten an email like this, right?
I've been tagged in a photo.
When this appears, I can't help but click on it right now.
Right? Because, like, what if it's a bad photo?
So I have to click it right now.
But I'm not just going to click "See photo," what I'm actually going to do is spend the next 20 minutes.
(Laughter) But the worst part is that I know this is what's going to happen, and even knowing that's what's going to happen doesn't stop me from doing it again the next time.
Or I find myself in a situation like this, where I check my email and I pull down to refresh, But the thing is that 60 seconds later, I'll pull down to refresh again.
Why am I doing this?
This doesn't make any sense.
But I'll give you a hint why this is happening.
What do you think makes more money in the United States than movies, game parks and baseball combined?
Slot machines.
How can slot machines make all this money when we play with such small amounts of money?
We play with coins.
How is this possible?
Well, the thing is ...
my phone is a slot machine.
Every time I check my phone, I'm playing the slot machine to see, what am I going to get?
What am I going to get?
Every time I check my email, I'm playing the slot machine, saying, "What am I going to get?"
Every time I scroll a news feed, I'm playing the slot machine to see, what am I going to get next?
And the thing is that, again, knowing exactly how this works -- and I'm a designer, I know exactly how the psychology of this works, I know exactly what's going on -- but it doesn't leave me with any choice, I still just get sucked into it.
So what are we going to do?
Because it leaves us with this all-or-nothing relationship with technology, right?
You're either on, and you're connected and distracted all the time, or you're off, but then you're wondering, am I missing something important?
In other words, you're either distracted or you have fear of missing out.
Right?
So we need to restore choice.
We want to have a relationship with technology that gives us back choice about how we spend time with it, and we're going to need help from designers, because knowing this stuff doesn't help.
We're going to need design help.
So what would that look like?
So let's take an example that we all face: chat -- text messaging.
So let's say there's two people.
Nancy's on the left and she's working on a document, and John's on the right.
And John suddenly remembers, "I need to ask Nancy for that document before I forget."
So when he sends her that message, it blows away her attention.
That's what we're doing all the time, bulldozing each other's attention, left and right.
And there's serious cost to this, because every time we interrupt each other, it takes us about 23 minutes, on average, to refocus our attention.
We actually cycle through two different projects before we come back to the original thing we were doing.
This is Gloria Mark's research combined with Microsoft research, that showed this.
And her research also shows that it actually trains bad habits.
The more interruptions we get externally, it's conditioning and training us to interrupt ourselves.
We actually self-interrupt every three-and-a-half minutes.
This is crazy.
So how do we fix this?
Because Nancy and John are in this all-or-nothing relationship.
Nancy might want to disconnect, but then she'd be worried: What if I'm missing something important?
Design can fix this problem.
Let's say you have Nancy again on the left, John on the right.
And John remembers, "I need to send Nancy that document."
Except this time, Nancy can mark that she's focused.
Let's say she drags a slider and says, "I want to be focused for 30 minutes," so -- bam -- she's focused.
Now when John wants to message her, he can get the thought off of his mind -- because he has a need, he has this thought, and he needs to dump it out before he forgets.
Except this time, it holds the messages so that Nancy can still focus, but John can get the thought off of his mind.
But this only works if one last thing is true, which is that Nancy needs to know that if something is truly important, John can still interrupt.
But instead of having constant accidental or mindless interruptions, we're now only creating conscious interruptions, So we're doing two things here.
We're creating a new choice for both Nancy and John, But there's a second, subtle thing we're doing here, too.
And it's that we're changing the question we're answering.
Instead of the goal of chat being: "Let's design it so it's easy to send a message" -- that's the goal of chat, it should be really easy to send a message to someone -- we change the goal to something deeper and a human value, which is: "Let's create the highest possible quality communication in a relationship between two people.
So we upgraded the goal.
Now, do designers actually care about this?
Do we want to have conversations about what these deeper human goals are?
Well, I'll tell you one story.
A little over a year ago, I got to help organize a meeting between some of technology's leading designers and Thich Nhat Hanh.
Thich Nhat Hanh is an international spokesperson for mindfulness meditation.
And it was the most amazing meeting.
You have to imagine -- picture a room -- on one side of the room, you have a bunch of tech geeks; on the other side of the room, you have a bunch of long brown robes, shaved heads, Buddhist monks.
And the questions were about the deepest human values, like what does the future of technology look like when you're designing for the deepest questions and the deepest human values?
And our conversation centered on listening more deeply to what those values might be.
He joked in our conversation that what if, instead of a spell check, you had a compassion check, meaning, you might highlight a word that might be accidentally abrasive -- perceived as abrasive by someone else.
So does this kind of conversation happen in the real world, not just in these design meetings?
Well, the answer is yes, and one of my favorites is Couchsurfing.
If you didn't know, Couchsurfing is a website that matches people who are looking for a place to stay with a free couch, from someone who's trying to offer it.
So, great service -- what would their design goal be?
What are you designing for if you work at Couchsurfing?
Well, you would think it's to match guests with hosts.
Right?
That's a pretty good goal.
But that would kind of be like our goal with messaging before, where we're just trying to deliver a message.
So what's the deeper, human goal?
Well, they set their goal as the need to create lasting, positive experiences and relationships between people who've never met before.
And the most amazing thing about this was in 2007, they introduced a way to measure this, which is incredible.
I'll tell you how it works.
For every design goal you have, you have to have a corresponding measurement to know how you're doing -- a way of measuring success.
So what they do is, let's say you take two people who meet up, and they take the number of days those two people spent together, and then they estimate how many hours were in those days -- how many hours did those two people spend together?
And then after they spend that time together, they ask both of them: How positive was your experience?
Did you have a good experience with this person that you met?
And they subtract from those positive hours the amount of time people spent on the website, because that's a cost to people's lives.
Why should we value that as success?
And what you were left with is something they refer to as "net orchestrated conviviality," or, really, just a net "Good Times" created.
The net hours that would have never existed, had Couchsurfing not existed.
Can you imagine how inspiring it would be to come to work every day and measure your success in the actual net new contribution of hours in people's lives that are positive, that would have never existed if you didn't do what you were about to do at work today?
Can you imagine a whole world that worked this way?
Can you imagine a social network that -- let's say you care about cooking, and it measured its success in terms of cooking nights organized and the cooking articles that you were glad you read, and subtracted from that the articles you weren't glad you read or the time you spent scrolling that you didn't like?
Imagine a professional social network that, instead of measuring its success in terms of connections created or messages sent, instead measured its success in terms of the job offers that people got that they were excited to get.
And subtracted the amount of time people spent on the website.
Or imagine dating services, like maybe Tinder or something, where instead of measuring the number of swipes left and right people did, which is how they measure success today, instead measured the deep, romantic, fulfilling connections people created.
Whatever that was for them, by the way.
But can you imagine a whole world that worked this way, that was helping you spend your time well?
Now to do this you also need a new system, because you're probably thinking, today's Internet economy -- today's economy in general -- is measured in time spent.
The more users you have, the more usage you have, the more time people spend, that's how we measure success.
But we've solved this problem before.
We solved it with organic, when we said we need to value things a different way.
We said this is a different kind of food.
So we can't compare it just based on price; this is a different category of food.
We solved it with Leed Certification, where we said this is a different kind of building that stood for different values of environmental sustainability.
What if we had something like that for technology?
What if we had something whose entire purpose and goal was to help create net new positive contributions to human life?
And what if we could value it a different way, so it would actually work?
Imagine you gave this different premium shelf space on app stores.
Imagine you had web browsers that helped route you to these kinds of design products.
Can you imagine how exciting it would be to live and create that world?
We can create this world today.
Company leaders, all you have to do -- only you can prioritize a new metric, which is your metric for net positive contribution to human life.
And have an honest conversation about that.
Maybe you're not doing so well to start with, but let's start that conversation.
Designers, you can redefine success; you can redefine design.
Arguably, you have more power than many people in your organization to create the choices that all of us live by.
Maybe like in medicine, where we have a Hippocratic oath to recognize the responsibility and this higher value that we have to treat patients.
What if designers had something like that, in terms of this new kind of design?
And users, for all of us -- we can demand technology that works this way.
Now it may seem hard, but McDonald's didn't have salads until the consumer demand was there.
Walmart didn't have organic food until the consumer demand was there.
We have to demand this new kind of technology.
And we can do that.
And doing that would amount to shifting from a world that's driven and run entirely on time spent, to world that's driven by time well spent.
I want to live in this world, and I want this conversation to happen.
Let's start that conversation now.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So we all have our own biases.
For example, some of us tend to think that it's very difficult to transform failing government systems.
When we think of government systems, we tend to think that they're archaic, set in their ways, and perhaps, the leadership is just too bureaucratic to be able to change things.
Well, today, I want to challenge that theory.
I want to tell you a story of a very large government system that has not only put itself on the path of reform but has also shown fairly spectacular results in less than three years.
This is what a classroom in a public school in India looks like.
There are 1 million such schools in India.
And even for me, who's lived in India all her life, walking into one of these schools is fairly heartbreaking.
By the time kids are 11, 50 percent of them have fallen so far behind in their education that they have no hope to recover.
11-year-olds cannot do simple addition, they cannot construct a grammatically correct sentence.
These are things that you and I would expect an 8-year-old to be able to do.
By the time kids are 13 or 14, they tend to drop out of schools.
In India, public schools not only offer free education -- they offer free textbooks, free workbooks, free meals, sometimes even cash scholarships.
And yet, 40 percent of the parents today are choosing to pull their children out of public schools and pay out of their pockets to put them in private schools.
As a comparison, in a far richer country, the US, that number is only 10 percent.
That's a huge statement on how broken the Indian public education system is.
So it was with that background that I got a call in the summer of 2013 from an absolutely brilliant lady called Surina Rajan.
She was, at that time, the head of the Department of School Education in a state called Haryana in India.
So she said to us, "Look, I've been heading this department for the last two years.
I've tried a number of things, and nothing seems to work.
Can you possibly help?"
Let me describe Haryana a little bit to you.
Haryana is a state which has 30 million people.
It has 15,000 public schools and 2 million plus children in those public schools.
So basically, with that phone call, I promised to help a state and system which was as large as that of Peru or Canada transform itself.
As I started this project, I was very painfully aware of two things.
One, that I had never done anything like this before.
And two, many others had, perhaps without too much success.
As my colleagues and I looked across the country and across the world, we couldn't find another example that we could just pick up and replicate in Haryana.
We knew that we had to craft our own journey.
But anyway, we jumped right in and as we jumped in, all sorts of ideas started flying at us.
People said, "Let's change the way we recruit teachers, let's hire new principals and train them and send them on international learning tours, let's put technology inside classrooms."
By the end of week one, we had 50 ideas on the table, all amazing, all sounded right.
There was no way we were going to be able to implement 50 things.
So I said, "Hang on, stop.
Let's first at least decide what is it we're trying to achieve."
So with a lot of push and pull and debate, Haryana set itself a goal which said: by 2020, we want 80 percent of our children to be at grade-level knowledge.
Now the specifics of the goal don't matter here, but what matters is how specific the goal is.
Because it really allowed us to take all those ideas which were being thrown at us and say which ones we were going to implement.
Does this idea support this goal? If yes, let's keep it.
But if it doesn't or we're not sure, then let's put it aside.
As simple as it sounds, having a very specific goal right up front has really allowed us to be very sharp and focused in our transformation journey.
And looking back over the last two and a half years, that has been a huge positive for us.
So we had the goal, and now we needed to figure out what are the issues, what is broken.
Before we went into schools, a lot of people told us that education quality is poor because either the teachers are lazy, they don't come into schools, or they're incapable, they actually don't know how to teach.
Well, when we went inside schools, we found something completely different.
On most days, most teachers were actually inside schools.
And when you spoke with them, you realized they were perfectly capable of teaching elementary classes.
But they were not teaching.
I went to a school where the teachers were getting the construction of a classroom and a toilet supervised.
I went to another school where two of the teachers had gone to a nearby bank branch to deposit scholarship money into kids' accounts.
At lunchtime, most teachers were spending all of their time getting the midday meal cooking, supervised and served to the students.
So we asked the teachers, "What's going on, why are you not teaching?"
And they said, "This is what's expected of us.
When a supervisor comes to visit us, these are exactly the things that he checks.
Has the toilet been made, has the meal been served.
When my principal goes to a meeting at headquarters, these are exactly the things which are discussed."
You see, what had happened was, over the last two decades, India had been fighting the challenge of access, having enough schools, and enrollment, bringing children into the schools.
So the government launched a whole host of programs to address these challenges, and the teachers became the implicit executors of these programs.
Not explicitly, but implicitly.
And now, what was actually needed was not to actually train teachers further or to monitor their attendance but to tell them that what is most important is for them to go back inside classrooms and teach.
They needed to be monitored and measured and awarded on the quality of teaching and not on all sorts of other things.
So as we went through the education system, as we delved into it deeper, we found a few such core root causes which were determining, which were shaping how people behaved in the system.
And we realized that unless we change those specific things, we could do a number of other things.
We could train, we could put technology into schools, but the system wouldn't change.
And addressing these non-obvious core issues became a key part of the program.
So, we had the goal and we had the issues, and now we needed to figure out what the solutions were.
We obviously did not want to recreate the wheel, so we said, "Let's look around and see what we can find."
And we found these beautiful, small pilot experiments all over the country and all over the world.
Small things being done by NGOs, being done by foundations.
But what was also interesting was that none of them actually scaled.
All of them were limited to 50, 100 or 500 schools.
And here, we were looking for a solution for 15,000 schools.
So we looked into why, if these things actually work, why don't they actually scale?
What happens is that when a typical NGO comes in, they not only bring in their expertise but they also bring in additional resources.
So they might bring in money, they might bring in people, they might bring in technology.
And in the 50 or 100 schools that they actually operate in, those additional resources actually create a difference.
But now imagine that the head of this NGO goes to the head of the School Education Department and says, "Hey, now let's do this for 15,000 schools."
Where is that guy or girl going to find the money to actually scale this up to 15,000 schools?
He doesn't have the additional money, he doesn't have the resources.
And hence, innovations don't scale.
So right at the beginning of the project, what we said was, "Whatever we have to do has to be scalable, it has to work in all 15,000 schools."
And hence, it has to work within the existing budgets and resources that the state actually has.
Much easier said than done.
(Laughter) I think this was definitely the point in time when my team hated me.
We spent a lot of long hours in office, in cafés, sometimes even in bars, scratching out heads and saying, "Where are the solutions, how are we going to solve this problem?"
In the end, I think we did find solutions to many of the issues.
I'll give you an example.
In the context of effective learning, one of the things people talk about is hands-on learning.
Children shouldn't memorize things from books, they should do activities, and that's a more effective way to learn.
Which basically means giving students things like beads, learning rods, abacuses.
But we did not have the budgets to give that to 15,000 schools, 2 million children.
We needed another solution.
We couldn't think of anything.
One day, one of our team members went to a school and saw a teacher pick up sticks and stones from the garden outside and take them into the classroom and give them to the students.
That was a huge eureka moment for us.
So what happens now in the textbooks in Haryana is that after every concept, we have a little box which are instructions for the teachers which say, "To teach this concept, here's an activity that you can do.
And by the way, in order to actually do this activity, here are things that you can use from your immediate environment, whether it be the garden outside or the classroom inside, which can be used as learning aids for kids."
And we see teachers all over Haryana using lots of innovative things to be able to teach students.
So in this way, whatever we designed, we were actually able to implement it across all 15,000 schools from day one.
Now, this brings me to my last point.
How do you implement something across 15,000 schools and 100,000 teachers?
The department used to have a process which is very interesting.
I like to call it "The Chain of Hope."
They would write a letter from the headquarters and send it to the next level, which was the district offices.
They would hope that in each of these district offices, an officer would get the letter, would open it, read it and then forward it to the next level, which was the block offices.
And then you would hope that at the block office, somebody else got the letter, opened it, read it and forwarded it eventually to the 15,000 principals.
And then one would hope that the principals got the letter, received it, understood it and started implementing it.
It was a little bit ridiculous.
Now, we knew technology was the answer, but we also knew that most of these schools don't have a computer or email.
However, what the teachers do have are smartphones.
They're constantly on SMS, on Facebook and on WhatsApp.
So what now happens in Haryana is, all principals and teachers are divided into hundreds of WhatsApp groups and anytime something needs to be communicated, it's just posted across all WhatsApp groups.
It spreads like wildfire.
You can immediately check who has received it, who has read it.
Teachers can ask clarification questions instantaneously.
And what's interesting is, it's not just the headquarters who are answering these questions.
Another teacher from a completely different part of the state will stand up and answer the question.
Everybody's acting as everybody's peer group, and things are getting implemented.
So today, when you go to a school in Haryana, things look different.
The teachers are back inside classrooms, they're teaching.
Often with innovative techniques.
When a supervisor comes to visit the classroom, he or she not only checks the construction of the toilet but also what is the quality of teaching.
Once a quarter, all students across the state are assessed on their learning outcomes and schools which are doing well are rewarded.
And schools which are not doing so well find themselves having difficult conversations.
Of course, they also get additional support to be able to do better in the future.
In the context of education, it's very difficult to see results quickly.
When people talk about systemic, large-scale change, they talk about periods of 7 years and 10 years.
But not in Haryana.
In the last one year, there have been three independent studies, all measuring student learning outcomes, which indicate that something fundamental, something unique is happening in Haryana.
Learning levels of children have stopped declining, and they have started going up.
Haryana is one of the few states in the country which is showing an improvement, and certainly the one that is showing the fastest rate of improvement.
These are still early signs, there's a long way to go, but this gives us a lot of hope for the future.
I recently went to a school, and as I was leaving, I ran into a lady, her name was Parvati, she was the mother of a child, and she was smiling.
And I said, "Why are you smiling, what's going on?"
And she said, "I don't know what's going on, but what I do know is that my children are learning, they're having fun, and for the time being, I'll stop my search for a private school to send them to."
So I go back to where I started: Can government systems transform?
I certainly believe so.
I think if you give them the right levers, they can move mountains.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a kid, I experienced something so powerful, I spent the rest of my life searching for it, and in all the wrong places.
What I experienced wasn't virtual reality.
It was music.
And this is where the story begins.
That's me, listening to the Beatles' "White Album."
And the look on my face is the feeling that I've been searching for ever since.
Music goes straight to the emotional vein, into your bloodstream and right into your heart.
It deepens every experience.
Fellas?
(Music) This is the amazing McKenzie Stubbert and Joshua Roman.
Music -- (Applause) Yeah.
Music makes everything have more emotional resonance.
Let's see how it does for this talk.
The right piece of music at the right time fuses with us on a cellular level.
When I hear that one song from that one summer with that one girl, I'm instantly transported back there again.
Hey, Stacey.
Here's a part of the story, though, where I got a little greedy.
I thought if I added more layers on top of the music, I could make the feelings even more powerful.
So I got into directing music videos.
This is what they looked like.
That's my brother, Jeff.
Sorry about this, Jeff.
(Laughter) Here's me, just so we're even.
Incredible moves.
Should've been a dancer.
(Laughter) These experiments grew, and in time, started to look more like this.
In both, I'm searching for the same thing, though, to capture that lightning in a bottle.
Except, I'm not.
Adding moving pictures over the music added narrative dimension, yes, but never quite equated the power that just raw music had for me on its own.
This is not a great thing to realize when you've devoted your life and professional career to becoming a music video director.
I kept asking myself, did I take the wrong path?
So I started thinking: if I could involve you, the audience, more, I might be able to make you feel something more as well.
So Aaron Koblin and I began auditioning new technologies that could put more of you inside of the work, like your childhood home in "The Wilderness Downtown," your hand-drawn portraits, in "The Johnny Cash Project," and your interactive dreams in "3 Dreams of Black."
We were pushing beyond the screen, trying to connect more deeply to people's hearts and imaginations.
But it wasn't quite enough.
It still didn't have the raw experiential power of pure music for me.
So I started chasing a new technology that I only had read about in science fiction.
And after years of searching, I found a prototype.
It was a project from Nonny de la Peña in Mark Bolas's lab in USC.
And when I tried it, I knew I'd found it.
I could taste the lightning.
It was called virtual reality.
This was it five years ago when I ran into it.
This is what it looks like now.
I quickly started building things in this new medium, and through that process we realized something: that VR is going to play an incredibly important role in the history of mediums.
In fact, it's going to be the last one.
I mean this because it's the first medium that actually makes the jump from our internalization of an author's expression of an experience, to our experiencing it firsthand.
You look confused. I'll explain. Don't worry.
(Laughter) If we go back to the origins of mediums, by all best guesses, it starts around a fire, with a good story.
Our clan leader is telling us about how he hunted the woolly mammoth on the tundra that day.
We hear his words and translate them into our own internal truths.
The same thing happens when we look at the cave painting version of the story, the book about the mammoth hunt, the play, the radio broadcast, the television show or the movie.
All of these mediums require what we call "suspension of disbelief," because there's a translation gap between the reality of the story and our consciousness interpreting the story into our reality.
I'm using the word "consciousness" as a feeling of reality that we get from our senses experiencing the world around us.
Virtual reality bridges that gap.
Now, you are on the tundra hunting with the clan leader.
Or you are the clan leader.
Or maybe you're even the woolly mammoth.
(Laughter) So here's what special about VR.
In all other mediums, your consciousness interprets the medium.
In VR, your consciousness is the medium.
So the potential for VR is enormous.
But where are we now?
What is the current state of the art?
Well, we are here.
We are the equivalent of year one of cinema.
This is the Lumière Brothers film that allegedly sent a theater full of people running for their lives as they thought a train was coming toward them.
Similar to this early stage of this medium, in VR, we also have to move past the spectacle and into the storytelling.
It took this medium decades to figure out its preferred language of storytelling, in the form of a feature film.
In VR today, we're more learning grammar than writing language.
We've made 15 films in the last year at our VR company, Vrse, and we've learned a few things.
We found that we have a unique, direct path into your senses, your emotions, even your body.
So let me show you some things.
For the purpose of this demo, we're going to take every direction that you could possibly look, and stretch it into this giant rectangle.
OK, here we go.
So, first: camera movement is tricky in VR.
Done wrong, it can actually make you sick.
We found if you move the camera at a constant speed in a straight line, you can actually get away with it, though.
The first day in film school, they told me you have to learn every single rule before you can break one.
We have not learned every single rule.
We've barely learned any at all, but we're already trying to break them to see what kind of creative things we can accomplish.
In this shot here, where we're moving up off the ground, I added acceleration.
I did that because I wanted to give you a physical sensation of moving up off the ground.
In VR, I can give that to you.
(Music) Not surprisingly, music matters a lot in this medium as well.
It guides us how to feel.
In this project we made with the New York Times, Zach Richter and our friend, JR, we take you up in a helicopter, and even though you're flying 2,000 feet above Manhattan, you don't feel afraid.
You feel triumphant for JR's character.
The music guides you there.
(Music) Contrary to popular belief, there is composition in virtual reality, but it's completely different than in film, where you have a rectangular frame.
Composition is now where your consciousness exists and how the world moves around you.
In this film, "Waves of Grace," which was a collaboration between Vrse, the United Nations, Gabo Arora, and Imraan Ismail, we also see the changing role of the close-up in virtual reality.
A close-up in VR means you're actually close up to someone.
It brings that character inside of your personal space, a space that we'd usually reserve for the people that we love.
And you feel an emotional closeness to the character because of what you feel to be a physical closeness.
Directing VR is not like directing for the rectangle.
It's more of a choreography of the viewer's attention.
One tool we can use to guide your attention is called "spatialized sound."
I can put a sound anywhere in front of you, to left or right, even behind you, and when you turn your head, the sound will rotate accordingly.
So I can use that to direct your attention to where I want you to see.
Next time you hear someone singing over your shoulder, it might be Bono.
(Laughter) VR makes us feel like we are part of something.
For most of human history, we lived in small family units.
We started in caves, then moved to clans and tribes, then villages and towns, and now we're all global citizens.
But I believe that we are still hardwired to care the most about the things that are local to us.
And VR makes anywhere and anyone feel local.
That's why it works as an empathy machine.
Our film "Clouds Over Sidra" takes you to a Syrian refugee camp, and instead of watching a story about people over there, it's now a story about us here.
But where do we go from here?
The tricky thing is that with all previous mediums, the format is fixed at its birth.
Film has been a sequence of rectangles, from Muybridge and his horses to now.
The format has never changed.
But VR as a format, as a medium, isn't complete yet.
It's not using physical celluloid or paper or TV signals.
It actually employs what we use to make sense of the world.
We're using your senses as the paints on the canvas, but only two right now.
Eventually, we can see if we will have all of our human senses employed, and we will have agency to live the story in any path we choose.
And we call it virtual reality right now, but what happens when we move past simulated realities?
What do we call it then?
What if instead of verbally telling you about a dream, I could let you live inside that dream?
What if instead of just experiencing visiting some reality on Earth, you could surf gravitational waves on the edge of a black hole, or create galaxies from scratch, or communicate with each other not using words but using our raw thoughts?
That's not a virtual reality anymore.
And honestly I don't know what that's called.
But I hope you see where we're going.
But here I am, intellectualizing a medium I'm saying is experiential.
So let's experience it.
In your hands, you hopefully hold a piece of cardboard.
Let's open the flap.
Tap on the power button to unlock the phone.
For the people watching at home, we're going to put up a card right now to show you how to download this experience on your phone yourself, and even get a Google cardboard of your own to try it with.
We played in cardboard boxes as kids, and as adults, I'm hoping we can all find a little bit of that lightning by sticking our head in one again.
You're about to participate in the largest collective VR viewing in history.
And in that classic old-timey style of yesteryear, we're all going to watch something at the exact same time, together.
Let's hope it works.
What's the countdown look like? I can't see.
Audience: ...15, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 (Birds singing) (Train engine) Audience: (Shreiks) (Video) JR: Let me tell you how I shot the cover of the New York Times Magazine, "Walking New York."
I just got strapped on outside the helicopter, and I had to be perfectly vertical so I could grab it.
And when I was perfectly above -- you know, with the wind, we had to redo it a few times -- then I kept shooting.
(Video) Woman's voice: Dear Lord, protect us from evil, for you are the Lord, the light.
You who gave us life took it away.
Let your will be done.
Please bring peace to the many who have lost loved ones.
Help us to live again.
(Music) (Video) (Children's voices) Child's voice: There are more kids in Zaatari than adults right now.
Sometimes I think we are the ones in charge.
Chris Milk: How was it?
(Applause) That was a cheap way of getting you to do a standing ovation.
I just made you all stand. I knew you'd applaud at the end.
(Applause) I believe that everyone on Earth needs to experience what you just experienced.
That way we can collectively start to shape this, not as a tech platform but as a humanity platform.
And to that end, in November of last year, the New York Times and Vrse made a VR project called "The Displaced."
It launched with one million Google Cardboards sent out to every Sunday subscriber with their newspaper.
But a funny thing happened that Sunday morning.
A lot of people got them that were not the intended recipients on the mailing label.
And we started seeing this all over Instagram.
Look familiar?
Music led me on a path of searching for what seemed like the unattainable for a very long time.
Now, millions of kids just had the same formative experience in their childhood that I had in mine.
Only I think this one surpasses it.
Let's see where this leads them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As a little Hawaiian, my mom and auntie always told me stories about Kalaupapa -- the Hawaiian leper colony surrounded by the highest sea cliffs in the world -- and Father Damien, the Belgian missionary who gave his life for the Hawaiian community.
As a young nurse, my aunt trained the nuns caring for the remaining lepers almost a 100 years after Father Damien died of leprosy.
I remember stories she told about traveling down switchback cliff paths on a mule, while my uncle played her favorite hula songs on the ukulele all the way down to Kalaupapa.
You see, as a youngster, I was always curious about a few things.
First was why a Belgian missionary chose to live in complete isolation in Kalaupapa, knowing he would inevitably contract leprosy from the community of people he sought to help.
And secondly, where did the leprosy bacteria come from?
And why were Kānaka Maoli, the indigenous people of Hawaii, so susceptible to developing leprosy, or "mai Pake?"
This got my curious about what makes us unique as Hawaiians -- namely, our genetic makeup.
But it wasn't until high school, through the Human Genome Project, that I realized I wasn't alone in trying to connect our unique genetic ancestry to our potential health, wellness and illness.
You see, the 2.7 billion-dollar project promised an era of predictive and preventative medicine based on our unique genetic makeup.
So to me it always seemed obvious that in order to achieve this dream, we would need to sequence a diverse cohort of people to obtain the full spectrum of human genetic variation on the planet.
That's why 10 years later, it continues to shock me, knowing that 96 percent of genome studies associating common genetic variation with specific diseases have focused exclusively on individuals of European ancestry.
Now you don't need a PhD to see that that leaves four percent for the rest of diversity.
And in my own searching, I've discovered that far less than one percent have actually focused on indigenous communities, like myself.
So that begs the question: Who is the Human Genome Project actually for?
Just like we have different colored eyes and hair, we metabolize drugs differently based on the variation in our genomes.
So how many of you would be shocked to learn that 95 percent of clinical trials have also exclusively featured individuals of European ancestry?
This bias and systematic lack of engagement of indigenous people in both clinical trials and genome studies is partially the result of a history of distrust.
For example, in 1989, researchers from Arizona State University obtained blood samples from Arizona's Havasupai tribe, promising to alleviate the burden of type 2 diabetes that was plaguing their community, only to turn around and use those exact same samples -- without the Havasupai's consent -- to study rates of schizophrenia, inbreeding, and challenge the Havasupai's origin story.
When the Havasupai found out, they sued successfully for $700,000, and they banned ASU from conducting research on their reservation.
This culminated in a sort of domino effect with local tribes in the Southwest -- including the Navajo Nation, one of the largest tribes in the country -- putting a moratorium on genetic research.
Now despite this history of distrust, I still believe that indigenous people can benefit from genetic research.
And if we don't do something soon, the gap in health disparities is going to continue to widen.
Hawaii, for example, has the longest life expectancy on average of any state in the US, yet native Hawaiians like myself die a full decade before our non-native counterparts, because we have some of the highest rates of type 2 diabetes, obesity, and the number one and number two killers in the US: cardiovascular disease and cancer.
So how do we ensure the populations of people that need genome sequencing the most are not the last to benefit?
My vision is to make genetic research more native, to indigenize genome sequencing technology.
Traditionally, genomes are sequenced in laboratories.
Here's an image of your classic genome sequencer.
It's huge.
It's the size of a refrigerator.
There's this obvious physical limitation.
But what if you could sequence genomes on the fly?
What if you could fit a genome sequencer in your pocket?
This nanopore-based sequencer is one 10,000th the size of your traditional genome sequencer.
It doesn't have the same physical limitations, in that it's not tethered to a lab bench with extraneous cords, large vats of chemicals or computer monitors.
It allows us to de-black box genome sequencing technology development in a way that's immersive and collaborative, activating and empowering indigenous communities ...
as citizen scientists.
100 years later in Kalaupapa, we now have the technology to sequence leprosy bacteria in real time, using mobile genome sequencers, remote access to the Internet and cloud computation.
But only if that's what Hawaiian people want.
In our space, on our terms.
IndiGenomics is about science for the people by the people.
We'll be starting with a tribal consultation resource, focused on educating indigenous communities on the potential use and misuse of genetic information.
Eventually we'd like to have our own IndiGenomics research institute to conduct our own experiments and educate the next generation of indigenous scientists.
In the end, indigenous people need to be partners in and not subjects of genetic research.
And for those on the outside, just as Father Damien did, the research community needs to immerse itself in indigenous culture or die trying.
Mahalo.
(Applause)
I'll never forget the sound of laughing with my friends.
I'll never forget the sound of my mother's voice right before I fell asleep.
And I'll never forget the comforting sound of water trickling down a stream.
Imagine my fear, pure fear, when, at the age of 10, I was told I was going to lose my hearing.
And over the next five years, it progressed until I was classified as profoundly deaf.
But I believe that losing my hearing was one of the greatest gifts I've ever received.
You see, I get to experience the world in a unique way.
And I believe that these unique experiences that people with disabilities have is what's going to help us make and design a better world for everyone -- both for people with and without disabilities.
I used to be a disability rights lawyer, and I spent a lot of my time focused on enforcing the law, ensuring that accommodations were made.
And then I had to quickly learn international policy, because I was asked to work on the UN Convention that protects people with disabilities.
As the leader of the NGO there, I spent most of my energy trying to convince people about the capabilities of people with disabilities.
But somewhere along the way, and after many career transitions that my parents weren't so happy about -- (Laughter) I stumbled upon a solution that I believe may be an even more powerful tool to solve some of the world's greatest problems, disability or not.
And that tool is called design thinking.
Design thinking is a process for innovation and problem solving.
There are five steps.
The first is defining the problem and understanding its constraints.
The second is observing people in real-life situations and empathizing with them.
Third, throwing out hundreds of ideas -- the more the better, the wilder the better.
Fourth, prototyping: gathering whatever you can, whatever you can find, to mimic your solution, to test it and to refine it.
And finally, implementation: ensuring that the solution you came up with is sustainable.
Warren Berger says that design thinking teaches us to look sideways, to reframe, to refine, to experiment and, probably most importantly, ask those stupid questions.
Design thinkers believe that everyone is creative.
They believe in bringing people from multiple disciplines together, because they want to share multiple perspectives and bring them together and ultimately merge them to form something new.
Design thinking is such a successful and versatile tool that it has been applied in almost every industry.
I saw the potential that it had for the issues I faced, so I decided to go back to school and get my master's in social design.
This looks at how to use design to create positive change in the world.
While I was there, I fell in love with woodworking.
But what I quickly realized was that I was missing out on something.
As you're working with a tool, right before it's about to kick back at you -- which means the piece or the tool jumps back at you -- it makes a sound.
And I couldn't hear this sound.
So I decided, why not try and solve it?
My solution was a pair of safety glasses that were engineered to visually alert the user to pitch changes in the tool, before the human ear could pick it up.
Why hadn't tool designers thought of this before?
(Laughter) Two reasons: one, I was a beginner.
I wasn't weighed down by expertise or conventional wisdom.
The second is: I was Deaf.
My unique experience of the world helped inform my solution.
And as I went on, I kept running into more and more solutions that were originally made for people with disabilities, and that ended up being picked up, embraced and loved by the mainstream, disability or not.
This is an OXO potato peeler.
It was originally designed for people with arthritis, but it was so comfortable, everybody loved it.
Text messaging: that was originally designed for people who are Deaf.
And as you know, everybody loves that, too.
(Laughter) I started thinking: What if we changed our mindset?
What if we started designing for disability first -- not the norm?
As you see, when we design for disability first, we often stumble upon solutions that are not only inclusive, but also are often better than when we design for the norm.
And this excites me, because this means that the energy it takes to accommodate someone with a disability can be leveraged, molded and played with as a force for creativity and innovation.
This moves us from the mindset of trying to change the hearts and the deficiency mindset of tolerance, to becoming an alchemist, the type of magician that this world so desperately needs to solve some of its greatest problems.
Now, I also believe that people with disabilities have great potential to be designers within this design-thinking process.
Without knowing it, from a very early age, I've been a design thinker, fine-tuning my skills.
Design thinkers are, by nature, problem solvers.
So imagine listening to a conversation and only understanding 50 percent of what is said.
You can't ask them to repeat every single word.
They would just get frustrated with you.
So without even realizing it, my solution was to take the muffled sound I heard, that was the beat, and turn it into a rhythm and place it with the lips I read.
Years later, someone commented that my writing had a rhythm to it.
Well, this is because I experience conversations as rhythms.
I also became really, really good at failing.
(Laughter) Quite literally.
My first semester in Spanish, I got a D.
But what I learned was that when I picked myself up and changed a few things around, eventually, I succeeded.
Similarly, design thinking encourages people to fail and fail often, because eventually, you will succeed.
Very few great innovations in this world have come from someone succeeding on the first try.
I also experienced this lesson in sports.
I'll never forget my coach saying to my mom, "If she just didn't have her hearing loss, she would be on the national team."
But what my coach, and what I didn't even know at the time, was that my hearing loss actually helped me excel at sports.
You see, when you lose your hearing, not only do you adapt your behavior, but you also adapt your physical senses.
One example of this is that my visual attention span increased.
Imagine a soccer player, coming down the left flank.
Imagine being goalkeeper, like I was, and the ball is coming down the left flank.
A person with normal hearing would have the visual perspective of this.
I had the benefit of a spectrum this wide.
So I picked up the players over here, that were moving about and coming down the field.
And I picked them up quicker, so that if the ball was passed, I could reposition myself and be ready for that shot.
So as you can see, I've been a design thinker for nearly all my life.
My observation skills have been honed so that I pick up on things that others would never pick up on.
My constant need to adapt has made me a great ideator and problem solver.
And I've often had to do this within limitations and constraints.
This is something that designers also have to deal with frequently.
My work most recently took me to Haiti.
Design thinkers often seek out extreme situations, because that often informs some of their best designs.
And Haiti -- it was like a perfect storm.
I lived and worked with 300 Deaf individuals that were relocated after the 2010 earthquake.
But five and a half years later, there still was no electricity; there still was no safe drinking water; there were still no job opportunities; there was still rampant crime, and it went unpunished.
International aid organizations came one by one.
But they came with pre-determined solutions.
They didn't come ready to observe and to adapt based on the community's needs.
One organization gave them goats and chickens.
But they didn't realize that there was so much hunger in that community, that when the Deaf went to sleep at night and couldn't hear, people broke into their yards and their homes and stole these chickens and goats, and eventually they were all gone.
Now, if that organization had taken the time to observe Deaf people, to observe the community, they would have realized their problem and perhaps they would have come up with a solution, something like a solar light, lighting up a secure pen to put them in at night to ensure their safety.
You don't have to be a design thinker to insert the ideas I've shared with you today.
You are creative.
You are a designer -- everyone is.
Let people like me help you.
Let people with disabilities help you look sideways, and in the process, solve some of the greatest problems.
That's it. Thank you.
(Applause)
This is the Large Hadron Collider.
It's 27 kilometers in circumference.
It's the biggest scientific experiment ever attempted.
Over 10,000 physicists and engineers from 85 countries around the world have come together over several decades to build this machine.
What we do is we accelerate protons -- so, hydrogen nuclei -- around 99.999999 percent the speed of light.
Right? At that speed, they go around that 27 kilometers 11,000 times a second.
And we collide them with another beam of protons going in the opposite direction.
We collide them inside giant detectors.
They're essentially digital cameras.
And this is the one that I work on, ATLAS.
You get some sense of the size -- you can just see these EU standard-size people underneath.
(Laughter) You get some sense of the size: 44 meters wide, 22 meters in diameter, 7,000 tons.
And we re-create the conditions that were present less than a billionth of a second after the universe began up to 600 million times a second inside that detector -- immense numbers.
And if you see those metal bits there -- those are huge magnets that bend electrically charged particles, so it can measure how fast they're traveling.
This is a picture about a year ago.
Those magnets are in there.
And, again, a EU standard-size, real person, so you get some sense of the scale.
And it's in there that those mini-Big Bangs will be created, sometime in the summer this year.
And actually, this morning, I got an email saying that we've just finished, today, building the last piece of ATLAS.
So as of today, it's finished. I'd like to say that I planned that for TED, but I didn't. So it's been completed as of today.
(Applause) Yeah, it's a wonderful achievement.
So, you might be asking, "Why?
Why create the conditions that were present less than a billionth of a second after the universe began?"
Well, particle physicists are nothing if not ambitious.
And the aim of particle physics is to understand what everything's made of, and how everything sticks together.
And by everything I mean, of course, me and you, the Earth, the Sun, the 100 billion suns in our galaxy and the 100 billion galaxies in the observable universe.
Absolutely everything.
Now you might say, "Well, OK, but why not just look at it?
You know? If you want to know what I'm made of, let's look at me."
Well, we found that as you look back in time, the universe gets hotter and hotter, denser and denser, and simpler and simpler.
Now, there's no real reason I'm aware of for that, but that seems to be the case.
So, way back in the early times of the universe, we believe it was very simple and understandable.
All this complexity, all the way to these wonderful things -- human brains -- are a property of an old and cold and complicated universe.
Back at the start, in the first billionth of a second, we believe, or we've observed, it was very simple.
It's almost like ...
imagine a snowflake in your hand, and you look at it, and it's an incredibly complicated, beautiful object. But as you heat it up, it'll melt into a pool of water, and you would be able to see that, actually, it was just made of H20, water.
So it's in that same sense that we look back in time to understand what the universe is made of.
And, as of today, it's made of these things.
Just 12 particles of matter, stuck together by four forces of nature.
The quarks, these pink things, are the things that make up protons and neutrons that make up the atomic nuclei in your body.
The electron -- the thing that goes around the atomic nucleus -- held around in orbit, by the way, by the electromagnetic force that's carried by this thing, the photon.
The quarks are stuck together by other things called gluons.
And these guys, here, they're the weak nuclear force, probably the least familiar.
But, without it, the sun wouldn't shine.
And when the sun shines, you get copious quantities of these things, called neutrinos, pouring out.
Actually, if you just look at your thumbnail -- about a square centimeter -- there are something like 60 billion neutrinos per second from the sun, passing through every square centimeter of your body.
But you don't feel them, because the weak force is correctly named -- very short range and very weak, so they just fly through you.
And these particles have been discovered over the last century, pretty much.
The first one, the electron, was discovered in 1897, and the last one, this thing called the tau neutrino, in the year 2000. Actually just -- I was going to say, just up the road in Chicago. I know it's a big country, America, isn't it?
Just up the road.
Relative to the universe, it's just up the road.
(Laughter) So, this thing was discovered in the year 2000, so it's a relatively recent picture.
One of the wonderful things, actually, I find, is that we've discovered any of them, when you realize how tiny they are.
You know, they're a step in size from the entire observable universe.
So, 100 billion galaxies, 13.7 billion light years away -- a step in size from that to Monterey, actually, is about the same as from Monterey to these things.
Absolutely, exquisitely minute, and yet we've discovered pretty much the full set.
So, one of my most illustrious forebears at Manchester University, Ernest Rutherford, discoverer of the atomic nucleus, once said, "All science is either physics or stamp collecting."
Now, I don't think he meant to insult the rest of science, although he was from New Zealand, so it's possible.
(Laughter) But what he meant was that what we've done, really, is stamp collect there.
OK, we've discovered the particles, but unless you understand the underlying reason for that pattern -- you know, why it's built the way it is -- really you've done stamp collecting. You haven't done science.
Fortunately, we have probably one of the greatest scientific achievements of the twentieth century that underpins that pattern.
It's the Newton's laws, if you want, of particle physics.
It's called the standard model -- beautifully simple mathematical equation.
You could stick it on the front of a T-shirt, which is always the sign of elegance.
This is it.
(Laughter) I've been a little disingenuous, because I've expanded it out in all its gory detail.
This equation, though, allows you to calculate everything -- other than gravity -- that happens in the universe.
So, you want to know why the sky is blue, why atomic nuclei stick together -- in principle, you've got a big enough computer -- why DNA is the shape it is.
In principle, you should be able to calculate it from that equation.
But there's a problem.
Can anyone see what it is?
A bottle of champagne for anyone that tells me.
I'll make it easier, actually, by blowing one of the lines up.
Basically, each of these terms refers to some of the particles.
So those Ws there refer to the Ws, and how they stick together.
These carriers of the weak force, the Zs, the same.
But there's an extra symbol in this equation: H.
Right, H.
H stands for Higgs particle.
Higgs particles have not been discovered.
But they're necessary: they're necessary to make that mathematics work.
So all the exquisitely detailed calculations we can do with that wonderful equation wouldn't be possible without an extra bit.
So it's a prediction: a prediction of a new particle.
What does it do?
Well, we had a long time to come up with good analogies.
And back in the 1980s, when we wanted the money for the LHC from the U.K. government, Margaret Thatcher, at the time, said, "If you guys can explain, in language a politician can understand, what the hell it is that you're doing, you can have the money.
I want to know what this Higgs particle does."
And we came up with this analogy, and it seemed to work.
Well, what the Higgs does is, it gives mass to the fundamental particles.
And the picture is that the whole universe -- and that doesn't mean just space, it means me as well, and inside you -- the whole universe is full of something called a Higgs field.
Higgs particles, if you will.
The analogy is that these people in a room are the Higgs particles.
Now when a particle moves through the universe, it can interact with these Higgs particles.
But imagine someone who's not very popular moves through the room.
Then everyone ignores them. They can just pass through the room very quickly, essentially at the speed of light. They're massless.
And imagine someone incredibly important and popular and intelligent walks into the room.
They're surrounded by people, and their passage through the room is impeded.
It's almost like they get heavy. They get massive.
And that's exactly the way the Higgs mechanism works.
The picture is that the electrons and the quarks in your body and in the universe that we see around us are heavy, in a sense, and massive, because they're surrounded by Higgs particles.
They're interacting with the Higgs field.
If that picture's true, then we have to discover those Higgs particles at the LHC.
If it's not true -- because it's quite a convoluted mechanism, although it's the simplest we've been able to think of -- then whatever does the job of the Higgs particles we know have to turn up at the LHC.
So, that's one of the prime reasons we built this giant machine.
I'm glad you recognize Margaret Thatcher.
Actually, I thought about making it more culturally relevant, but -- (Laughter) anyway.
So that's one thing.
That's essentially a guarantee of what the LHC will find.
There are many other things. You've heard many of the big problems in particle physics.
One of them you heard about: dark matter, dark energy.
There's another issue, which is that the forces in nature -- it's quite beautiful, actually -- seem, as you go back in time, they seem to change in strength.
Well, they do change in strength.
So, the electromagnetic force, the force that holds us together, gets stronger as you go to higher temperatures.
The strong force, the strong nuclear force, which sticks nuclei together, gets weaker. And what you see is the standard model -- you can calculate how these change -- is the forces, the three forces, other than gravity, almost seem to come together at one point.
It's almost as if there was one beautiful kind of super-force, back at the beginning of time.
But they just miss.
Now there's a theory called super-symmetry, which doubles the number of particles in the standard model, which, at first sight, doesn't sound like a simplification.
But actually, with this theory, we find that the forces of nature do seem to unify together, back at the Big Bang -- absolutely beautiful prophecy. The model wasn't built to do that, but it seems to do it.
Also, those super-symmetric particles are very strong candidates for the dark matter.
So a very compelling theory that's really mainstream physics.
And if I was to put money on it, I would put money on -- in a very unscientific way -- that that these things would also crop up at the LHC.
Many other things that the LHC could discover.
But in the last few minutes, I just want to give you a different perspective of what I think -- what particle physics really means to me -- particle physics and cosmology.
And that's that I think it's given us a wonderful narrative -- almost a creation story, if you'd like -- about the universe, from modern science over the last few decades.
And I'd say that it deserves, in the spirit of Wade Davis' talk, to be at least put up there with these wonderful creation stories of the peoples of the high Andes and the frozen north.
This is a creation story, I think, equally as wonderful.
The story goes like this: we know that the universe began 13.7 billion years ago, in an immensely hot, dense state, much smaller than a single atom.
It began to expand about a million, billion, billion, billion billionth of a second -- I think I got that right -- after the Big Bang.
Gravity separated away from the other forces.
The universe then underwent an exponential expansion called inflation.
In about the first billionth of a second or so, the Higgs field kicked in, and the quarks and the gluons and the electrons that make us up got mass.
The universe continued to expand and cool.
After about a few minutes, there was hydrogen and helium in the universe. That's all.
The universe was about 75 percent hydrogen, 25 percent helium. It still is today.
It continued to expand about 300 million years.
Then light began to travel through the universe.
It was big enough to be transparent to light, and that's what we see in the cosmic microwave background that George Smoot described as looking at the face of God.
After about 400 million years, the first stars formed, and that hydrogen, that helium, then began to cook into the heavier elements.
So the elements of life -- carbon, and oxygen and iron, all the elements that we need to make us up -- were cooked in those first generations of stars, which then ran out of fuel, exploded, threw those elements back into the universe.
They then re-collapsed into another generation of stars and planets.
And on some of those planets, the oxygen, which had been created in that first generation of stars, could fuse with hydrogen to form water, liquid water on the surface.
On at least one, and maybe only one of those planets, primitive life evolved, which evolved over millions of years into things that walked upright and left footprints about three and a half million years ago in the mud flats of Tanzania, and eventually left a footprint on another world.
And built this civilization, this wonderful picture, that turned the darkness into light, and you can see the civilization from space.
As one of my great heroes, Carl Sagan, said, these are the things -- and actually, not only these, but I was looking around -- these are the things, like Saturn V rockets, and Sputnik, and DNA, and literature and science -- these are the things that hydrogen atoms do when given 13.7 billion years.
Absolutely remarkable.
And, the laws of physics. Right?
So, the right laws of physics -- they're beautifully balanced.
If the weak force had been a little bit different, then carbon and oxygen wouldn't be stable inside the hearts of stars, and there would be none of that in the universe.
And I think that's a wonderful and significant story.
50 years ago, I couldn't have told that story, because we didn't know it.
It makes me really feel that that civilization -- which, as I say, if you believe the scientific creation story, has emerged purely as a result of the laws of physics, and a few hydrogen atoms -- then I think, to me anyway, it makes me feel incredibly valuable.
So that's the LHC.
The LHC is certainly, when it turns on in summer, going to write the next chapter of that book.
And I'm certainly looking forward with immense excitement to it being turned on.
Thanks.
(Applause)
What an intriguing group of individuals you are ...
to a psychologist.
(Laughter) I've had the opportunity over the last couple of days of listening in on some of your conversations and watching you interact with each other.
And I think it's fair to say, already, that there are 47 people in this audience, at this moment, displaying psychological symptoms I would like to discuss today.
(Laughter) And I thought you might like to know who you are.
(Laughter) But instead of pointing at you, which would be gratuitous and intrusive, I thought I would tell you a few facts and stories, in which you may catch a glimpse of yourself.
I'm in the field of research known as personality psychology, which is part of a larger personality science which spans the full spectrum, from neurons to narratives.
And what we try to do, in our own way, is to make sense of how each of us -- each of you -- is, in certain respects, like all other people, like some other people and like no other person.
Now, already you may be saying of yourself, "I'm not intriguing.
I am the 46th most boring person in the Western Hemisphere."
Or you may say of yourself, "I am intriguing, even if I am regarded by most people as a great, thundering twit."
(Laughter) But it is your self-diagnosed boringness and your inherent "twitiness" that makes me, as a psychologist, really fascinated by you.
So let me explain why this is so.
One of the most influential approaches in personality science is known as trait psychology, and it aligns you along five dimensions which are normally distributed, and that describe universally held aspects of difference between people.
They spell out the acronym OCEAN.
So, "O" stands for "open to experience," versus those who are more closed.
"C" stands for "conscientiousness," in contrast to those with a more lackadaisical approach to life.
"E" -- "extroversion," in contrast to more introverted people.
"A" -- "agreeable individuals," in contrast to those decidedly not agreeable.
And "N" -- "neurotic individuals," in contrast to those who are more stable.
All of these dimensions have implications for our well-being, for how our life goes.
And so we know that, for example, openness and conscientiousness are very good predictors of life success, but the open people achieve that success through being audacious and, occasionally, odd.
The conscientious people achieve it through sticking to deadlines, to persevering, as well as having some passion.
Extroversion and agreeableness are both conducive to working well with people.
Extroverts, for example, I find intriguing.
With my classes, I sometimes give them a basic fact that might be revealing with respect to their personality: I tell them that it is virtually impossible for adults to lick the outside of their own elbow.
(Laughter) Did you know that?
Already, some of you have tried to lick the outside of your own elbow.
But extroverts amongst you are probably those who have not only tried, but they have successfully licked the elbow of the person sitting next to them.
(Laughter) Those are the extroverts.
Let me deal in a bit more detail with extroversion, because it's consequential and it's intriguing, and it helps us understand what I call our three natures.
First, our biogenic nature -- our neurophysiology.
Second, our sociogenic or second nature, which has to do with the cultural and social aspects of our lives.
And third, what makes you individually you -- idiosyncratic -- what I call your "idiogenic" nature.
Let me explain.
One of the things that characterizes extroverts is they need stimulation.
And that stimulation can be achieved by finding things that are exciting: loud noises, parties and social events here at TED -- you see the extroverts forming a magnetic core.
They all gather together.
And I've seen you.
The introverts are more likely to spend time in the quiet spaces up on the second floor, where they are able to reduce stimulation -- and may be misconstrued as being antisocial, but you're not necessarily antisocial.
It may be that you simply realize that you do better when you have a chance to lower that level of stimulation.
Sometimes it's an internal stimulant, from your body.
Caffeine, for example, works much better with extroverts than it does introverts.
When extroverts come into the office at nine o'clock in the morning and say, "I really need a cup of coffee," they're not kidding -- they really do.
Introverts do not do as well, particularly if the tasks they're engaged in -- and they've had some coffee -- if those tasks are speeded, and if they're quantitative, introverts may give the appearance of not being particularly quantitative.
But it's a misconstrual.
So here are the consequences that are really quite intriguing: we're not always what seem to be, and that takes me to my next point.
I should say, before getting to this, something about sexual intercourse, although I may not have time.
And so, if you would like me to -- yes, you would?
OK.
(Laughter) There are studies done on the frequency with which individuals engage in the conjugal act, as broken down by male, female; introvert, extrovert.
So I ask you: How many times per minute -- oh, I'm sorry, that was a rat study -- (Laughter) How many times per month do introverted men engage in the act?
3.0.
Extroverted men?
More or less?
Yes, more.
5.5 -- almost twice as much.
Introverted women: 3.1.
Extroverted women?
Frankly, speaking as an introverted male, which I will explain later -- they are heroic.
7.5.
They not only handle all the male extroverts, they pick up a few introverts as well.
(Laughter) (Applause) We communicate differently, extroverts and introverts.
Extroverts, when they interact, want to have lots of social encounter punctuated by closeness.
They'd like to stand close for comfortable communication.
They like to have a lot of eye contact, or mutual gaze.
We found in some research that they use more diminutive terms when they meet somebody.
So when an extrovert meets a Charles, it rapidly becomes "Charlie," and then "Chuck," and then "Chuckles Baby."
(Laughter) Whereas for introverts, it remains "Charles," until he's given a pass to be more intimate by the person he's talking to.
We speak differently.
Extroverts prefer black-and-white, concrete, simple language.
Introverts prefer -- and I must again tell you that I am as extreme an introvert as you could possibly imagine -- we speak differently.
We prefer contextually complex, contingent, weasel-word sentences -- (Laughter) More or less.
(Laughter) As it were.
(Laughter) Not to put too fine a point upon it -- like that.
When we talk, we sometimes talk past each other.
I had a consulting contract I shared with a colleague who's as different from me as two people can possibly be.
First, his name is Tom.
Mine isn't.
(Laughter) Secondly, he's six foot five.
I have a tendency not to be.
(Laughter) And thirdly, he's as extroverted a person as you could find.
I am seriously introverted.
I overload so much, I can't even have a cup of coffee after three in the afternoon and expect to sleep in the evening.
We had seconded to this project a fellow called Michael.
And Michael almost brought the project to a crashing halt.
So the person who seconded him asked Tom and me, "What do you make of Michael?"
Well, I'll tell you what Tom said in a minute.
He spoke in classic "extrovert-ese."
And here is how extroverted ears heard what I said, which is actually pretty accurate.
I said, "Well Michael does have a tendency at times of behaving in a way that some of us might see as perhaps more assertive than is normally called for."
(Laughter) Tom rolled his eyes and he said, "Brian, that's what I said: he's an asshole!"
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, as an introvert, I might gently allude to certain "assholic" qualities in this man's behavior, but I'm not going to lunge for the a-word.
(Laughter) But the extrovert says, "If he walks like one, if he talks like one, I call him one."
And we go past each other.
Now is this something that we should be heedful of?
Of course.
It's important that we know this.
Is that all we are?
Are we just a bunch of traits?
No, we're not.
Remember, you're like some other people and like no other person.
How about that idiosyncratic you?
As Elizabeth or as George, you may share your extroversion or your neuroticism.
But are there some distinctively Elizabethan features of your behavior, or Georgian of yours, that make us understand you better than just a bunch of traits?
That make us love you?
Not just because you're a certain type of person.
I'm uncomfortable putting people in pigeonholes.
I don't even think pigeons belong in pigeonholes.
So what is it that makes us different?
It's the doings that we have in our life -- the personal projects.
You have a personal project right now, but nobody may know it here.
It relates to your kid -- you've been back three times to the hospital, and they still don't know what's wrong.
Or it could be your mom.
And you'd been acting out of character.
These are free traits.
You're very agreeable, but you act disagreeably in order to break down those barriers of administrative torpor in the hospital, to get something for your mom or your child.
What are these free traits?
They're where we enact a script in order to advance a core project in our lives.
And they are what matters.
Don't ask people what type you are; ask them, "What are your core projects in your life?"
And we enact those free traits.
I'm an introvert, but I have a core project, which is to profess.
I'm a professor.
And I adore my students, and I adore my field.
And I can't wait to tell them about what's new, what's exciting, what I can't wait to tell them about.
And so I act in an extroverted way, because at eight in the morning, the students need a little bit of humor, a little bit of engagement to keep them going in arduous days of study.
But we need to be very careful when we act protractedly out of character.
Sometimes we may find that we don't take care of ourselves.
I find, for example, after a period of pseudo-extroverted behavior, I need to repair somewhere on my own.
As Susan Cain said in her "Quiet" book, in a chapter that featured the strange Canadian professor who was teaching at the time at Harvard, I sometimes go to the men's room to escape the slings and arrows of outrageous extroverts.
(Laughter) I remember one particular day when I was retired to a cubicle, trying to avoid overstimulation.
And a real extrovert came in beside me -- not right in my cubicle, but in the next cubicle over -- and I could hear various evacuatory noises, which we hate -- even our own, that's why we flush during as well as after.
(Laughter) And then I heard this gravelly voice saying, "Hey, is that Dr. Little?"
(Laughter) If anything is guaranteed to constipate an introvert for six months, it's talking on the john.
(Laughter) That's where I'm going now.
Don't follow me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When we're designing new products, services or businesses, the only time you'll know if they're any good, if the designs are good, is to see how they're used in the real world, in context.
I'm reminded of that every time I walk past Highbury Fields in north London.
It's absolutely beautiful.
There's a big open green space.
There's Georgian buildings around the side.
But then there's this mud trap that cuts across the middle.
People clearly don't want to walk all the way around the edge.
Instead, they want to take the shortcut, and that shortcut is self-reinforcing.
Now, this shortcut is called a desire path, and it's often the path of least resistance.
I find them fascinating, because they're often the point where design and user experience diverge.
Now at this point, I should apologize, because you guys are going to start seeing these everywhere.
But today, I'm going to pick three I find interesting and share what actually it reminds me about launching new products and services.
The first is in the capital city of Brazil -- Brasilia.
And it reminds me that sometimes, you have to just focus on designing for a real need at low friction.
Now, Brasilia is fascinating.
It was designed by Niemeyer in the '50s.
It was the golden age of flying, so he laid it out like a plane, as you can see there.
Slightly worryingly, he put most of the important government buildings in the cockpit.
But if you zoom in, in the very center of Brasilia, just where the point is there, you see it's littered with desire paths.
They're absolutely everywhere.
Now, they thought that they had future-proofed this design.
They thought in the future we wouldn't need to walk anywhere -- we'd be able to drive -- so there was little need for walkways or pavements.
But as you can see, there's a real need.
These are very dangerous desire paths.
If we just pick one, in the middle, you can see it crosses 15 lanes of traffic.
It won't surprise you guys that Brasilia has five times the pedestrian accident rate of your average US city.
People are resourceful.
They'll always find the low-friction route to save money, save time.
Not all these desire paths are dangerous, I was reminded flying here when I was in Heathrow.
Many of us get frustrated when we're confronted with the obligatory walk through duty-free.
It was amazing to me how many people refused to take the long, meandering path to the left, and just cut through to the right, cut through the desire path.
The question that's interesting is: What do designers think when they see our behavior here?
Do they think we're stupid?
Do they think we're lazy?
Or do they accept that this is the only truth?
This is their product.
We're effectively co-designing their product.
So our job is to design for real needs at low friction, because if you don't, the customer will, anyway.
The second desire path I wanted to share is at the University of California.
And it reminds me that sometimes the best way to come up with a great design is just to launch it.
Now, university campuses are fantastic for spotting desire paths.
I think it's because students are always late and they're pretty smart.
So they're dashing to lectures.
They'll always find the shortcut.
And the designers here knew that.
So they built the buildings and then they waited a few months for the paths to form.
They then paved them.
(Laughter) Incredibly smart approach.
In fact, often, just launching the straw man of a service can teach you what people really want.
For example, Ayr Muir in Boston knew he wanted to open a restaurant.
But where should it be?
What should the menu be?
He launched a service, in this case a food truck, and he changed the location each day.
He'd write a different menu on the side in a whiteboard marker to figure out what people wanted.
He now has a chain of restaurants.
So it can be incredibly efficient to launch something to spot the desire paths.
The third and final desire path I wanted to share with you is the UNIH.
It reminds me that the world's in flux, and we have to respond to those changes.
So as you'll guess, this is a hospital.
I've marked for you on the left the Oncology Department.
The patients would usually stay in the hotels down on the bottom right.
This was a patient-centered organization, so they laid on cars for their patients.
But what they realized when they started offering chemotherapy is the patients rarely wanted to get in cars.
They were too nauseous, so they'd walk back to their hotels.
This desire path that you see diagonally, formed.
The patients even called it "The Chemo Trail."
Now, when the hospital saw this originally, they tried to lay turf back over it, ignore it.
But after a while, they realized it was an important need they were meeting for their patients, so they paved it.
And I think our job is often to pave these emerging desire paths.
If we look back at the one in North London again, that desire path hasn't always been there.
The reason it sprung up is people were traveling to the mighty Arsenal Football Club stadium on game days, from the Underground station you see on the bottom right.
So you see the desire path.
If we just wind the clock back a few years, when the stadium was being constructed, there is no desire path.
So our job is to watch for these desire paths emerging, and, where appropriate, pave them, as someone did here.
Someone installed a barrier, people started walking across and round the bottom as you see, and they paved it.
(Laughter) But I think this is a wonderful reminder as well, that, actually, the world is in flux.
It's constantly changing, because if you look at the top of this image, there's another desire path forming.
So these three desire paths remind me we need to design for real human needs.
I think empathy for what your customers want is probably the biggest leading indicator of business success.
Design for real needs and design them in low friction, because if you don't offer them in low friction, someone else will, often the customer.
Secondly, often the best way to learn what people really want is to launch your service.
The answer is rarely inside the building.
Get out there and see what people really want.
And finally, in part because of technology, the world is incredibly flux at the moment.
It's changing constantly.
These desire paths are going to spring up faster than ever.
Our job is to pick the appropriate ones and pave over them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Every weekend for as long as I can remember, my father would get up on a Saturday, put on a worn sweatshirt and he'd scrape away at the squeaky old wheel of a house that we lived in.
I wouldn't even call it restoration; it was a ritual, catharsis.
He would spend all year scraping paint with this old heat gun and a spackle knife, and then he would repaint where he scraped, only to begin again the following year.
Scraping and re-scraping, painting and repainting: the work of an old house is never meant to be done.
The day my father turned 52, I got a phone call.
My mother was on the line to tell me that doctors had found a lump in his stomach -- terminal cancer, she told me, and he had been given only three weeks to live.
I immediately moved home to Poughkeepsie, New York, to sit with my father on death watch, not knowing what the next days would bring us.
To keep myself distracted, I rolled up my sleeves, and I went about finishing what he could now no longer complete -- the restoration of our old home.
When that looming three-week deadline came and then went, he was still alive.
And at three months, he joined me.
We gutted and repainted the interior.
At six months, the old windows were refinished, and at 18 months, the rotted porch was finally replaced.
And there was my father, standing with me outside, admiring a day's work, hair on his head, fully in remission, when he turned to me and he said, "You know, Michael, this house saved my life."
So the following year, I decided to go to architecture school.
(Laughter) But there, I learned something different about buildings.
Recognition seemed to come to those who prioritized novel and sculptural forms, like ribbons, or ...
pickles?
(Laughter) And I think this is supposed to be a snail.
Something about this bothered me.
Why was it that the best architects, the greatest architecture -- all beautiful and visionary and innovative -- is also so rare, and seems to serve so very few?
And more to the point: With all of this creative talent, what more could we do?
Just as I was about to start my final exams, I decided to take a break from an all-nighter and go to a lecture by Dr. Paul Farmer, a leading health activist for the global poor.
I was surprised to hear a doctor talking about architecture.
Buildings are making people sicker, he said, and for the poorest in the world, this is causing epidemic-level problems.
In this hospital in South Africa, patients that came in with, say, a broken leg, to wait in this unventilated hallway, walked out with a multidrug-resistant strand of tuberculosis.
Simple designs for infection control had not been thought about, and people had died because of it.
"Where are the architects?" Paul said.
If hospitals are making people sicker, where are the architects and designers to help us build and design hospitals that allow us to heal?
That following summer, I was in the back of a Land Rover with a few classmates, bumping over the mountainous hillside of Rwanda.
For the next year, I'd be living in Butaro in this old guesthouse, which was a jail after the genocide.
I was there to design and build a new type of hospital with Dr. Farmer and his team.
If hallways are making patients sicker, what if we could design a hospital that flips the hallways on the outside, and makes people walk in the exterior?
If mechanical systems rarely work, what if we could design a hospital that could breathe through natural ventilation, and meanwhile reduce its environmental footprint?
And what about the patients' experience?
Evidence shows that a simple view of nature can radically improve health outcomes, So why couldn't we design a hospital where every patient had a window with a view?
Simple, site-specific designs can make a hospital that heals.
Designing it is one thing; getting it built, we learned, is quite another.
We worked with Bruce Nizeye, a brilliant engineer, and he thought about construction differently than I had been taught in school.
When we had to excavate this enormous hilltop and a bulldozer was expensive and hard to get to site, Bruce suggested doing it by hand, using a method in Rwanda called "Ubudehe," which means "community works for the community."
Hundreds of people came with shovels and hoes, and we excavated that hill in half the time and half the cost of that bulldozer.
Instead of importing furniture, Bruce started a guild, and he brought in master carpenters to train others in how to make furniture by hand.
And on this job site, 15 years after the Rwandan genocide, Bruce insisted that we bring on labor from all backgrounds, and that half of them be women.
Bruce was using the process of building to heal, not just for those who were sick, but for the entire community as a whole.
We call this the locally fabricated way of building, or "lo-fab," and it has four pillars: hire locally, source regionally, train where you can and most importantly, think about every design decision as an opportunity to invest in the dignity of the places where you serve.
Think of it like the local food movement, but for architecture.
And we're convinced that this way of building can be replicated across the world, and change the way we talk about and evaluate architecture.
Using the lo-fab way of building, even aesthetic decisions can be designed to impact people's lives.
In Butaro, we chose to use a local volcanic stone found in abundance within the area, but often considered a nuisance by farmers, and piled on the side of the road.
We worked with these masons to cut these stones and form them into the walls of the hospital.
And when they began on this corner and wrapped around the entire hospital, they were so good at putting these stones together, they asked us if they could take down the original wall and rebuild it.
And you see what is possible.
It's beautiful.
And the beauty, to me, comes from the fact that I know that hands cut these stones, and they formed them into this thick wall, made only in this place with rocks from this soil.
When you go outside today and you look at your built world, ask not only: "What is the environmental footprint?" -- an important question -- but what if we also asked, "What is the human handprint of those who made it?"
We started a new practice based around these questions, and we tested it around the world.
Like in Haiti, where we asked if a new hospital could help end the epidemic of cholera.
In this 100-bed hospital, we designed a simple strategy to clean contaminated medical waste before it enters the water table, and our partners at Les Centres GHESKIO are already saving lives because of it.
Or Malawi: we asked if a birthing center could radically reduce maternal and infant mortality.
Malawi has one of the highest rates of maternal and infant death in the world.
Using a simple strategy to be replicated nationally, we designed a birthing center that would attract women and their attendants to come to the hospital earlier and therefore have safer births.
Or in the Congo, where we asked if an educational center could also be used to protect endangered wildlife.
Poaching for ivory and bushmeat is leading to global epidemic, disease transfer and war.
In one of the hardest-to-reach places in the world, we used the mud and the dirt and the wood around us to construct a center that would show us ways to protect and conserve our rich biodiversity.
Even here in the US, we were asked to rethink the largest university for the deaf and hard of hearing in the world.
The deaf community, through sign language, shows us the power of visual communication.
We designed a campus that would awaken the ways in which we as humans all communicate, both verbally and nonverbally.
And even in Poughkeepsie, my hometown, we thought about old industrial infrastructure.
We wondered: Could we use arts and culture and design to revitalize this city and other Rust Belt cities across our nation, and turn them into centers for innovation and growth?
In each of these projects, we asked a simple question: What more can architecture do?
And by asking that question, we were forced to consider how we could create jobs, how we could source regionally and how we could invest in the dignity of the communities in which we serve.
I have learned that architecture can be a transformative engine for change.
About a year ago, I read an article about a tireless and intrepid civil rights leader named Bryan Stevenson.
(Applause) And Bryan had a bold architectural vision.
He and his team had been documenting the over 4,000 lynchings of African-Americans that have happened in the American South.
And they had a plan to mark every county where these lynchings occurred, and build a national memorial to the victims of lynching in Montgomery, Alabama.
Countries like Germany and South Africa and, of course, Rwanda, have found it necessary to build memorials to reflect on the atrocities of their past, in order to heal their national psyche.
We have yet to do this in the United States.
So I sent a cold email to info@equaljusticeintiative.org: "Dear Bryan," it said, "I think your building project is maybe the most important project we could do in America and could change the way we think about racial injustice.
By any chance, do you know who will design it?"
(Laughter) Surprisingly, shockingly, Bryan got right back to me, and invited me down to meet with his team and talk to them.
Needless to say, I canceled all my meetings and I jumped on a plane to Montgomery, Alabama.
When I got there, Bryan and his team picked me up, and we walked around the city.
And they took the time to point out the many markers that have been placed all over the city to the history of the Confederacy, and the very few that mark the history of slavery.
And then he walked me to a hill.
It overlooked the whole city.
He pointed out the river and the train tracks where the largest domestic slave-trading port in America had once prospered.
And then to the Capitol rotunda, where George Wallace had stood on its steps and proclaimed, "Segregation forever."
And then to the very hill below us.
He said, "Here we will build a new memorial that will change the identity of this city and of this nation."
Our two teams have worked together over the last year to design this memorial.
The memorial will take us on a journey through a classical, almost familiar building type, like the Parthenon or the colonnade at the Vatican.
But as we enter, the ground drops below us and our perception shifts, where we realize that these columns evoke the lynchings, which happened in the public square.
And as we continue, we begin to understand the vast number of those who have yet to be put to rest.
Their names will be engraved on the markers that hang above us.
And just outside will be a field of identical columns.
But these are temporary columns, waiting in purgatory, to be placed in the very counties where these lynchings occurred.
Over the next few years, this site will bear witness, as each of these markers is claimed and visibly placed in those counties.
Our nation will begin to heal from over a century of silence.
When we think about how it should be built, we were reminded of Ubudehe, the building process we learned about in Rwanda.
We wondered if we could fill those very columns with the soil from the sites of where these killings occurred.
Brian and his team have begun collecting that soil and preserving it in individual jars with family members, community leaders and descendants.
The act of collecting soil itself has lead to a type of spiritual healing.
It's an act of restorative justice.
As one EJI team member noted in the collection of the soil from where Will McBride was lynched, "If Will McBride left one drop of sweat, one drop of blood, one hair follicle -- I pray that I dug it up, and that his whole body would be at peace."
We plan to break ground on this memorial later this year, and it will be a place to finally speak of the unspeakable acts that have scarred this nation.
(Applause) When my father told me that day that this house -- our house -- had saved his life, what I didn't know was that he was referring to a much deeper relationship between architecture and ourselves.
Buildings are not simply expressive sculptures.
They make visible our personal and our collective aspirations as a society.
Great architecture can give us hope.
Great architecture can heal.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, I lead a team at Google that works on machine intelligence; in other words, the engineering discipline of making computers and devices able to do some of the things that brains do.
And this makes us interested in real brains and neuroscience as well, and especially interested in the things that our brains do that are still far superior to the performance of computers.
Historically, one of those areas has been perception, the process by which things out there in the world -- sounds and images -- can turn into concepts in the mind.
This is essential for our own brains, and it's also pretty useful on a computer.
The machine perception algorithms, for example, that our team makes, are what enable your pictures on Google Photos to become searchable, based on what's in them.
The flip side of perception is creativity: turning a concept into something out there into the world.
So over the past year, our work on machine perception has also unexpectedly connected with the world of machine creativity and machine art.
I think Michelangelo had a penetrating insight into to this dual relationship between perception and creativity.
This is a famous quote of his: "Every block of stone has a statue inside of it, and the job of the sculptor is to discover it."
So I think that what Michelangelo was getting at is that we create by perceiving, and that perception itself is an act of imagination and is the stuff of creativity.
The organ that does all the thinking and perceiving and imagining, of course, is the brain.
And I'd like to begin with a brief bit of history about what we know about brains.
Because unlike, say, the heart or the intestines, you really can't say very much about a brain by just looking at it, at least with the naked eye.
The early anatomists who looked at brains gave the superficial structures of this thing all kinds of fanciful names, like hippocampus, meaning "little shrimp."
But of course that sort of thing doesn't tell us very much about what's actually going on inside.
The first person who, I think, really developed some kind of insight into what was going on in the brain was the great Spanish neuroanatomist, Santiago Ramón y Cajal, in the 19th century, who used microscopy and special stains that could selectively fill in or render in very high contrast the individual cells in the brain, in order to start to understand their morphologies.
And these are the kinds of drawings that he made of neurons in the 19th century.
This is from a bird brain.
And you see this incredible variety of different sorts of cells, even the cellular theory itself was quite new at this point.
And these structures, these cells that have these arborizations, these branches that can go very, very long distances -- this was very novel at the time.
They're reminiscent, of course, of wires.
That might have been obvious to some people in the 19th century; the revolutions of wiring and electricity were just getting underway.
But in many ways, these microanatomical drawings of Ramón y Cajal's, like this one, they're still in some ways unsurpassed.
We're still more than a century later, trying to finish the job that Ramón y Cajal started.
These are raw data from our collaborators at the Max Planck Institute of Neuroscience.
And what our collaborators have done is to image little pieces of brain tissue.
The entire sample here is about one cubic millimeter in size, and I'm showing you a very, very small piece of it here.
That bar on the left is about one micron.
The structures you see are mitochondria that are the size of bacteria.
And these are consecutive slices through this very, very tiny block of tissue.
Just for comparison's sake, the diameter of an average strand of hair is about 100 microns.
So we're looking at something much, much smaller than a single strand of hair.
And from these kinds of serial electron microscopy slices, one can start to make reconstructions in 3D of neurons that look like these.
So these are sort of in the same style as Ramón y Cajal.
Only a few neurons lit up, because otherwise we wouldn't be able to see anything here.
It would be so crowded, so full of structure, of wiring all connecting one neuron to another.
So Ramón y Cajal was a little bit ahead of his time, and progress on understanding the brain proceeded slowly over the next few decades.
But we knew that neurons used electricity, and by World War II, our technology was advanced enough to start doing real electrical experiments on live neurons to better understand how they worked.
This was the very same time when computers were being invented, very much based on the idea of modeling the brain -- of "intelligent machinery," as Alan Turing called it, one of the fathers of computer science.
Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts looked at Ramón y Cajal's drawing of visual cortex, which I'm showing here.
This is the cortex that processes imagery that comes from the eye.
And for them, this looked like a circuit diagram.
So there are a lot of details in McCulloch and Pitts's circuit diagram that are not quite right.
But this basic idea that visual cortex works like a series of computational elements that pass information one to the next in a cascade, is essentially correct.
Let's talk for a moment about what a model for processing visual information would need to do.
The basic task of perception is to take an image like this one and say, "That's a bird," which is a very simple thing for us to do with our brains.
But you should all understand that for a computer, this was pretty much impossible just a few years ago.
The classical computing paradigm is not one in which this task is easy to do.
So what's going on between the pixels, between the image of the bird and the word "bird," is essentially a set of neurons connected to each other in a neural network, as I'm diagramming here.
This neural network could be biological, inside our visual cortices, or, nowadays, we start to have the capability to model such neural networks on the computer.
And I'll show you what that actually looks like.
So the pixels you can think about as a first layer of neurons, and that's, in fact, how it works in the eye -- that's the neurons in the retina.
And those feed forward into one layer after another layer, after another layer of neurons, all connected by synapses of different weights.
The behavior of this network is characterized by the strengths of all of those synapses.
Those characterize the computational properties of this network.
And at the end of the day, you have a neuron or a small group of neurons that light up, saying, "bird."
Now I'm going to represent those three things -- the input pixels and the synapses in the neural network, and bird, the output -- by three variables: x, w and y.
There are maybe a million or so x's -- a million pixels in that image.
There are billions or trillions of w's, which represent the weights of all these synapses in the neural network.
And there's a very small number of y's, of outputs that that network has.
"Bird" is only four letters, right?
So let's pretend that this is just a simple formula, x "x" w = y.
I'm putting the times in scare quotes because what's really going on there, of course, is a very complicated series of mathematical operations.
That's one equation.
There are three variables.
And we all know that if you have one equation, you can solve one variable by knowing the other two things.
So the problem of inference, that is, figuring out that the picture of a bird is a bird, is this one: it's where y is the unknown and w and x are known.
You know the neural network, you know the pixels.
As you can see, that's actually a relatively straightforward problem.
You multiply two times three and you're done.
I'll show you an artificial neural network that we've built recently, doing exactly that.
This is running in real time on a mobile phone, and that's, of course, amazing in its own right, that mobile phones can do so many billions and trillions of operations per second.
What you're looking at is a phone looking at one after another picture of a bird, and actually not only saying, "Yes, it's a bird," but identifying the species of bird with a network of this sort.
So in that picture, the x and the w are known, and the y is the unknown.
I'm glossing over the very difficult part, of course, which is how on earth do we figure out the w, the brain that can do such a thing?
How would we ever learn such a model?
So this process of learning, of solving for w, if we were doing this with the simple equation in which we think about these as numbers, we know exactly how to do that: 6 = 2 x w, well, we divide by two and we're done.
The problem is with this operator.
So, division -- we've used division because it's the inverse to multiplication, but as I've just said, the multiplication is a bit of a lie here.
This is a very, very complicated, very non-linear operation; it has no inverse.
So we have to figure out a way to solve the equation without a division operator.
And the way to do that is fairly straightforward.
You just say, let's play a little algebra trick, and move the six over to the right-hand side of the equation.
Now, we're still using multiplication.
And that zero -- let's think about it as an error.
In other words, if we've solved for w the right way, then the error will be zero.
And if we haven't gotten it quite right, the error will be greater than zero.
So now we can just take guesses to minimize the error, and that's the sort of thing computers are very good at.
So you've taken an initial guess: what if w = 0?
Well, then the error is 6.
What if w = 1? The error is 4.
And then the computer can sort of play Marco Polo, and drive down the error close to zero.
As it does that, it's getting successive approximations to w.
Typically, it never quite gets there, but after about a dozen steps, we're up to w = 2.999, which is close enough.
And this is the learning process.
So remember that what's been going on here is that we've been taking a lot of known x's and known y's and solving for the w in the middle through an iterative process.
It's exactly the same way that we do our own learning.
We have many, many images as babies and we get told, "This is a bird; this is not a bird."
And over time, through iteration, we solve for w, we solve for those neural connections.
So now, we've held x and w fixed to solve for y; that's everyday, fast perception.
We figure out how we can solve for w, that's learning, which is a lot harder, because we need to do error minimization, using a lot of training examples.
And about a year ago, Alex Mordvintsev, on our team, decided to experiment with what happens if we try solving for x, given a known w and a known y.
In other words, you know that it's a bird, and you already have your neural network that you've trained on birds, but what is the picture of a bird?
It turns out that by using exactly the same error-minimization procedure, one can do that with the network trained to recognize birds, and the result turns out to be ...
a picture of birds.
So this is a picture of birds generated entirely by a neural network that was trained to recognize birds, just by solving for x rather than solving for y, and doing that iteratively.
Here's another fun example.
This was a work made by Mike Tyka in our group, which he calls "Animal Parade."
It reminds me a little bit of William Kentridge's artworks, in which he makes sketches, rubs them out, makes sketches, rubs them out, and creates a movie this way.
In this case, what Mike is doing is varying y over the space of different animals, in a network designed to recognize and distinguish different animals from each other.
And you get this strange, Escher-like morph from one animal to another.
Here he and Alex together have tried reducing the y's to a space of only two dimensions, thereby making a map out of the space of all things recognized by this network.
Doing this kind of synthesis or generation of imagery over that entire surface, varying y over the surface, you make a kind of map -- a visual map of all the things the network knows how to recognize.
The animals are all here; "armadillo" is right in that spot.
You can do this with other kinds of networks as well.
This is a network designed to recognize faces, to distinguish one face from another.
And here, we're putting in a y that says, "me," my own face parameters.
And when this thing solves for x, it generates this rather crazy, kind of cubist, surreal, psychedelic picture of me from multiple points of view at once.
The reason it looks like multiple points of view at once is because that network is designed to get rid of the ambiguity of a face being in one pose or another pose, being looked at with one kind of lighting, another kind of lighting.
So when you do this sort of reconstruction, if you don't use some sort of guide image or guide statistics, then you'll get a sort of confusion of different points of view, because it's ambiguous.
This is what happens if Alex uses his own face as a guide image during that optimization process to reconstruct my own face.
So you can see it's not perfect.
There's still quite a lot of work to do on how we optimize that optimization process.
But you start to get something more like a coherent face, rendered using my own face as a guide.
You don't have to start with a blank canvas or with white noise.
When you're solving for x, you can begin with an x, that is itself already some other image.
That's what this little demonstration is.
This is a network that is designed to categorize all sorts of different objects -- man-made structures, animals ...
Here we're starting with just a picture of clouds, and as we optimize, basically, this network is figuring out what it sees in the clouds.
And the more time you spend looking at this, the more things you also will see in the clouds.
You could also use the face network to hallucinate into this, and you get some pretty crazy stuff.
(Laughter) Or, Mike has done some other experiments in which he takes that cloud image, hallucinates, zooms, hallucinates, zooms hallucinates, zooms.
And in this way, you can get a sort of fugue state of the network, I suppose, or a sort of free association, in which the network is eating its own tail.
So every image is now the basis for, "What do I think I see next?
What do I think I see next? What do I think I see next?"
I showed this for the first time in public to a group at a lecture in Seattle called "Higher Education" -- this was right after marijuana was legalized.
(Laughter) So I'd like to finish up quickly by just noting that this technology is not constrained.
I've shown you purely visual examples because they're really fun to look at.
It's not a purely visual technology.
Our artist collaborator, Ross Goodwin, has done experiments involving a camera that takes a picture, and then a computer in his backpack writes a poem using neural networks, based on the contents of the image.
And that poetry neural network has been trained on a large corpus of 20th-century poetry.
And the poetry is, you know, I think, kind of not bad, actually.
(Laughter) In closing, I think that per Michelangelo, I think he was right; perception and creativity are very intimately connected.
What we've just seen are neural networks that are entirely trained to discriminate, or to recognize different things in the world, able to be run in reverse, to generate.
One of the things that suggests to me is not only that Michelangelo really did see the sculpture in the blocks of stone, but that any creature, any being, any alien that is able to do perceptual acts of that sort is also able to create because it's exactly the same machinery that's used in both cases.
Also, I think that perception and creativity are by no means uniquely human.
We start to have computer models that can do exactly these sorts of things.
And that ought to be unsurprising; the brain is computational.
And finally, computing began as an exercise in designing intelligent machinery.
It was very much modeled after the idea of how could we make machines intelligent.
And we finally are starting to fulfill now some of the promises of those early pioneers, of Turing and von Neumann and McCulloch and Pitts.
And I think that computing is not just about accounting or playing Candy Crush or something.
From the beginning, we modeled them after our minds.
And they give us both the ability to understand our own minds better and to extend them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So two weeks ago, I searched the word "nationalist" on Twitter.
The results were quite colorful, with expressions like, "Emboldened Racist Moron," -- (Laughter) "White Supremacist Idiot," "Fascist Sock Puppets," -- (Laughter) "Orwellian, Hitlerian, Terrifying."
I then searched the word "globalist" and got things like, "Socialist Sell-Outs," "Disgusting Corporate Propaganda," "Elitist Financial Overlords," "Ruthless Cosmopolitan Rats."
(Laughter) Even by social media standards, the words are cruel and disgusting.
But they reflect the intensity of one of the most fundamental questions of our times: Nationalism or globalism -- what is the best path forward?
This question impacts everything we care about: our cultural identity, our prosperity, our political systems -- everything -- the health of our planet -- everything.
So on the one hand, we have nationalism.
Collins defines it as a "devotion to one's nation," but also, a "doctrine that puts national interests above international considerations."
For nationalists, our modern societies are built on national grounds: we share a land, a history, a culture, and we defend each other.
In a big and chaotic world, they see nationalism as the only sensible way to maintain social stability.
But alarmed globalists warn us: self-centered nationalism can easily turn ugly.
We've seen it with 20th-century fascisms: bloody wars, millions of deaths, immeasurable destruction.
On the other hand, we have globalism.
The Oxford Living Dictionary defines it as: "the operation or planning of economic and foreign policy on a global basis."
For nationalists, globalism is rapidly deconstructing what our ancestors took decades to build.
It's like spitting on our soldiers' tombs; it's eroding our national solidarities and opening the doors to foreign invasions.
But globalists make the case that reinforcing our global governance is the only way to tackle big supernational problems, like nuclear proliferation, the global refugee crisis, climate change or terrorism or even the consequences of superhuman AI.
So we are at the crossroads, and we are asked to choose: nationalism or globalism?
Having lived in four continents, I've always been interested in this question.
But it took a whole new level when I saw this happening: the biggest surge in nationalist votes in Western democracies since World War II.
All of a sudden, this isn't theory anymore.
I mean, these political movements have built their success with ideas that could mean, down the road, losing my French citizenship because I'm North African or not being able to come back home to the US because I come from a Muslim-majority country.
You know, when you live in a democracy, you live with this idea that your government will always protect you, as long as you abide by the laws.
With the rise of national populism, despite being the best citizen I can, I now have to live with the idea that my government can hurt me for reasons I cannot control.
It's very unsettling.
But it forced me to rethink and rethink this question and try to think deeper.
And the more I thought about it, the more I started questioning the question.
Why would we have to choose between nationalism and globalism, between loving our country and caring for the world?
There's no reason for that.
We don't have to choose between family and country or region or religion and country.
We already have multiple identities, and we live with them very well.
Why would we have to choose between country and world?
What if, instead of accepting this absurd choice, we took it on ourselves to fight this dangerous, binary thinking?
So for all the globalists in the audience, I want to ask: When I say the word "nationalist," what image comes to your mind?
Something like this?
Believe me, I think of that, too.
But I'd like you to remember that for most people, nationalism feels more like this.
Or maybe like that.
You know, it's that thing inside you when you accidentally watch an obscure Olympic sport on TV -- (Laughter) wait -- and the mere sight of an unknown athlete wearing your national colors gets you all excited.
Your heartbeat goes up, your stress level goes up, and you're standing in front of the TV and screaming with passion for that athlete to win.
That's nationalism.
It's people happy to be together, happy to belong to a large national community.
Why would it be wrong?
You know, globalists, you may think of nationalism as an old, 19th-century idea that is destined to fade.
But I'm sorry to tell you that the facts are not on your side.
When the World Values Survey asked more than 89,000 people across 60 countries how proud they felt about their country, 88.5 percent said "very proud" or "quite proud" -- 88.5 percent.
Nationalism is not going away anytime soon.
It's a powerful feeling that, according to another study, is a strong predictor of individual happiness.
It's crazy, but your happiness is more correlated with national satisfaction than with things you would expect, like household income or your job satisfaction or your health satisfaction.
So if nationalism makes people happy, why would anybody take it away from them?
Fellow globalists, if you are like me, you may be attached to globalization for humanistic reasons.
And you may take great joy in some of its accomplishments since 1945.
After all, major regions of the world have been exceptionally peaceful; extreme poverty rates around the globe are trending down; and more than two billion people, most notably in Asia, show spectacular improvements in their standards of living.
But studies also show that globalization has a dark side.
And left on the side of the road are hundreds of millions of people in Western middle classes with anemic income growth for more than two decades, possibly three decades, according to some studies.
We cannot ignore this elephant in our room.
If anything, our collective energy would be better used finding ways to fix this aspect of globalization, instead of fighting this polarizing battle against nationalism.
So now, the nationalists in the audience, I have some crusty, nonbinary nuggets for you.
(Laughter) When I say the word "globalist," what comes to your mind?
Out-of-touch, one-percent plutocrats?
(Laughter) Or maybe the heartless, greedy Wall Street type, right?
Or maybe people like me, with multiple origins, living in a big, cosmopolitan metropolis.
Well, you remember that World Values Survey that I mentioned earlier?
It showed another fascinating finding: 71 percent of the world population agreed with the statement, "I am a citizen of the world."
Do you know what it means?
Most of us are simultaneously proud of our country and citizens of the world.
And it gets even better.
The citizens of the world in the survey show a higher level of national pride than the ones that rejected that label.
So once and for all, being a globalist doesn't mean betraying your country.
It just means that you have enough social empathy, and you project some of it outside your national borders.
Now, I know that when I dig into my own nationalist feelings, one of my anxieties versus the globalized world is national identity: How are we going to preserve what makes us special, what makes us different, what brings us together?
And as I started thinking about it, I realized something really strange, which is that a lot of the key ingredients of our national identities actually come from outside our national borders.
Like, think of the letters that we use every day.
I don't know if you realize, but the Latin script, the Latin alphabet that we use has its origins thousands of years ago, near the Nile River.
It all started with a cow just like this, that was captured by a scribe into an elegant hieroglyph.
That hieroglyph was transcribed by a Semite in the Sinai into the letter aleph.
Aleph traveled with Phoenicians and reached the European shores in Greece, where it became alpha, the mother of our letter A.
So that's how an Egyptian cow became our letter A.
(Laughter) And same thing with the Egyptian house that became bet, beta and B.
And the Egyptian fish that became daleth, delta and D.
Our most fundamental texts are full of Egyptian cows, houses and fish.
(Laughter) And there are so many other examples.
Take the United Kingdom and its monarchy.
Queen Elizabeth II?
German ancestry.
The mottos on the royal coat of arms?
All written in French, not a single word of English.
Take France and it's iconic Eiffel Tower.
The inspiration?
The United States of America -- and I don't mean Las Vegas, I mean 19th-century New York.
(Laughter) This was the tallest building in New York in the mid-19th century.
Does it remind you of something?
And you may think of China as a self-contained civilization, protected behind its Great Wall.
But think twice.
The Chinese official ideology?
Marxism, made in Germany.
One of China's biggest religions?
Buddhism, imported from India.
India's favorite pastime?
Cricket.
I really love this quote from Ashis Nandy, who said, "Cricket is an Indian game accidentally discovered by the British."
(Laughter) So these are good reminders that a lot of what we love in our national traditions actually come from previous waves of globalization.
And beyond individual symbols, there are whole national traditions that could not have existed without globalization.
And the example that comes to my mind is a world-beloved national tradition: Italian cuisine.
My friends, if you ever have a chance to go to a superauthentic Italian restaurant that only serves ancient Roman recipes, my advice for you is: don't go.
(Laughter) You'd get very, very disappointed.
No spaghetti, no pasta -- that really started in Sicily in the eighth century, when it was under Arabian rule.
No perfect espresso, no creamy cappuccino -- that came from Abyssinia via Yemen in the 17th century.
And of course, no perfect pizza Napoletana -- how would you make it without the tomatoes of the New World?
No, instead, you would be served probably a lot of porridge, some vegetable -- mostly cabbage -- some cheese, and maybe if you're lucky, the absolute delicacy of that time -- mmm, perfectly cooked fattened dormice.
(Laughter) Thankfully, it was not a close tradition preserved by fanatic watchdogs.
No, it was an open process, nourished by explorers, traders, street sellers and innovative home cooks.
And in many ways, globalization is a chance for our national traditions to be questioned, regenerated, reinterpreted, to attract new converts to stay vibrant and relevant over time.
So just remember this: most of us nationalists in the world are globalists, and most of us globalists in the world are nationalists.
A lot of what we like in our national traditions come from outside our national borders.
And the reason we venture outside our national borders is to discover these other national traditions.
So the real question should not be to choose between nationalism and globalism.
The real questions is: How can we do both better?
It's a complex question for a complex world that calls for creative, nonbinary solutions.
What are you waiting for?
Thank you.
(Applause)
The annals of Ancient Egyptian king Thutmose III described a marvelous foreign bird that “gives birth daily.” Zoroastrians viewed them as spirits whose cries told of the cosmic struggle between darkness and light.
Romans brought them on their military campaigns to foretell the success of future battles.
And today, this bird still occupies an important, though much less honorable position – on our dinner plates.
The modern chicken is descended primarily from the Red Junglefowl, and partially from three other closely related species, all native to India and Southeast Asia.
The region’s bamboo plants produce massive amounts of fruit just once every few decades.
Junglefowls’ ability to lay eggs daily may have evolved to take advantage of these rare feasts, increasing their population when food was abundant.
This was something humans could exploit on a consistent basis, and the birds’ weak flight capabilities and limited need for space made them easy to capture and contain.
The earliest domesticated chickens, dating at least back to 7,000 years ago, weren’t bred for food, but for something considered less savory today.
The aggressiveness of breeding males, armed with natural leg spurs, made cockfighting a popular entertainment.
By the second millennium BCE, chickens had spread from the Indus Valley to China and the Middle East to occupy royal menageries and to be used in religious rituals.
But it was in Egypt where the next chapter in the bird’s history began.
When a hen naturally incubates eggs, she will stop laying new ones and sit on a “clutch” of 6 or more eggs for 21 days.
By the middle of the 1st millennium BCE, the Egyptians had learned to artificially incubate chicken eggs by placing them in baskets over hot ashes.
That freed up hens to continue laying daily, and what had been a royal delicacy or religious offering became a common meal.
Around the same time as Egyptians were incubating eggs, Phoenician merchants introduced chickens to Europe, where they quickly became an essential part of European livestock.
However, for a long time, the chicken’s revered status continued to exist alongside its culinary one.
The Ancient Greeks used fighting roosters as inspirational examples for young soldiers.
The Romans consulted chickens as oracles.
And as late as the 7th Century, the chicken was considered a symbol for Christianity.
Over the next few centuries, chickens accompanied humans wherever they went, spreading throughout the world through trade, conquest, and colonization.
After the Opium Wars, Chinese breeds were brought to England and crossed with local chickens.
This gave rise to a phenomenon called “Hen Fever” or “The Fancy”, with farmers all over Europe striving to breed new varieties with particular combinations of traits.
This trend also caught the attention of a certain Charles Darwin, who wondered if a similar selective breeding process occurred in nature.
Darwin would observe hundreds of chickens while finalizing his historic work introducing the theory of Evolution.
But the chicken’s greatest contribution to science was yet to come.
In the early 20th century, a trio of British scientists conducted extensive crossbreeding of chickens, building on Gregor Mendel’s studies of genetic inheritance.
With their high genetic diversity, many distinct traits, and only 7 months between generations, chickens were the perfect subject.
This work resulted in the famous Punnett Square, used to show the genotypes that would result from breeding a given pairing.
Since then, numerous breeding initiatives have made chickens bigger and meatier, and allowed them to lay more eggs than ever.
Meanwhile, chicken production has shifted to an industrial, factory-like model, with birds raised in spaces with a footprint no larger than a sheet of paper.
And while there’s been a shift towards free-range farming due to animal rights and environmental concerns, most of the world’s more than 22 billion chickens today are factory farmed.
From gladiators and gifts to the gods, to traveling companions and research subjects, chickens have played many roles over the centuries.
And though they may not have come before the proverbial egg, chickens’ fascinating history tells us a great deal about our own.
Once there was a star.
Like everything else, she was born; grew to be around 30 times the mass of our sun and lived for a very long time.
Exactly how long, people cannot really tell.
Just like everything in life, she reached the end of her regular star days when her heart, the core of her life, exhausted its fuel.
But that was no end.
She transformed into a supernova, and in the process releasing a tremendous amount of energy, outshining the rest of the galaxy and emitting, in one second, the same amount of energy our sun will release in 10 days.
And she evolved into another role in our galaxy.
Supernova explosions are very extreme.
But the ones that emit gamma rays are even more extreme.
In the process of becoming a supernova, the interior of the star collapses under its own weight and it starts rotating ever faster, like an ice skater when pulling their arms in close to their body.
In that way, it starts rotating very fast and it increases, powerfully, its magnetic field.
The matter around the star is dragged around, and some energy from that rotation is transferred to that matter and the magnetic field is increased even further.
In that way, our star had extra energy to outshine the rest of the galaxy in brightness and gamma ray emission.
My star, the one in my story, became what is known as a magnetar.
And just for your information, the magnetic field of a magnetar is 1,000 trillion times the magnetic field of Earth.
The most energetic events ever measured by astronomers carry the name gamma-ray bursts because we observe them as bursts most or explosions, most strongly measured as gamma-ray light.
Our star, like the one in our story that became a magnetar, is detected as a gamma-ray burst during the most energetic portion of the explosion.
Yet, even though gamma-ray bursts are the strongest events ever measured by astronomers, we cannot see them with our naked eye.
We depend, we rely on other methods in order to study this gamma-ray light.
We cannot see them with our naked eye.
We can only see an itty bitty, tiny portion of the electromagnetic spectrum that we call visible light.
And beyond that, we rely on other methods.
Yet as astronomers, we study a wider range of light and we depend on other methods to do that.
On the screen, it may look like this.
You're seeing a plot.
That is a light curve.
It's a plot of intensity of light over time.
It is a gamma-ray light curve.
Sighted astronomers depend on this kind of plot in order to interpret how this light intensity changes over time.
On the left, you will be seeing the light intensity without a burst, and on the right, you will be seeing the light intensity with the burst.
Early during my career, I could also see this kind of plot.
But then, I lost my sight.
I completely lost my sight because of extended illness, and with it, I lost the opportunity to see this plot and the opportunity to do my physics.
It was a very strong transition for me in many ways.
And professionally, it left me without a way to do my science.
I longed to access and scrutinize this energetic light and figure out the astrophysical cause.
I wanted to experience the spacious wonder, the excitement, the joy produced by the detection of such a titanic celestial event.
I thought long and hard about it, when I suddenly realized that all a light curve is, is a table of numbers converted into a visual plot.
So along with my collaborators, we worked really hard and we translated the numbers into sound.
I achieved access to the data, and today I'm able to do physics at the level of the best astronomer, using sound.
And what people have been able to do, mainly visually, for hundreds of years, now I do it using sound.
(Applause) Listening to this gamma-ray burst that you're seeing on the -- (Applause continues) Thank you.
Listening to this burst that you're seeing on the screen brought something to the ear beyond the obvious burst.
Now I'm going to play the burst for you.
It's not music, it's sound.
(Digital beeping sounds) This is scientific data converted into sound, and it's mapped in pitch.
The process is called sonification.
So listening to this brought something to the ear besides the obvious burst.
When I examine the very strong low-frequency regions, or bass line -- I'm zooming into the bass line now.
We noted resonances characteristic of electrically charged gasses like the solar wind.
And I want you to hear what I heard.
You will hear it as a very fast decrease in volume.
And because you're sighted, I'm giving you a red line indicating what intensity of light is being converted into sound.
(Digital hum and whistling sound) The (Whistles) is frogs at home, don't pay attention to that.
(Laughter) (Digital hum and whistling sound) I think you heard it, right?
So what we found is that the bursts last long enough in order to support wave resonances, which are things caused by exchanges of energy between particles that may have been excited, that depend on the volume.
You may remember that I said that the matter around the star is dragged around?
It transmits power with frequency and field distribution determined by the dimensions.
You may remember that we were talking about a super-massive star that became a very strong magnetic field magnetar.
If this is the case, then outflows from the exploding star may be associated with this gamma-ray burst.
What does that mean?
That star formation may be a very important part of these supernova explosions.
Listening to this very gamma-ray burst brought us to the notion that the use of sound as an adjunctive visual display may also support sighted astronomers in the search for more information in the data.
Simultaneously, I worked on analyzing measurements from other telescopes, and my experiments demonstrated that when you use sound as an adjunctive visual display, astronomers can find more information in this now more accessible data set.
This ability to transform data into sound gives astronomy a tremendous power of transformation.
And the fact that a field that is so visual may be improved in order to include anyone with interest in understanding what lies in the heavens is a spirit-lifter.
When I lost my sight, I noticed that I didn't have access to the same amount and quality of information a sighted astronomer had.
It was not until we innovated with the sonification process that I regained the hope to be a productive member of the field that I had worked so hard to be part of.
Yet, information access is not the only area in astronomy where this is important.
The situation is systemic and scientific fields are not keeping up.
The body is something changeable -- anyone may develop a disability at any point.
Let's think about, for example, scientists that are already at the top of their careers.
What happens to them if they develop a disability?
Will they feel excommunicated as I did?
Information access empowers us to flourish.
It gives us equal opportunities to display our talents and choose what we want to do with our lives, based on interest and not based on potential barriers.
When we give people the opportunity to succeed without limits, that will lead to personal fulfillment and prospering life.
And I think that the use of sound in astronomy is helping us to achieve that and to contribute to science.
While other countries told me that the study of perception techniques in order to study astronomy data is not relevant to astronomy because there are no blind astronomers in the field, South Africa said, "We want people with disabilities to contribute to the field."
Right now, I'm working at the South African Astronomical Observatory, at the Office of Astronomy for Development.
There, we are working on sonification techniques and analysis methods to impact the students of the Athlone School for the Blind.
These students will be learning radio astronomy, and they will be learning the sonification methods in order to study astronomical events like huge ejections of energy from the sun, known as coronal mass ejections.
What we learn with these students -- these students have multiple disabilities and coping strategies that will be accommodated -- what we learn with these students will directly impact the way things are being done at the professional level.
I humbly call this development.
And this is happening right now.
I think that science is for everyone.
It belongs to the people, and it has to be available to everyone, because we are all natural explorers.
I think that if we limit people with disabilities from participating in science, we'll sever our links with history and with society.
I dream of a level scientific playing field, where people encourage respect and respect each other, where people exchange strategies and discover together.
If people with disabilities are allowed into the scientific field, an explosion, a huge titanic burst of knowledge will take place, I am sure.
(Digital beeping sounds) That is the titanic burst.
Thank you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A shabby man named Estragon, sits near a tree at dusk and struggles to remove his boot.
He’s soon joined by his friend Vladimir, who reminds his anxious companion that they must wait here for someone called Godot.
So begins a vexing cycle in which the two debate when Godot will come, why they’re waiting, and whether they’re even at the right tree.
From here, Waiting for Godot only gets stranger - but it’s considered a play that changed the face of modern drama.
Written by Samuel Beckett between 1949 and 1955, it offers a simple but stirring question - what should the characters do?
Estragon: Don’t let's do anything. It's safer.
Vladimir: Let’s wait and see what he says.
Estragon: Who?
Vladimir: Godot.
Estragon: Good idea.
Such cryptic dialogue and circular reasoning are key features of the Theatre of the Absurd, a movement which emerged after the Second World War and found artists struggling to find meaning in devastation.
The absurdists deconstructed plot, character and language to question their meaning and share their profound uncertainty on stage.
While this may sound grim, the absurd blends its hopelessness with humor.
This is reflected in Beckett’s unique approach to genre in Waiting for Godot, which he branded “a tragicomedy in two acts."
Tragically, the characters are locked in an existential conundrum: they wait in vain for an unknown figure to give them a sense of purpose, but their only sense of purpose comes from the act of waiting, While they wait, they sink into boredom, express religious dread and contemplate suicide.
But comically, there is a jagged humor to their predicament, which comes across in their language and movements.
Their interactions are filled with bizarre wordplay, repetition and double entendres, as well as physical clowning, singing and dancing, and frantically swapping their hats.
It’s often unclear whether the audience is supposed to laugh or cry - or whether Beckett saw any difference between the two.
Born in Dublin, Beckett studied English, French and Italian before moving to Paris, where he spent most of his life writing theatre, poetry and prose.
While Beckett had a lifelong love of language, he also made space for silence by incorporating gaps, pauses and moments of emptiness into his work.
This was a key feature of his trademark uneven tempo and black humor, which became popular throughout the Theatre of the Absurd.
He also cultivated a mysterious persona, and refused to confirm or deny any speculations about the meaning of his work.
This kept audiences guessing, increasing their fascination with his surreal worlds and enigmatic characters.
The lack of any clear meaning makes Godot endlessly open to interpretation.
Critics have offered countless readings of the play, resulting in a cycle of ambiguity and speculation that mirrors the plot of the drama itself.
It's been read as an allegory of the Cold War, the French Resistance, and Britain’s colonization of Ireland.
The dynamic of the two protagonists has also sparked intense debate.
They’ve been read as survivors of the apocalypse, an aging couple, two impotent friends, and even as personifications of Freud’s ego and id.
Famously, Beckett said the only thing he could be sure of was that Vladimir and Estragon were "wearing bowler hats."
Like the critical speculation and maddening plot, their language often goes in circles as the two bicker and banter, lose their train of thought, and pick up right where they left off: Vladimir: We could start all over again perhaps Estragon: That should be easy Vladimir: It’s the start that’s difficult Estragon: You can start from anything Vladimir: Yes, but you have to decide.
Beckett reminds us that just like our daily lives, the world onstage doesn’t always make sense.
It can explore both reality and illusion, the familiar and the strange.
And although a tidy narrative still appeals, the best theatre keeps us thinking – and waiting.
I could never have imagined that a 19-year-old suicide bomber would actually teach me a valuable lesson.
But he did.
He taught me to never presume anything about anyone you don't know.
On a Thursday morning in July 2005, the bomber and I, unknowingly, boarded the same train carriage at the same time, standing, apparently, just feet apart.
I didn't see him.
Actually, I didn't see anyone.
You know not to look at anyone on the Tube, but I guess he saw me.
I guess he looked at all of us, as his hand hovered over the detonation switch.
I've often wondered: What was he thinking?
Especially in those final seconds.
I know it wasn't personal.
He didn't set out to kill or maim me, Gill Hicks.
I mean -- he didn't know me.
No.
Instead, he gave me an unwarranted and an unwanted label.
I had become the enemy.
To him, I was the "other," the "them," as opposed to "us."
The label "enemy" allowed him to dehumanize us.
It allowed him to push that button.
And he wasn't selective.
Twenty-six precious lives were taken in my carriage alone, and I was almost one of them.
In the time it takes to draw a breath, we were plunged into a darkness so immense that it was almost tangible; what I imagine wading through tar might be like.
We didn't know we were the enemy.
We were just a bunch of commuters who, minutes earlier, had followed the Tube etiquette: no direct eye contact, no talking and absolutely no conversation.
But in the lifting of the darkness, we were reaching out.
We were helping each other.
We were calling out our names, a little bit like a roll call, waiting for responses.
"I'm Gill. I'm here.
I'm alive.
OK."
"I'm Gill.
Here.
Alive.
OK."
I didn't know Alison.
But I listened for her check-ins every few minutes.
I didn't know Richard.
But it mattered to me that he survived.
All I shared with them was my first name.
They didn't know that I was a head of a department at the Design Council.
And here is my beloved briefcase, also rescued from that morning.
They didn't know that I published architecture and design journals, that I was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts, that I wore black -- still do -- that I smoked cigarillos.
I don't smoke cigarillos anymore.
I drank gin and I watched TED Talks, of course, never dreaming that one day I would be standing, balancing on prosthetic legs, giving a talk.
I was a young Australian woman doing extraordinary things in London.
And I wasn't ready for that all to end.
I was so determined to survive that I used my scarf to tie tourniquets around the tops of my legs, and I just shut everything and everyone out, to focus, to listen to myself, to be guided by instinct alone.
I lowered my breathing rate.
I elevated my thighs.
I held myself upright and I fought the urge to close my eyes.
I held on for almost an hour, an hour to contemplate the whole of my life up until this point.
Perhaps I should have done more.
Perhaps I could have lived more, seen more.
Maybe I should have gone running, dancing, taken up yoga.
But my priority and my focus was always my work.
I lived to work.
Who I was on my business card mattered to me.
But it didn't matter down in that tunnel.
By the time I felt that first touch from one of my rescuers, I was unable to speak, unable to say even a small word, like "Gill."
I surrendered my body to them.
I had done all I possibly could, and now I was in their hands.
I understood just who and what humanity really is, when I first saw the ID tag that was given to me when I was admitted to hospital.
And it read: "One unknown estimated female."
One unknown estimated female.
Those four words were my gift.
What they told me very clearly was that my life was saved, purely because I was a human being.
Difference of any kind made no difference to the extraordinary lengths that the rescuers were prepared to go to save my life, to save as many unknowns as they could, and putting their own lives at risk.
To them, it didn't matter if I was rich or poor, the color of my skin, whether I was male or female, my sexual orientation, who I voted for, whether I was educated, if I had a faith or no faith at all.
Nothing mattered other than I was a precious human life.
I see myself as a living fact.
I am proof that unconditional love and respect can not only save, but it can transform lives.
Here is a wonderful image of one of my rescuers, Andy, and I taken just last year.
Ten years after the event, and here we are, arm in arm.
Throughout all the chaos, my hand was held tightly.
My face was stroked gently.
What did I feel?
I felt loved.
What's shielded me from hatred and wanting retribution, what's given me the courage to say: this ends with me is love.
I was loved.
I believe the potential for widespread positive change is absolutely enormous because I know what we're capable of.
I know the brilliance of humanity.
So this leaves me with some pretty big things to ponder and some questions for us all to consider: Is what unites us not far greater than what can ever divide?
Does it have to take a tragedy or a disaster for us to feel deeply connected as one species, as human beings?
And when will we embrace the wisdom of our era to rise above mere tolerance and move to an acceptance for all who are only a label until we know them?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Ichthyology, the study of fishes.
It looks like a big, boring word, but it's actually quite exciting, because ichthyology is the only "ology" with "YOLO" in it.
(Laughter) Now, to the cool kids in the audience, you already know, YOLO stands for "you only live once," and because I only have one life, I'm going to spend it doing what I always dreamt of doing: seeing the hidden wonders of the world and discovering new species.
And that's what I get to do.
Now, in recent years, I really focused on caves for finding new species.
And it turns out, there's lots of new cavefish species out there.
You just have to know where to look, and to maybe be a little thin.
(Laughter) Now, cavefishes can tell me a lot about biology and geology.
They can tell me how the landmasses around them have changed and moved by being stuck in these little holes, and they can tell me about the evolution of sight, by being blind.
Now, fish have eyes that are essentially the same as ours.
All vertebrates do, and each time a fish species starts to adapt to this dark, cold, cave environment, over many, many generations, they lose their eyes and their eyesight until the end up like an eyeless cavefish like this one here.
Now, each cavefish species has evolved in a slightly different way, and each one has a unique geological and biological story to tell us, and that's why it's so exciting when we find a new species.
So this is a new species we described, from southern Indiana.
We named it Amblyopsis hoosieri, the Hoosier cavefish.
(Laughter) Its closest relatives are cavefishes in Kentucky, in the Mammoth Cave system.
And they start to diverge when the Ohio River split them a few million years ago.
And in that time they developed these subtle differences in the genetic architecture behind their blindness.
There's this gene called rhodopsin that's super-critical for sight.
We have it, and these species have it too, except one species has lost all function in that gene, and the other one maintains it.
So this sets up this beautiful natural experiment where we can look at the genes behind our vision, and at the very roots of how we can see.
But the genes in these cavefishes can also tell us about deep geological time, maybe no more so than in this species here.
This is a new species we described from Madagascar that we named Typhleotris mararybe.
That means "big sickness" in Malagasy, for how sick we got trying to collect this species.
Now, believe it or not, swimming around sinkholes full of dead things and cave full of bat poop isn't the smartest thing you could be doing with your life, but YOLO.
(Laughter) Now, I love this species despite the fact that it tried to kill us, and that's because this species in Madagascar, its closest relatives are 6,000 kilometers away, cavefishes in Australia.
Now, there's no way a three-inch-long freshwater cavefish can swim across the Indian Ocean, so what we found when we compared the DNA of these species is that they've been separated for more than 100 million years, or about the time that the southern continents were last together.
So in fact, these species didn't move at all.
It's the continents that moved them.
And so they give us, through their DNA, this precise model and measure of how to date and time these ancient geological events.
Now, this species here is so new I'm not even allowed to tell you its name yet, but I can tell you it's a new species from Mexico, and it's probably already extinct.
It's probably extinct because the only known cave system it's from was destroyed when a dam was built nearby.
Unfortunately for cavefishes, their groundwater habitat is also our main source of drinking water.
Now, we actually don't know this species' closest relative, yet.
It doesn't appear to be anything else in Mexico, so maybe it's something in Cuba, or Florida, or India.
But whatever it is, it might tell us something new about the geology of the Caribbean, or the biology of how to better diagnose certain types of blindness.
But I hope we discover this species before it goes extinct too.
And I'm going to spend my one life as an ichthyologist trying to discover and save these humble little blind cavefishes that can tell us so much about the geology of the planet and the biology of how we see.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi. My name is Aparna.
I am a shopaholic -- (Laughter) and I'm addicted to online returns.
(Laughter) Well, at least I was.
At one time, I had two or three packages of clothing delivered to me every other day.
I would intentionally buy the same item in a couple different sizes and many colors, because I did not know what I really wanted.
So I overordered, I tried things on, and then I sent what didn't work back.
Once my daughter was watching me return some of those packages back, and she said, "Mom, I think you have a problem."
(Laughter) I didn't think so.
I mean, it's free shipping and free returns, right?
(Laughter) I didn't even think twice about it, until I heard a statistic at work that shocked me.
You see, I'm a global solutions director for top-tier retail, and we were in a meeting with one of my largest customers, discussing how to streamline costs.
One of their biggest concerns was managing returns.
Just this past holiday season alone, they had 7.5 million pieces of clothing returned to them.
I could not stop thinking about it.
What happens to all these returned clothes?
So I came home and researched.
And I learned that every year, four billion pounds of returned clothing ends up in the landfill.
That's like every resident in the US did a load of laundry last night and decided to throw it in the trash today.
I was horrified.
I'm like, "Of all people, I should be able to help prevent this."
(Laughter) My job is to find solutions to logistical issues like these -- not create them.
So this issue became very personal to me.
I said, "You know what? We have to solve this."
And we can, with some of the existing systems we already have in place.
And then I started to wonder: How did we get here?
I mean, it was only like six years ago when a study recommended that offering free online returns would drive customers to spend more.
We started seeing companies offering free online returns to drive more sales and provide a better experience.
What we didn't realize is that this would lead to more items being returned as well.
In the US, companies lost $351 billion in sales in 2017 alone.
Retailers are scrambling to recover their losses.
They try to place that returned item online to be sold again, or they'll sell it to a discount partner or a liquidator.
Basically, if companies cannot find a place for this item quickly and economically, its place becomes the trash.
Suddenly, I felt very guilty for being that shopper, somebody who contributes to this.
Who would have thought my innocent shopping behavior would be hurting not only me, but our planet as well?
And as I thought about what to do, I kept thinking: Why does the item have to be returned to the retailer in the first place?
What if there was another way, a win-win for everyone?
What if when a person is trying to return something, it could go to the next shopper who wants it, and not the retailer?
What if, instead of a return, they could do what I call a "green turn"?
Consumers could use an app to take pictures of the item and verify the condition while returning it.
Artificial intelligence systems could then sort these clothes by condition -- mint condition or slightly used -- and direct it to the next appropriate person.
Mint-condition clothes could automatically go to the next buyer, while slightly used clothes could be marked down and offered online again.
The retailer can decide the business rules on the number of times a particular item can be resold.
All that the consumer would need to do is obtain a mobile code, take it to the nearest shipping place to be packed and shipped, and off it goes from one buyer to the next, not the landfill.
Now you will ask, "Would people really go through all this trouble?"
I think they would if they had incentives, like loyalty points or cash back.
Let's call it "green cash."
There would be a whole new opportunity to make money from this new customer base looking to buy these returns.
This system would make a fun thing like shopping a spiritual experience that helps save our planet.
(Applause) This is doable and would probably take six months to weave some of our existing systems and run a pilot.
Even before any of these logistical systems are in place, each of us shoppers can act now, if every single adult in the US made a few small changes to our shopping behavior.
Take the extra time to research and think -- Do I really need this item?
No: Do I really want this item? -- before making a purchase.
And if every one of us adults in the US returned five less items this year, we would keep 240 million pounds of clothes out of the landfill.
Six percent reduction, just like that.
This environmental problem that we have created is not thousands of years away; it's happening today, and must stop now to prevent growing landfills across the globe.
I want to leave my daughter and my daughter's daughter a better and cleaner place than I found it, so I have not only stopped overordering, I recycle religiously as well.
And you can, too. It's not difficult.
Before we fill our shopping carts and our landfills with extra items that we don't want, let's pause next time we are shopping online and think twice about what we all hopefully really do want: a beautiful Earth to call home.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I'd like you to imagine for a moment that you're a soldier in the heat of battle.
Maybe you're a Roman foot soldier or a medieval archer or maybe you're a Zulu warrior.
Regardless of your time and place, there are some things that are constant.
Your adrenaline is elevated, and your actions are stemming from these deeply ingrained reflexes, reflexes rooted in a need to protect yourself and your side and to defeat the enemy.
So now, I'd like you to imagine playing a very different role, that of the scout.
The scout's job is not to attack or defend.
The scout's job is to understand.
The scout is the one going out, mapping the terrain, identifying potential obstacles.
And the scout may hope to learn that, say, there's a bridge in a convenient location across a river.
But above all, the scout wants to know what's really there, as accurately as possible.
And in a real, actual army, both the soldier and the scout are essential.
But you can also think of each of these roles as a mindset -- a metaphor for how all of us process information and ideas in our daily lives.
What I'm going to argue today is that having good judgment, making accurate predictions, making good decisions, is mostly about which mindset you're in.
To illustrate these mindsets in action, I'm going to take you back to 19th-century France, where this innocuous-looking piece of paper launched one of the biggest political scandals in history.
It was discovered in 1894 by officers in the French general staff.
It was torn up in a wastepaper basket, but when they pieced it back together, they discovered that someone in their ranks had been selling military secrets to Germany.
So they launched a big investigation, and their suspicions quickly converged on this man, Alfred Dreyfus.
He had a sterling record, no past history of wrongdoing, no motive as far as they could tell.
But Dreyfus was the only Jewish officer at that rank in the army, and unfortunately at this time, the French Army was highly anti-Semitic.
They compared Dreyfus's handwriting to that on the memo and concluded that it was a match, even though outside professional handwriting experts were much less confident in the similarity, but never mind that.
They went and searched Dreyfus's apartment, looking for any signs of espionage.
They went through his files, and they didn't find anything.
This just convinced them more that Dreyfus was not only guilty, but sneaky as well, because clearly he had hidden all of the evidence before they had managed to get to it.
Next, they went and looked through his personal history for any incriminating details.
They talked to his teachers, they found that he had studied foreign languages in school, which clearly showed a desire to conspire with foreign governments later in life.
His teachers also said that Dreyfus was known for having a good memory, which was highly suspicious, right?
You know, because a spy has to remember a lot of things.
So the case went to trial, and Dreyfus was found guilty.
Afterwards, they took him out into this public square and ritualistically tore his insignia from his uniform and broke his sword in two.
This was called the Degradation of Dreyfus.
And they sentenced him to life imprisonment on the aptly named Devil's Island, which is this barren rock off the coast of South America.
So there he went, and there he spent his days alone, writing letters and letters to the French government begging them to reopen his case so they could discover his innocence.
But for the most part, France considered the matter closed.
One thing that's really interesting to me about the Dreyfus Affair is this question of why the officers were so convinced that Dreyfus was guilty.
I mean, you might even assume that they were setting him up, that they were intentionally framing him.
But historians don't think that's what happened.
As far as we can tell, the officers genuinely believed that the case against Dreyfus was strong.
Which makes you wonder: What does it say about the human mind that we can find such paltry evidence to be compelling enough to convict a man?
Well, this is a case of what scientists call "motivated reasoning."
It's this phenomenon in which our unconscious motivations, our desires and fears, shape the way we interpret information.
Some information, some ideas, feel like our allies.
We want them to win. We want to defend them.
And other information or ideas are the enemy, and we want to shoot them down.
So this is why I call motivated reasoning, "soldier mindset."
Probably most of you have never persecuted a French-Jewish officer for high treason, I assume, but maybe you've followed sports or politics, so you might have noticed that when the referee judges that your team committed a foul, for example, you're highly motivated to find reasons why he's wrong.
But if he judges that the other team committed a foul -- awesome!
That's a good call, let's not examine it too closely.
Or, maybe you've read an article or a study that examined some controversial policy, like capital punishment.
And, as researchers have demonstrated, if you support capital punishment and the study shows that it's not effective, then you're highly motivated to find all the reasons why the study was poorly designed.
But if it shows that capital punishment works, it's a good study.
And vice versa: if you don't support capital punishment, same thing.
Our judgment is strongly influenced, unconsciously, by which side we want to win.
And this is ubiquitous.
This shapes how we think about our health, our relationships, how we decide how to vote, what we consider fair or ethical.
What's most scary to me about motivated reasoning or soldier mindset, is how unconscious it is.
We can think we're being objective and fair-minded and still wind up ruining the life of an innocent man.
However, fortunately for Dreyfus, his story is not over.
This is Colonel Picquart.
He's another high-ranking officer in the French Army, and like most people, he assumed Dreyfus was guilty.
Also like most people in the army, he was at least casually anti-Semitic.
But at a certain point, Picquart began to suspect: "What if we're all wrong about Dreyfus?"
What happened was, he had discovered evidence that the spying for Germany had continued, even after Dreyfus was in prison.
And he had also discovered that another officer in the army had handwriting that perfectly matched the memo, much closer than Dreyfus's handwriting.
So he brought these discoveries to his superiors, but to his dismay, they either didn't care or came up with elaborate rationalizations to explain his findings, like, "Well, all you've really shown, Picquart, is that there's another spy who learned how to mimic Dreyfus's handwriting, and he picked up the torch of spying after Dreyfus left.
But Dreyfus is still guilty."
Eventually, Picquart managed to get Dreyfus exonerated.
But it took him 10 years, and for part of that time, he himself was in prison for the crime of disloyalty to the army.
A lot of people feel like Picquart can't really be the hero of this story because he was an anti-Semite and that's bad, which I agree with.
But personally, for me, the fact that Picquart was anti-Semitic actually makes his actions more admirable, because he had the same prejudices, the same reasons to be biased as his fellow officers, but his motivation to find the truth and uphold it trumped all of that.
So to me, Picquart is a poster child for what I call "scout mindset."
It's the drive not to make one idea win or another lose, but just to see what's really there as honestly and accurately as you can, even if it's not pretty or convenient or pleasant.
This mindset is what I'm personally passionate about.
And I've spent the last few years examining and trying to figure out what causes scout mindset.
Why are some people, sometimes at least, able to cut through their own prejudices and biases and motivations and just try to see the facts and the evidence as objectively as they can?
And the answer is emotional.
So, just as soldier mindset is rooted in emotions like defensiveness or tribalism, scout mindset is, too.
It's just rooted in different emotions.
For example, scouts are curious.
They're more likely to say they feel pleasure when they learn new information or an itch to solve a puzzle.
They're more likely to feel intrigued when they encounter something that contradicts their expectations.
Scouts also have different values.
They're more likely to say they think it's virtuous to test your own beliefs, and they're less likely to say that someone who changes his mind seems weak.
And above all, scouts are grounded, which means their self-worth as a person isn't tied to how right or wrong they are about any particular topic.
So they can believe that capital punishment works.
If studies come out showing that it doesn't, they can say, "Huh. Looks like I might be wrong. Doesn't mean I'm bad or stupid."
This cluster of traits is what researchers have found -- and I've also found anecdotally -- predicts good judgment.
And the key takeaway I want to leave you with about those traits is that they're primarily not about how smart you are or about how much you know.
In fact, they don't correlate very much with IQ at all.
They're about how you feel.
There's a quote that I keep coming back to, by Saint-Exupéry.
He's the author of "The Little Prince."
He said, "If you want to build a ship, don't drum up your men to collect wood and give orders and distribute the work.
Instead, teach them to yearn for the vast and endless sea."
In other words, I claim, if we really want to improve our judgment as individuals and as societies, what we need most is not more instruction in logic or rhetoric or probability or economics, even though those things are quite valuable.
But what we most need to use those principles well is scout mindset.
We need to change the way we feel.
We need to learn how to feel proud instead of ashamed when we notice we might have been wrong about something.
We need to learn how to feel intrigued instead of defensive when we encounter some information that contradicts our beliefs.
So the question I want to leave you with is: What do you most yearn for?
Do you yearn to defend your own beliefs?
Or do you yearn to see the world as clearly as you possibly can?
Thank you.
(Applause)
At Free America, we've done a listening and learning tour.
We visited not only with prosecutors but with legislators, with inmates in our state and local prisons.
We've gone to immigration detention centers.
We've met a lot of people.
And we've seen that redemption and transformation can happen in our prisons, our jails and our immigration detention centers, giving hope to those who want to create a better life after serving their time.
Imagine if we also considered the front end of this prison pipeline.
What would it look like if we intervened, with rehabilitation as a core value -- with love and compassion as core values?
We would have a society that is safer, healthier and worthy of raising our children in.
I want to introduce you to James Cavitt.
James served 12 years in the San Quentin State Prison and is being released in 18 months.
Now James, like you and me, is more than the worst thing he's done.
He is a father, a husband, a son, a poet.
He committed a crime; he's paying his debt, and working hard to build the skills to make the transition back to a productive life when he enters the civilian population again.
Now James, like millions of people behind bars, is an example of what happens if we believe that our failings don't define who we are, that we are all worthy of redemption and if we support those impacted by mass incarceration, we can all heal together.
I'd like to introduce you to James right now, and he's going to share his journey of redemption through spoken word.
James Cavitt: Thanks, John.
TED, welcome to San Quentin.
The talent is abundant behind prison walls.
Future software engineers, entrepreneurs, craftsmen, musicians and artists.
This piece is inspired by all of the hard work that men and women are doing on the inside to create better lives and futures for themselves after they serve their time.
This piece is entitled, "Where I Live."
I live in a world where most people are too afraid to go.
Surrounded by tall, concrete walls, steel bars, where razor wire have a way of cutting away at the hopes for a brighter tomorrow.
I live in a world that kill people who kill people in order to teach people that killing people is wrong.
Imagine that.
Better yet, imagine a world where healed people helped hurt people heal and become strong.
Maybe then we would all be singin' "Redemption Song."
I live in a world that has been called "hell on Earth" by those trapped inside.
But I've come to the stark realization that prison -- it really is what you make it.
You see, in spite of the harshness of my reality, there is a silver lining.
I knew that my freedom was gonna come, it was just a matter of time.
And so I treated my first steps as if they were my last mile, and I realized that you don't have to be free in order to experience freedom.
And just because you're free, doesn't mean that you have freedom.
Many of us, for years, have been battling our inner demons.
We walk around smiling when inside we're really screamin': freedom!
Don't you get it?
We're all serving time; we're just in different places.
As for me, I choose to be free from the prisons I've created.
The key: forgiveness.
Action's my witness.
If we want freedom, then we gotta think different.
Because freedom ...
it isn't a place.
It's a mind setting.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Piano) John Legend: Old pirates, yes, they rob I.
Sold I to the merchant ships.
Minutes after they took I from the bottomless pit.
My hands were made strong by the hand of the almighty.
We forward in this generation triumphantly.
Won't you help to sing these songs of freedom?
'Cause all I ever had -- redemption songs.
Redemption songs.
Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery.
None but ourselves can free our minds.
Have no fear for atomic energy 'cause none of them can stop the time.
How long shall they kill our prophets while we stand aside and look?
Some say it's just a part of it, we've got to fulfill the book.
Won't you help to sing these songs of freedom?
'Cause all I ever had -- redemption songs.
Redemption songs.
(Piano) Emancipate yourselves from mental slavery.
None but ourselves can free our minds.
Have no fear for atomic energy 'cause none of them can stop the time.
How long shall they kill our prophets while we stand aside and look?
Some say it's just a part of it, we've got to fulfill the book.
Won't you help to sing these songs of freedom?
'Cause all I ever had -- redemption songs.
Redemption songs.
These songs of freedom.
'Cause all I ever had -- redemption songs.
Redemption songs.
Redemption songs.
(Piano) (Applause) Thank you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I used to have this recurring dream where I'd walk into a roomful of people, and I'd try not to make eye contact with anyone.
Until someone notices me, and I just panic.
And the person walks up to me, and says, "Hi, my name is So-and-so.
And what is your name?"
And I'm just quiet, unable to respond.
After some awkward silence, he goes, "Have you forgotten your name?"
And I'm still quiet.
And then, slowly, all the other people in the room begin to turn toward me and ask, almost in unison, (Voice-over, several voices) "Have you forgotten your name?"
As the chant gets louder, I want to respond, but I don't.
I'm a visual artist.
Some of my work is humorous, and some is a bit funny but in a sad way.
And one thing that I really enjoy doing is making these little animations where I get to do the voice-over for all kinds of characters.
I've been a bear.
(Video) Bear (Safwat Saleem's voice): Hi.
(Laughter) Safwat Saleem: I've been a whale.
(Video) Whale (SS's voice): Hi.
(Laughter) SS: I've been a greeting card.
(Video) Greeting card (SS's voice): Hi.
(Laughter) SS: And my personal favorite is Frankenstein's monster.
(Video) Frankenstein's monster (SS's voice): (Grunts) (Laughter) SS: I just had to grunt a lot for that one.
A few years ago, I made this educational video about the history of video games.
And for that one, I got to do the voice of Space Invader.
(Video) Space Invader (SS's voice): Hi.
SS: A dream come true, really, (Laughter) And when that video was posted online, I just sat there on the computer, hitting "refresh," excited to see the response.
The first comment comes in.
(Video) Comment: Great job.
SS: Yes!
I hit "refresh."
(Video) Comment: Excellent video. I look forward to the next one.
SS: This was just the first of a two-part video.
I was going to work on the second one next.
I hit "refresh."
(Video) Comment: Where is part TWO? WHEREEEEE? I need it NOWWWWW!: P (Laughter) SS: People other than my mom were saying nice things about me, on the Internet!
It felt like I had finally arrived.
I hit "refresh."
(Video) Comment: His voice is annoying. No offense.
SS: OK, no offense taken. Refresh.
(Video) Comment: Could you remake this without peanut butter in your mouth?
SS: OK, at least the feedback is somewhat constructive. Hit "refresh."
(Video) Comment: Please don't use this narrator again u can barely understand him.
SS: Refresh.
(Video) Comment: Couldn't follow because of the Indian accent.
SS: OK, OK, OK, two things.
Number one, I don't have an Indian accent, I have a Pakistani accent, OK?
And number two, I clearly have a Pakistani accent.
(Laughter) But comments like that kept coming in, so I figured I should just ignore them and start working on the second part of the video.
I recorded my audio, but every time I sat down to edit, I just could not do it.
Every single time, it would take me back to my childhood, when I had a much harder time speaking.
I've stuttered for as long as I can remember.
I was the kid in class who would never raise his hand when he had a question -- or knew the answer.
Every time the phone rang, I would run to the bathroom so I would not have to answer it.
If it was for me, my parents would say I'm not around.
I spent a lot of time in the bathroom.
And I hated introducing myself, especially in groups.
I'd always stutter on my name, and there was usually someone who'd go, "Have you forgotten your name?"
And then everybody would laugh.
That joke never got old.
(Laughter) I spent my childhood feeling that if I spoke, it would become obvious that there was something wrong with me, that I was not normal.
So I mostly stayed quiet.
And so you see, eventually for me to even be able to use my voice in my work was a huge step for me.
Every time I record audio, I fumble my way through saying each sentence many, many times, and then I go back in and pick the ones where I think I suck the least.
(Voice-over) SS: Audio editing is like Photoshop for your voice.
I can slow it down, speed it up, make it deeper, add an echo.
And if I stutter along the way, and if I stutter along the way, I just go back in and fix it.
It's magic.
SS: Using my highly edited voice in my work was a way for me to finally sound normal to myself.
But after the comments on the video, it no longer made me feel normal.
And so I stopped using my voice in my work.
Since then, I've thought a lot about what it means to be normal.
And I've come to understand that "normal" has a lot to do with expectations.
Let me give you an example.
I came across this story about the Ancient Greek writer, Homer.
Now, Homer mentions very few colors in his writing.
And even when he does, he seems to get them quite a bit wrong.
For example, the sea is described as wine red, people's faces are sometimes green and sheep are purple.
But it's not just Homer.
If you look at all of the ancient literature -- Ancient Chinese, Icelandic, Greek, Indian and even the original Hebrew Bible -- they all mention very few colors.
And the most popular theory for why that might be the case is that cultures begin to recognize a color only once they have the ability to make that color.
So basically, if you can make a color, only then can you see it.
A color like red, which was fairly easy for many cultures to make -- they began to see that color fairly early on.
But a color like blue, which was much harder to make -- many cultures didn't begin to learn how to make that color until much later.
They didn't begin to see it until much later as well.
So until then, even though a color might be all around them, they simply did not have the ability to see it.
It was invisIble.
It was not a part of their normal.
And that story has helped put my own experience into context.
So when I first read the comments on the video, my initial reaction was to take it all very personally.
But the people commenting did not know how self-conscious I am about my voice.
They were mostly reacting to my accent, that it is not normal for a narrator to have an accent.
But what is normal, anyway?
We know that reviewers will find more spelling errors in your writing if they think you're black.
We know that professors are less likely to help female or minority students.
And we know that resumes with white-sounding names get more callbacks than resumes with black-sounding names.
Why is that?
Because of our expectations of what is normal.
We think it is normal when a black student has spelling errors.
We think it is normal when a female or minority student does not succeed.
And we think it is normal that a white employee is a better hire than a black employee.
But studies also show that discrimination of this kind, in most cases, is simply favoritism, and it results more from wanting to help people that you can relate to than the desire to harm people that you can't relate to.
And not relating to people starts at a very early age.
Let me give you an example.
One library that keeps track of characters in the children's book collection every year, found that in 2014, only about 11 percent of the books had a character of color.
And just the year before, that number was about eight percent, even though half of American children today come from a minority background.
Half.
So there are two big issues here.
Number one, children are told that they can be anything, they can do anything, and yet, most stories that children of color consume are about people who are not like them.
Number two is that majority groups don't get to realize the great extent to which they are similar to minorities -- our everyday experiences, our hopes, our dreams, our fears and our mutual love for hummus.
It's delicious!
(Laughter) Just like the color blue for Ancient Greeks, minorities are not a part of what we consider normal, because normal is simply a construction of what we've been exposed to, and how visible it is around us.
And this is where things get a bit difficult.
I can accept the preexisting notion of normal -- that normal is good, and anything outside of that very narrow definition of normal is bad.
Or I can challenge that preexisting notion of normal with my work and with my voice and with my accent and by standing here onstage, even though I'm scared shitless and would rather be in the bathroom.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Video) Sheep (SS's voice): I'm now slowly starting to use my voice in my work again.
And it feels good.
It does not mean I won't have a breakdown the next time a couple dozen people say that I talk (Mumbling) like I have peanut butter in my mouth.
(Laughter) SS: It just means I now have a much better understanding of what's at stake, and how giving up is not an option.
The Ancient Greeks didn't just wake up one day and realize that the sky was blue.
It took centuries, even, for humans to realize what we had been ignoring for so long.
And so we must continuously challenge our notion of normal, because doing so is going to allow us as a society to finally see the sky for what it is.
(Video) Characters: Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Frankenstein's monster: (Grunts) (Laughter) SS: Thank you.
(Applause)
(Bass guitar) (Bass guitar and accordion) ♫ You're older than you've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're even older. ♫ ♫ You're older than you've even been ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're older still. ♫ ♫ Time ♫ ♫ is marching on ♫ ♫ and time ♫ ♫ is still marching on. ♫ ♫ This day will soon be at an end ♫ ♫ and now it's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it's even sooner. ♫ ♫ This day will soon be at an end ♫ ♫ and now it's even sooner ♫ ♫ and now it's sooner still. ♫ ♫ You're older than you've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're even older. ♫ ♫ You're older than you've ever been ♫ ♫ and now you're even older ♫ ♫ and now you're older still. ♫ Thank you very much.
Good morning everybody.
We are They Might Be Giants.
(Applause) I am wearing the Al Gore in-ear monitors he wore on the Larry King show and I'm hearing that transmission and not mine.
But I guess that's in keeping, so now we'll just move to the PowerPoint presentation, ladies and gentlemen.
This is a brand new song.
In the spirit of TED, we're bringing you something that has not been released.
John, do you want to introduce the song?
This is a song about a creature called a hummingbird moth which imitates another creature which imitates yet another creature.
It's completely fucked up and can only be explained in song.
♫ Everyone is crying at the dread hypnotic flying ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ You can't walk, you can't ramble ♫ ♫ 'cause you're gonna have to scramble ♫ ♫ from the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ Catbird is a cat ♫ ♫ but he's got bugness in his veins. ♫ ♫ Manhouse lives within himself ♫ ♫ with thoughtful human brains. ♫ ♫ Neither one is equal ♫ ♫ to the challenge of the freak we'll call ♫ ♫ the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ Now the moth ♫ ♫ defeats the mouse and man. ♫ ♫ It's messing with the plan. ♫ ♫ It can't be believed ♫ ♫ 'cause it's just a hummingbird moth ♫ ♫ who's acting like the bird ♫ ♫ that thinks it's a bee. ♫ ♫ Got a brand new shipment ♫ ♫ of electrical equipment ♫ ♫ it's addressed to the bottom of the sea. ♫ ♫ Send a tangerine-colored ♫ ♫ nuclear submarine ♫ ♫ with a sticker that says STP. ♫ ♫ Windshield wiper washer fluid ♫ ♫ spraying in the air ... ♫ ♫ headlights under head lice ♫ ♫ under hats lie everywhere. ♫ ♫ Subatomic waves ♫ ♫ to the underwater caves ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ Now the moth defeats the mouse and man. ♫ ♫ It's messing with the plan. ♫ ♫ It can't be believed ♫ ♫ 'cause it's just a hummingbird moth ♫ ♫ who's acting like a bird ♫ ♫ that thinks it's a bee. ♫ ♫ Is it us or is this messed up? ♫ ♫ Everyone's deforming ♫ ♫ in the presence of the swarming ♫ ♫ of the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ Protozoa, snakes and horses ♫ ♫ have enlisted in the forces ♫ ♫ of the bee of bird of the moth. ♫ ♫ Catbug is a cat ♫ ♫ but he's got bugness in his veins. ♫ ♫ Manhouse lives within himself ♫ ♫ with thoughtful human brains. ♫ ♫ Neither one is equal ♫ ♫ to the challenge of the freak we'll call ♫ ♫ the bee of the bird of the moth. ♫ (Applause) Thanks a lot.
Thank you very much.
So we are past our 1,000th show.
Probably somewhere around 1,500.
It's hard to know.
We've only done two shows in 2007 so far, but our first show was actually the coldest performance we've ever had.
It was 19 degrees in St. Louis about a month ago and I'm happy to report that this performance you are seeing today is the earliest we have ever performed.
So thank you.
We are cultural test pilots, ladies and gentlemen.
How early can a rock performance begin?
Not all the facts are in about performing at 8.30 in the morning.
I can tell you the 19 degree thing was fantastic.
All right.
So we don't know that much about the history of violinists but we do know that when we entered the state of New Jersey there is an uptick in violence.
This song is called "Asbury Park."
It's based on a real life experience.
♫ I ♫ ♫ I got ♫ ♫ I got kicked ♫ ♫ I got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the Stone. ♫ ♫ Stone Pone. ♫ ♫ Stone Pony. ♫ ♫ I got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the Stone Pony ♫ ♫ where I swore to the guy ♫ ♫ that the guy who took his beer wasn't me. ♫ ♫ Me got ♫ ♫ Me got kicked ♫ ♫ Me got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the Stone. ♫ ♫ Stone Pone. ♫ ♫ Stone Pony. ♫ ♫ Me got kicked in the head ♫ ♫ backstage at the Stone Pony ♫ ♫ where I swore to the guy ♫ ♫ that the guy who took his beer ♫ ♫ was a guy dressed like me. ♫ ♫ Not me! ♫ ♫ Not me! ♫ ♫ Not me! ♫ Thank you.
Marty Beller on the drums over there.
(Applause) We want to get in as many songs as possible during our brief time here so this is the one to play.
This song is called "Fingertips."
♫ Everything is catching on fire ♫ ♫ Yes, everything is catching on fire ♫ ♫ Yes, everything is catching on fire. ♫ ♫ Fingertips ♫ ♫ Fingertips ♫ ♫ Fingertips ♫ ♫ I hear the wind blow ♫ ♫ I hear the wind blow ♫ ♫ It seems to say ♫ ♫ Hello ♫ ♫ Hello ♫ ♫ I'm the one who loves you so. ♫ ♫ Hey, now everybody, now. ♫ ♫ Hey, now everybody ♫ ♫ Hey, now everybody, now ♫ ♫ Who's that standing ♫ ♫ at the window?♫ ♫ I found a new friend ♫ ♫ underneath my pillow. ♫ ♫ Come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ Come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ Come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ Come on and wreck my car ♫ ♫ Aren't you the guy who hit me in the eye? ♫ ♫ Aren't you the guy who hit me in the eye? ♫ ♫ Please pass the milk, please. ♫ ♫ Please pass the milk, please. ♫ ♫ Please pass the milk, please. ♫ ♫ Leave me alone, leave me alone. ♫ ♫ Who's knocking on the wall? ♫ ♫ All alone, all alone. ♫ ♫ All by myself. ♫ ♫ What's that blue thing doing here? ♫ ♫ Something grabbed ahold of my hand ♫ ♫ I didn't know what had my hand ♫ ♫ but that's when all my troubles began. ♫ ♫ I don't understand you ♫ ♫ I don't understand you ♫ ♫ I cannot understand you ♫ ♫ I cannot understand you ♫ ♫ I don't understand the things you say ♫ ♫ I can't understand a single word ♫ ♫ I don't understand you ♫ ♫ I don't understand you ♫ ♫ I just don't understand you ♫ ♫ I don't understand you ♫ ♫ I do not understand you ♫ ♫ Don't understand you ♫ ♫ Don't understand you ♫ ♫ I turn around ♫ ♫ See the sound ♫ ♫ Turn around and see the thing ♫ ♫ that made the sound. ♫ ♫ Mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ Mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ Mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ Mysterious whisper ♫ ♫ The day that love came to play. ♫ ♫ I'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ I'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ I'm having a heart attack ♫ ♫ I'm having a ... ♫ ♫ Fingertips ♫ ♫ Fingertips ♫ ♫ I walk along darkened corridors ♫ ♫ And I walk along darkened corridors ♫ Thank you very much -- "Fingertips."
(Applause) ♫ We're taking calls -- from the dead. ♫ ♫ We're taking calls -- from the dead. ♫ ♫ We're taking phone calls from the dead. ♫ ♫ They're calling from beyond the grave. ♫ ♫ Beyond the grave. ♫ ♫ They have some questions ♫ ♫ And things to share ♫ ♫ From underneath the cold, cold ground. ♫ We're soliciting phone calls from dead people as a special TED presentation.
We're taking calls live on stage here at TED in Monterey.
And I think we have a caller coming in here.
Hello there.
You're live.
Hello. Who's there, please?
Am I on the air?
Hi there.
You're on with They Might Be Giants.
This is Eleanor Roosevelt.
Hello, Eleanor, please ...
I want to talk to ...
Please turn off your radio, Eleanor.
I wanna talk to Randi.
I've got a question for Randi.
What's your question, please?
I want to talk to the Amazing Randi.
Do you have a laminated badge, Eleanor?
I want my million dollars.
Eleanor, I'm sorry, do you have a laminated badge?
No, I don't have a badge.
Well, I think we're going to stop that part of the show.
Here's a song we like to think of as the future anthem of TED.
It's actually a children's song but like so many projects for children it's really just a Trojan horse for adult work.
This song is called "The Alphabet ...
Of Nations!"
♫ Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Dominica, ♫ ♫ Egypt, France, The Gambia ♫ ♫ Hungary, Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, ♫ ♫ Libya and Mongolia. ♫ ♫ Norway, Oman, Pakistan, ♫ ♫ Qatar, Russia, Suriname, ♫ ♫ Turkey, Uruguay, Vietnam, ♫ ♫ West Xylophone, Yemen, Zimbabwe. ♫ ♫ Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Dominica, ♫ ♫ Egypt, France, The Gambia, ♫ ♫ Hungary, Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, ♫ ♫ Libya and Mongolia. ♫ ♫ Norway, Oman, Pakistan, ♫ ♫ Qatar, Russia, Suriname, ♫ ♫ Turkey, Uruguay, Vietnam, ♫ ♫ West Xylophone, Yemen, Zimbabwe. ♫ ♫ Azerbaijan, Bolivia, Canada, ♫ ♫ Australia, Belgium, Chad, ♫ ♫ Afghanistan, Brunei, China, Denmark, ♫ ♫ Ecuador, Fiji, Guatemala, ♫ ♫ Algeria, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Dominica, ♫ ♫ Egypt, France, The Gambia, ♫ ♫ Hungary, Iran, Japan, Kazakhstan, ♫ ♫ Libya and Mongolia. ♫ ♫ Norway, Oman, Pakistan, ♫ ♫ Qatar, Russia, Suriname, ♫ ♫ Turkey, Uruguay, Vietnam, ♫ ♫ West Xylophone, Yemen, Zimbabwe. ♫ Thank you so much.
You've been a wonderful 8:30 audience.
Have a great session.
Thank you all.
Imagine you are a part of a crew of astronauts traveling to Mars or some distant planet.
The travel time could take a year or even longer.
The space on board and the resources would be limited.
So you and the crew would have to figure out how to produce food with minimal inputs.
What if you could bring with you just a few packets of seeds, and grow crops in a matter of hours?
And what if those crops would then make more seeds, enabling you to feed the entire crew with just those few packets of seeds for the duration of the trip?
Well, the scientists at NASA actually figured out a way to do this.
What they came up with was actually quite interesting.
It involved microorganisms, which are single-celled organisms.
And they also used hydrogen from water.
The types of microbes that they used were called hydrogenotrophs, and with these hydrogenotrophs, you can create a virtuous carbon cycle that would sustain life onboard a spacecraft.
Astronauts would breathe out carbon dioxide, that carbon dioxide would then be captured by the microbes and converted into a nutritious, carbon-rich crop.
The astronauts would then eat that carbon-rich crop and exhale the carbon out in the form of carbon dioxide, which would then be captured by the microbes, to create a nutritious crop, which then would be exhaled in the form of carbon dioxide by the astronauts.
So in this way, a closed-loop carbon cycle is created.
So why is this important?
We need carbon to survive as humans, and we get our carbon from food.
On a long space journey, you simply wouldn't be able to pick up any carbon along the way, so you'd have to figure out how to recycle it on board.
This is a clever solution, right?
But the thing is, that research didn't really go anywhere.
We haven't yet gone to Mars. We haven't yet gone to another planet.
And this was actually done in the '60s and '70s.
So a colleague of mine, Dr. John Reed, and I, were interested, actually, in carbon recycling here on Earth.
We wanted to come up with technical solutions to address climate change.
And we discovered this research by reading some papers published in the '60s -- 1967 and later -- articles about this work.
And we thought it was a really good idea.
So we said, well, Earth is actually like a spaceship.
We have limited space and limited resources, and on Earth, we really do need to figure out how to recycle our carbon better.
So we had the idea, can we take some of these NASA-type ideas and apply them to our carbon problem here on Earth?
Could we cultivate these NASA-type microbes in order to make valuable products here on Earth?
We started a company to do it.
And in that company, we discovered that these hydrogenotrophs -- which I'll actually call nature's supercharged carbon recyclers -- we found that they are a powerful class of microbes that had been largely overlooked and understudied, and that they could make some really valuable products.
So we began cultivating these products, these microbes, in our lab.
We found that we can make essential amino acids from carbon dioxide using these microbes.
And we even made a protein-rich meal that has an amino acid profile similar to what you might find in some animal proteins.
We began cultivating them even further, and we found that we can make oil.
Oils are used to manufacture many products.
We made an oil that was similar to a citrus oil, which can be used for flavoring and for fragrances, but it also can be used as a biodegradable cleaner or even as a jet fuel.
And we made an oil that's similar to palm oil.
Palm oil is used to manufacture a wide range of consumer and industrial goods.
We began working with manufacturers to scale up this technology, and we're currently working with them to bring some of these products to market.
We believe this type of technology can indeed help us profitably recycle carbon dioxide into valuable products -- something that's beneficial for the planet but also beneficial for business.
That's what we're doing today.
But tomorrow, this type of technology and using these types of microbes actually could help us do something even greater if we take it to the next level.
We believe that this type of technology can actually help us address an issue with agriculture and allow us to create a type of agriculture that's sustainable, that will allow us to scale to meet the demands of tomorrow.
And why might we need a sustainable agriculture?
Well, actually, it is estimated that the population will reach about 10 billion by 2050, and we're projecting that we will need to increase food production by 70 percent.
In addition, we will need many more resources and raw materials to make consumer goods and industrial goods.
So how will we scale to meet that demand?
Well, modern agriculture simply cannot sustainably scale to meet that demand.
There are a number of reasons why.
One of them is that modern agriculture is one of the largest emitters of greenhouse gases.
In fact, it emits more greenhouse gases than our cars, our trucks, our planes and our trains combined.
Another reason is that modern ag simply takes up a whole lot of land.
We have cleared 19.4 million square miles for crops and livestock.
What does that look like?
Well, that's roughly the size of South America and Africa combined.
Let me give you a specific example.
In Indonesia, an amount of virgin rainforest was cleared totaling the size of approximately Ireland, between 2000 and 2012.
Just think of all of the species, the diversity, that was removed in the process, whether plant life, insects or animal life.
And a natural carbon sink was also removed.
So let me make this real for you.
This clearing happened primarily to make room for palm plantations.
And as I mentioned before, palm oil is used to manufacture many products.
In fact, it is estimated that over 50 percent of consumer products are manufactured using palm oil.
And that includes things like ice cream, cookies ...
It includes cooking oils.
It also includes detergents, lotions, soaps.
You and I both probably have numerous items in our kitchens and our bathrooms that were manufactured using palm oil.
So you and I are direct beneficiaries of removed rainforests.
Modern ag has some problems, and we need solutions if we want to scale sustainably.
I believe that microbes can be a part of the answer -- specifically, these supercharged carbon recyclers.
These supercharged carbon recyclers, like plants, serve as the natural recyclers in their ecosystems where they thrive.
And they thrive in exotic places on Earth, like hydrothermal vents and hot springs.
In those ecosystems, they take carbon and recycle it into the nutrients needed for those ecosystems.
And they're rich in nutrients, such as oils and proteins, minerals and carbohydrates.
And actually, microbes are already an integral part of our everyday lives.
If you enjoy a glass of pinot noir on a Friday night, after a long, hard work week, then you are enjoying a product of microbes.
If you enjoy a beer from your local microbrewery -- a product of microbes.
Or bread, or cheese, or yogurt.
These are all products of microbes.
But the beauty and power associated with these supercharged carbon recyclers lies in the fact that they can actually produce in a matter of hours versus months.
That means we can make crops much faster than we're making them today.
They grow in the dark, so they can grow in any season and in any geography and any location.
They can grow in containers that require minimal space.
And we can get to a type of vertical agriculture.
Instead of our traditional horizontal agriculture that requires so much land, we can scale vertically, and as a result produce much more product per area.
If we implement this type of approach and use these carbon recyclers, then we wouldn't have to remove any more rainforests to make the food and the goods that we consume.
Because, at a large scale, you can actually make 10,000 times more output per land area than you could -- for instance, if you used soybeans -- if you planted soybeans on that same area of land over a period of a year.
Ten thousand times over a period of a year.
So this is what I mean by a new type of agriculture.
And this is what I mean by developing a system that allows us to sustainably scale to meet the demands of 10 billion.
And what would be the products of this new type of agriculture?
Well, we've already made a protein meal, so you can imagine something similar to a soybean meal, or even cornmeal, or wheat flour.
We've already made oils, so you can imagine something similar to coconut oil or olive oil or soybean oil.
So this type of crop can actually produce the nutrients that would give us pasta and bread, cakes, nutritional items of many sorts.
Furthermore, since oil is used to manufacture multiple other goods, industrial products and consumer products, you can imagine being able to make detergents, soaps, lotions, etc., using these types of crops.
Not only are we running out of space, but if we continue to operate under the status quo with modern agriculture, we run the risk of robbing our progeny of a beautiful planet.
But it doesn't have to be this way.
We can imagine a future of abundance.
Let us create systems that keep planet Earth, our spaceship, not only from not crashing, but let us also develop systems and ways of living that will be beneficial to the lives of ourselves and the 10 billion that will be on this planet by 2050.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hi. My name is Marwa, and I'm an architect.
I was born and raised in Homs, a city in the central western part of Syria, and I've always lived here.
After six years of war, Homs is now a half-destroyed city.
My family and I were lucky; our place is still standing.
Although for two years, we were like prisoners at home.
Outside there were demonstrations and battles and bombings and snipers.
My husband and I used to run an architecture studio in the old town main square.
It's gone, as is most of the old town itself.
Half of the city's other neighborhoods are now rubble.
Since the ceasefire in late 2015, large parts of Homs have been more or less quiet.
The economy is completely broken, and people are still fighting.
The merchants who had stalls in the old city market now trade out of sheds on the streets.
Under our apartment, there is a carpenter, sweetshops, a butcher, a printing house, workshops, among many more.
I have started teaching part-time, and with my husband, who juggles several jobs, we've opened a small bookshop.
Other people do all sorts of jobs to get by.
When I look at my destroyed city, of course, I ask myself: What has led to this senseless war?
Syria was largely a place of tolerance, historically accustomed to variety, accommodating a wide range of beliefs, origins, customs, goods, food.
How did my country -- a country with communities living harmoniously together and comfortable in discussing their differences -- how did it degenerate into civil war, violence, displacement and unprecedented sectarian hatred?
There were many reasons that had led to the war -- social, political and economic.
They all have played their role.
But I believe there is one key reason that has been overlooked and which is important to analyze, because from it will largely depend whether we can make sure that this doesn't happen again.
And that reason is architecture.
Architecture in my country has played an important role in creating, directing and amplifying conflict between warring factions, and this is probably true for other countries as well.
There is a sure correspondence between the architecture of a place and the character of the community that has settled there.
Architecture plays a key role in whether a community crumbles or comes together.
Syrian society has long lived the coexistence of different traditions and backgrounds.
Syrians have experienced the prosperity of open trade and sustainable communities.
They have enjoyed the true meaning of belonging to a place, and that was reflected in their built environment, in the mosques and churches built back-to-back, in the interwoven souks and public venues, and the proportions and sizes based on principles of humanity and harmony.
This architecture of mixity can still be read in the remains.
The old Islamic city in Syria was built over a multilayered past, integrating with it and embracing its spirit.
So did its communities.
People lived and worked with each other in a place that gave them a sense of belonging and made them feel at home.
They shared a remarkably unified existence.
But over the last century, gradually this delicate balance of these places has been interfered with; first, by the urban planners of the colonial period, when the French went enthusiastically about, transforming what they saw as the un-modern Syrian cities.
They blew up city streets and relocated monuments.
They called them improvements, and they were the beginning of a long, slow unraveling.
The traditional urbanism and architecture of our cities assured identity and belonging not by separation, but by intertwining.
But over time, the ancient became worthless, and the new, coveted.
The harmony of the built environment and social environment got trampled over by elements of modernity -- brutal, unfinished concrete blocks, neglect, aesthetic devastation, divisive urbanism that zoned communities by class, creed or affluence.
And the same was happening to the community.
As the shape of the built environment changed, so the lifestyles and sense of belonging of the communities also started changing.
From a register of togetherness, of belonging, architecture became a way of differentiation, and communities started drifting apart from the very fabric that used to unite them, and from the soul of the place that used to represent their common existence.
While many reasons had led to the Syrian war, we shouldn't underestimate the way in which, by contributing to the loss of identity and self-respect, urban zoning and misguided, inhumane architecture have nurtured sectarian divisions and hatred.
Over time, the united city has morphed into a city center with ghettos along its circumference.
And in turn, the coherent communities became distinct social groups, alienated from each other and alienated from the place.
From my point of view, losing the sense of belonging to a place and a sense of sharing it with someone else has made it a lot easier to destroy.
The clear example can be seen in the informal housing system, which used to host, before the war, over 40 percent of the population.
Yes, prior to the war, almost half of the Syrian population lived in slums, peripheral areas without proper infrastructure, made of endless rows of bare block boxes containing people, people who mostly belonged to the same group, whether based on religion, class, origin or all of the above.
This ghettoized urbanism proved to be a tangible precursor of war.
Conflict is much easier between pre-categorized areas -- where the "others" live.
The ties that used to bind the city together -- whether they were social, through coherent building, or economic, through trade in the souk, or religious, through the coexistent presence -- were all lost in the misguided and visionless modernization of the built environment.
Allow me an aside.
When I read about heterogeneous urbanism in other parts of the world, involving ethnic neighborhoods in British cities or around Paris or Brussels, I recognize the beginning of the kind of instability we have witnessed so disastrously here in Syria.
We have severely destroyed cities, such as Homs, Aleppo, Daraa and many others, and almost half of the population of the country is now displaced.
Hopefully, the war will end, and the question that, as an architect, I have to ask, is: How do we rebuild?
What are the principles that we should adopt in order to avoid repeating the same mistakes?
From my point of view, the main focus should be on creating places that make their people feel they belong.
Architecture and planning need to recapture some of the traditional values that did just that, creating the conditions for coexistence and peace, values of beauty that don't exhibit ostentation, but rather, approachability and ease, moral values that promote generosity and acceptance, architecture that is for everyone to enjoy, not just for the elite, just as used to be in the shadowed alleys of the old Islamic city, mixed designs that encourage a sense of community.
There is a neighborhood here in Homs that's called Baba Amr that has been fully destroyed.
Almost two years ago, I introduced this design into a UN-Habitat competition for rebuilding it.
The idea was to create an urban fabric inspired by a tree, capable of growing and spreading organically, echoing the traditional bridge hanging over the old alleys, and incorporating apartments, private courtyards, shops, workshops, places for parking and playing and leisure, trees and shaded areas.
It's far from perfect, obviously.
I drew it during the few hours of electricity we get.
And there are many possible ways to express belonging and community through architecture.
But compare it with the freestanding, disconnected blocks proposed by the official project for rebuilding Baba Amr.
Architecture is not the axis around which all human life rotates, but it has the power to suggest and even direct human activity.
In that sense, settlement, identity and social integration are all the producer and product of effective urbanism.
The coherent urbanism of the old Islamic city and of many old European towns, for instance, promote integration, while rows of soulless housing or tower blocks, even when they are luxurious, tend to promote isolation and "otherness."
Even simple things like shaded places or fruit plants or drinking water inside the city can make a difference in how people feel towards the place, and whether they consider it a generous place that gives, a place that's worth keeping, contributing to, or whether they see it as an alienating place, full of seeds of anger.
In order for a place to give, its architecture should be giving, too.
Our built environment matters.
The fabric of our cities is reflected in the fabric of our souls.
And whether in the shape of informal concrete slums or broken social housing or trampled old towns or forests of skyscrapers, the contemporary urban archetypes that have emerged all across the Middle East have been one cause of the alienation and fragmentation of our communities.
We can learn from this.
We can learn how to rebuild in another way, how to create an architecture that doesn't contribute only to the practical and economic aspects of people's lives, but also to their social, spiritual and psychological needs.
Those needs were totally overlooked in the Syrian cities before the war.
We need to create again cities that are shared by the communities that inhabit them.
If we do so, people will not feel the need to seek identities opposed to the other identities all around, because they will all feel at home.
Thank you for listening.
I am British.
(Laughter) (Applause) Never before has the phrase "I am British" elicited so much pity.
(Laughter) I come from an island where many of us like to believe there's been a lot of continuity over the last thousand years.
We tend to have historically imposed change on others but done much less of it ourselves.
So it came as an immense shock to me when I woke up on the morning of June 24 to discover that my country had voted to leave the European Union, my Prime Minister had resigned, and Scotland was considering a referendum that could bring to an end the very existence of the United Kingdom.
So that was an immense shock for me, and it was an immense shock for many people, but it was also something that, over the following several days, created a complete political meltdown in my country.
There were calls for a second referendum, almost as if, following a sports match, we could ask the opposition for a replay.
Everybody was blaming everybody else.
People blamed the Prime Minister for calling the referendum in the first place.
They blamed the leader of the opposition for not fighting it hard enough.
The young accused the old.
The educated blamed the less well-educated.
That complete meltdown was made even worse by the most tragic element of it: levels of xenophobia and racist abuse in the streets of Britain at a level that I have never seen before in my lifetime.
People are now talking about whether my country is becoming a Little England, or, as one of my colleagues put it, whether we're about to become a 1950s nostalgia theme park floating in the Atlantic Ocean.
(Laughter) But my question is really, should we have the degree of shock that we've experienced since?
Was it something that took place overnight?
Or are there deeper structural factors that have led us to where we are today?
So I want to take a step back and ask two very basic questions.
First, what does Brexit represent, not just for my country, but for all of us around the world?
And second, what can we do about it?
How should we all respond?
So first, what does Brexit represent?
Hindsight is a wonderful thing.
Brexit teaches us many things about our society and about societies around the world.
It highlights in ways that we seem embarrassingly unaware of how divided our societies are.
The vote split along lines of age, education, class and geography.
Young people didn't turn out to vote in great numbers, but those that did wanted to remain.
Older people really wanted to leave the European Union.
Geographically, it was London and Scotland that most strongly committed to being part of the European Union, while in other parts of the country there was very strong ambivalence.
Those divisions are things we really need to recognize and take seriously.
But more profoundly, the vote teaches us something about the nature of politics today.
Contemporary politics is no longer just about right and left.
It's no longer just about tax and spend.
It's about globalization.
The fault line of contemporary politics is between those that embrace globalization and those that fear globalization.
(Applause) If we look at why those who wanted to leave -- we call them "Leavers," as opposed to "Remainers" -- we see two factors in the opinion polls that really mattered.
The first was immigration, and the second sovereignty, and these represent a desire for people to take back control of their own lives and the feeling that they are unrepresented by politicians.
But those ideas are ones that signify fear and alienation.
They represent a retreat back towards nationalism and borders in ways that many of us would reject.
What I want to suggest is the picture is more complicated than that, that liberal internationalists, like myself, and I firmly include myself in that picture, need to write ourselves back into the picture in order to understand how we've got to where we are today.
When we look at the voting patterns across the United Kingdom, we can visibly see the divisions.
The blue areas show Remain and the red areas Leave.
When I looked at this, what personally struck me was the very little time in my life I've actually spent in many of the red areas.
I suddenly realized that, looking at the top 50 areas in the UK that have the strongest Leave vote, I've spent a combined total of four days of my life in those areas.
In some of those places, I didn't even know the names of the voting districts.
It was a real shock to me, and it suggested that people like me who think of ourselves as inclusive, open and tolerant, perhaps don't know our own countries and societies nearly as well as we like to believe.
(Applause) And the challenge that comes from that is we need to find a new way to narrate globalization to those people, to recognize that for those people who have not necessarily been to university, who haven't necessarily grown up with the Internet, that don't get opportunities to travel, they may be unpersuaded by the narrative that we find persuasive in our often liberal bubbles.
(Applause) It means that we need to reach out more broadly and understand.
In the Leave vote, a minority have peddled the politics of fear and hatred, creating lies and mistrust around, for instance, the idea that the vote on Europe could reduce the number of refugees and asylum-seekers coming to Europe, when the vote on leaving had nothing to do with immigration from outside the European Union.
But for a significant majority of the Leave voters the concern was disillusionment with the political establishment.
This was a protest vote for many, a sense that nobody represented them, that they couldn't find a political party that spoke for them, and so they rejected that political establishment.
This replicates around Europe and much of the liberal democratic world.
We see it with the rise in popularity of Donald Trump in the United States, with the growing nationalism of Viktor Orbán in Hungary, with the increase in popularity of Marine Le Pen in France.
The specter of Brexit is in all of our societies.
So the question I think we need to ask is my second question, which is how should we collectively respond?
For all of us who care about creating liberal, open, tolerant societies, we urgently need a new vision, a vision of a more tolerant, inclusive globalization, one that brings people with us rather than leaving them behind.
That vision of globalization is one that has to start by a recognition of the positive benefits of globalization.
The consensus amongst economists is that free trade, the movement of capital, the movement of people across borders benefit everyone on aggregate.
The consensus amongst international relations scholars is that globalization brings interdependence, which brings cooperation and peace.
But globalization also has redistributive effects.
It creates winners and losers.
To take the example of migration, we know that immigration is a net positive for the economy as a whole under almost all circumstances.
But we also have to be very aware that there are redistributive consequences, that importantly, low-skilled immigration can lead to a reduction in wages for the most impoverished in our societies and also put pressure on house prices.
That doesn't detract from the fact that it's positive, but it means more people have to share in those benefits and recognize them.
In 2002, the former Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, gave a speech at Yale University, and that speech was on the topic of inclusive globalization.
That was the speech in which he coined that term.
And he said, and I paraphrase, "The glass house of globalization has to be open to all if it is to remain secure.
Bigotry and ignorance are the ugly face of exclusionary and antagonistic globalization."
That idea of inclusive globalization was briefly revived in 2008 in a conference on progressive governance involving many of the leaders of European countries.
But amid austerity and the financial crisis of 2008, the concept disappeared almost without a trace.
Globalization has been taken to support a neoliberal agenda.
It's perceived to be part of an elite agenda rather than something that benefits all.
And it needs to be reclaimed on a far more inclusive basis than it is today.
So the question is, how can we achieve that goal?
How can we balance on the one hand addressing fear and alienation while on the other hand refusing vehemently to give in to xenophobia and nationalism?
That is the question for all of us.
And I think, as a social scientist, that social science offers some places to start.
Our transformation has to be about both ideas and about material change, and I want to give you four ideas as a starting point.
The first relates to the idea of civic education.
What stands out from Brexit is the gap between public perception and empirical reality.
It's been suggested that we've moved to a postfactual society, where evidence and truth no longer matter, and lies have equal status to the clarity of evidence.
So how can we -- (Applause) How can we rebuild respect for truth and evidence into our liberal democracies?
It has to begin with education, but it has to start with the recognition that there are huge gaps.
In 2014, the pollster Ipsos MORI published a survey on attitudes to immigration, and it showed that as numbers of immigrants increase, so public concern with immigration also increases, although it obviously didn't unpack causality, because this could equally be to do not so much with numbers but the political and media narrative around it.
But the same survey also revealed huge public misinformation and misunderstanding about the nature of immigration.
For example, in these attitudes in the United Kingdom, the public believed that levels of asylum were a greater proportion of immigration than they were, but they also believed the levels of educational migration were far lower as a proportion of overall migration than they actually are.
So we have to address this misinformation, the gap between perception and reality on key aspects of globalization.
And that can't just be something that's left to our schools, although that's important to begin at an early age.
It has to be about lifelong civic participation and public engagement that we all encourage as societies.
The second thing that I think is an opportunity is the idea to encourage more interaction across diverse communities.
(Applause) One of the things that stands out for me very strikingly, looking at immigration attitudes in the United Kingdom, is that ironically, the regions of my country that are the most tolerant of immigrants have the highest numbers of immigrants.
So for instance, London and the Southeast have the highest numbers of immigrants, and they are also by far the most tolerant areas.
It's those areas of the country that have the lowest levels of immigration that actually are the most exclusionary and intolerant towards migrants.
So we need to encourage exchange programs.
We need to ensure that older generations who maybe can't travel get access to the Internet.
We need to encourage, even on a local and national level, more movement, more participation, more interaction with people who we don't know and whose views we might not necessarily agree with.
The third thing that I think is crucial, though, and this is really fundamental, is we have to ensure that everybody shares in the benefits of globalization.
This illustration from the Financial Times post-Brexit is really striking.
It shows tragically that those people who voted to leave the European Union were those who actually benefited the most materially from trade with the European Union.
But the problem is that those people in those areas didn't perceive themselves to be beneficiaries.
They didn't believe that they were actually getting access to material benefits of increased trade and increased mobility around the world.
I work on questions predominantly to do with refugees, and one of the ideas I spent a lot of my time preaching, mainly to developing countries around the world, is that in order to encourage the integration of refugees, we can't just benefit the refugee populations, we also have to address the concerns of the host communities in local areas.
But in looking at that, one of the policy prescriptions is that we have to provide disproportionately better education facilities, health facilities, access to social services in those regions of high immigration to address the concerns of those local populations.
But while we encourage that around the developing world, we don't take those lessons home and incorporate them in our own societies.
Furthermore, if we're going to really take seriously the need to ensure people share in the economic benefits, our businesses and corporations need a model of globalization that recognizes that they, too, have to take people with them.
The fourth and final idea I want to put forward is an idea that we need more responsible politics.
There's very little social science evidence that compares attitudes on globalization.
But from the surveys that do exist, what we can see is there's huge variation across different countries and time periods in those countries for attitudes and tolerance of questions like migration and mobility on the one hand and free trade on the other.
But one hypothesis that I think emerges from a cursory look at that data is the idea that polarized societies are far less tolerant of globalization.
It's the societies like Sweden in the past, like Canada today, where there is a centrist politics, where right and left work together, that we encourage supportive attitudes towards globalization.
And what we see around the world today is a tragic polarization, a failure to have dialogue between the extremes in politics, and a gap in terms of that liberal center ground that can encourage communication and a shared understanding.
We might not achieve that today, but at the very least we have to call upon our politicians and our media to drop a language of fear and be far more tolerant of one another.
(Applause) These ideas are very tentative, and that's in part because this needs to be an inclusive and shared project.
I am still British.
I am still European.
I am still a global citizen.
For those of us who believe that our identities are not mutually exclusive, we have to all work together to ensure that globalization takes everyone with us and doesn't leave people behind.
Only then will we truly reconcile democracy and globalization.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Two hundred years of modern science.
We have to admit that our performance is not great.
The machines we build continue to suffer from mechanical failures.
The houses we build do not survive severe earthquakes.
But we shouldn't be so critical of our scientists for a simple reason: they didn't have much time.
Two hundred years is not a lot of time, while nature had three billion years to perfect some of the most amazing materials, that we wish we had in our possession.
Remember, these materials carry a quality assurance of three billion years.
Take, for example, sequoia trees.
They carry hundreds of tons for hundreds of years in cold weather, in warm climates, UV light.
Yet, if you look at the structure by high-resolution electron microscopy, and you ask yourself, what is it made of, surprisingly, it's made of sugar.
Well, not exactly as we drink in our tea.
It's actually a nanofiber called nanocrystalline cellulose.
And this nanocrystalline cellulose is so strong, on a weight basis, it's about 10 times stronger than steel.
Yet it's made of sugar.
So scientists all over the world believe that nanocellulose is going to be one of the most important materials for the entire industry.
But here's the problem: say you want to buy a half a ton of nanocellulose to build a boat or an airplane.
Well, you can Google, you can eBay, you can even Alibaba.
You won't find it.
Of course, you're going to find thousands of scientific papers -- great papers, where scientists are going to say this is a great material, there are lots of things we can do with it.
But no commercial source.
So we at the Hebrew University, together with our partners in Sweden, decided to focus on the development of an industrial-scale process to produce this nanocellulose.
And, of course, we didn't want to cut trees.
So we were looking for another source of raw material, and we found one -- in fact, the sludge of the paper industry.
The reason: there is a lot of it.
Europe alone produces 11 million tons of that material annually.
It's the equivalent of a mountain three kilometers high, sitting on a soccer field.
And we produce this mountain every year.
So for everybody, it's an environmental problem, and for us, it's a gold mine.
So now, we are actually producing, on an industrial scale in Israel, nanocellulose, and very soon, in Sweden.
We can do a lot of things with the material.
For example, we have shown that by adding only a small percent of nanocellulose into cotton fibers, the same as my shirt is made of, it increases its strength dramatically.
So this can be used for making amazing things, like super-fabrics for industrial and medical applications.
But this is not the only thing.
For example, self-standing, self-supporting structures, like the shelters that you can see now, actually are now showcasing in the Venice Biennale for Architecture.
Nature actually didn't stop its wonders in the plant kingdom.
Think about insects.
Cat fleas, for example, have the ability to jump about a hundred times their height.
That's amazing.
It's the equivalent of a person standing in the middle of Liberty Island in New York, and in a single jump, going to the top of the Statue of Liberty.
I'm sure everybody would like to do that.
So the question is: How do cat fleas do it?
It turns out, they make this wonderful material, which is called resilin.
In simple words, resilin, which is a protein, is the most elastic rubber on Earth.
You can stretch it, you can squish it, and it doesn't lose almost any energy to the environment.
When you release it -- snap!
It brings back all the energy.
So I'm sure everybody would like to have that material.
But here's the problem: to catch cat fleas is difficult.
(Laughter) Why? Because they are jumpy.
(Laughter) But now, it's actually enough to catch one.
Now we can extract its DNA and read how cat fleas make the resilin, and clone it into a less-jumpy organism like a plant.
So that's exactly what we did.
Now we have the ability to produce lots of resilin.
Well, my team decided to do something really cool at the university.
They decided to combine the strongest material produced by the plant kingdom with the most elastic material produced by the insect kingdom -- nanocellulose with resilin.
And the result is amazing.
This material, in fact, is tough, elastic and transparent.
So there are lots of things that can be done with this material.
For example, next-generation sport shoes, so we can jump higher, run faster.
And even touch screens for computers and smartphones, that won't break.
Well, the problem is, we continue to implant synthetic implants in our body, which we glue and screw into our body.
And I'm going to say that this is not a good idea.
Why? Because they fail.
This synthetic material fails, just like this plastic fork, that is not strong enough for its performance.
But sometimes they are too strong, and therefore their mechanical properties do not really fit their surrounding tissues.
But in fact, the reason is much more fundamental.
The reason is that in nature, there is no one there that actually takes my head and screws it onto my neck, or takes my skin and glues it onto my body.
In nature, everything is self-assembled.
So every living cell, whether coming from a plant, insect or human being, has a DNA that encodes for nanobio building blocks.
Many times they are proteins.
Other times, they are enzymes that make other materials, like polysaccharides, fatty acids.
And the common feature about all these materials is that they need no one.
They recognize each other and self-assemble into structures -- scaffolds on which cells are proliferating to give tissues.
They develop into organs, and together bring life.
So we at the Hebrew University, about 10 years ago, decided to focus on probably the most important biomaterial for humans, which is collagen.
Why collagen?
Because collagen accounts for about 25 percent of our dry weight.
We have nothing more than collagen, other than water, in our body.
So I always like to say, anyone who is in the replacement parts of human beings would like to have collagen.
Admittedly, before we started our project, there were already more than 1,000 medical implants made of collagen.
You know, simple things like dermal fillers to reduce wrinkles, augment lips, and other, more sophisticated medical implants, like heart valves.
So where is the problem?
Well, the problem is the source.
The source of all that collagen is actually coming from dead bodies: dead pigs, dead cows and even human cadavers.
So safety is a big issue.
But it's not the only one.
Also, the quality.
Now here, I have a personal interest.
This is my father, Zvi, in our winery in Israel.
A heart valve, very similar to the one that I showed you before, seven years ago, was implanted in his body.
Now, the scientific literature says that these heart valves start to fail 10 years after the operation.
No wonder: they are made from old, used tissues, just like this wall made of bricks that is falling apart.
Yeah, of course, I can take those bricks and build a new wall.
But it's not going to be the same.
So the US Food and Drug Administration made a notice already in 2007, asking the companies to start to look for better alternatives.
So that's exactly what we did.
We decided to clone all the five human genes responsible for making type I collagen in humans into a transgenic tobacco plant.
So now, the plant has the ability to make human collagen brand new, untouched.
This is amazing.
Actually, it's happening now.
Today in Israel, we grow it in 25,000 square meters of greenhouses all over the country.
The farmers receive small plantlets of tobacco.
It looks exactly like regular tobacco, except that they have five human genes.
They're responsible for making type I collagen.
We grow them for about 50 to 70 days, we harvest the leaves, and then the leaves are transported by cooling trucks to the factory.
There, the process of extracting the collagen starts.
Now, if you ever made a pesto -- essentially, the same thing.
(Laughter) You crush the leaves, you get the juice that contains the collagen.
We concentrate the protein, transfer the protein to clean rooms for the final purification, and the end result is a collagen identical to what we have in our body -- untouched, brand new and from which we make different medical implants: bone void fillers, for example, for severe bone fractures, spinal fusion.
And more recently, even, we've been able to launch into the market here in Europe a flowable gel that is used for diabetic foot ulcers, that is now approved for use in the clinic.
This is not science fiction.
This is happening now.
We are using plants to make medical implants for replacement parts for human beings.
In fact, more recently, we've been able to make collagen fibers which are six times stronger than the Achilles tendon.
That's amazing.
Together with our partners from Ireland, we thought about the next thing: adding resilin to those fibers.
By doing that, we've been able to make a superfiber which is about 380 percent tougher, and 300 percent more elastic.
So oddly enough, in the future, when a patient is transplanted with artificial tendons or ligaments made from these fibers, we'll have better performance after the surgery than we had before the injury.
So what's for the future?
In the future, we believe we'll be able to make many nanobio building blocks that nature provided for us -- collagen, nanocellulose, resilin and many more.
And that will enable us to make better machines perform better, even the heart.
Now, this heart is not going to be the same as we can get from a donor.
It will be better.
It actually will perform better and will last longer.
My friend Zion Suliman once told me a smart sentence.
He said, "If you want a new idea, you should open an old book."
And I'm going to say that the book was written.
It was written over three billion years of evolution.
And the text is the DNA of life.
All we have to do is read this text, embrace nature's gift to us and start our progress from here.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm really glad to be here.
I'm glad you're here, because that would be a little weird.
I'm glad we're all here.
And by "here," I don't mean here.
Or here.
But here.
I mean Earth.
And by "we," I don't mean those of us in this auditorium, but life, all life on Earth -- (Laughter) from complex to single-celled, from mold to mushrooms to flying bears.
(Laughter) The interesting thing is, Earth is the only place we know of that has life -- 8.7 million species.
We've looked other places, maybe not as hard as we should or we could, but we've looked and haven't found any; Earth is the only place we know of with life.
Is Earth special?
This is a question I've wanted to know the answer to since I was a small child, and I suspect 80 percent of this auditorium has thought the same thing and also wanted to know the answer.
To understand whether there are any planets -- out there in our solar system or beyond -- that can support life, the first step is to understand what life here requires.
It turns out, of all of those 8.7 million species, life only needs three things.
On one side, all life on Earth needs energy.
Complex life like us derives our energy from the sun, but life deep underground can get its energy from things like chemical reactions.
There are a number of different energy sources available on all planets.
On the other side, all life needs food or nourishment.
And this seems like a tall order, especially if you want a succulent tomato.
(Laughter) However, all life on Earth derives its nourishment from only six chemical elements, and these elements can be found on any planetary body in our solar system.
So that leaves the thing in the middle as the tall pole, the thing that's hardest to achieve.
Not moose, but water.
(Laughter) Although moose would be pretty cool.
(Laughter) And not frozen water, and not water in a gaseous state, but liquid water.
This is what life needs to survive, all life.
And many solar system bodies don't have liquid water, and so we don't look there.
Other solar system bodies might have abundant liquid water, even more than Earth, but it's trapped beneath an icy shell, and so it's hard to access, it's hard to get to, it's hard to even find out if there's any life there.
So that leaves a few bodies that we should think about.
So let's make the problem simpler for ourselves.
Let's think only about liquid water on the surface of a planet.
There are only three bodies to think about in our solar system, with regard to liquid water on the surface of a planet, and in order of distance from the sun, it's: Venus, Earth and Mars.
You want to have an atmosphere for water to be liquid.
You have to be very careful with that atmosphere.
You can't have too much atmosphere, too thick or too warm an atmosphere, because then you end up too hot like Venus, and you can't have liquid water.
But if you have too little atmosphere and it's too thin and too cold, you end up like Mars, too cold.
So Venus is too hot, Mars is too cold, and Earth is just right.
You can look at these images behind me and you can see automatically where life can survive in our solar system.
It's a Goldilocks-type problem, and it's so simple that a child could understand it.
However, I'd like to remind you of two things from the Goldilocks story that we may not think about so often but that I think are really relevant here.
Number one: if Mama Bear's bowl is too cold when Goldilocks walks into the room, does that mean it's always been too cold?
Or could it have been just right at some other time?
When Goldilocks walks into the room determines the answer that we get in the story.
And the same is true with planets.
They're not static things. They change.
They vary. They evolve.
And atmospheres do the same.
So let me give you an example.
Here's one of my favorite pictures of Mars.
It's not the highest resolution image, it's not the sexiest image, it's not the most recent image, but it's an image that shows riverbeds cut into the surface of the planet; riverbeds carved by flowing, liquid water; riverbeds that take hundreds or thousands or tens of thousands of years to form.
This can't happen on Mars today.
The atmosphere of Mars today is too thin and too cold for water to be stable as a liquid.
This one image tells you that the atmosphere of Mars changed, and it changed in big ways.
And it changed from a state that we would define as habitable, because the three requirements for life were present long ago.
Where did that atmosphere go that allowed water to be liquid at the surface?
Well, one idea is it escaped away to space.
Atmospheric particles got enough energy to break free from the gravity of the planet, escaping away to space, never to return.
And this happens with all bodies with atmospheres.
Comets have tails that are incredibly visible reminders of atmospheric escape.
But Venus also has an atmosphere that escapes with time, and Mars and Earth as well.
It's just a matter of degree and a matter of scale.
So we'd like to figure out how much escaped over time so we can explain this transition.
How do atmospheres get their energy for escape?
How do particles get enough energy to escape?
There are two ways, if we're going to reduce things a little bit.
Number one, sunlight.
Light emitted from the sun can be absorbed by atmospheric particles and warm the particles.
Yes, I'm dancing, but they -- (Laughter) Oh my God, not even at my wedding.
(Laughter) They get enough energy to escape and break free from the gravity of the planet just by warming.
A second way they can get energy is from the solar wind.
These are particles, mass, material, spit out from the surface of the sun, and they go screaming through the solar system at 400 kilometers per second, sometimes faster during solar storms, and they go hurtling through interplanetary space towards planets and their atmospheres, and they may provide energy for atmospheric particles to escape as well.
This is something that I'm interested in, because it relates to habitability.
I mentioned that there were two things about the Goldilocks story that I wanted to bring to your attention and remind you about, and the second one is a little bit more subtle.
If Papa Bear's bowl is too hot, and Mama Bear's bowl is too cold, shouldn't Baby Bear's bowl be even colder if we're following the trend?
This thing that you've accepted your entire life, when you think about it a little bit more, may not be so simple.
And of course, distance of a planet from the sun determines its temperature.
This has to play into habitability.
But maybe there are other things we should be thinking about.
Maybe it's the bowls themselves that are also helping to determine the outcome in the story, what is just right.
I could talk to you about a lot of different characteristics of these three planets that may influence habitability, but for selfish reasons related to my own research and the fact that I'm standing up here holding the clicker and you're not -- (Laughter) I would like to talk for just a minute or two about magnetic fields.
Earth has one; Venus and Mars do not.
Magnetic fields are generated in the deep interior of a planet by electrically conducting churning fluid material that creates this big old magnetic field that surrounds Earth.
If you have a compass, you know which way north is.
Venus and Mars don't have that.
If you have a compass on Venus and Mars, congratulations, you're lost.
(Laughter) Does this influence habitability?
Well, how might it?
Many scientists think that a magnetic field of a planet serves as a shield for the atmosphere, deflecting solar wind particles around the planet in a bit of a force field-type effect having to do with electric charge of those particles.
I like to think of it instead as a salad bar sneeze guard for planets.
(Laughter) And yes, my colleagues who watch this later will realize this is the first time in the history of our community that the solar wind has been equated with mucus.
(Laughter) OK, so the effect, then, is that Earth may have been protected for billions of years, because we've had a magnetic field.
Atmosphere hasn't been able to escape.
Mars, on the other hand, has been unprotected because of its lack of magnetic field, and over billions of years, maybe enough atmosphere has been stripped away to account for a transition from a habitable planet to the planet that we see today.
Other scientists think that magnetic fields may act more like the sails on a ship, enabling the planet to interact with more energy from the solar wind than the planet would have been able to interact with by itself.
The sails may gather energy from the solar wind.
The magnetic field may gather energy from the solar wind that allows even more atmospheric escape to happen.
It's an idea that has to be tested, but the effect and how it works seems apparent.
That's because we know energy from the solar wind is being deposited into our atmosphere here on Earth.
That energy is conducted along magnetic field lines down into the polar regions, resulting in incredibly beautiful aurora.
If you've ever experienced them, it's magnificent.
We know the energy is getting in.
We're trying to measure how many particles are getting out and if the magnetic field is influencing this in any way.
So I've posed a problem for you here, but I don't have a solution yet.
We don't have a solution.
But we're working on it. How are we working on it?
Well, we've sent spacecraft to all three planets.
Some of them are orbiting now, including the MAVEN spacecraft which is currently orbiting Mars, which I'm involved with and which is led here, out of the University of Colorado.
It's designed to measure atmospheric escape.
We have similar measurements from Venus and Earth.
Once we have all our measurements, we can combine all these together, and we can understand how all three planets interact with their space environment, with the surroundings.
And we can decide whether magnetic fields are important for habitability or not.
Once we have that answer, why should you care?
I mean, I care deeply ...
And financially as well, but deeply.
(Laughter) First of all, an answer to this question will teach us more about these three planets, Venus, Earth and Mars, not only about how they interact with their environment today, but how they were billions of years ago, whether they were habitable long ago or not.
It will teach us about atmospheres that surround us and that are close.
But moreover, what we learn from these planets can be applied to atmospheres everywhere, including planets that we're now observing around other stars.
For example, the Kepler spacecraft, which is built and controlled here in Boulder, has been observing a postage stamp-sized region of the sky for a couple years now, and it's found thousands of planets -- in one postage stamp-sized region of the sky that we don't think is any different from any other part of the sky.
We've gone, in 20 years, from knowing of zero planets outside of our solar system, to now having so many, that we don't know which ones to investigate first.
Any lever will help.
In fact, based on observations that Kepler's taken and other similar observations, we now believe that, of the 200 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy alone, on average, every star has at least one planet.
In addition to that, estimates suggest there are somewhere between 40 billion and 100 billion of those planets that we would define as habitable in just our galaxy.
We have the observations of those planets, but we just don't know which ones are habitable yet.
It's a little bit like being trapped on a red spot -- (Laughter) on a stage and knowing that there are other worlds out there and desperately wanting to know more about them, wanting to interrogate them and find out if maybe just one or two of them are a little bit like you.
You can't do that. You can't go there, not yet.
And so you have to use the tools that you've developed around you for Venus, Earth and Mars, and you have to apply them to these other situations, and hope that you're making reasonable inferences from the data, and that you're going to be able to determine the best candidates for habitable planets, and those that are not.
In the end, and for now, at least, this is our red spot, right here.
This is the only planet that we know of that's habitable, although very soon we may come to know of more.
But for now, this is the only habitable planet, and this is our red spot.
I'm really glad we're here.
Thanks.
(Applause)
This is a man-made forest.
It can spread over acres and acres of area, or it could fit in a small space -- as small as your house garden.
Age of this forest is just two years old.
I have a forest in the backyard of my own house.
It attracts a lot of biodiversity.
(Bird call) I wake up to this every morning, like a Disney princess.
(Laughter) I am an entrepreneur who facilitates the making of these forests professionally.
We have helped factories, farms, schools, homes, resorts, apartment buildings, public parks and even a zoo to have one of such forests.
A forest is not an isolated piece of land where animals live together.
A forest can be an integral part of our urban existence.
A forest, for me, is a place so dense with trees that you just can't walk into it.
It doesn't matter how big or small they are.
Most of the world we live in today was forest.
This was before human intervention.
Then we built up our cities on those forests, like São Paulo, forgetting that we belong to nature as well, as much as 8.4 million other species on the planet.
Our habitat stopped being our natural habitat.
But not anymore for some of us.
A few others and I today make these forests professionally -- anywhere and everywhere.
I'm an industrial engineer.
I specialize in making cars.
In my previous job at Toyota, I learned how to convert natural resources into products.
To give you an example, we would drip the sap out of a rubber tree, convert it into raw rubber and make a tire out of it -- the product.
But these products can never become a natural resource again.
We separate the elements from nature and convert them into an irreversible state.
That's industrial production.
Nature, on the other hand, works in a totally opposite way.
The natural system produces by bringing elements together, atom by atom.
All the natural products become a natural resource again.
This is something which I learned when I made a forest in the backyard of my own house.
And this was the first time I worked with nature, rather than against it.
Since then, we have made 75 such forests in 25 cities across the world.
Every time we work at a new place, we find that every single element needed to make a forest is available right around us.
All we have to do is to bring these elements together and let nature take over.
To make a forest we start with soil.
We touch, feel and even taste it to identify what properties it lacks.
If the soil is made up of small particles it becomes compact -- so compact, that water cannot seep in.
We mix some local biomass available around, which can help soil become more porous.
Water can now seep in.
If the soil doesn't have the capacity to hold water, we will mix some more biomass -- some water-absorbent material like peat or bagasse, so soil can hold this water and it stays moist.
To grow, plants need water, sunlight and nutrition.
What if the soil doesn't have any nutrition in it?
We don't just add nutrition directly to the soil.
That would be the industrial way.
It goes against nature.
We instead add microorganisms to the soil.
They produce the nutrients in the soil naturally.
They feed on the biomass we have mixed in the soil, so all they have to do is eat and multiply.
And as their number grows, the soil starts breathing again.
It becomes alive.
We survey the native tree species of the place.
How do we decide what's native or not?
Well, whatever existed before human intervention is native.
That's the simple rule.
We survey a national park to find the last remains of a natural forest.
We survey the sacred groves, or sacred forests around old temples.
And if we don't find anything at all, we go to museums to see the seeds or wood of trees existing there a long time ago.
We research old paintings, poems and literature from the place, to identify the tree species belonging there.
Once we know our trees, we divide them in four different layers: shrub layer, sub-tree layer, tree layer and canopy layer.
We fix the ratios of each layer, and then we decide the percentage of each tree species in the mix.
If we are making a fruit forest, we increase the percentage of fruit-bearing trees.
It could be a flowering forest, a forest that attracts a lot of birds or bees, or it could simply be a native, wild evergreen forest.
We collect the seeds and germinate saplings out of them.
We make sure that trees belonging to the same layer are not planted next to each other, or they will fight for the same vertical space when they grow tall.
We plant the saplings close to each other.
On the surface, we spread a thick layer of mulch, so when it's hot outside the soil stays moist.
When it's cold, frost formation happens only on the mulch, so soil can still breathe while it's freezing outside.
The soil is very soft -- so soft, that roots can penetrate into it easily, rapidly.
Initially, the forest doesn't seem like it's growing, but it's growing under the surface.
In the first three months, roots reach a depth of one meter.
These roots form a mesh, tightly holding the soil.
Microbes and fungi live throughout this network of roots.
So if some nutrition is not available in the vicinity of a tree, these microbes are going to get the nutrition to the tree.
Whenever it rains, magically, mushrooms appear overnight.
And this means the soil below has a healthy fungal network.
Once these roots are established, forest starts growing on the surface.
As the forest grows we keep watering it -- for the next two to three years, we water the forest.
We want to keep all the water and soil nutrition only for our trees, so we remove the weeds growing on the ground.
As this forest grows, it blocks the sunlight.
Eventually, the forest becomes so dense that sunlight can't reach the ground anymore.
Weeds cannot grow now, because they need sunlight as well.
At this stage, every single drop of water that falls into the forest doesn't evaporate back into the atmosphere.
This dense forest condenses the moist air and retains its moisture.
We gradually reduce and eventually stop watering the forest.
And even without watering, the forest floor stays moist and sometimes even dark.
Now, when a single leaf falls on this forest floor, it immediately starts decaying.
This decayed biomass forms humus, which is food for the forest.
As the forest grows, more leaves fall on the surface -- it means more humus is produced, it means more food so the forest can grow still bigger.
And this forest keeps growing exponentially.
Once established, these forests are going to regenerate themselves again and again -- probably forever.
In a natural forest like this, no management is the best management.
It's a tiny jungle party.
(Laughter) This forest grows as a collective.
If the same trees -- same species -- would have been planted independently, it wouldn't grow so fast.
And this is how we create a 100-year-old forest in just 10 years.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
"Mom, who are these people?"
It was an innocent question from my young daughter Alia around the time when she was three.
We were walking along with my husband in one of Abu Dhabi's big fancy malls.
Alia was peering at a huge poster standing tall in the middle of the mall.
It featured the three rulers of the United Arab Emirates.
As she tucked in my side, I bent down and explained that these were the rulers of the UAE who had worked hard to develop their nation and preserve its unity.
She asked, "Mom, why is it that here where we live, and back in Lebanon, where grandma and grandpa live, we never see the pictures of powerful women on the walls?
Is it because women are not important?"
This is probably the hardest question I've had to answer in my years as a parent and in my 16-plus years of professional life, for that matter.
I had grown up in my hometown in Lebanon, the younger of two daughters to a very hard-working pilot and director of operations for the Lebanese Airlines and a super-supportive stay-at-home mom and grandma.
My father had encouraged my sister and I to pursue our education even though our culture emphasized at the time that it was sons and not daughters who should be professionally motivated.
I was one of very few girls of my generation who left home at 18 to study abroad.
My father didn't have a son, and so I, in a sense, became his.
Fast-forward a couple of decades, and I hope I didn't do too badly in making my father proud of his would-be son.
As I got my Bachelor's and PhD in electrical engineering, did R and D in the UK, then consulting in the Middle East, I have always been in male-dominated environments.
Truth be told, I have never found a role model I could truly identify with.
My mother's generation wasn't into professional leadership.
There were some encouraging men along the way, but none knew the demands and pressures I was facing, pressures that got particularly acute when I had my own two beautiful children.
And although Western women love to give us poor, oppressed Arab women advice, they live different lives with different constraints.
So Arab women of my generation have had to become our own role models.
We have had to juggle more than Arab men, and we have had to face more cultural rigidity than Western women.
As a result, I would like to think that we poor, oppressed women actually have some useful, certainly hard-earned lessons to share, lessons that might turn out useful for anyone wishing to thrive in the modern world.
Here are three of mine.
["Convert their sh*t into your fuel."] (Laughter) (Applause) There is this word that everybody is touting as the key to success: resilience.
Well, what exactly is resilience, and how do you develop it?
I believe resilience is simply the ability to transform shit into fuel.
In my previous job, well before my current firm, I was working with a man we will call John.
I had teamed up with John and was working hard, hoping he would notice how great I was and that he would come to support my case to make partner at the firm.
I was, in addition to delivering on my consulting projects, writing passionately on the topic of women economic empowerment.
One day, I got to present my research to a roomful of MBA students.
John was part of the audience listening for the first time to the details of my study.
As I proceeded with my presentation, I could see John in the corner of my eye.
He had turned a dark shade of pink and had slid under his chair in apparent shame.
I finished my presentation to an applauding audience and we rushed out and jumped into the car.
There he exploded.
"What you did up there was unacceptable!
You are a consultant, not an activist!"
I said, "John, I don't understand.
I presented a couple of gender parity indices, and some conclusions about the Arab world.
Yes, we do happen to be today at the bottom of the index, but what is it that I said or presented that was not factual?"
To which he replied, "The whole premise of your study is wrong.
What you are doing is dangerous and will break the social fabric of our society."
He paused, then added, "When women have children, their place is in the home."
Time stood still for a long while, and all I could think and repeat in the chaos of my brain was: "You can forget about that partnership, Leila.
It's just never going to happen."
It took me a couple of days to fully absorb this incident and its implications, but once I did, I reached three conclusions.
One, that these were his issues, his complexes.
There may be many like him in our society, but I would never let their issues become mine.
Two, that I needed another sponsor, and fast.
(Laughter) I got one, by the way, and boy, was he great.
And three, that I would get to show John what women with children can do.
I apply this lesson equally well to my personal life.
As I have progressed in my career, I have received many words of encouragement, but I have also often been met by women, men and couples who have clearly had an issue with my husband and I having chosen the path of a dual-career couple.
So you get this well-meaning couple who tells you straight out at a family gathering or at a friends gathering, that, come on, you must know you're not a great mom, given how much you're investing in your career, right?
I would lie if I said these words didn't hurt.
My children are the most precious thing to me, and the thought that I could be failing them in any way is intolerable.
But just like I did with John, I quickly reminded myself that these were their issues, their complexes.
So instead of replying, I gave back one of my largest smiles as I saw, in flashing light, the following sign in my mind's eye.
[Be happy, it drives people crazy.] (Applause) You see, as a young woman in these situations, you have two options.
You can either decide to internalize these negative messages that are being thrown at you, to let them make you feel like a failure, like success is way too hard to ever achieve, or you can choose to see that others' negativity is their own issue, and instead transform it into your own personal fuel.
I have learned to always go for option two, and I have found that it has taken me from strength to strength.
And it's true what they say: success is the best revenge.
Some women in the Middle East are lucky enough to be married to someone supportive of their career.
Correction: I should say "smart enough," because who you marry is your own choice, and you'd better marry someone supportive if you plan to have a long career.
Still today, the Arab man is not an equal contributor in the home.
It's simply not expected by our society, and even frowned upon as not very manly.
As for the Arab woman, our society still assumes that her primary source of happiness should be the happiness and prosperity of her children and husband.
She mostly exists for her family.
Things are changing, but it will take time.
For now, it means that the professional Arab woman has to somehow maintain the perfect home, make sure that her children's every need is being taken care of and manage her demanding career.
To achieve this, I have found the hard way that you need to apply your hard-earned professional skills to your personal life.
You need to work your life.
Here is how I do this in my personal life.
One thing to know about the Middle East is that nearly every family has access to affordable domestic help.
The challenge therefore becomes how to recruit effectively.
Just like I would in my business life, I have based the selection of who would support me with my children while I'm at work on a strong referral.
Cristina had worked for four years with my sister and the quality of her work was well-established.
She is now an integral member of our family, having been with us since Alia was six months old.
She makes sure that the house is running smoothly while I'm at work, and I make sure to empower her in the most optimal conditions for her and my children, just like I would my best talent at work.
This lesson applies whatever your childcare situation, whether an au pair, nursery, part-time nanny that you share with someone else.
Choose very carefully, and empower.
If you look at my calendar, you will see every working day one and a half hours from 7pm to 8:30pm UAE time blocked and called "family time."
This is sacred time.
I have done this ever since Alia was a baby.
I do everything in my power to protect this time so that I can be home by then to spend quality time with my children, asking them about their day, checking up on homework, reading them a bedtime story and giving them lots of kisses and cuddles.
If I'm traveling, in whatever the time zone, I use Skype to connect with my children even if I am miles away.
Our son Burhan is five years old, and he's learning to read and do basic maths.
Here's another confession: I have found that our daughter is actually more successful at teaching him these skills than I am.
(Laughter) It started as a game, but Alia loves playing teacher to her little brother, and I have found that these sessions actually improve Burhan's literacy, increase Alia's sense of responsibility, and strengthen the bonding between them, a win-win all around.
The successful Arab women I know have each found their unique approach to working their life as they continue to shoulder the lion's share of responsibility in the home.
But this is not just about surviving in your dual role as a career woman and mother.
This is also about being in the present.
When I am with my children, I try to leave work out of our lives.
Instead of worrying about how many minutes I can spend with them every day, I focus on turning these minutes into memorable moments, moments where I'm seeing my kids, hearing them, connecting with them.
["Join forces, don't compete."] Arab women of my generation have not been very visible in the public eye as they grew up.
This explains, I think, to some extent, why you find so few women in politics in the Arab world.
The upside of this, however, is that we have spent a lot of time developing a social skill behind the scenes, in coffee shops, in living rooms, on the phone, a social skill that is very important to success: networking.
I would say the average Arab woman has a large network of friends and acquaintances.
The majority of those are also women.
In the West, it seems like ambitious women often compare themselves to other women hoping to be noticed as the most successful woman in the room.
This leads to the much-spoken-about competitive behavior between professional women.
If there's only room for one woman at the top, then you can't make room for others, much less lift them up.
Arab women, generally speaking, have not fallen for this psychological trap.
Faced with a patriarchal society, they have found that by helping each other out, all benefit.
In my previous job, I was the most senior woman in the Middle East, so one could think that investing in my network of female colleagues couldn't bring many benefits and that I should instead invest my time developing my relationships with male seniors and peers.
Yet two of my biggest breaks came through the support of other women.
It was the head of marketing who initially suggested I be considered as a young global leader to the World Economic Forum.
She was familiar with my media engagements and my publications, and when she was asked to voice her opinion, she highlighted my name.
It was a young consultant, a Saudi lady and friend, who helped me sell my first project in Saudi Arabia, a market I was finding hard to gain traction in as a woman.
She introduced me to a client, and that introduction led to the first of very many projects for me in Saudi.
Today, I have two senior women on my team, and I see making them successful as key to my own success.
Women continue to advance in the world, not fast enough, but we're moving.
The Arab world, too, is making progress, despite many recent setbacks.
Just this year, the UAE appointed five new female ministers to its cabinet, for a total of eight female ministers.
That's nearly 28 percent of the cabinet, and more than many developed countries can claim.
This is today my daughter Alia's favorite picture.
This is the result, no doubt, of great leadership, but it is also the result of strong Arab women not giving up and continuously pushing the boundaries.
It is the result of Arab women deciding every day like me to convert shit into fuel, to work their life to keep work out of their life, and to join forces and not compete.
As I look to the future, my hopes for my daughter when she stands on this stage some 20, 30 years from now are that she be as proud to call herself her mother's daughter as her father's daughter.
My hopes for my son are that by then, the expression "her mother's son" or "mama's boy" would have taken on a completely different meaning.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So this is my niece.
Her name is Yahli.
She is nine months old.
Her mum is a doctor, and her dad is a lawyer.
By the time Yahli goes to college, the jobs her parents do are going to look dramatically different.
In 2013, researchers at Oxford University did a study on the future of work.
They concluded that almost one in every two jobs have a high risk of being automated by machines.
Machine learning is the technology that's responsible for most of this disruption.
It's the most powerful branch of artificial intelligence.
It allows machines to learn from data and mimic some of the things that humans can do.
My company, Kaggle, operates on the cutting edge of machine learning.
We bring together hundreds of thousands of experts to solve important problems for industry and academia.
This gives us a unique perspective on what machines can do, what they can't do and what jobs they might automate or threaten.
Machine learning started making its way into industry in the early '90s.
It started with relatively simple tasks.
It started with things like assessing credit risk from loan applications, sorting the mail by reading handwritten characters from zip codes.
Over the past few years, we have made dramatic breakthroughs.
Machine learning is now capable of far, far more complex tasks.
In 2012, Kaggle challenged its community to build an algorithm that could grade high-school essays.
The winning algorithms were able to match the grades given by human teachers.
Last year, we issued an even more difficult challenge.
Can you take images of the eye and diagnose an eye disease called diabetic retinopathy?
Again, the winning algorithms were able to match the diagnoses given by human ophthalmologists.
Now, given the right data, machines are going to outperform humans at tasks like this.
A teacher might read 10,000 essays over a 40-year career.
An ophthalmologist might see 50,000 eyes.
A machine can read millions of essays or see millions of eyes within minutes.
We have no chance of competing against machines on frequent, high-volume tasks.
But there are things we can do that machines can't do.
Where machines have made very little progress is in tackling novel situations.
They can't handle things they haven't seen many times before.
The fundamental limitations of machine learning is that it needs to learn from large volumes of past data.
Now, humans don't.
We have the ability to connect seemingly disparate threads to solve problems we've never seen before.
Percy Spencer was a physicist working on radar during World War II, when he noticed the magnetron was melting his chocolate bar.
He was able to connect his understanding of electromagnetic radiation with his knowledge of cooking in order to invent -- any guesses? -- the microwave oven.
Now, this is a particularly remarkable example of creativity.
But this sort of cross-pollination happens for each of us in small ways thousands of times per day.
Machines cannot compete with us when it comes to tackling novel situations, and this puts a fundamental limit on the human tasks that machines will automate.
So what does this mean for the future of work?
The future state of any single job lies in the answer to a single question: To what extent is that job reducible to frequent, high-volume tasks, and to what extent does it involve tackling novel situations?
On frequent, high-volume tasks, machines are getting smarter and smarter.
Today they grade essays. They diagnose certain diseases.
Over coming years, they're going to conduct our audits, and they're going to read boilerplate from legal contracts.
Accountants and lawyers are still needed.
They're going to be needed for complex tax structuring, for pathbreaking litigation.
But machines will shrink their ranks and make these jobs harder to come by.
Now, as mentioned, machines are not making progress on novel situations.
The copy behind a marketing campaign needs to grab consumers' attention.
It has to stand out from the crowd.
Business strategy means finding gaps in the market, things that nobody else is doing.
It will be humans that are creating the copy behind our marketing campaigns, and it will be humans that are developing our business strategy.
So Yahli, whatever you decide to do, let every day bring you a new challenge.
If it does, then you will stay ahead of the machines.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine that you are a product designer.
And you've designed a product, a new type of product, called the human immune system.
You're pitching this product to a skeptical, strictly no-nonsense manager.
Let's call him Bob.
I think we all know at least one Bob, right?
How would that go?
Bob, I've got this incredible idea for a completely new type of personal health product.
It's called the human immune system.
I can see from your face that you're having some problems with this.
Don't worry. I know it's very complicated.
I don't want to take you through the gory details, I just want to tell you about some of the amazing features of this product.
First of all, it cleverly uses redundancy by having millions of copies of each component -- leukocytes, white blood cells -- before they're actually needed, to create a massive buffer against the unexpected.
And it cleverly leverages diversity by having not just leukocytes but B cells, T cells, natural killer cells, antibodies.
The components don't really matter.
The point is that together, this diversity of different approaches can cope with more or less anything that evolution has been able to throw up.
And the design is completely modular.
You have the surface barrier of the human skin, you have the very rapidly reacting innate immune system and then you have the highly targeted adaptive immune system.
The point is, that if one system fails, another can take over, creating a virtually foolproof system.
I can see I'm losing you, Bob, but stay with me, because here is the really killer feature.
The product is completely adaptive.
It's able to actually develop targeted antibodies to threats that it's never even met before.
It actually also does this with incredible prudence, detecting and reacting to every tiny threat, and furthermore, remembering every previous threat, in case they are ever encountered again.
What I'm pitching you today is actually not a stand-alone product.
The product is embedded in the larger system of the human body, and it works in complete harmony with that system, to create this unprecedented level of biological protection.
So Bob, just tell me honestly, what do you think of my product?
And Bob may say something like, I sincerely appreciate the effort and passion that have gone into your presentation, blah blah blah -- (Laughter) But honestly, it's total nonsense.
You seem to be saying that the key selling points of your product are that it is inefficient and complex.
Didn't they teach you 80-20?
And furthermore, you're saying that this product is siloed.
It overreacts, makes things up as it goes along and is actually designed for somebody else's benefit.
I'm sorry to break it to you, but I don't think this one is a winner.
If we went with Bob's philosophy, I think we'd actually end up with a more efficient immune system.
And efficiency is always important in the short term.
Less complex, more efficient, more bang for the buck.
Who could say no to that?
Unfortunately, there's one very tiny problem, and that is that the user of this product, you or I, would probably die within one week of the next winter, when we encountered a new strain of the influenza virus.
I first became interested in biology and business, and longevity and resilience, when I was asked a very unusual question by the CEO of a global tech company.
And the question was: What do we have to do to make sure that our company lasts 100 years?
A seemingly innocent question, but actually, it's a little trickier than you might think, considering that the average US public company now can expect a life span of only 30 years.
That is less than half of the life span that its employees can expect to enjoy.
Now, if you were the CEO of such a company, badgered by investors and buffeted by change, we might forgive you for not even worrying too much about what happens 30 years out.
But here's something that should keep you awake at night: the probability that your company will not be around in five year's time, on average, is now a staggering 32 percent.
That's a one in three chance that your company will be taken over or will fail within just five years.
Let's come back to our tech CEO's question.
Where better to turn for advice than nature, that's been in the business of life and death for longer than any company?
As a lapsed biologist, I decided to immediately call a real biologist, my friend Simon Levin, Professor of Biology and Mathematics at Princeton University.
Together, we looked at a variety of biological systems, ranging from natural tropical rainforests through to managed forests and fisheries.
And we asked ourselves the question: What makes these systems resilient and enduring?
And what we found was that the same six principles that we saw underpinning the miracle of the human immune system actually cropped up again and again, from redundancy through to embeddedness.
In fact, we saw these principles not only in biologically enduring systems, we also found them being very characteristic of long-lived social systems, like the Roman Empire and the Catholic Church, believe it or not.
We also went on to look at business, and found that these very same properties also characterized businesses that were resilient and long-lived, and we noted their absence from ones which were short-lived.
Let's first take a look at what happens when the corporate immune system collapses.
This beautiful building is part of the Shitennoji Temple Complex in Osaka, Japan.
In fact, it's one of the oldest temples in Japan.
It was built by a Korean artisan, because at the time, Japan was not yet building temples.
And this Korean artisan went on to found a temple-building company.
Amazingly, his company, Kongō Gumi, was still around 1,428 years later.
In fact, it became the oldest continuously operating company in the world.
So how is Kongō Gumi doing today?
Not too well, I'm afraid.
It borrowed very heavily during the bubble period of the Japanese economy, to invest in real estate.
And when the bubble burst, it couldn't refinance its loans.
The company failed, and it was taken over by a major construction company.
Tragically, after 40 generations of very careful stewardship by the Kongō family, Kongō Gumi succumbed to a spectacular lapse in the ability to apply a principle of prudence.
Speaking of company failures: we're all familiar with the failure of Kodak, the company that declared bankruptcy in January 2012.
Much more interesting, however, is the question: Why did Fujifilm -- same product, same pressures from digital technology, same time -- why was Fujifilm able to survive and flourish?
Fujifilm used its capabilities in chemistry, material science and optics to diversify into a number of areas, ranging from cosmetics to pharmaceuticals, to medical systems to biomaterials.
Some of these diversification attempts failed.
But in aggregate, it was able to adapt its portfolio sufficiently to survive and flourish.
As the CEO, Mr. Komori, put it, the strategy succeeded because it had "more pockets and drawers" than the rivals.
He meant, of course, that they were able to create more options than the rivals.
Fujifilm survived because it applied the principles of prudence, diversity and adaptation.
A catastrophic factory fire, like the one we see here, completely wiped out, in one evening, the only plant which supplied Toyota with valves for car-braking systems.
The ultimate test of resilience.
Car production ground to a screeching halt.
How was it, then, that Toyota was able to recover car production?
Can you imagine how long it took?
Just five days.
From having no braking valves to complete recovery in five days.
How was this possible?
Toyota managed its network of suppliers in such a collaborative manner that it could work very quickly and smoothly with suppliers to repurpose production, fill the missing braking valve capacity and have car production come online again.
Toyota applied the principles of modularity of its supply network, embeddedness in an integrated system and the functional redundancy to be able to repurpose, smoothly, existing capacity.
Now fortunately, few companies succumb to catastrophic fires.
But we do read in the newspaper every day about companies succumbing to the disruption of technology.
How is it, then, that the consumer optics giant Essilor is able to avoid technology disruption, and even profit from it?
And yes, technology disruption is not only a big deal in software and electronics.
Essilor carefully scans the competitive environment for potentially disruptive technologies.
It acquires those technologies very early, before they've become expensive or competitors have mobilized around them, and it then develops those technologies itself, even at the risk of failure or the risk of self-disruption.
Essilor stays ahead of its game, and has delivered spectacular performance for over 40 years, by using the principles of prudence and adaptation.
OK, if these principles are so powerful, you might be thinking, why are they not commonplace in business?
Why do we not use these words every day?
Well, change has to first start in the mind.
If we think back to our pitch to Bob, in order to apply the principles that underpin the miracle of the human immune system, we first need to think differently about business.
Now typically, when we think about business, we use what I call "mechanical thinking."
We set goals, we analyze problems, we construct and we adhere to plans, and more than anything else, we stress efficiency and short-term performance.
Now, don't get me wrong -- this is a splendidly practical and effective way of addressing relatively simple challenges in relatively stable environments.
It's the way that Bob -- and probably many of us, myself included -- process most business problems we're faced with every day.
In fact, it was a pretty good mental model for business -- overall -- until about the mid-1980s, when the conjunction of globalization and a revolution in technology and telecommunications made business far more dynamic and unpredictable.
But what about those more dynamic and unpredictable situations that we now increasingly face?
I think in addition to the mechanical thinking, we now need to master the art of biological thinking, as embodied by our six principles.
In other words, we need to think more modestly and subtly about when and how we can shape, rather than control, unpredictable and complex situations.
It's a little like the difference between throwing a ball and releasing a bird.
The ball would head in a straight line, probably towards the intended target, and the bird certainly would not.
So what do you think?
Sounds a little impractical, a little theoretical, perhaps?
Not at all.
Every small entrepreneurial company naturally thinks and acts biologically.
Why?
Because it lacks the resources to shape its environment through brute force.
It lacks the scale to buffer change, and it's constantly thinking about the tough odds for a start-up to survive.
Now, the irony is, of course, that every large company started off as a small, entrepreneurial company.
But along the way somewhere, many have lost this ability to think and act biologically.
They need to rejuvenate their ability to think biologically in order to survive and thrive in today's environment.
So let's not just think about short-term performance.
Every company I know spends plenty of time thinking about the central question of strategy: How good is our competitive game?
In addition, let's also consider the second, more biological and equally important question: How long will that game last?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You know, one of the things that I'd like to say upfront is that I'm really here by accident.
And what I mean -- not at TED -- that I'm -- at this point in my life, truly my set of circumstances I would truly consider an accident.
But what I'd like to talk to you about today is perhaps a way in which we could use technology to make those accidents happen often.
Because I really think, when I look back at how I actually ended up in this accident, technology played a big role in that.
So, what I'd like to do today is tell you a little bit about myself, because I'd like to put in context what I'm going to tell you.
And I think you will see why the two greatest passions in my life today are children and education.
And once I put that in context, I'd like to tell you a little bit about technology: why I believe technology is a tremendous enabler; a very powerful tool to help address some of these challenges.
Then, about the initiative that Chris mentioned, that we decided to launch at AMD that we call 50x15.
And then I'll come back to the beginning, and tell you a little bit more -- hopefully convince you -- that I believe that in today's world, it is really important for business leaders not only to have an idea of what their business is all about, but to have a passion for something that is meaningful.
So, with that in mind, first of all let me tell you, I'm one of five children. I'm the oldest, the other four are women.
So I grew up in a family of women.
I learned a lot about how to deal with that part of the world.
(Laughter) And, as you can imagine, if you can picture this: I was born in a very small village in Mexico, in, unfortunately, very poor surroundings, and my parents did not have a college education.
But I was fortunate to be able to have one, and so were my four sisters.
That kind of tells you a little bit of an idea of the emphasis that my parents placed on education.
My parents were fanatics about learning, and I'll come back to that a little bit later.
But one of the things that exposed me early to learning, and a tremendous curiosity that was instilled in me as a child, was through a technology which is on the screen -- is a Victrola.
My father found that in a junkyard, and was able to repair it and make it work. And somehow -- to this day, I frankly don't know how he was so aware of what was going on in the world -- but, by inviting me to sit down with him when I was only a few years old, and playing records in this Victrola by Mozart, and he would tell me how Mozart was the most romantic of all the classic composers ever, and how Claire de Lune, which was one of his favorites, was a real exposure to me to classical music.
He explained to me about Johann Strauss, and how he created the waltzes that became so famous in the world.
And would tell me a little bit about history too, when he'd play the 1812 Overture by Tchaikovsky on this little Victrola, and he would tell me about Russia and all the things that were happening in Russia at those times and why this music, in some way, represented a little bit of that history.
And even as a child, he was able to instill in me a lot of curiosity.
And perhaps to you this product may not look like high tech, but if you can imagine the time when this occurred -- it was in the mid '40s -- this was really, in his view, a pretty piece of high tech.
Well, one of the things that is really critical to try to distill from that experience is that in addition to that, people ask me and say, "Well, how did your parents treat you when you were a child?"
And I always said that they were really tough on me.
And not tough in the sense that most people think of, where your parents yell at you or hit you or whatever.
They were tough in the sense that, as I grew up, both my mother and father would always say to me, it's really important that you always remember two things.
First of all, when you go to bed at night, you've got to look back on the day and make sure that you felt the day was a day which you contributed something, and that you did everything you could to do it the best way you could.
And the second thing they said: and we trust you, that no matter where you are or where you go, you will always do the right thing.
Now, I don't know how many of you have ever done that with your kids, but if you do, please trust me, it's the most pressure you can put on a child, to say -- (Laughter) -- we trust you that you will always do the right thing.
When I was out with my friends drinking beer, I always was very aware of those words -- (Laughter) -- and very careful. One of the things that has happened with technology is that it can only be helpful if it is useful, of course, but it can only be helpful too if it's accessible, and it can only be helpful if it's affordable.
And in today's world, being useful, affordable and accessible is not necessarily what happens in a lot of the technology that is done today.
So, one of our passions in our company, and now one of my personal passions, is to be able to really work hard at making the technology useful, accessible and affordable.
And to me, that is very, very critical.
Now, technology has changed a lot since the Victrola days.
You know, we now have, of course, incredibly powerful computers.
A tremendous thing that people refer to as a killer app is called the Internet.
Although frankly speaking, we don't believe the Internet is the killer app.
What we believe is that the Internet, frankly, is a connection of people and ideas.
The Internet happens to be just the medium in which those people and ideas get connected.
And the power of connecting people and ideas can be pretty awesome.
And so, we believe that through all the changes that have occurred, that we're faced today with a tremendous opportunity.
If we can connect people and ideas more intensely -- and although you've seen a plethora and a myriad of products that have come to the market today, the key to me is how many of these products are able to provide people connectivity, in a useful way, accessibility, in an easy manner, and also affordability, that regardless of the economic status that a person could have, that they could have the opportunity to afford this technology.
So, when you look at that, we said, well, we would like to, then, enable that a little bit. We would like to create an initiative.
And a couple of years ago at AMD, we came up with this idea of saying, what if we create this initiative we call 50x15, where we are going to aim, that by the year 2015, half of the world will be connected to the Internet so that people and ideas can get connected.
We knew we couldn't do it by ourselves, and by no means did we ever intend to imply that we at AMD could do it alone.
We always felt that this was something that could be done through partnerships with governments, industry, educational institutions, a myriad of other companies and, frankly, even competitors.
So, it is really a rather lofty initiative, if you want to think that way, but we felt that we had to put a real stake up in the years ahead, that was bold enough and courageous enough that it would force us all to think of ways to do things differently.
And I'll come back to that in a minute, because I think the results so far have been remarkable, and I can only anticipate and get real excited about what I think is going to happen in the next eight years, while we get to the 2015 initiative.
Where are we today?
That's year by year. This comes from our friends at Gapminder.com.
Those of you who've never looked at their website, you should look at it. It's really impressive. And you can see how the Internet penetration has changed over the years.
And so when we gave ourselves this scorecard to say well, where are we related to our goal towards 2015, the thing that becomes apparent is three pieces.
One is the Western world, defined mostly by Western Europe and the United States, has made an awful lot of progress.
The connectivity in these parts of the world are really truly phenomenal and continue to increase.
As a matter of fact, we think reaching 100 percent is very doable, even before the 2015 timeframe. In other parts of emerging countries, such as India and China, the progress has been good -- has been solid, has been good. But in places that are not as developed, places like Africa, Latin America and other places in the world, the progress has been rather slow. As a matter of fact, I was just recently visiting South Africa.
I had the opportunity to have a discussion with President Mbeki, and one of the things that we talked about is, what is it that's keeping this connectivity goal from moving ahead faster?
And one of the reasons is, in South Africa, it costs 100 dollars a month to have a broadband connectivity.
It is impossible, even in the United States, for that cost, to be able to enable the connectivity that we're all trying to reach.
So, we talked about ways in which perhaps one could partner to be able to bring the cost of this technology down.
So, when you look at this chart, you look at the very last -- it's a logarithmic chart on a horizontal scale -- you look at the very end: we've got quite a long way to go to get to the 2015 goal of 50 percent.
But we're excited in our company; we're motivated.
We really think it's a phenomenal driver of things, to force us to do things differently, and we look forward to being able to actually, working with so many partners around the world, to be able to reach that goal.
Now, one of the things I'd like to explain [about] 50x15, which I think is really critical, is that it is not a charity.
It is actually a business venture.
Let's take a small segment of this, of this unconnected world, and call it the education market.
When you look at elementary-school children, we have hundreds and hundreds of millions of children around the world that could benefit tremendously from being able to be connected to the Internet.
Therefore, when we see that, we see an opportunity to have a business that addresses the need of that segment.
And when we embarked in this initiative, from the very beginning we said it very clearly: this is not a charity.
This is really a business venture, one that addresses a very challenging segment of the market.
Because what we have learned in the last three years is that this segment of the market, whether it's education or under-developed nations, either way, it's a segment that demands incredibly high quality, incredibly high reliability, tremendous low cost and access, and a lot of challenges that frankly, without actually doing it, it would be very difficult to understand, and I'll explain that in just a minute.
It is an initiative that is focused on simple, accessible and human-centric solutions.
What we mean by that is, you know, frankly, the PC was invented in 1980, roughly speaking more or less, and for 20-odd years, it hasn't changed.
It is still, in most places, a gray or black box, and it looks the same.
And frankly -- and I know that sometimes I offend some of my customers when I say this, but I truly mean it -- if you could take the name of the computer off the top of it, it would be very difficult to judge who made it, because they're all highly commoditized but they're all different.
So, there has not been a human-centric approach to addressing this segment of the market, so we really believe it is critical to think of it.
It reminded me a lot of the talk we heard this morning, about this operating room machinery that was designed specifically for Africa.
We're talking about something very similar here.
And it has to be based on a geo-sensitive approach.
What I mean by that is that in some parts of the world, the government plays a key role in the development of technology.
In other parts, it doesn't.
In other parts of the world, you have an infrastructure that allows for manufacturing to take place.
In other parts, it doesn't. And then we have to be sensitive about how this technology can be developed and put into action in those regions.
And the last piece, which is really important -- and this is an opinion that we have, not shared by many, this is one where we seem to stand alone, on this one -- is that we really believe that the greatest success of this initiative can come by fostering local, integrated, end-to-end ecosystems.
What I mean by that, and let me use this example, the country of South Africa, because I was just there, therefore I'm a little bit familiar with some of the challenges they have.
It's a country of 45 million people. It's an economy that's emerging.
It's beginning to grow tremendously.
They have an objective to lowering the cost of connectivity.
They have a computer company that makes computers in South Africa.
They're developing a software-training environment in their universities.
What a place, what an ideal place to create an ecosystem that could build the hardware and the software needed for their schools. And to my surprise, I learned in South Africa they have 18 dialects, I always thought they only had two -- English and Afrikaans -- but it turns out they have 18 dialects.
And to be able to meet the needs of this rather complex educational system, it could only be done from inside.
I don't think this segment of the market can be addressed by companies parachuting from another place of the world, and just dumping product and selling into the markets.
So, we believe that in those regions of the world where the population is large, and there's an infrastructure that can provide it, that a local, integrated, end-to-end system is really critical for its success.
This is a picture of a classroom that we outfitted with computers in Mexico, in my home country.
This particular classroom happens to be in the state of Michoacan.
Those of you that might be familiar with Mexico -- Michoacan is a very colorful state.
Children dress with very colorful, colorful clothes, and it is incredible to see the power that this has in the hands of kids, in a computer. And I have to tell you that it's so easy to appreciate the impact that access to technology and connectivity can have in the lives and education of these kids.
We just recently opened a learning laboratory in a school in the West Cape in South Africa, in a school that's called Nelson Mandela School, and when you see the faces and activities of these children being able to access computers, it's just phenomenal.
And recently, they've written us letters, telling us how excited they are about the impact that this has had on their lives, on their educational dreams, on their capabilities, and it's just phenomenal.
We have now deployed 30 different technologists in 18 different countries, and we have been able to connect millions of people in an effort to continue to learn what this particular segment of the market needs and demands.
And I have to tell you that although millions doesn't sound like a lot in terms of the billions that need to be connected, it's a start. And we are learning a lot.
And we're learning a tremendous amount about what we believe this segment needs to be able to be effective.
One example of this has been the One Laptop per Child.
Some of you are familiar with this.
This is a partnership between MIT and a group of companies -- Google is involved, Red Hat -- and AMD is a key player.
The electronics behind the One Laptop per Child are based on AMD technology; it's a microprocessor.
But to give you an idea how creative this group of people can be, one of the objectives of the One Laptop per Child is to be able to achieve a 10-hour battery life.
Because it was felt that a school day would last at least eight hours, and you wanted the child to have the ability to use the laptop for at least one full day without having to recharge it.
The engineers have done a phenomenal amount of innovation on this part, and battery life on this product is now 15 hours -- just through a lot of innovative work people have done because they're passionate and motivated to be able to do this.
We expect this to be deployed towards the end of this year, and we're very excited at the opportunities that this is going to offer in the field of education.
It's a highly focused product aimed at strictly the education market, not only in the developing countries, but actually in the developed regions as well, because there are parts of the United States where this can have also a huge impact on the ability to make education more fun and more efficient.
We also have partnered with TED in this project, with Architecture for Humanity, and along with the TED Prize winner Cameron Sinclair, we're having a contest that we have issued to the architectural community to come up with the best design for a computer lab for an emerging region.
And we're really thrilled about the opportunity to be part of this, and can't wait to see what comes out of this exciting, exciting activity.
Let me come back to the beginning, to end this presentation.
I'll tell you that one of the things that I feel is really critical for us in industry, in business, is to be able to be passionate about solving these problems.
I don't think it's enough to be able to put them on a spreadsheet, and look at numbers and say, yes, that's a good business.
I really believe that you have to have a passion for it.
And one of the things that I learned, too, from my parents -- and I'll give you a little anecdote -- especially from my father.
And it took me a while to understand it, but he said to me, when I went to college, he said, "You're the first person in the family to go to college.
And it's really important you understand that for civilization to make progress, each generation has to do better than the last one.
And therefore, this is your opportunity to do better than my generation."
Frankly, I don't know that I really understood what he told me at the time.
I was eager to go off to college, and go find girls, and study, and girls, and study, but then I finished college and I fell in love.
I graduated. I decided to get married.
And on my wedding day, my father came to me again and said, "You know, I'm going to remind you again, that each generation has to do better than the last one.
You have to be a better husband than I was, because that's how you make progress." And now he began to make sense.
Because I knew what a great husband he was, and now he was once again beginning to put pressure on me, like he did when I was a little kid. And then a few years later, I had a child, my first child, and again, my father comes to the hospital, and we're looking at the glass, and see all the children on the other side, and he said, "I've got to remind you again, that for each generation to do better, you're going to have to be a better father than I was."
That's when it dawned on me the tremendous challenge that he was placing on me, because he was a great father.
But the key is that he instilled in me a passion to really get up every day in the morning and want to do better, to really get up and think that my role in life is not just to be the CEO of a Fortune 500 company.
It's got to be that someday I can look back, and this place is truly better through some small contribution that perhaps each of us could make.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Is there life beyond Earth in our solar system?
Wow, what a powerful question.
You know, as a scientist -- planetary scientist -- we really didn't take that very seriously until recently.
Carl Sagan always said, "It takes extraordinary evidence for extraordinary claims."
And the claims of having life beyond Earth need to be definitive, they need to be loud and they need to be everywhere for us to be able to believe it.
So how do we make this journey?
What we decided to do is first look for those ingredients for life.
The ingredients of life are: liquid water -- we have to have a solvent, can't be ice, has to be liquid.
We also have to have energy.
We also have to have organic material -- things that make us up, but also things that we need to consume.
So we have to have these elements in environments for long periods of time for us to be able to be confident that life, in that moment when it starts, can spark and then grow and evolve.
Well, I have to tell you that early in my career, when we looked at those three elements, I didn't believe that they were beyond Earth in any length of time and for any real quantity.
Why? We look at the inner planets.
Venus is way too hot -- it's got no water.
Mars -- dry and arid.
It's got no water.
And beyond Mars, the water in the solar system is all frozen.
But recent observations have changed all that.
It's now turning our attention to the right places for us to take a deeper look and really start to answer our life question.
So when we look out into the solar system, where are the possibilities?
We're concentrating our attention on four locations.
The planet Mars and then three moons of the outer planets: Titan, Europa and small Enceladus.
So what about Mars?
Let's go through the evidence.
Well, Mars we thought was initially moon-like: full of craters, arid and a dead world.
And so about 15 years ago, we started a series of missions to go to Mars and see if water existed on Mars in its past that changed its geology.
We ought to be able to notice that.
And indeed we started to be surprised right away.
Our higher resolution images show deltas and river valleys and gulleys that were there in the past.
And in fact, Curiosity -- which has been roving on the surface now for about three years -- has really shown us that it's sitting in an ancient river bed, where water flowed rapidly.
And not for a little while, perhaps hundreds of millions of years.
And if everything was there, including organics, perhaps life had started.
Curiosity has also drilled in that red soil and brought up other material.
And we were really excited when we saw that.
Because it wasn't red Mars, it was gray material, it's gray Mars.
We brought it into the rover, we tasted it, and guess what?
We tasted organics -- carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur -- they were all there.
So Mars in its past, with a lot of water, perhaps plenty of time, could have had life, could have had that spark, could have grown.
And is that life still there?
We don't know that.
But a few years ago we started to look at a number of craters.
During the summer, dark lines would appear down the sides of these craters.
The more we looked, the more craters we saw, the more of these features.
We now know more than a dozen of them.
A few months ago the fairy tale came true.
We announced to the world that we know what these streaks are.
It's liquid water.
These craters are weeping during the summer.
Liquid water is flowing down these craters.
So what are we going to do now -- now that we see the water?
Well, it tells us that Mars has all the ingredients necessary for life.
In its past it had perhaps two-thirds of its northern hemisphere -- there was an ocean.
It has weeping water right now.
Liquid water on its surface.
It has organics.
It has all the right conditions.
So what are we going to do next?
We're going to launch a series of missions to begin that search for life on Mars.
And now it's more appealing than ever before.
As we move out into the solar system, here's the tiny moon Enceladus.
This is not in what we call the traditional habitable zone, this area around the sun.
This is much further out.
This object should be ice over a silicate core.
But what did we find?
Cassini was there since 2006, and after a couple years looked back after it flew by Enceladus and surprised us all.
Enceladus is blasting sheets of water out into the solar system and sloshing back down onto the moon.
What a fabulous environment.
Cassini just a few months ago also flew through the plume, and it measured silicate particles.
Where does the silica come from?
It must come from the ocean floor.
The tidal energy is generated by Saturn, pulling and squeezing this moon -- is melting that ice, creating an ocean.
But it's also doing that to the core.
Now, the only thing that we can think of that does that here on Earth as an analogy ...
are hydrothermal vents.
Hydrothermal vents deep in our ocean were discovered in 1977.
Oceanographers were completely surprised.
And now there are thousands of these below the ocean.
What do we find?
The oceanographers, when they go and look at these hydrothermal vents, they're teeming with life, regardless of whether the water is acidic or alkaline -- doesn't matter.
So hydrothermal vents are a fabulous abode for life here on Earth.
So what about Enceladus?
Well, we believe because it has water and has had it for a significant period of time, and we believe it has hydrothermal vents with perhaps the right organic material, it is a place where life could exist.
And not just microbial -- maybe more complex because it's had time to evolve.
Another moon, very similar, is Europa.
Galileo visited Jupiter's system in 1996 and made fabulous observations of Europa.
Europa, we also know, has an under-the-ice crust ocean.
Galileo mission told us that, but we never saw any plumes.
But we didn't look for them.
Hubble, just a couple years ago, observing Europa, saw plumes of water spraying from the cracks in the southern hemisphere, just exactly like Enceladus.
These moons, which are not in what we call a traditional habitable zone, that are out in the solar system, have liquid water.
And if there are organics there, there may be life.
This is a fabulous set of discoveries because these moons have been in this environment like that for billions of years.
Life started here on Earth, we believe, after about the first 500 million, and look where we are.
These moons are fabulous moons.
Another moon that we're looking at is Titan.
Titan is a huge moon of Saturn.
It perhaps is much larger than the planet Mercury.
It has an extensive atmosphere.
It's so extensive -- and it's mostly nitrogen with a little methane and ethane -- that you have to peer through it with radar.
And on the surface, Cassini has found liquid.
We see lakes ...
actually almost the size of our Black Sea in some places.
And this area is not liquid water; it's methane.
If there's any place in the solar system where life is not like us, where the substitute of water is another solvent -- and it could be methane -- it could be Titan.
Well, is there life beyond Earth in the solar system?
We don't know yet, but we're hot on the pursuit.
The data that we're receiving is really exciting and telling us -- forcing us to think about this in new and exciting ways.
I believe we're on the right track.
That in the next 10 years, we will answer that question.
And if we answer it, and it's positive, then life is everywhere in the solar system.
Just think about that.
We may not be alone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We are stealing nature from our children.
Now, when I say this, I don't mean that we are destroying nature that they will have wanted us to preserve, although that is unfortunately also the case.
What I mean here is that we've started to define nature in a way that's so purist and so strict that under the definition we're creating for ourselves, there won't be any nature left for our children when they're adults.
But there's a fix for this.
So let me explain.
Right now, humans use half of the world to live, to grow their crops and their timber, to pasture their animals.
If you added up all the human beings, we would weigh 10 times as much as all the wild mammals put together.
We cut roads through the forest.
We have added little plastic particles to the sand on ocean beaches.
We've changed the chemistry of the soil with our artificial fertilizers.
And of course, we've changed the chemistry of the air.
So when you take your next breath, you'll be breathing in 42 percent more carbon dioxide than if you were breathing in 1750.
So all of these changes, and many others, have come to be kind of lumped together under this rubric of the "Anthropocene."
And this is a term that some geologists are suggesting we should give to our current epoch, given how pervasive human influence has been over it.
Now, it's still just a proposed epoch, but I think it's a helpful way to think about the magnitude of human influence on the planet.
So where does this put nature?
What counts as nature in a world where everything is influenced by humans?
So 25 years ago, environmental writer Bill McKibben said that because nature was a thing apart from man and because climate change meant that every centimeter of the Earth was altered by man, then nature was over.
In fact, he called his book "The End of Nature."
I disagree with this. I just disagree with this.
I disagree with this definition of nature, because, fundamentally, we are animals.
Right? Like, we evolved on this planet in the context of all the other animals with which we share a planet, and all the other plants, and all the other microbes.
And so I think that nature is not that which is untouched by humanity, man or woman.
I think that nature is anywhere where life thrives, anywhere where there are multiple species together, anywhere that's green and blue and thriving and filled with life and growing.
And under that definition, things look a little bit different.
Now, I understand that there are certain parts of this nature that speak to us in a special way.
Places like Yellowstone, or the Mongolian steppe, or the Great Barrier Reef or the Serengeti.
Places that we think of as kind of Edenic representations of a nature before we screwed everything up.
And in a way, they are less impacted by our day to day activities.
Many of these places have no roads or few roads, so on, like such.
But ultimately, even these Edens are deeply influenced by humans.
Now, let's just take North America, for example, since that's where we're meeting.
So between about 15,000 years ago when people first came here, they started a process of interacting with the nature that led to the extinction of a big slew of large-bodied animals, from the mastodon to the giant ground sloth, saber-toothed cats, all of these cool animals that unfortunately are no longer with us.
And when those animals went extinct, you know, the ecosystems didn't stand still.
Massive ripple effects changed grasslands into forests, changed the composition of forest from one tree to another.
So even in these Edens, even in these perfect-looking places that seem to remind us of a past before humans, we're essentially looking at a humanized landscape.
Not just these prehistoric humans, but historical humans, indigenous people all the way up until the moment when the first colonizers showed up.
And the case is the same for the other continents as well.
Humans have just been involved in nature in a very influential way for a very long time.
Now, just recently, someone told me, "Oh, but there are still wild places."
And I said, "Where? Where? I want to go."
And he said, "The Amazon."
And I was like, "Oh, the Amazon. I was just there.
It's awesome. National Geographic sent me to Manú National Park, which is in the Peruvian Amazon, but it's a big chunk of rainforest, uncleared, no roads, protected as a national park, one of the most, in fact, biodiverse parks in the world.
And when I got in there with my canoe, what did I find, but people.
People have been living there for hundreds and thousands of years.
People live there, and they don't just float over the jungle.
They have a meaningful relationship with the landscape.
They hunt. They grow crops.
They domesticate crops.
They use the natural resources to build their houses, to thatch their houses.
They even make pets out of animals that we consider to be wild animals.
These people are there and they're interacting with the environment in a way that's really meaningful and that you can see in the environment.
Now, I was with an anthropologist on this trip, and he told me, as we were floating down the river, he said, "There are no demographic voids in the Amazon."
This statement has really stuck with me, because what it means is that the whole Amazon is like this.
There's people everywhere.
And many other tropical forests are the same, and not just tropical forests.
People have influenced ecosystems in the past, and they continue to influence them in the present, even in places where they're harder to notice.
So, if all of the definitions of nature that we might want to use that involve it being untouched by humanity or not having people in it, if all of those actually give us a result where we don't have any nature, then maybe they're the wrong definitions.
Maybe we should define it by the presence of multiple species, by the presence of a thriving life.
Now, if we do it that way, what do we get?
Well, it's this kind of miracle.
All of a sudden, there's nature all around us.
All of a sudden, we see this Monarch caterpillar munching on this plant, and we realize that there it is, and it's in this empty lot in Chattanooga.
And look at this empty lot.
I mean, there's, like, probably, a dozen, minimum, plant species growing there, supporting all kinds of insect life, and this is a completely unmanaged space, a completely wild space.
This is a kind of wild nature right under our nose, that we don't even notice.
And there's an interesting little paradox, too.
So this nature, this kind of wild, untended part of our urban, peri-urban, suburban agricultural existence that flies under the radar, it's arguably more wild than a national park, because national parks are very carefully managed in the 21st century.
Crater Lake in southern Oregon, which is my closest national park, is a beautiful example of a landscape that seems to be coming out of the past.
But they're managing it carefully.
One of the issues they have now is white bark pine die-off.
White bark pine is a beautiful, charismatic -- I'll say it's a charismatic megaflora that grows up at high altitude -- and it's got all these problems right now with disease.
There's a blister rust that was introduced, bark beetle.
So to deal with this, the park service has been planting rust-resistant white bark pine seedlings in the park, even in areas that they are otherwise managing as wilderness.
And they're also putting out beetle repellent in key areas as I saw last time I went hiking there.
And this kind of thing is really much more common than you would think.
National parks are heavily managed.
The wildlife is kept to a certain population size and structure.
Fires are suppressed.
Fires are started.
Non-native species are removed.
Native species are reintroduced.
And in fact, I took a look, and Banff National Park is doing all of the things I just listed: suppressing fire, having fire, radio-collaring wolves, reintroducing bison.
It takes a lot of work to make these places look untouched.
(Laughter) (Applause) And in a further irony, these places that we love the most are the places that we love a little too hard, sometimes.
A lot of us like to go there, and because we're managing them to be stable in the face of a changing planet, they often are becoming more fragile over time.
Which means that they're the absolute worst places to take your children on vacation, because you can't do anything there.
You can't climb the trees.
You can't fish the fish.
You can't make a campfire out in the middle of nowhere.
You can't take home the pinecones.
There are so many rules and restrictions that from a child's point of view, this is, like, the worst nature ever.
Because children don't want to hike through a beautiful landscape for five hours and then look at a beautiful view.
That's maybe what we want to do as adults, but what kids want to do is hunker down in one spot and just tinker with it, just work with it, just pick it up, build a house, build a fort, do something like that.
Additionally, these sort of Edenic places are often distant from where people live.
And they're expensive to get to. They're hard to visit.
So this means that they're only available to the elites, and that's a real problem.
The Nature Conservancy did a survey of young people, and they asked them, how often do you spend time outdoors?
And only two out of five spent time outdoors at least once a week.
The other three out of five were just staying inside.
And when they asked them why, what are the barriers to going outside, the response of 61 percent was, "There are no natural areas near my home."
And this is crazy. This is just patently false.
I mean, 71 percent of people in the US live within a 10-minute walk of a city park.
And I'm sure the figures are similar in other countries.
And that doesn't even count your back garden, the urban creek, the empty lot.
Everybody lives near nature.
Every kid lives near nature.
We've just somehow forgotten how to see it.
We've spent too much time watching David Attenborough documentaries where the nature is really sexy -- (Laughter) and we've forgotten how to see the nature that is literally right outside our door, the nature of the street tree.
So here's an example: Philadelphia.
There's this cool elevated railway that you can see from the ground, that's been abandoned.
Now, this may sound like the beginning of the High Line story in Manhattan, and it's very similar, except they haven't developed this into a park yet, although they're working on it.
So for now, it's still this little sort of secret wilderness in the heart of Philadelphia, and if you know where the hole is in the chain-link fence, you can scramble up to the top and you can find this completely wild meadow just floating above the city of Philadelphia.
Every single one of these plants grew from a seed that planted itself there.
This is completely autonomous, self-willed nature.
And it's right in the middle of the city.
And they've sent people up there to do sort of biosurveys, and there are over 50 plant species up there.
And it's not just plants.
This is an ecosystem, a functioning ecosystem.
It's creating soil. It's sequestering carbon.
There's pollination going on.
I mean, this is really an ecosystem.
So scientists have started calling ecosystems like these "novel ecosystems," because they're often dominated by non-native species, and because they're just super weird.
They're just unlike anything we've ever seen before.
For so long, we dismissed all these novel ecosystems as trash.
We're talking about regrown agricultural fields, timber plantations that are not being managed on a day-to-day basis, second-growth forests generally, the entire East Coast, where after agriculture moved west, the forest sprung up.
And of course, pretty much all of Hawaii, where novel ecosystems are the norm, where exotic species totally dominate.
This forest here has Queensland maple, it has sword ferns from Southeast Asia.
You can make your own novel ecosystem, too.
It's really simple.
You just stop mowing your lawn.
(Laughter) Ilkka Hanski was an ecologist in Finland, and he did this experiment himself.
He just stopped mowing his lawn, and after a few years, he had some grad students come, and they did sort of a bio-blitz of his backyard, and they found 375 plant species, including two endangered species.
So when you're up there on that future High Line of Philadelphia, surrounded by this wildness, surrounded by this diversity, this abundance, this vibrance, you can look over the side and you can see a local playground for a local school, and that's what it looks like.
These children have, that -- You know, under my definition, there's a lot of the planet that counts as nature, but this would be one of the few places that wouldn't count as nature.
There's nothing there except humans, no other plants, no other animals.
And what I really wanted to do was just, like, throw a ladder over the side and get all these kids to come up with me into this cool meadow.
In a way, I feel like this is the choice that faces us.
If we dismiss these new natures as not acceptable or trashy or no good, we might as well just pave them over.
And in a world where everything is changing, we need to be very careful about how we define nature.
In order not to steal it from our children, we have to do two things.
First, we cannot define nature as that which is untouched.
This never made any sense anyway.
Nature has not been untouched for thousands of years.
And it excludes most of the nature that most people can visit and have a relationship with, including only nature that children cannot touch.
Which brings me to the second thing that we have to do, which is that we have to let children touch nature, because that which is untouched is unloved.
(Applause) We face some pretty grim environmental challenges on this planet.
Climate change is among them.
There's others too: habitat loss is my favorite thing to freak out about in the middle of the night.
But in order to solve them, we need people -- smart, dedicated people -- who care about nature.
And the only way we're going to raise up a generation of people who care about nature is by letting them touch nature.
I have a Fort Theory of Ecology, Fort Theory of Conservation.
Every ecologist I know, every conservation biologist I know, every conservation professional I know, built forts when they were kids.
If we have a generation that doesn't know how to build a fort, we'll have a generation that doesn't know how to care about nature.
And I don't want to be the one to tell this kid, who is on a special program that takes Philadelphia kids from poor neighborhoods and takes them to city parks, I don't want to be the one to tell him that the flower he's holding is a non-native invasive weed that he should throw away as trash.
I think I would much rather learn from this boy that no matter where this plant comes from, it is beautiful, and it deserves to be touched and appreciated.
Thank you.
(Applause)
There's this fact that I love that I read somewhere once, that one of the things that's contributed to homo sapiens' success as a species is our lack of body hair -- that our hairlessness, our nakedness combined with our invention of clothing, gives us the ability to modulate our body temperature and thus be able to survive in any climate we choose.
And now we've evolved to the point where we can't survive without clothing.
And it's more than just utility, now it's a communication.
Everything that we choose to put on is a narrative, a story about where we've been, what we're doing, who we want to be.
I was a lonely kid.
I didn't have an easy time finding friends to play with, and I ended up making a lot of my own play.
I made a lot of my own toys.
It began with ice cream.
There was a Baskin-Robbins in my hometown, and they served ice cream from behind the counter in these giant, five-gallon, cardboard tubs.
And someone told me -- I was eight years old -- someone told me that when they were done with those tubs, they washed them out and kept them in the back, and if you asked they would give you one.
It took me a couple of weeks to work up the courage, but I did, and they did.
They gave me one -- I went home with this beautiful cardboard tub.
I was trying to figure out what I could do with this exotic material -- metal ring, top and bottom.
I started turning it over in my head, and I realized, "Wait a minute -- my head actually fits inside this thing."
(Laughter) Yeah, I cut a hole out, I put some acetate in there and I made myself a space helmet.
(Laughter) I needed a place to wear the space helmet, so I found a refrigerator box a couple blocks from home.
I pushed it home, and in my parents' guest room closet, I turned it into a spaceship.
I started with a control panel out of cardboard.
I cut a hole for a radar screen and put a flashlight underneath it to light it.
I put a view screen up, which I offset off the back wall -- and this is where I thought I was being really clever -- without permission, I painted the back wall of the closet black and put a star field, which I lit up with some Christmas lights I found in the attic, and I went on some space missions.
A couple years later, the movie "Jaws" came out.
I was way too young to see it, but I was caught up in "Jaws" fever, like everyone else in America at the time.
There was a store in my town that had a "Jaws" costume in their window, and my mom must have overheard me talking to someone about how awesome I thought this costume was, because a couple days before Halloween, she blew my freaking mind by giving me this "Jaws" costume.
Now, I recognize it's a bit of a trope for people of a certain age to complain that kids these days have no idea how good they have it, but let me just show you a random sampling of entry-level kids' costumes you can buy online right now ...
... and this is the "Jaws" costume my mom bought for me.
(Laughter) This is a paper-thin shark face and a vinyl bib with the poster of "Jaws" on it.
(Laughter) And I loved it.
A couple years later, my dad took me to a film called "Excalibur."
I actually got him to take me to it twice, which is no small thing, because it is a hard, R-rated film.
But it wasn't the blood and guts or the boobs that made me want to go see it again.
They helped -- (Laughter) It was the armor.
The armor in "Excalibur" was intoxicatingly beautiful to me.
These were literally knights in shining, mirror-polished armor.
And moreover, the knights in "Excalibur" wear their armor everywhere.
All the time -- they wear it at dinner, they wear it to bed.
(Laughter) I was like, "Are they reading my mind?
I want to wear armor all the time!"
(Laughter) So I went back to my favorite material, the gateway drug for making, corrugated cardboard, and I made myself a suit of armor, replete with the neck shields and a white horse.
Now that I've oversold it, here's a picture of the armor that I made.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, this is only the first suit of armor I made inspired by "Excalibur."
A couple of years later, I convinced my dad to embark on making me a proper suit of armor.
Over about a month, he graduated me from cardboard to roofing aluminum called flashing and still, one of my all-time favorite attachment materials, POP rivets.
We carefully, over that month, constructed an articulated suit of aluminum armor with compound curves.
We drilled holes in the helmet so that I could breathe, and I finished just in time for Halloween and wore it to school.
Now, this is the one thing in this talk that I don't have a slide to show you, because no photo exists of this armor.
I did wear it to school, there was a yearbook photographer patrolling the halls, but he never found me, for reasons that are about to become clear.
There were things I didn't anticipate about wearing a complete suit of aluminum armor to school.
In third period math, I was standing in the back of class, and I'm standing in the back of class because the armor did not allow me to sit down.
(Laughter) This is the first thing I didn't anticipate.
And then my teacher looks at me sort of concerned about halfway through the class and says, "Are you feeling OK?"
I'm thinking, "Are you kidding? Am I feeling OK?
I'm wearing a suit of armor! I am having the time of my --" And I'm just about to tell her how great I feel, when the classroom starts to list to the left and disappear down this long tunnel, and then I woke up in the nurse's office.
I had passed out from heat exhaustion, wearing the armor.
And when I woke up, I wasn't embarrassed about having passed out in front of my class, I was wondering, "Who took my armor? Where's my armor?"
OK, fast-forward a whole bunch of years, some colleagues and I get hired to make a show for Discovery Channel, called "MythBusters."
And over 14 years, I learn on the job how to build experimental methodologies and how to tell stories about them for television.
I also learn early on that costuming can play a key role in this storytelling.
I use costumes to add humor, comedy, color and narrative clarity to the stories we're telling.
And then we do an episode called "Dumpster Diving," and I learn a little bit more about the deeper implications of what costuming means to me.
In the episode "Dumpster Diving," the question we were trying to answer is: Is jumping into a dumpster as safe as the movies would lead you to believe?
(Laughter) The episode was going to have two distinct parts to it.
One was where we get trained to jump off buildings by a stuntman into an air bag.
And the second was the graduation to the experiment: we'd fill a dumpster full of material and we'd jump into it.
I wanted to visually separate these two elements, and I thought, "Well, for the first part we're training, so we should wear sweatsuits -- Oh! Let's put 'Stunt Trainee' on the back of the sweatsuits.
That's for the training."
But for the second part, I wanted something really visually striking -- "I know! I'll dress as Neo from 'The Matrix.'" (Laughter) So I went to Haight Street.
I bought some beautiful knee-high, buckle boots.
I found a long, flowing coat on eBay.
I got sunglasses, which I had to wear contact lenses in order to wear.
The day of the experiment shoot comes up, and I step out of my car in this costume, and my crew takes a look at me ...
and start suppressing their church giggles.
They're like, "(Laugh sound)."
And I feel two distinct things at this moment.
I feel total embarrassment over the fact that it's so nakedly clear to my crew that I'm completely into wearing this costume.
(Laughter) But the producer in my mind reminds myself that in the high-speed shot in slow-mo, that flowing coat is going to look beautiful behind me.
(Laughter) Five years into the "MythBusters" run, we got invited to appear at San Diego Comic-Con.
I'd known about Comic-Con for years and never had time to go.
This was the big leagues -- this was costuming mecca.
People fly in from all over the world to show their amazing creations on the floor in San Diego.
And I wanted to participate.
I decided that I would put together an elaborate costume that covered me completely, and I would walk the floor of San Diego Comic-Con anonymously.
The costume I chose?
Hellboy.
That's not my costume, that's actually Hellboy.
(Laughter) But I spent months assembling the most screen-accurate Hellboy costume I could, from the boots to the belt to the pants to the right hand of doom.
I found a guy who made a prosthetic Hellboy head and chest and I put them on.
I even had contact lenses made in my prescription.
I wore it onto the floor at Comic-Con and I can't even tell you how balls hot it was in that costume.
(Laughter) Sweating! I should've remembered this.
I'm sweating buckets and the contact lenses hurt my eyes, and none of it matters because I'm totally in love.
(Laughter) Not just with the process of putting on this costume and walking the floor, but also with the community of other costumers.
It's not called costuming at Cons, it's called "cosplay."
Now ostensibly, cosplay means people who dress up as their favorite characters from film and television and especially anime, but it is so much more than that.
These aren't just people who find a costume and put it on -- they mash them up.
They bend them to their will.
They change them to be the characters they want to be in those productions.
They're super clever and genius.
They let their freak flag fly and it's beautiful.
(Laughter) But more than that, they rehearse their costumes.
At Comic-Con or any other Con, you don't just take pictures of people walking around.
You go up and say, "Hey, I like your costume, can I take your picture?"
And then you give them time to get into their pose.
They've worked hard on their pose to make their costume look great for your camera.
And it's so beautiful to watch.
And I take this to heart.
At subsequent Cons, I learn Heath Ledger's shambling walk as the Joker from "The Dark Knight."
I learn how to be a scary Ringwraith from "Lord of the Rings," and I actually frighten some children.
I learned that "hrr hrr hrr" -- that head laugh that Chewbacca does.
And then I dressed up as No-Face from "Spirited Away."
If you don't know about "Spirited Away" and its director, Hayao Miyazaki, first of all, you're welcome.
(Laughter) This is a masterpiece, and one of my all-time favorite films.
It's about a young girl named Chihiro who gets lost in the spirit world in an abandoned Japanese theme park.
And she finds her way back out again with the help of a couple of friends she makes -- a captured dragon named Haku and a lonely demon named No-Face.
No-Face is lonely and he wants to make friends, and he thinks the way to do it is by luring them to him and producing gold in his hand.
But this doesn't go very well, and so he ends up going on kind of a rampage until Chihiro saves him, rescues him.
So I put together a No-Face costume, and I wore it on the floor at Comic-Con.
And I very carefully practiced No-Face's gestures.
I resolved I would not speak in this costume at all.
When people asked to take my picture, I would nod and I would shyly stand next to them.
They would take the picture and then I would secret out from behind my robe a chocolate gold coin.
And at the end of the photo process, I'd make it appear for them.
Ah, ah ah! -- like that.
And people were freaking out.
"Holy crap! Gold from No-Face! Oh my god, this is so cool!"
And I'm feeling and I'm walking the floor and it's fantastic.
And about 15 minutes in something happens.
Somebody grabs my hand, and they put a coin back into it.
And I think maybe they're giving me a coin as a return gift, but no, this is one of the coins that I'd given away.
I don't know why.
And I keep on going, I take some more pictures.
And then it happens again.
Understand, I can't see anything inside this costume.
I can see through the mouth -- I can see people's shoes.
I can hear what they're saying and I can see their feet.
But the third time someone gives me back a coin, I want to know what's going on.
So I sort of tilt my head back to get a better view, and what I see is someone walking away from me going like this.
And then it hits me: it's bad luck to take gold from No-Face.
In the film "Spirited Away," bad luck befalls those who take gold from No-Face.
This isn't a performer-audience relationship; this is cosplay.
We are, all of us on that floor, injecting ourselves into a narrative that meant something to us.
And we're making it our own.
We're connecting with something important inside of us.
And the costumes are how we reveal ourselves to each other.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What do you do if you had to figure out the information behind 11.5 million documents, verify it and make sense of it?
That was a challenge that a group of journalists had to face late last year.
An anonymous person calling himself John Doe had somehow managed to copy nearly 40 years of records of the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca.
This is one of many firms around the world that specialize in setting up accounts in offshore tax havens like the British Virgin Islands, for rich and powerful people who like to keep secrets.
John Doe had managed to copy every spreadsheet from this firm, every client file, every email, from 1977 to the present day.
It represented the biggest cache of inside information into the tax haven system that anyone had ever seen.
But it also presented a gigantic challenge to investigative journalism.
Think about it: 11.5 million documents, containing the secrets of people from more than 200 different countries.
Where do you start with such a vast resource?
Where do you even begin to tell a story that can trail off into every corner of the globe, and that can affect almost any person in any language, sometimes in ways they don't even know yet.
John Doe had given the information to two journalists at the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung.
He said he was motivated by -- and I quote -- "The scale of the injustice that the documents would reveal."
But one user alone can never make sense of such a vast amount of information.
So the Süddeutsche Zeitung reached out to my organization in Washington, DC, The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists.
We decided to do something that was the very opposite of everything we'd been taught to do as journalists: share.
(Laughter) By nature, investigative reporters are lone wolves.
We fiercely guard our secrets, at times even from our editors, because we know that the moment we tell them what we have, they'll want that story right away.
And to be frank, when you get a good story, you like to keep the glory to yourself.
But there's no doubt that we live in a shrinking world, and that the media has largely been slow to wake up to this.
The issues we report on are more and more transnational.
Giant corporations operate on a global level.
Environmental and health crises are global.
So, too, are financial flows and financial crises.
So it seems staggering that journalism has been so late to cover stories in a truly global way.
And it also seems staggering that journalism has been so slow to wake up to the possibilities that technology brings, rather than being frightened of it.
The reason journalists are scared of technology is this: the profession's largest institutions are going through tough times because of the changing way that people are consuming news.
The advertising business models that have sustained reporting are broken.
And this has plunged journalism into crisis, forcing those institutions to reexamine how they function.
But where there is crisis, there is also opportunity.
The first challenge presented by what would eventually become known as the Panama Papers was to make the documents searchable and readable.
There were nearly five million emails, two million PDFs that needed to be scanned and indexed, and millions more files and other kinds of documents.
They all needed to be housed in a safe and secure location in the cloud.
We next invited reporters to have a look at the documents.
In all, reporters from more than 100 media organizations in 76 countries -- from the BBC in Britain to Le Monde newspaper in France to the Asahi Shimbun in Japan.
"Native eyes on native names," we called it, the idea being, who best to tell you who was important to Nigeria than a Nigerian journalist?
Who best in Canada than a Canadian?
There were only two rules for everyone who was invited: we all agreed to share everything that we found with everybody else, and we all agreed to publish together on the same day.
We chose our media partners based on trust that had been built up through previous smaller collaborations and also from leads that jumped out from the documents.
Over the next few months, my small nonprofit organization of less than 20 people was joined by more than 350 other reporters from 25 language groups.
The biggest information leak in history had now spawned the biggest journalism collaboration in history: 376 sets of native eyes doing what journalists normally never do, working shoulder to shoulder, sharing information, but telling no one.
For it became clear at this point that in order to make the biggest kind of noise, we first needed the biggest kind of silence.
To manage the project over the many months it would take, we built a secure virtual newsroom.
We used encrypted communication systems, and we built a specially designed search engine.
Inside the virtual newsroom, the reporters could gather around the themes that were emerging from the documents.
Those interested in blood diamonds or exotic art, for instance, could share information about how the offshore world was being used to hide the trade in both of those commodities.
Those interested in sport could share information about how famous sports stars were putting their image rights into offshore companies, thereby likely avoiding taxes in the countries where they plied their trade.
But perhaps most exciting of all were the number of world leaders and elect politicians that were emerging from the documents -- figures like Petro Poroshenko in Ukraine, close associates of Vladimir Putin in Russia and the British Prime Minister, David Cameron, who is linked through his late father, Ian Cameron.
Buried in the documents were secret offshore entities, such as Wintris Inc., a company in the British Virgin Islands that had actually belonged to the sitting Icelandic prime minister.
I like to refer to Johannes Kristjansson, the Icelandic reporter we invited to join the project, as the loneliest man in the world.
For nine months, he refused paid work and lived off the earnings of his wife.
He pasted tarps over the windows of his home to prevent prying eyes during the long Icelandic winter.
And he soon ran out of excuses to explain his many absences, as he worked red-eyed, night after night, month after month.
In all that time, he sat on information that would eventually bring down the leader of his country.
Now, when you're an investigative reporter and you make an amazing discovery, such as your prime minster can be linked to a secret offshore company, that that company has a financial interest in Icelandic banks -- the very issue he's been elected on -- well, your instinct is to scream out very loud.
Instead, as one of the few people that he could speak to, Johannes and I shared a kind of gallows humor.
"Wintris is coming," he used to say.
(Laughter) (Applause) We were big fans of "Game of Thrones."
When reporters like Johannes wanted to scream, they did so inside the virtual newsroom, and then they turned those screams into stories by going outside the documents to court records, official company registers, and by eventually putting questions to those that we intended to name.
Panama Papers actually allowed the reporters to look at the world through a different lens from everybody else.
As we were researching the story, unconnected to us, a major political bribery scandal happened in Brazil.
A new leader was elected in Argentina.
The FBI began to indict officials at FIFA, the organization that controls the world of professional soccer.
The Panama Papers actually had unique insights into each one of these unfolding events.
So you can imagine the pressure and the ego dramas that could have ruined what we were trying to do.
Any of one of these journalists, they could have broken the pact.
But they didn't.
And on April 3 this year, at exactly 8pm German time, we published simultaneously in 76 countries.
(Applause) The Panama Papers quickly became one of the biggest stories of the year.
This is the scene in Iceland the day after we published.
It was the first of many protests.
The Icelandic prime minister had to resign.
It was a first of many resignations.
We spotlighted many famous people such as Lionel Messi, the most famous soccer player in the world.
And there were some unintended consequences.
These alleged members of a Mexican drug cartel were arrested after we published details about their hideout.
They'd been using the address to register their offshore company.
(Laughter) There's a kind of irony in what we've been able to do.
The technology -- the Internet -- that has broken the business model is allowing us to reinvent journalism itself.
And this dynamic is producing unprecedented levels of transparency and impact.
We showed how a group of journalists can effect change across the world by applying new methods and old-fashioned journalism techniques to vast amounts of leaked information.
We put all-important context around what was given to us by John Doe.
And by sharing resources, we were able to dig deep -- much deeper and longer than most media organizations allow these days, because of financial concerns.
Now, it was a big risk, and it wouldn't work for every story, but we showed with the Panama Papers that you can write about any country from just about anywhere, and then choose your preferred battleground to defend your work.
Try obtaining a court injunction that would prevent the telling of a story in 76 different countries.
Try stopping the inevitable.
Shortly after we published, I got a three-word text from Johannes: "Wintris has arrived."
(Laughter) It had arrived and so, too, perhaps has a new era for journalism.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Gerard, thank you.
I guess you're going to send that applause to the 350 journalists who worked with you, right?
Now, a couple of questions I would like to ask.
The first one is, you'd been working in secrecy for over a year with 350-something colleagues from all over the world -- was there ever a moment when you thought that the leak may be leaked, that the collaboration may just be broken by somebody publishing a story?
Or somebody not in the group releasing some information that they got to know?
Gerard Ryle: We had a series of crises along the way, including when something major was happening in the world, the journalists from that country wanted to publish right away.
We had to calm them down.
We'd sent a series of questions to the associates of Vladimir Putin, but instead of responding, the Kremlin actually held a press conference and denounced us, and denounced the whole thing as being, I guess, a plot from the West.
At that point, Putin thought it was just about him.
And, of course, a lot of editors around the world were very nervous about this.
They thought the story was going to get out.
You can imagine the amount of time they'd spent, the amount of resources, money spent on this.
So I had to basically spend the last week calming everyone down, a bit like a general, where you're holding your troops back: "Calm, remain calm."
And then eventually, of course, they all did.
BG: And then a couple weeks ago or so, you released a lot of the documents as an open database for everybody to search via keyword, essentially.
GR: We very much believe that the basic information about the offshore world should be made public.
Now, we didn't publish the underlying documents of the journalists we're working with.
But the basic information such as the name of a person, what their offshore company was and the name of that company, is now all available online.
In fact, the biggest resource of its kind basically is out there now BG: Gerard, thank you for the work you do.
GR: Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to tell you about the future of money.
Let's start with a story about this culture that lived in Micronesia in the early 1900s, called the Yap.
Now, I want to tell you about the Yap because their form of money is really interesting.
They use these limestone discs called Rai stones.
Now, the Yap don't actually move these Rai stones around or exchange them the way we do with our coins, because Rai stones can get to be pretty massive.
The largest is about four tons and 12 feet across.
So the Yap just keep track of who owns part of what stone.
There's a story about these sailors that were transporting a stone across the ocean when they ran into some trouble and the stone actually fell in.
The sailors got back to the main island and they told everyone what had happened.
And everyone decided that, actually, yes, the sailors had the stone and -- why not? -- it still counted.
Even though it was at the bottom of the ocean, it was still part of the Yap economy.
You might think that this was just a small culture a hundred years ago.
But things like this happen in the Western world as well, and the Yap actually still use a form of these stones.
In 1932, the Bank of France asked the United States to convert their holdings from dollars into gold.
But it was too inconvenient to think about actually shipping all of that gold over to Europe.
So instead, someone went to where that gold was being stored and they just labeled it as belonging to France now.
And everyone agreed that France owned the gold.
It's just like those Rai stones.
The point I want to make with these two examples is that there's nothing inherently valuable about a dollar or a stone or a coin.
The only reason these things have any value is because we've all decided they should.
And because we've decided that, they do.
Money is about the exchanges and the transactions that we have with each other.
Money isn't anything objective.
It's about a collective story that we tell each other about value.
A collective fiction.
And that's a really powerful concept.
In the past two decades, we've begun to use digital money.
So I get paid via direct deposit, I pay my rent via bank transfer, I pay my taxes online.
And every month, a small amount of money is deducted from my paycheck and invested in mutual funds in my retirement account.
All of these interactions are literally just changing 1's and 0's on computers.
There's not even anything physical, like a stone or a coin.
Digital money makes it so that I can pay someone around the world in seconds.
Now when this works, it's because there are large institutions underwriting every 1 or 0 that changes on a computer.
And when it doesn't, it's often the fault of those large institutions.
Or at least, it's up to them to fix the problem.
And a lot of times, they don't.
There's a lot of friction in the system.
How long did it take the US credit card companies to implement chip and pin?
Half my credit cards still don't work in Europe.
That's friction.
Transferring money across borders and across currencies is really expensive: friction.
An entrepreneur in India can set up an online business in minutes, but it's hard for her to get loans and to get paid: friction.
Our access to digital money and our ability to freely transact is being held captive by these gatekeepers.
And there's a lot of impediments in the system slowing things down.
That's because digital money isn't really mine, it's entries in databases that belong to my bank, my credit card company or my investment firm.
And these companies have the right to say "no."
If I'm a PayPal merchant and PayPal wrongly flags me for fraud, that's it.
My account gets frozen, and I can't get paid.
These institutions are standing in the way of innovation.
How many of you use Facebook photos, Google Photos, Instagram?
My photos are everywhere.
They are on my phone, they're on my laptop, they're on my old phone, they're in Dropbox.
They're on all these different websites and services.
And most of these services don't work together.
They don't inter-operate.
And as a result, my photo library is a mess.
The same thing happens when institutions control the money supply.
A lot of these services don't inter-operate, and as a result, this blocks what we can do with payment.
And it makes transaction costs go up.
So far, we've been through two phases of money.
In an analog world, we had to deal with these physical objects, and money moved at a certain speed -- the speed of humans.
In a digital world, money can reach much farther and is much faster, but we're at the mercy of these gatekeeper institutions.
Money only moves at the speed of banks.
We're about to enter a new phase of money.
The future of money is programmable.
When we combine software and currency, money becomes more than just a static unit of value, and we don't have to rely on institutions for security.
In a programmable world, we remove humans and institutions from the loop.
And when this happens, we won't even feel like we're transacting anymore.
Money will be directed by software, and it will just safely and securely flow.
Cryptocurrencies are the first step of this evolution.
Cryptocurrencies are digital money that isn't run by any government or bank.
It's money designed to work in a world without intermediaries.
Bitcoin is the most ubiquitous cryptocurrency, but there are hundreds of them.
There's Ethereum, Litecoin, Stellar, Dogecoin, and those are just a few of the more popular ones.
And these things are real money.
The sushi restaurant down my street takes Bitcoin.
I have an app on my phone that I can use to buy sashimi.
But it's not just for small transactions.
In March, there was a transaction that moved around 100,000 bitcoins.
That's the equivalent of 40 million US dollars.
Cryptocurrencies are based on a special field of mathematics called cryptography.
Cryptography is the study of how to secure communication, and it's about two really important things: masking information so it can be hidden in plain sight, and verifying a piece of information's source.
Cryptography underpins so many of the systems around us.
And it's so powerful that at times the US government has actually classified it as a weapon.
During World War II, breaking cryptosystems like Enigma was critical to decoding enemy transmissions and turning the tide of the war.
Today, anyone with a modern web browser is running a pretty sophisticated cryptosystem.
It's what we use to secure our interactions on the Internet.
It's what makes it safe for us to type our passwords in and to send financial information to websites.
So what the banks used to give us -- trustworthy digital money transfer -- we can now get with a clever application of cryptography.
And this means that we don't have to rely on the banks anymore to secure our transactions.
We can do it ourselves.
Bitcoin is based on the very same idea that the Yap used, this collective global knowledge of transfers.
In Bitcoin, I spend by transferring Bitcoin, and I get paid when someone transfers Bitcoin to me.
Imagine that we had this magic paper.
So the way that this paper works is I can give you a sheet of it and if you write something on it, it will magically appear on my piece as well.
Let's say we just give everyone this paper and everyone writes down the transfers that they're doing in the Bitcoin system.
All of these transfers get copied around to everyone else's pieces of paper.
And I can look at mine and I'll have a list of all of the transfers that are happening in the entire Bitcoin economy.
This is actually what's happening with the Bitcoin blockchain, which is a list of all of the transactions in Bitcoin.
Except, it's not done through paper.
It's done through computer code, running on thousands of networked computers around the world.
All of these computers are collectively confirming who owns what Bitcoin.
So the Bitcoin blockchain is core to how Bitcoin works.
But where do bitcoins actually come from?
Well, the code is designed to create new Bitcoin according to a schedule.
And the way that it works is that to get those Bitcoin, I have to solve a puzzle -- a random cryptographic puzzle.
Imagine that we had 15 dice, and we were throwing these dice over and over again.
Whenever the dice come up all sixes, we say that we win.
This is very close to what these computers are all actually doing.
They're trying over and over again to land on the right number.
And when they do, we say that they've solved the puzzle.
The computer that solves the puzzle publishes its solution to the rest of the network and collects its reward: new bitcoins.
And in the act of solving this puzzle, these computers are actually helping to secure the Bitcoin blockchain and add to the list of transactions.
There are actually people all over the world running this software, and we call them Bitcoin miners.
Anyone can become a Bitcoin miner.
You can go download the software right now and run it in your computer and try to collect some bitcoins.
I can't say that I would recommend it, because right now, the puzzle is so hard and the network is so powerful, that if I tried to mine Bitcoin on my laptop, I probably wouldn't see any for about two million years.
The miners, professional miners, use this special hardware that's designed to solve the puzzle really fast.
Now, the Bitcoin network and all of this special hardware, there are estimates that the amount of energy it uses is equivalent to that of a small country.
So, the first set of cryptocurrencies are a little bit slow and a little bit cumbersome.
But the next generation is going to be so much better and so much faster.
Cryptocurrencies are the first step to a world with a global programmable money.
And in a world with programmable money, I can pay anyone else securely without having to sign up or ask permission, or do a conversion or worry about my money getting stuck.
And I can send money around the world.
This is a really amazing thing.
It's the idea of permission-less innovation.
The Internet caused an explosion of innovation, because it was built upon an open architecture.
And just like the Internet changed the way we communicate, programmable money is going to change the way we pay, allocate and decide on value.
So what kind of world does programmable money create?
Imagine a world where I can rent out my healthcare data to a pharmaceutical company.
They can run large-scale data analysis and provide me with a cryptographic proof that shows they're only using my data in a way that we agreed.
And they can pay me for what they find out.
Instead of signing up for streaming services and getting a cable bill, what if my television analyzed my watching habits and recommended well-priced content that fit within my budget that I would enjoy?
Imagine an Internet without ads, because instead of paying with our attention when we view content, we just pay.
Interestingly, things like micro-payments are actually going to change the way security works in our world, because once we're better able to allocate value, people will use their money and their energies for more constructive things.
If it cost a fraction of a cent to send an email, would we still have spam?
We're not at this world yet, but it's coming.
Right now, it's like we're in a world that is seeing the first automobile.
The first cryptocurrency, like the first car, is slow and hard to understand and hard to use.
Digital money, like the horse and carriage, works pretty well, and the whole world economy is built on it.
If you were the first person on your block to get a car with an internal combustion engine, your neighbors would probably think you were crazy: "Why would you want this large, clunky machine that breaks down all the time, that lights on fire, and is still slower than a horse?"
But we all know how that story turns out.
We're entering a new era of programmable money.
And it's very exciting, but it's also a little bit scary.
Cryptocurrencies can be used for illegal transactions, just like cash is used for crime in the world today.
When all of our transactions are online, what does that mean for surveillance -- who can see what we do?
Who's advantaged in this new world and who isn't?
Will I have to start to pay for things that I didn't have to pay for before?
Will we all become slaves to algorithms and utility functions?
All new technology comes with trade-offs.
The Internet brought us a lot of ways to waste time.
But it also greatly increased productivity.
Mobile phones are annoying because they make me feel like I have to stay connected to work all the time.
But they also help me stay connected to friends and family.
The new sharing economy is going to eliminate some jobs.
But it's also going to create new, flexible forms of employment.
With programmable money, we decouple the need for large, trusted institutions from the architecture of the network.
And this pushes innovation in money out to the edges, where it belongs.
Programmable money democratizes money.
And because of this, things are going to change and unfold in ways that we can't even predict.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The most complex problems in our time can be solved with simple techniques, if we are able to dream.
As a child, I discovered that creativity is the key to cross from dreams to reality.
I learned this from my grandmother, Dr. Ruth Tichauer, a Jewish refugee that settled in the heart of the Andes.
That is how I grew up: encouraged to see beyond any limitation.
So part of my education included helping her in remote, indigenous communities.
I cherish those memories, because they helped me to understand life outside the city, a life with a lot of possibilities, without barriers, as language or culture.
During those trips, my grandmother used to recite a Kipling poem: "Something hidden. Go and find it.
Go and look behind the Mountains.
Something lost behind the mountains.
Lost and waiting for you. Go!"
In the coming years, I became a medical student.
One of every hundred children born worldwide has some kind of heart disease.
There's a part of this problem I think I can solve -- the part of this problem I have spent my life working on.
The problem starts during pregnancy.
The fetus needs to survive inside the mother.
Survival depends on communication between the systemic and the pulmonary blood.
At the moment of birth, this communication needs to stop.
If it doesn't close, the baby has a hole in the heart.
It is caused by prematurity and genetic conditions.
But what we know today is that a lack of oxygen is also one of the causes.
As you can see in the chart, the frequency of this kind of hole dramatically increases with altitude.
Video: (Baby crying) When you look at patients with this condition, they seem desperate to breathe.
To close the hole, major surgery used to be the only solution.
One night, my friend Malte, were camping in the Amazon region.
The only thing that would not burn in the fire was a green avocado branch.
Then came a moment of inspiration.
So we used the branch as a mold for our first invention.
The holes in children's hearts can be closed with it.
A coil is a piece of wire wrapped onto itself.
It maybe doesn't look so fancy to you now, but that was our first successful attempt to create a device for this major problem.
In this video, we can see how a very tiny catheter takes the coil to the heart.
The coil then closes the hole.
After that moment of inspiration, there came a very long time of effort developing a prototype.
In vitro and in vivo studies took thousands of hours of work in the lab.
The coil, if it works, can save lives.
I returned from Germany to Bolivia, thinking that wherever we go, we have the opportunity to make a difference.
With my wife and partner, Dr. Alexandra Heath, we started to see patients.
After successfully treating patients with our coil, we felt really enthusiastic.
But we live in a place that is 12,000 feet high.
And, the patients there need a special device to solve their heart condition.
The hole in altitude patients is different, because the orifice between the arteries is larger.
Most patients cannot afford to be treated on time, and they die.
The first coil could successfully treat only half of the patients in Bolivia.
The search started again.
We went back to the drawing board.
After many trials, and with the help of my grandmother's indigenous friends in the mountains, we obtained a new device.
For centuries, indigenous women told stories by weaving complex patterns on looms, and an unexpected skill helped us for the new device.
We take this traditional method of weaving and make a design made by a smart material that records shape.
It seems this time, the weaving allows us to create a seamless device that doesn't rust because it's made of only one piece.
It can change by itself into very complex structures by a procedure that took decades to develop.
As you can see, the device enters the body through the natural channels.
Doctors have only to close the catheter through the hole.
Our device expands, places itself and closes the hole.
We have this beautiful delivery system that is so simple to use because it works by itself.
No open surgery was necessary.
(Applause) As doctors, we fight with diseases that take a long time and effort to heal -- if they do.
This is the child from before, after the procedure.
As you can see -- (Applause) As you can see, once the device is in place, the patient is 100 percent healed.
From start to finish, the whole procedure takes only 30 minutes.
That's very rewarding from the medical and human point of view.
We are so proud that some of our former patients are part of our team -- a team, thanks to added close interaction with patients that work with us.
Together, we have only one idea: the best solutions need to be simple.
We lost the fear of creating something new.
The path, it's not easy.
Many obstacles arise all the time.
But we receive strength from our patients.
Their resilience and courage inspire our creativity.
Our goal is to make sure that no child is left behind, not because of cost or access.
So we have to start a foundation with a one-to-one model.
We will give one device for free to make sure that every child is treated.
We are in many countries now, but we need to be everywhere.
This whole thing began with one impossible idea as will continue it, really: No child is left behind.
Muchas gracias.
(Applause)
So when I decided to create an art piece in Manshiyat Naser, the neighborhood of the Cairo garbage collectors in Egypt, I never thought this project would be the most amazing human experience that I would ever live.
As an artist, I had this humanist intention of beautifying a poor and neglected neighborhood by bringing art to it and hopefully shining light on this isolated community.
The first time I heard about this Christian Coptic community was in 2009 when the Egyptian authorities under the regime of Hosni Mubarak decided to slaughter 300,000 pigs using the pretext of H1N1 virus.
Originally, they are pig breeders.
Their pigs and other animals are fed with the organic waste that they collect on a daily basis.
This event killed their livelihood.
The first time I entered Manshiyat Naser, it felt like a maze.
I was looking for the St. Simon Monastery on the top of the Muqattam Mountain.
So you go right, then straight, then right again, then left to reach all the way to the top.
But to reach there, you must dodge between the trucks overpacked with garbage and slalom between the tuk-tuks, the fastest vehicle to move around in the neighborhood.
The smell of the garbage unloaded from those trucks was intense, and the noise of the traffic was loud and overbearing.
Add to it the din created by the crushers in those warehouses along the way.
From outside it looks chaotic, but everything is perfectly organized.
The Zaraeeb, that’s how they call themselves, which means the pig breeders, have been collecting the garbage of Cairo and sorting it in their own neighborhood for decades.
They have developed one of the most efficient and highly profitable systems on a global level.
Still, the place is perceived as dirty, marginalized and segregated because of their association with the trash.
So my initial idea was to create an anamorphic piece, a piece that you can only see from one vantage point.
I wanted to challenge myself artistically by painting over several buildings and having it only fully visible from one point on the Muqattam Mountain.
The Muqattam Mountain is the pride of the community.
This is where they built the St. Simon Monastery, a 10,000-seat cave church that they carved into the mountain itself.
So, the first time I stood on top of the mountain and I looked at the neighborhood, I asked myself, how on earth will I convince all those owners to let me paint on their buildings?
And then Magd came.
Magd is a guide from the Church.
He told me the only person I needed to convince was Father Samaan, who is the leader of the community.
But to convince Father Samaan, I needed to convince Mario, who is a Polish artist who moved to Cairo 20 years ago and who created all the artwork of the Cave Church.
I am really grateful to Mario. He was the key of the project.
He managed to get me a meeting with Father Samaan, and surprisingly, he loved the idea.
He asked me about where I painted before and how I will make it happen.
And he was mainly concerned by what I was going to write.
In every work that I create, I write messages with my style of Arabic calligraphy.
I make sure those messages are relevant to the place where I am painting but have this universal dimension, so anybody around the world can relate to it.
So for Manshiyat Naser, I decided to write in Arabic the words of St. Athanasius of Alexandria, a Coptic bishop from the third century, who said: (Arabic), which means in English, "Anyone who wants to see the sunlight clearly needs to wipe his eyes first."
It was really important for me that the community felt connected to the words.
And for me this quote was perfectly reflecting the spirit of the project.
So Father Samaan blessed the project, and his approval brought all the residents on board.
Hundreds of liters of paint, a dozen blue manual lifts, several trips back and forth to Cairo, a strong and solid team from France, North Africa, Middle East and the US, and after a year of planning and logistics, there we are, my team and some members from the local community creating a piece that will spread over 50 buildings, some filling up the space of the calligraphy that I trace with colors.
Here some blue, there some yellow, there some orange.
Some others carrying some sand bags and putting them on the top of the buildings to hold those manual lifts, and some others assembling and disassembling those same lifts and moving them around the different buildings.
At the beginning of the project, I numbered all those buildings on my sketch, and there was no real interaction with the community.
People didn’t get the point of all this.
But fast enough, those building numbers became family names.
The first building was the house of Uncle Ibrahim.
Uncle Ibrahim is such an enthusiastic person.
He was always singing and making jokes, and his daughters and sons saved me from his bull who wanted to attack me on the fourth floor.
(Laughter) Actually, the bull saw me from the window and came out on the balcony.
(Laughter) Yeah.
Uncle Ibrahim was always hanging out on the balcony and talking to me while I was painting.
I remember him saying that he didn’t go to the mountain for 10 years, and that he never takes a day off.
He said that if he stopped working, who will stop the garbage?
But surprisingly, at the end of the project, he came all the way to the mountain to look at the piece.
He was really proud to see his house painted, and he said that this project was a project of peace and -- sorry -- (Applause) Thank you.
He said that it was a project of peace and unity and that it brought people together.
So his perception towards the project changed, and my perception towards the community changed also, and towards what they do.
All the garbage that everybody is disgusted by is not theirs.
They just work out of it.
Actually, they don’t live in the garbage. They live from the garbage.
So I started doubting myself and wondering what was the real purpose of this whole project?
It was not about beautifying a place by bringing art to it.
It was about switching perception and opening a dialogue on the connection that we have with communities that we don’t know.
So day after day, the calligraphy circle was taking shape, and we were always excited to go back on the mountain to look at the piece.
And standing exactly at this point every day made my realize the symbolism behind this anamorphic piece.
If you want to see the real image of somebody, maybe you should change your angle.
There was doubts and difficulties, like fears and stress.
It wasn't simple to work in such environments, sometimes having pigs under you while you paint or climbing a stack of garbage to reach a lift.
But we all got over the fear of the heights, the swinging lifts, the strength of the smell and also the stress of not finishing on time.
But the kindness of all those people made us forget everything.
The building number 3 was the house of Uncle Bakheet and Aunty Fareeda.
In Egyptian, they have this expression that says, "Ahsen Nas," which means "the best people."
They were the best people.
We used to take our break in front of their houses, and all the kids of the neighborhood used to join us.
I was impressed and amazed by the kids of Manshiyat Naser.
For the first few days, they were always refusing anything we were offering them, even a snack or a drink.
So I asked Aunty Fareeda, "Why is that?"
And she told me they teach their kids to refuse anything from somebody that they don't know because maybe this person needs it more than they do.
So at this exact point I realized actually the Zaraeeb community was the ideal context to raise the topic of perception.
We need to question our level of misconception and judgment we can have as a society upon communities based on their differences.
I remember how we got delayed on Uncle Ibrahim's house when his pigs that are bred on the rooftop were eating the sand bags that hold the lifts.
(Laughter) The house of Uncle Bakheet and Aunty Fareeda was this kind of meeting point.
Everybody used to gather there.
I think this is what Uncle Ibrahim meant when he said that was a project of peace and unity, because I really felt that people were coming together.
Everyone was greeting us with a smile, offering us a drink or inviting us into their own house for lunch.
Sometime, you are at the first level of a building, and somebody opens his window and offers you some tea.
And then the same thing happens on the second floor.
And you keep going all the way to the top.
(Laughter) (Applause) I think I never drink as much tea as I did in Egypt.
(Laughter) And to be honest with you, we could have finished earlier, but I think it took us three weeks because of all those tea breaks.
(Laughter) In Egypt, they have another expression, which is "Nawartouna," which means, "You brought light to us."
In Manshiyat Naser they were always telling us this.
The calligraphy, actually -- I used a white glow-in-the-dark paint for the calligraphy so at the end of the project, we rented some black light projectors and lit up the whole neighborhood, surprising everybody around.
We wanted to tell them that they are the ones who brought light to us.
(Applause) The Zaraeeb community are strong, honest, hard workers, and they know their value.
The people of Cairo call them "the Zabaleen," which means "the people of the garbage," but ironically, the people of Manshiyat Naser call the people of Cairo the Zabaleen.
They say, they are the ones who produce the garbage, not them.
(Laughter) (Applause) The goal was to leave something to this community, but I feel that they are the ones who left something in our lives.
You know, the art project was just a pretext for this amazing human experience.
The art piece at some point will disappear, vanish, and actually there is somebody who is building a second floor in front of Uncle Ibrahim's house, so it's covering part of the painting, so I might need to go back and paint over it.
(Laughter) It was about the experience, about the story, about the moment.
From the streets of the neighborhood, the painting appears in fragments, isolated from one another, standing alone.
But connected with the sign of calligraphy that today reveals the powerful message that we should all think about before we want to judge somebody.
Anyone who wants to see the sunlight clearly needs to wipe his eyes first.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello, everybody.
I brought with me today a baby diaper.
You'll see why in a second.
Baby diapers have interesting properties.
They can swell enormously when you add water to them, an experiment done by millions of kids every day.
(Laughter) But the reason why is that they're designed in a very clever way.
They're made out of a thing called a swellable material.
It's a special kind of material that, when you add water, it will swell up enormously, maybe a thousand times in volume.
And this is a very useful, industrial kind of polymer.
But what we're trying to do in my group at MIT is to figure out if we can do something similar to the brain.
Can we make it bigger, big enough that you can peer inside and see all the tiny building blocks, the biomolecules, how they're organized in three dimensions, the structure, the ground truth structure of the brain, if you will?
If we could get that, maybe we could have a better understanding of how the brain is organized to yield thoughts and emotions and actions and sensations.
Maybe we could try to pinpoint the exact changes in the brain that result in diseases, diseases like Alzheimer's and epilepsy and Parkinson's, for which there are few treatments, much less cures, and for which, very often, we don't know the cause or the origins and what's really causing them to occur.
Now, our group at MIT is trying to take a different point of view from the way neuroscience has been done over the last hundred years.
We're designers. We're inventors.
We're trying to figure out how to build technologies that let us look at and repair the brain.
And the reason is, the brain is incredibly, incredibly complicated.
So what we've learned over the first century of neuroscience is that the brain is a very complicated network, made out of very specialized cells called neurons with very complex geometries, and electrical currents will flow through these complexly shaped neurons.
Furthermore, neurons are connected in networks.
They're connected by little junctions called synapses that exchange chemicals and allow the neurons to talk to each other.
The density of the brain is incredible.
In a cubic millimeter of your brain, there are about 100,000 of these neurons and maybe a billion of those connections.
But it's worse.
So, if you could zoom in to a neuron, and, of course, this is just our artist's rendition of it.
What you would see are thousands and thousands of kinds of biomolecules, little nanoscale machines organized in complex, 3D patterns, and together they mediate those electrical pulses, those chemical exchanges that allow neurons to work together to generate things like thoughts and feelings and so forth.
Now, we don't know how the neurons in the brain are organized to form networks, and we don't know how the biomolecules are organized within neurons to form these complex, organized machines.
If we really want to understand this, we're going to need new technologies.
But if we could get such maps, if we could look at the organization of molecules and neurons and neurons and networks, maybe we could really understand how the brain conducts information from sensory regions, mixes it with emotion and feeling, and generates our decisions and actions.
Maybe we could pinpoint the exact set of molecular changes that occur in a brain disorder.
And once we know how those molecules have changed, whether they've increased in number or changed in pattern, we could use those as targets for new drugs, for new ways of delivering energy into the brain in order to repair the brain computations that are afflicted in patients who suffer from brain disorders.
We've all seen lots of different technologies over the last century to try to confront this.
I think we've all seen brain scans taken using MRI machines.
These, of course, have the great power that they are noninvasive, they can be used on living human subjects.
But also, they're spatially crude.
Each of these blobs that you see, or voxels, as they're called, can contain millions and millions of neurons.
So it's not at the level of resolution where it can pinpoint the molecular changes that occur or the changes in the wiring of these networks that contributes to our ability to be conscious and powerful beings.
At the other extreme, you have microscopes.
Microscopes, of course, will use light to look at little tiny things.
For centuries, they've been used to look at things like bacteria.
For neuroscience, microscopes are actually how neurons were discovered in the first place, about 130 years ago.
But light is fundamentally limited.
You can't see individual molecules with a regular old microscope.
You can't look at these tiny connections.
So if we want to make our ability to see the brain more powerful, to get down to the ground truth structure, we're going to need to have even better technologies.
My group, a couple years ago, started thinking: Why don't we do the opposite?
If it's so darn complicated to zoom in to the brain, why can't we make the brain bigger?
It initially started with two grad students in my group, Fei Chen and Paul Tillberg.
Now many others in my group are helping with this process.
We decided to try to figure out if we could take polymers, like the stuff in the baby diaper, and install it physically within the brain.
If we could do it just right, and you add water, you can potentially blow the brain up to where you could distinguish those tiny biomolecules from each other.
You would see those connections and get maps of the brain.
This could potentially be quite dramatic.
We brought a little demo here.
We got some purified baby diaper material.
It's much easier just to buy it off the Internet than to extract the few grains that actually occur in these diapers.
I'm going to put just one teaspoon here of this purified polymer.
And here we have some water.
What we're going to do is see if this teaspoon of the baby diaper material can increase in size.
You're going to see it increase in volume by about a thousandfold before your very eyes.
I could pour much more of this in there, but I think you've got the idea that this is a very, very interesting molecule, and if can use it in the right way, we might be able to really zoom in on the brain in a way that you can't do with past technologies.
OK. So a little bit of chemistry now.
What's going on in the baby diaper polymer?
If you could zoom in, it might look something like what you see on the screen.
Polymers are chains of atoms arranged in long, thin lines.
The chains are very tiny, about the width of a biomolecule, and these polymers are really dense.
They're separated by distances that are around the size of a biomolecule.
This is very good because we could potentially move everything apart in the brain.
If we add water, what will happen is, this swellable material is going to absorb the water, the polymer chains will move apart from each other, and the entire material is going to become bigger.
And because these chains are so tiny and spaced by biomolecular distances, we could potentially blow up the brain and make it big enough to see.
Here's the mystery, then: How do we actually make these polymer chains inside the brain so we can move all the biomolecules apart?
If we could do that, maybe we could get ground truth maps of the brain.
We could look at the wiring.
We can peer inside and see the molecules within.
To explain this, we made some animations where we actually look at, in these artist renderings, what biomolecules might look like and how we might separate them.
Step one: what we'd have to do, first of all, is attach every biomolecule, shown in brown here, to a little anchor, a little handle.
We need to pull the molecules of the brain apart from each other, and to do that, we need to have a little handle that allows those polymers to bind to them and to exert their force.
Now, if you just take baby diaper polymer and dump it on the brain, obviously, it's going to sit there on top.
So we need to find a way to make the polymers inside.
And this is where we're really lucky.
It turns out, you can get the building blocks, monomers, as they're called, and if you let them go into the brain and then trigger the chemical reactions, you can get them to form those long chains, right there inside the brain tissue.
They're going to wind their way around biomolecules and between biomolecules, forming those complex webs that will allow you, eventually, to pull apart the molecules from each other.
And every time one of those little handles is around, the polymer will bind to the handle, and that's exactly what we need in order to pull the molecules apart from each other.
All right, the moment of truth.
We have to treat this specimen with a chemical to kind of loosen up all the molecules from each other, and then, when we add water, that swellable material is going to start absorbing the water, the polymer chains will move apart, but now, the biomolecules will come along for the ride.
And much like drawing a picture on a balloon, and then you blow up the balloon, the image is the same, but the ink particles have moved away from each other.
And that's what we've been able to do now, but in three dimensions.
There's one last trick.
As you can see here, we've color-coded all the biomolecules brown.
That's because they all kind of look the same.
Biomolecules are made out of the same atoms, but just in different orders.
So we need one last thing in order to make them visible.
We have to bring in little tags, with glowing dyes that will distinguish them.
So one kind of biomolecule might get a blue color.
Another kind of biomolecule might get a red color.
And so forth.
And that's the final step.
Now we can look at something like a brain and look at the individual molecules, because we've moved them far apart enough from each other that we can tell them apart.
So the hope here is that we can make the invisible visible.
We can turn things that might seem small and obscure and blow them up until they're like constellations of information about life.
Here's an actual video of what it might look like.
We have here a little brain in a dish -- a little piece of a brain, actually.
We've infused the polymer in, and now we're adding water.
What you'll see is that, right before your eyes -- this video is sped up about sixtyfold -- this little piece of brain tissue is going to grow.
It can increase by a hundredfold or even more in volume.
And the cool part is, because those polymers are so tiny, we're separating biomolecules evenly from each other.
It's a smooth expansion.
We're not losing the configuration of the information.
We're just making it easier to see.
So now we can take actual brain circuitry -- here's a piece of the brain involved with, for example, memory -- and we can zoom in.
We can start to actually look at how circuits are configured.
Maybe someday we could read out a memory.
Maybe we could actually look at how circuits are configured to process emotions, how the actual wiring of our brain is organized in order to make us who we are.
And of course, we can pinpoint, hopefully, the actual problems in the brain at a molecular level.
What if we could actually look into cells in the brain and figure out, wow, here are the 17 molecules that have altered in this brain tissue that has been undergoing epilepsy or changing in Parkinson's disease or otherwise being altered?
If we get that systematic list of things that are going wrong, those become our therapeutic targets.
We can build drugs that bind those.
We can maybe aim energy at different parts of the brain in order to help people with Parkinson's or epilepsy or other conditions that affect over a billion people around the world.
Now, something interesting has been happening.
It turns out that throughout biomedicine, there are other problems that expansion might help with.
This is an actual biopsy from a human breast cancer patient.
It turns out that if you look at cancers, if you look at the immune system, if you look at aging, if you look at development -- all these processes are involving large-scale biological systems.
But of course, the problems begin with those little nanoscale molecules, the machines that make the cells and the organs in our body tick.
So what we're trying to do now is to figure out if we can actually use this technology to map the building blocks of life in a wide variety of diseases.
Can we actually pinpoint the molecular changes in a tumor so that we can actually go after it in a smart way and deliver drugs that might wipe out exactly the cells that we want to?
You know, a lot of medicine is very high risk.
Sometimes, it's even guesswork.
My hope is we can actually turn what might be a high-risk moon shot into something that's more reliable.
If you think about the original moon shot, where they actually landed on the moon, it was based on solid science.
We understood gravity; we understood aerodynamics.
We knew how to build rockets.
The science risk was under control.
It was still a great, great feat of engineering.
But in medicine, we don't necessarily have all the laws.
Do we have all the laws that are analogous to gravity, that are analogous to aerodynamics?
I would argue that with technologies like the kinds I'm talking about today, maybe we can actually derive those.
We can map the patterns that occur in living systems, and figure out how to overcome the diseases that plague us.
You know, my wife and I have two young kids, and one of my hopes as a bioengineer is to make life better for them than it currently is for us.
And my hope is, if we can turn biology and medicine from these high-risk endeavors that are governed by chance and luck, and make them things that we win by skill and hard work, then that would be a great advance.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Sitting around a campfire, you can feel its heat, smell the woody smoke, and hear it crackle.
If you get too close, it burns your eyes and stings your nostrils.
You could stare at the bright flames forever as they twist and flicker in endless incarnations.
But what exactly are you looking at?
The flames are obviously not solid, nor are they liquid.
Mingling with the air, they’re more like a gas, but more visible--and more fleeting.
And on a scientific level, fire differs from gas because gases can exist in the same state indefinitely while fires always burn out eventually.
One misconception is that fire is a plasma, the fourth state of matter in which atoms are stripped of their electrons.
Like fire and unlike the other kinds of matter, plasmas don’t exist in a stable state on earth.
They only form when gas is exposed to an electric field or superheated to temperatures of thousands or tens of thousands of degrees.
By contrast, fuels like wood and paper burn at a few hundred degrees —far below the threshold of what's usually considered a plasma.
So if fire isn’t a solid, liquid, gas, or a plasma, what does that leave?
It turns out fire isn’t actually matter at all.
Instead, it’s our sensory experience of a chemical reaction called combustion.
In a way, fire is like the leaves changing color in fall, the smell of fruit as it ripens, or a firefly’s blinking light.
All of these are sensory clues that a chemical reaction is taking place.
What differs about fire is that it engages a lot of our senses at the same time, creating the kind of vivid experience we expect to come from a physical thing.
Combustion creates that sensory experience using fuel, heat, and oxygen.
In a campfire, when the logs are heated to their ignition temperature, the walls of their cells decompose, releasing sugars and other molecules into the air.
These molecules then react with airborne oxygen to create carbon dioxide and water.
At the same time, any trapped water in the logs vaporizes, expands, ruptures the wood around it, and escapes with a satisfying crackle.
As the fire heats up, the carbon dioxide and water vapor created by combustion expand.
Now that they’re less dense, they rise in a thinning column.
Gravity causes this expansion and rising, which gives flames their characteristic taper.
Without gravity, molecules don’t separate by density and the flames have a totally different shape.
We can see all of this because combustion also generates light.
Molecules emit light when heated, and the color of the light depends on the temperature of the molecules.
The hottest flames are white or blue.
The type of molecules in a fire can also influence flame color.
For instance, any unreacted carbon atoms from the logs form little clumps of soot that rise into the flames and emit the yellow-orange light we associate with a campfire.
Substances like copper, calcium chloride, and potassium chloride can add their own characteristic hues to the mix.
Besides colorful flames, fire also continues to generate heat as it burns.
This heat sustains the flames by keeping the fuel at or above ignition temperature.
Eventually, though, even the hottest fires run out of fuel or oxygen.
Then, those twisting flames give a final hiss and disappear with a wisp of smoke as if they were never there at all.
Imagine you're walking through a forest.
I'm guessing you're thinking of a collection of trees, what we foresters call a stand, with their rugged stems and their beautiful crowns.
Yes, trees are the foundation of forests, but a forest is much more than what you see, and today I want to change the way you think about forests.
You see, underground there is this other world, a world of infinite biological pathways that connect trees and allow them to communicate and allow the forest to behave as though it's a single organism.
It might remind you of a sort of intelligence.
How do I know this?
Here's my story.
I grew up in the forests of British Columbia.
I used to lay on the forest floor and stare up at the tree crowns.
They were giants.
My grandfather was a giant, too.
He was a horse logger, and he used to selectively cut cedar poles from the inland rainforest.
Grandpa taught me about the quiet and cohesive ways of the woods, and how my family was knit into it.
So I followed in grandpa's footsteps.
He and I had this curiosity about forests, and my first big "aha" moment was at the outhouse by our lake.
Our poor dog Jigs had slipped and fallen into the pit.
So grandpa ran up with his shovel to rescue the poor dog.
He was down there, swimming in the muck.
But as grandpa dug through that forest floor, I became fascinated with the roots, and under that, what I learned later was the white mycelium and under that the red and yellow mineral horizons.
Eventually, grandpa and I rescued the poor dog, but it was at that moment that I realized that that palette of roots and soil was really the foundation of the forest.
And I wanted to know more.
So I studied forestry.
But soon I found myself working alongside the powerful people in charge of the commercial harvest.
The extent of the clear-cutting was alarming, and I soon found myself conflicted by my part in it.
Not only that, the spraying and hacking of the aspens and birches to make way for the more commercially valuable planted pines and firs was astounding.
It seemed that nothing could stop this relentless industrial machine.
So I went back to school, and I studied my other world.
You see, scientists had just discovered in the laboratory in vitro that one pine seedling root could transmit carbon to another pine seedling root.
But this was in the laboratory, and I wondered, could this happen in real forests?
I thought yes.
Trees in real forests might also share information below ground.
But this was really controversial, and some people thought I was crazy, and I had a really hard time getting research funding.
But I persevered, and I eventually conducted some experiments deep in the forest, 25 years ago.
I grew 80 replicates of three species: paper birch, Douglas fir, and western red cedar.
I figured the birch and the fir would be connected in a belowground web, but not the cedar.
It was in its own other world.
And I gathered my apparatus, and I had no money, so I had to do it on the cheap.
So I went to Canadian Tire -- (Laughter) and I bought some plastic bags and duct tape and shade cloth, a timer, a paper suit, a respirator.
And then I borrowed some high-tech stuff from my university: a Geiger counter, a scintillation counter, a mass spectrometer, microscopes.
And then I got some really dangerous stuff: syringes full of radioactive carbon-14 carbon dioxide gas and some high pressure bottles of the stable isotope carbon-13 carbon dioxide gas.
But I was legally permitted.
(Laughter) Oh, and I forgot some stuff, important stuff: the bug spray, the bear spray, the filters for my respirator.
Oh well.
The first day of the experiment, we got out to our plot and a grizzly bear and her cub chased us off.
And I had no bear spray.
But you know, this is how forest research in Canada goes.
(Laughter) So I came back the next day, and mama grizzly and her cub were gone.
So this time, we really got started, and I pulled on my white paper suit, I put on my respirator, and then I put the plastic bags over my trees.
I got my giant syringes, and I injected the bags with my tracer isotope carbon dioxide gases, first the birch.
I injected carbon-14, the radioactive gas, into the bag of birch.
And then for fir, I injected the stable isotope carbon-13 carbon dioxide gas.
I used two isotopes, because I was wondering whether there was two-way communication going on between these species.
I got to the final bag, the 80th replicate, and all of a sudden mama grizzly showed up again.
And she started to chase me, and I had my syringes above my head, and I was swatting the mosquitos, and I jumped into the truck, and I thought, "This is why people do lab studies."
(Laughter) I waited an hour.
I figured it would take this long for the trees to suck up the CO2 through photosynthesis, turn it into sugars, send it down into their roots, and maybe, I hypothesized, shuttle that carbon belowground to their neighbors.
After the hour was up, I rolled down my window, and I checked for mama grizzly.
Oh good, she's over there eating her huckleberries.
So I got out of the truck and I got to work.
I went to my first bag with the birch. I pulled the bag off.
I ran my Geiger counter over its leaves.
Kkhh!
Perfect.
The birch had taken up the radioactive gas.
Then the moment of truth.
I went over to the fir tree.
I pulled off its bag.
I ran the Geiger counter up its needles, and I heard the most beautiful sound.
Kkhh!
It was the sound of birch talking to fir, and birch was saying, "Hey, can I help you?"
And fir was saying, "Yeah, can you send me some of your carbon?
Because somebody threw a shade cloth over me."
I went up to cedar, and I ran the Geiger counter over its leaves, and as I suspected, silence.
Cedar was in its own world.
It was not connected into the web interlinking birch and fir.
I was so excited, I ran from plot to plot and I checked all 80 replicates.
The evidence was clear.
The C-13 and C-14 was showing me that paper birch and Douglas fir were in a lively two-way conversation.
It turns out at that time of the year, in the summer, that birch was sending more carbon to fir than fir was sending back to birch, especially when the fir was shaded.
And then in later experiments, we found the opposite, that fir was sending more carbon to birch than birch was sending to fir, and this was because the fir was still growing while the birch was leafless.
So it turns out the two species were interdependent, like yin and yang.
And at that moment, everything came into focus for me.
I knew I had found something big, something that would change the way we look at how trees interact in forests, from not just competitors but to cooperators.
And I had found solid evidence of this massive belowground communications network, the other world.
Now, I truly hoped and believed that my discovery would change how we practice forestry, from clear-cutting and herbiciding to more holistic and sustainable methods, methods that were less expensive and more practical.
What was I thinking?
I'll come back to that.
So how do we do science in complex systems like forests?
Well, as forest scientists, we have to do our research in the forests, and that's really tough, as I've shown you.
And we have to be really good at running from bears.
But mostly, we have to persevere in spite of all the stuff stacked against us.
And we have to follow our intuition and our experiences and ask really good questions.
And then we've got to gather our data and then go verify.
For me, I've conducted and published hundreds of experiments in the forest.
Some of my oldest experimental plantations are now over 30 years old.
You can check them out.
That's how forest science works.
So now I want to talk about the science.
How were paper birch and Douglas fir communicating?
Well, it turns out they were conversing not only in the language of carbon but also nitrogen and phosphorus and water and defense signals and allele chemicals and hormones -- information.
And you know, I have to tell you, before me, scientists had thought that this belowground mutualistic symbiosis called a mycorrhiza was involved.
Mycorrhiza literally means "fungus root."
You see their reproductive organs when you walk through the forest.
They're the mushrooms.
The mushrooms, though, are just the tip of the iceberg, because coming out of those stems are fungal threads that form a mycelium, and that mycelium infects and colonizes the roots of all the trees and plants.
And where the fungal cells interact with the root cells, there's a trade of carbon for nutrients, and that fungus gets those nutrients by growing through the soil and coating every soil particle.
The web is so dense that there can be hundreds of kilometers of mycelium under a single footstep.
And not only that, that mycelium connects different individuals in the forest, individuals not only of the same species but between species, like birch and fir, and it works kind of like the Internet.
You see, like all networks, mycorrhizal networks have nodes and links.
We made this map by examining the short sequences of DNA of every tree and every fungal individual in a patch of Douglas fir forest.
In this picture, the circles represent the Douglas fir, or the nodes, and the lines represent the interlinking fungal highways, or the links.
The biggest, darkest nodes are the busiest nodes.
We call those hub trees, or more fondly, mother trees, because it turns out that those hub trees nurture their young, the ones growing in the understory.
And if you can see those yellow dots, those are the young seedlings that have established within the network of the old mother trees.
In a single forest, a mother tree can be connected to hundreds of other trees.
And using our isotope tracers, we have found that mother trees will send their excess carbon through the mycorrhizal network to the understory seedlings, and we've associated this with increased seedling survival by four times.
Now, we know we all favor our own children, and I wondered, could Douglas fir recognize its own kin, like mama grizzly and her cub?
So we set about an experiment, and we grew mother trees with kin and stranger's seedlings.
And it turns out they do recognize their kin.
Mother trees colonize their kin with bigger mycorrhizal networks.
They send them more carbon below ground.
They even reduce their own root competition to make elbow room for their kids.
When mother trees are injured or dying, they also send messages of wisdom on to the next generation of seedlings.
So we've used isotope tracing to trace carbon moving from an injured mother tree down her trunk into the mycorrhizal network and into her neighboring seedlings, not only carbon but also defense signals.
And these two compounds have increased the resistance of those seedlings to future stresses.
So trees talk.
(Applause) Thank you.
Through back and forth conversations, they increase the resilience of the whole community.
It probably reminds you of our own social communities, and our families, well, at least some families.
(Laughter) So let's come back to the initial point.
Forests aren't simply collections of trees, they're complex systems with hubs and networks that overlap and connect trees and allow them to communicate, and they provide avenues for feedbacks and adaptation, and this makes the forest resilient.
That's because there are many hub trees and many overlapping networks.
But they're also vulnerable, vulnerable not only to natural disturbances like bark beetles that preferentially attack big old trees but high-grade logging and clear-cut logging.
You see, you can take out one or two hub trees, but there comes a tipping point, because hub trees are not unlike rivets in an airplane.
You can take out one or two and the plane still flies, but you take out one too many, or maybe that one holding on the wings, and the whole system collapses.
So now how are you thinking about forests? Differently?
(Audience) Yes.
Cool.
I'm glad.
So, remember I said earlier that I hoped that my research, my discoveries would change the way we practice forestry.
Well, I want to take a check on that 30 years later here in western Canada.
This is about 100 kilometers to the west of us, just on the border of Banff National Park.
That's a lot of clear-cuts.
It's not so pristine.
In 2014, the World Resources Institute reported that Canada in the past decade has had the highest forest disturbance rate of any country worldwide, and I bet you thought it was Brazil.
In Canada, it's 3.6 percent per year.
Now, by my estimation, that's about four times the rate that is sustainable.
Now, massive disturbance at this scale is known to affect hydrological cycles, degrade wildlife habitat, and emit greenhouse gases back into the atmosphere, which creates more disturbance and more tree diebacks.
Not only that, we're continuing to plant one or two species and weed out the aspens and birches.
These simplified forests lack complexity, and they're really vulnerable to infections and bugs.
And as climate changes, this is creating a perfect storm for extreme events, like the massive mountain pine beetle outbreak that just swept across North America, or that megafire in the last couple months in Alberta.
So I want to come back to my final question: instead of weakening our forests, how can we reinforce them and help them deal with climate change?
Well, you know, the great thing about forests as complex systems is they have enormous capacity to self-heal.
In our recent experiments, we found with patch-cutting and retention of hub trees and regeneration to a diversity of species and genes and genotypes that these mycorrhizal networks, they recover really rapidly.
So with this in mind, I want to leave you with four simple solutions.
And we can't kid ourselves that these are too complicated to act on.
First, we all need to get out in the forest.
We need to reestablish local involvement in our own forests.
You see, most of our forests now are managed using a one-size-fits-all approach, but good forest stewardship requires knowledge of local conditions.
Second, we need to save our old-growth forests.
These are the repositories of genes and mother trees and mycorrhizal networks.
So this means less cutting.
I don't mean no cutting, but less cutting.
And third, when we do cut, we need to save the legacies, the mother trees and networks, and the wood, the genes, so they can pass their wisdom onto the next generation of trees so they can withstand the future stresses coming down the road.
We need to be conservationists.
And finally, fourthly and finally, we need to regenerate our forests with a diversity of species and genotypes and structures by planting and allowing natural regeneration.
We have to give Mother Nature the tools she needs to use her intelligence to self-heal.
And we need to remember that forests aren't just a bunch of trees competing with each other, they're supercooperators.
So back to Jigs.
Jigs's fall into the outhouse showed me this other world, and it changed my view of forests.
I hope today to have changed how you think about forests.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Whenever I get to travel for work, I try to find out where my drinking water comes from, and where my poop and pee go.
(Laughter) This has earned me the nickname "The Poo Princess" in my family, and it's ruined many family vacations, because this is not normal.
But thinking about where it all goes is the first step in activating what are actually superpowers in our poop and pee.
(Laughter) Yeah.
And if we use them well, we can live healthier and more beautifully.
Check out this landscape in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Just notice what kinds of words and feelings come to mind.
This landscape was watered with treated sewage water.
Does that change anything for you?
I imagine it might.
And that's OK.
How we feel about this is going to determine exactly how innovative we can be.
And I want to explain how it works, but what words do I use?
I mean, I can use profane words like "shit" and "piss," and then my grandma won't watch the video.
Or I can use childish words like "poo" and "pee." Eh.
Or I can use scientific words like "excrement" and "feces." Humph.
I'll use a mix.
(Laughter) It's all I got. (Laughs) So, in this suburb, the poo and the pee and the wash water are going to this treatment plant right in the middle of the community.
It looks more like a park than a treatment plant.
The poo at the very bottom of all those layers of gravel -- not touching anyone -- is providing solid food for those marsh plants.
And the clean, clear water that comes out the other end is traveling underground to water each person's yard.
So even though they're in a desert, they get their own personal oasis.
This approach is called Integrated Water Management, or holistic or closed-loop.
Whatever you want to call it, it's in conflict with the status quo of how we think about sanitation, which is contain, treat, push it away.
But in this approach, we're doing one step better.
We're designing for reuse from the very beginning, because everything does get reused, only now we're planning for it.
And often, that makes for really beautiful spaces.
But the most important thing about this system isn't the technicals of how it works.
It's how you feel about it.
Do you want this in your yard?
Why not?
I got really curious about this question.
Why don't we see more innovation in sanitation?
Why isn't that kind of thing the new normal?
And I care so much about this question, that I work for a nonprofit called Recode.
We want to accelerate adoption of sustainable building and development practices.
We want more innovation.
But a lot of times, whole categories of innovation -- ones that can help us live more beautifully -- turn out to be illegal.
Today's regulations and codes were written under the assumption that best practices would remain best practices, with incremental updates forever and ever.
But innovation isn't always incremental.
It turns out, how we feel about any particular new technique gets into everything we do: how we talk about it, how we encourage people to study, our jokes, our codes ...
And it ultimately determines how innovative we can be.
So, that's the first reason we don't innovate in sanitation.
We're kind of uncomfortable talking about sanitation, that's why I've gotten called "The Poo Princess" so much.
The second reason is: we think the problem is solved here in the US.
But not so.
Here in the US we still get sick from drinking shit in our sewage water.
Seven million people get sick every year, 900 die annually.
And we're not taking a holistic approach to making it better.
So we're not solving it.
Where I live in Portland, Oregon, I can't take Echo for a swim during the rainy season, because we dump raw sewage sometimes into our river.
Our rainwater and our sewage go to the same treatment plant.
Too much rain overflows into the river.
And Portland is not alone here.
Forty percent of municipalities self-report dumping raw or partially treated sewage into our waterways.
The other bummer going on here with our status quo is that half of all of your poop and pee is going to fertilize farmland.
The other half is being incinerated or land-filled.
And that's a bummer to me, because there are amazing nutrients in your daily doody.
It is comparable to pig manure; we're omnivores, they're omnivores.
Think of your poo and pee as a health smoothie for a tree.
(Laughter) The other bummer going on here is that we're quickly moving all the drugs we take into our waterways.
The average wastewater treatment plant can remove maybe half of the drugs that come in.
The other half goes right out the other side.
Consider what a cocktail of pharmaceuticals -- hormones, steroids, Vicodin -- does to a fish, to a dog, to a child.
But this isn't just some problem that we need to contain.
If we flip this around, we can create a resource that can solve so many of our other problems.
And I want to get you comfortable with this idea, so imagine the things I'm going to show you, these technologies, and this attitude that says, "We're going to reuse this.
Let's design to make it beautiful" -- as advanced potty training.
(Laughter) I think you're ready for it.
I think we as a culture are ready for advanced potty training.
And there are three great reasons to enroll today.
Number one: we can fertilize our food.
Each one of us is pooping and peeing something that could fertilize half or maybe all of our food, depending on our diet.
That dark brown poo in the toilet is dark brown because of what?
Dead stuff, bacteria.
That's carbon.
And carbon, if we're getting that into the soil, is going to bind to the other minerals and nutrients in there.
Boom! Healthier food.
Voilà! Healthier people.
Chemical fertilizers by definition don't have carbon in them.
Imagine if we could move our animal manure and our human manure to our soil, we might not need to rely on fossil fuel-based fertilizers, mine minerals from far away.
Imagine how much energy we could save.
Now, some of us are concerned about industrial pollutants contaminating this reuse cycle.
That can be addressed.
But we need to separate our discomfort about talking about poo and pee so we can calmly talk about how we want to reuse it and what things we don't want to reuse.
And get this: if we change our approach to sanitation, we can start to slow down climate change.
Remember that carbon in the poop?
If we can get that into our soil bank, it's going to start to absorb carbon dioxide that we put into the air.
And that could help slow down global warming.
I want to show you some brave souls who've had the courage to embrace this advanced potty training approach.
So those folks in New Mexico -- why did they do it?
'Cause they're in a desert? 'Cause they save money? Yeah.
But more importantly, they felt comfortable seeing what was going down the toilet as a resource.
Here's an average house in Portland, Oregon.
This house is special because they have a composting toilet turning all their poo and pee, over time, into a soil amendment.
Their wash water, their shower water, is going underground to a series of mulch basins, and then watering that orchard downhill.
When they went to get this permitted, it wasn't allowed in Oregon.
But it was allowed in five other states nearby.
That was Recode's -- my organization's -- first code-change campaign.
Here's a great example where the Integrated Water Management approach was the cheapest.
This is three high-rise residential buildings in downtown Portland, and they're not flushing to the sewer system.
How?
Well, their wash water is getting reused to flush toilets, cool mechanical systems, water the landscape.
And then once the building has thoroughly used everything -- aka, shat in it -- it's treated to highest standard right on-site by plants and bacteria, and then infiltrated into the groundwater right below.
And all that was cheaper than updating the surrounding sewer infrastructure.
So that's the last reason we should get really excited about doing things differently: we can save a lot of money.
This was the first permit of its kind in Oregon.
Brave and open-minded people sat down and felt comfortable saying, "Yeah, that shit makes sense."
(Laughter) "Let's do it."
(Applause) You know?
I keep showing examples where everyone's reusing everything on-site.
Why?
Well, when we look at our aging infrastructure -- and it is old -- and we look at the cost of updating it, three-quarters of that cost is just the pipes snaking through our city.
So as we build anew, as we renovate, it might make more sense to treat and reuse everything on-site.
San Francisco realized that it made sense to invest in rebates for every household to reuse their wash water and their rainwater to water the backyard, because the amount of water they would save as a community would be so big.
But why were all these projects so innovative?
The money piece, yeah.
But more importantly, they felt comfortable with this idea of advanced potty training.
Imagine if we embraced innovation for sanitation the way we have for, say, solar power.
Think about it -- solar power used to be uncommon and unaffordable.
Now it's more a part of our web of power than ever before.
And it's creating resiliency.
We now have sources of power like the sun that don't vary with our earthly dramas.
What's driving all that innovation?
It's us.
We're talking about energy.
It's cool to talk about energy.
Some folks are even talking about the problems with the limited resources where our current energy is coming from.
We encourage our best and brightest to work on this issue -- better solar panels, better batteries, everything.
So let's talk about where our drinking water is coming from, where our poo and pee are actually going.
If we can get over this discomfort with this entire topic, we could create something that creates our future goldmine.
Every time you flush the toilet, I want you to think, "Where is my poop and pee going?
Will they be gainfully employed?"
(Laughter) "Or are they going to be wreaking havoc in some waterway?"
If you don't know, find out.
And if you don't like the answer, figure out how you can communicate to those who can drive this change that you have advanced potty training, that you are ready for reuse.
How all of you feel is going to determine exactly how innovative we can be.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Who do you want to be?
It's a simple question, and whether you know it or not, you're answering it every day through your actions.
This one question will define your professional success more than any other, because how you show up and treat people means everything.
Either you lift people up by respecting them, making them feel valued, appreciated and heard, or you hold people down by making them feel small, insulted, disregarded or excluded.
And who you choose to be means everything.
I study the effects of incivility on people.
What is incivility?
It's disrespect or rudeness.
It includes a lot of different behaviors, from mocking or belittling someone to teasing people in ways that sting to telling offensive jokes to texting in meetings.
And what's uncivil to one person may be absolutely fine to another.
Take texting while someone's speaking to you.
Some of us may find it rude, others may think it's absolutely civil.
So it really depends.
It's all in the eyes of the beholder and whether that person felt disrespected.
We may not mean to make someone feel that way, but when we do, it has consequences.
Over 22 years ago, I vividly recall walking into this stuffy hospital room.
It was heartbreaking to see my dad, this strong, athletic, energetic guy, lying in the bed with electrodes strapped to his bare chest.
What put him there was work-related stress.
For over a decade, he suffered an uncivil boss.
And for me, I thought he was just an outlier at that time.
But just a couple years later, I witnessed and experienced a lot of incivility in my first job out of college.
I spent a year going to work every day and hearing things from coworkers like, "Are you an idiot? That's not how it's done," and, "If I wanted your opinion, I'd ask."
So I did the natural thing.
I quit, and I went back to grad school to study the effects of this.
There, I met Christine Pearson.
And she had a theory that small, uncivil actions can lead to much bigger problems like aggression and violence.
We believed that incivility affected performance and the bottom line.
So we launched a study, and what we found was eye-opening.
We sent a survey to business school alumni working in all different organizations.
We asked them to write a few sentences about one experience where they were treated rudely, disrespectfully or insensitively, and to answer questions about how they reacted.
One person told us about a boss that made insulting statements like, "That's kindergartner's work," and another tore up someone's work in front of the entire team.
And what we found is that incivility made people less motivated: 66 percent cut back work efforts, 80 percent lost time worrying about what happened, and 12 percent left their job.
And after we published these results, two things happened.
One, we got calls from organizations.
Cisco read about these numbers, took just a few of these and estimated, conservatively, that incivility was costing them 12 million dollars a year.
The second thing that happened was, we heard from others in our academic field who said, "Well, people are reporting this, but how can you really show it?
Does people's performance really suffer?"
I was curious about that, too.
With Amir Erez, I compared those that experienced incivility to those that didn't experience incivility.
And what we found is that those that experience incivility do actually function much worse.
"OK," you may say. "This makes sense.
After all, it's natural that their performance suffers."
But what about if you're not the one who experiences it?
What if you just see or hear it?
You're a witness.
We wondered if it affected witnesses, too.
So we conducted studies where five participants would witness an experimenter act rudely to someone who arrived late to the study.
The experimenter said, "What is it with you?
Look at you! How do you expect to hold a job in the real world?"
And in another study in a small group, we tested the effects of a peer insulting a group member.
Now, what we found was really interesting, because witnesses' performance decreased, too -- and not just marginally, quite significantly.
Incivility is a bug.
It's contagious, and we become carriers of it just by being around it.
And this isn't confined to the workplace.
We can catch this virus anywhere -- at home, online, in schools and in our communities.
It affects our emotions, our motivation, our performance and how we treat others.
It even affects our attention and can take some of our brainpower.
And this happens not only if we experience incivility or we witness it.
It can happen even if we just see or read rude words.
Let me give you an example of what I mean.
To test this, we gave people combinations of words to use to make a sentence.
But we were very sneaky.
Half the participants got a list with 15 words used to trigger rudeness: impolitely, interrupt, obnoxious, bother.
Half the participants received a list of words with none of these rude triggers.
And what we found was really surprising, because the people who got the rude words were five times more likely to miss information right in front of them on the computer screen.
And as we continued this research, what we found is that those that read the rude words took longer to make decisions, to record their decisions, and they made significantly more errors.
This can be a big deal, especially when it comes to life-and-death situations.
Steve, a physician, told me about a doctor that he worked with who was never very respectful, especially to junior staff and nurses.
But Steve told me about this one particular interaction where this doctor shouted at a medical team.
Right after the interaction, the team gave the wrong dosage of medication to their patient.
Steve said the information was right there on the chart, but somehow everyone on the team missed it.
He said they lacked the attention or awareness to take it into account.
Simple mistake, right?
Well, that patient died.
Researchers in Israel have actually shown that medical teams exposed to rudeness perform worse not only in all their diagnostics, but in all the procedures they did.
This was mainly because the teams exposed to rudeness didn't share information as readily, and they stopped seeking help from their teammates.
And I see this not only in medicine but in all industries.
So if incivility has such a huge cost, why do we still see so much of it?
I was curious, so we surveyed people about this, too.
The number one reason is stress.
People feel overwhelmed.
The other reason that people are not more civil is because they're skeptical and even concerned about being civil or appearing nice.
They believe they'll appear less leader-like.
They wonder: Do nice guys finish last?
Or in other words: Do jerks get ahead?
(Laughter) It's easy to think so, especially when we see a few prominent examples that dominate the conversation.
Well, it turns out, in the long run, they don't.
There's really rich research on this by Morgan McCall and Michael Lombardo when they were at the Center for Creative Leadership.
They found that the number one reason tied to executive failure was an insensitive, abrasive or bullying style.
There will always be some outliers that succeed despite their incivility.
Sooner or later, though, most uncivil people sabotage their success.
For example, with uncivil executives, it comes back to hurt them when they're in a place of weakness or they need something.
People won't have their backs.
But what about nice guys?
Does civility pay?
Yes, it does.
And being civil doesn't just mean that you're not a jerk.
Not holding someone down isn't the same as lifting them up.
Being truly civil means doing the small things, like smiling and saying hello in the hallway, listening fully when someone's speaking to you.
Now, you can have strong opinions, disagree, have conflict or give negative feedback civilly, with respect.
Some people call it "radical candor," where you care personally, but you challenge directly.
So yes, civility pays.
In a biotechnology firm, colleagues and I found that those that were seen as civil were twice as likely to be viewed as leaders, and they performed significantly better.
Why does civility pay?
Because people see you as an important -- and a powerful -- unique combination of two key characteristics: warm and competent, friendly and smart.
In other words, being civil isn't just about motivating others.
It's about you.
If you're civil, you're more likely to be seen as a leader.
You'll perform better, and you're seen as warm and competent.
But there's an even bigger story about how civility pays, and it ties to one of the most important questions around leadership: What do people want most from their leaders?
We took data from over 20,000 employees around the world, and we found the answer was simple: respect.
Being treated with respect was more important than recognition and appreciation, useful feedback, even opportunities for learning.
Those that felt respected were healthier, more focused, more likely to stay with their organization and far more engaged.
So where do you start?
How can you lift people up and make people feel respected?
Well, the nice thing is, it doesn't require a huge shift.
Small things can make a big difference.
I found that thanking people, sharing credit, listening attentively, humbly asking questions, acknowledging others and smiling has an impact.
Patrick Quinlan, former CEO of Ochsner Health [System], told me about the effects of their 10-5 way, where if you're within 10 feet of someone, you make eye contact and smile, and if you're within five feet, you say hello.
He explained that civility spread, patient satisfaction scores rose, as did patient referrals.
Civility and respect can be used to boost an organization's performance.
When my friend Doug Conant took over as CEO of Campbell's Soup Company in 2001, the company's market share had just dropped in half.
Sales were declining, lots of people had just been laid off.
A Gallup manager said it was the least engaged organization that they had surveyed.
And as Doug drove up to work his first day, he noticed that the headquarters was surrounded by barbwire fence.
There were guard towers in the parking lot.
He said it looked like a minimum security prison.
It felt toxic.
Within five years, Doug had turned things around.
And within nine years, they were setting all-time performance records and racking up awards, including best place to work.
How did he do it?
On day one, Doug told employees that he was going to have high standards for performance, but they were going to do it with civility.
He walked the talk, and he expected his leaders to.
For Doug, it all came down to being tough-minded on standards and tenderhearted with people.
For him, he said it was all about these touch points, or these daily interactions he had with employees, whether in the hallway, in the cafeteria or in meetings.
And if he handled each touch point well, he'd make employees feel valued.
Another way that Doug made employees feel valued and showed them that he was paying attention is that he handwrote over 30,000 thank-you notes to employees.
And this set an example for other leaders.
Leaders have about 400 of these touch points a day.
Most don't take long, less than two minutes each.
The key is to be agile and mindful in each of these moments.
Civility lifts people.
We'll get people to give more and function at their best if we're civil.
Incivility chips away at people and their performance.
It robs people of their potential, even if they're just working around it.
What I know from my research is that when we have more civil environments, we're more productive, creative, helpful, happy and healthy.
We can do better.
Each one of us can be more mindful and can take actions to lift others up around us, at work, at home, online, in schools and in our communities.
In every interaction, think: Who do you want to be?
Let's put an end to incivility bug and start spreading civility.
After all, it pays.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The narrative of a rising Africa is being challenged.
About 10 years ago, I spoke about an Africa, an Africa of hope and opportunity, an Africa of entrepreneurs, an Africa very different from the Africa that you normally hear about of death, poverty and disease.
And that what I spoke about, became part of what is known now as the narrative of the rising Africa.
I want to tell you two stories about this rising Africa.
The first has to do with Rwanda, a country that has gone through many trials and tribulations.
And Rwanda has decided to become the technology hub, or a technology hub on the continent.
It's a country with mountainous and hilly terrain, a little bit like here, so it's very difficult to deliver services to people.
So what has Rwanda said?
In order to save lives, it's going to try using drones to deliver lifesaving drugs, vaccines and blood to people in hard-to-reach places in partnership with a company called Zipline, with UPS, and also with the Gavi, a global vaccine alliance.
In doing this, it will save lives.
This is part of the type of innovation we want to see in the rising Africa.
The second story has to do with something that I'm sure most of you have seen or will remember.
Very often, countries in Africa suffer drought and floods, and it's getting more frequent because of climate change effects.
When this happens, they normally wait for international appeals to raise money.
You see pictures of children with flies on their faces, carcasses of dead animals and so on.
Now these countries, 32 countries, came together under the auspices of the African Union and decided to form an organization called the African Risk Capacity.
What does it do?
It's a weather-based insurance agency, and what these countries do is to pay insurance each year, about 3 million dollars a year of their own resources, so that in the event they have a difficult drought situation or flood, this money will be paid out to them, which they can then use to take care of their populations, instead of waiting for aid to come.
The African Risk Capacity last year paid 26 million dollars to Mauritania, Senegal and Niger.
This enabled them to take care of 1.3 million people affected by drought.
They were able to restore livelihoods, buy fodder for cattle, feed children in school and in short keep the populations home instead of migrating out of the area.
So these are the kinds of stories of an Africa ready to take responsibility for itself, and to look for solutions for its own problems.
But that narrative is being challenged now because the continent has not been doing well in the last two years.
It had been growing at five percent per annum for the last one and a half decades, but this year's forecast was three percent. Why?
In an uncertain global environment, commodity prices have fallen.
Many of the economies are still commodity driven, and therefore their performance has slipped.
And now the issue of Brexit doesn't make it any easier.
I never knew that the Brexit could happen and that it could be one of the things that would cause global uncertainty such as we have.
So now we've got this situation, and I think it's time to take stock and to say what were the things that the African countries did right?
What did they do wrong?
How do we build on all of this and learn lessons so that we can keep Africa rising?
So let me talk about six things that I think we did right.
The first is managing our economies better.
The '80s and '90s were the lost decades, when Africa was not doing well, and some of you will remember an "Economist" cover that said, "The Lost Continent."
But in the 2000s, policymakers learned that they needed to manage the macroeconomic environment better, to ensure stability, keep inflation low in single digits, keep their fiscal deficits low, below three percent of GDP, give investors, both domestic and foreign, some stability so they'll have confidence to invest in these economies.
So that was number one.
Two, debt.
In 1994, the debt-to-GDP ratio of African countries was 130 percent, and they didn't have fiscal space.
They couldn't use their resources to invest in their development because they were paying debt.
There may be some of you in this room who worked to support African countries to get debt relief.
So private creditors, multilaterals and bilaterals came together and decided to do the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and give debt relief.
So this debt relief in 2005 made the debt-to-GDP ratio fall down to about 30 percent, and there was enough resources to try and reinvest.
The third thing was loss-making enterprises.
Governments were involved in business which they had no business being in.
And they were running businesses, they were making losses.
So some of these enterprises were restructured, commercialized, privatized or closed, and they became less of a burden on government.
The fourth thing was a very interesting thing.
The telecoms revolution came, and African countries jumped on it.
In 2000, we had 11 million phone lines.
Today, we have about 687 million mobile lines on the continent.
And this has enabled us to go, move forward with some mobile technology where Africa is actually leading.
In Kenya, the development of mobile money -- M-Pesa, which all of you have heard about -- it took some time for the world to notice that Africa was ahead in this particular technology.
And this mobile money is also providing a platform for access to alternative energy.
You know, people who can now pay for solar the same way they pay for cards for their telephone.
So this was a very good development, something that went right.
We also invested more in education and health, not enough, but there were some improvements.
250 million children were immunized in the last one and a half decades.
The other thing was that conflicts decreased.
There were many conflicts on the continent.
Many of you are aware of that.
But they came down, and our leaders even managed to dampen some coups.
New types of conflicts have emerged, and I'll refer to those later.
So based on all this, there's also some differentiation on the continent that I want you to know about, because even as the doom and gloom is here, there are some countries -- Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Ethiopia, Tanzania and Senegal are performing relatively well at the moment.
But what did we do wrong?
Let me mention eight things.
You have to have more things wrong than right.
(Laughter) So there are eight things we did wrong.
The first was that even though we grew, we didn't create enough jobs.
We didn't create jobs for our youth.
Youth unemployment on the continent is about 15 percent, and underemployment is a serious problem.
The second thing that we did is that the quality of growth was not good enough.
Even those jobs we created were low-productivity jobs, so we moved people from low-productivity agriculture to low-productivity commerce and working in the informal sector in the urban areas.
The third thing is that inequality increased.
So we created more billionaires.
50 billionaires worth 96 billion dollars own more wealth than the bottom 75 million people on the continent.
Poverty, the proportion of people in poverty -- that's the fourth thing -- did decrease, but the absolute numbers did not because of population growth.
And population growth is something that we don't have enough of a dialogue about on the continent.
And I think we will need to get a handle on it, particularly how we educate girls.
That is the road to really working on this particular issue.
The fifth thing is that we didn't invest enough in infrastructure.
We had investment from the Chinese.
That helped some countries, but it's not enough.
The consumption of electricity in Africa on the continent in Sub-Saharan Africa is equivalent to Spain.
The total consumption is equivalent to that of Spain.
So many people are living in the dark, and as the President of the African Development Bank said recently, Africa cannot develop in the dark.
The other thing we have not done is that our economies retain the same structure that we've had for decades.
So even though we've been growing, the structure of the economies has not changed very much.
We are still exporting commodities, and exporting commodities is what? It's exporting jobs.
Our manufacturing value-added is only 11 percent.
We are not creating enough decent manufacturing jobs for our youth, and trade among ourselves is low.
Only about 12 percent of our trade is among ourselves.
So that's another serious problem.
Then governance.
Governance is a serious issue.
We have weak institutions, and sometimes nonexistent institutions, and I think this gives way for corruption.
Corruption is an issue that we have not yet gotten a good enough handle on, and we have to fight tooth and nail, that and increased transparency in the way we manage our economies and the way we manage our finances.
We also need to be wary of new conflicts, new types of conflicts, such as we have with Boko Haram in my country, Nigeria, and with Al-Shabaab in Kenya.
We need to partner with international partners, developed countries, to fight this together.
Otherwise, we create a new reality which is not the type we want for a rising Africa.
And finally, the issue of education.
Our education systems in many countries are broken.
We are not creating the types of skills needed for the future.
So we have to find a way to educate better.
So those are the things that we are not doing right.
Now, where do we go from there?
I believe that the way forward is to learn to manage success.
Very often, when people succeed or countries succeed, they forget what made them succeed.
Learning what you're successful at, managing it and keeping it is vital for us.
So all those things I said we did right, we have to learn to do it right again, keep doing it right.
Managing the economy while creating stability is vital, getting prices right, and policy consistency.
Very often, we are not consistent.
One regime goes out, another comes in and they throw away even the functioning policies that were there before.
What does this do?
It creates uncertainty for people, for households, uncertainties for business.
They don't know whether and how to invest.
Debt: we must manage the success we had in reducing our debt, but now countries are back to borrowing again, and we see our debt-to-GDP ratio beginning to creep up, and in certain countries, debt is becoming a problem, so we have to avoid that.
So managing success.
The next thing is focusing with a laser beam on those things we did not do well.
First and foremost is infrastructure.
Yes, most countries now recognize they have to invest in this, and they are trying to do the best they can to do that.
We must.
The most important thing is power.
You cannot develop in the dark.
And then governance and corruption: we have to fight.
We have to make our countries transparent.
And above all, we have to engage our young people.
We have genius in our young people.
I see it every day.
It's what makes me wake up in the morning and feel ready to go.
We have to unleash the genius of our young people, get out of their way, support them to create and innovate and lead the way.
And I know that they will lead us in the right direction.
And our women, and our girls: we have to recognize that girls and women are a gift.
They have strength, and we have to unleash that strength so that they can contribute to the continent.
I strongly believe that when we do all of these things, we find that the rising Africa narrative is not a fluke.
It's a trend, and if we continue, if we unleash our youth, if we unleash our women, we may step backwards sometimes, we may even step sideways, but the trend is clear.
Africa will continue to rise.
And I tell you businesspeople in the audience, investment in Africa is not for today, is not for tomorrow, it's not a short-term thing, it's a longer term thing.
But if you are not invested in Africa, then you will be missing one of the most important emerging opportunities in the world.
Thank you.
(Applause) Kelly Stoetzel: So you mentioned corruption in your talk, and you're known, well-known as a strong anticorruption fighter.
But that's had consequences.
People have fought back, and your mother was kidnapped.
How have you been handling this?
Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala: It's been very difficult.
Thank you for mentioning the issue of the kidnap of my mother.
It's a very difficult subject.
But what it means is that when you fight corruption, when you touch the pockets of people who are stealing money, they don't just keep quiet.
They fight back, and the issue for you is when they try to intimidate you, do you give up, or do you fight on?
Do you find a way to stay on and fight back?
And the answer that I had with the teams I worked with is we have to fight on.
We have to create those institutions.
We have to find ways to stop these people from taking away the heritage of the future.
And so that's what we did.
And even out of government, we continued to make that point.
In our countries, nobody, nobody is going to fight corruption for us but us.
And therefore, that comes with consequences, and we just have to do the best we can.
But I thank you and thank TED for giving us a voice to say to those people, you will not win, and we will not be intimidated.
Thank you.
(Applause) Kelly Stoetzel: Thank you so much for your great talk and important work.
(Applause)
It was my third day on the job at a hot Silicon Valley start-up in early 2013.
I was twice the age of the dozen engineers in the room.
I'd been brought in to the company because I was a seasoned expert in my field, but in this particular room, I felt like a newbie amongst the tech geniuses.
I was listening to them talk and thinking that the best thing I could do was be invisible.
And then suddenly, the 25-year-old wizard leading the meeting stared at me and asked, "If you shipped a feature and no one used it, did it really ship?"
(Laughter) "Ship a feature"?
In that moment, Chip knew he was in deep ship.
(Laughter) I had no idea what he was talking about.
I just sat there awkwardly, and mercifully, he moved on to someone else.
I slid down in my chair, and I couldn't wait for that meeting to end.
That was my introduction to Airbnb.
I was asked and invited by the three millennial cofounders to join their company to help them take their fast-growing tech start-up and turn it into a global hospitality brand, as well as to be the in-house mentor for CEO Brian Chesky.
Now, I'd spent from age 26 to 52 being a boutique hotel entrepreneur, and so I guess I'd learned a few things along the way and accumulated some hospitality knowledge.
But after my first week, I realized that the brave new home-sharing world didn't need much of my old-school bricks-and-mortar hotel insights.
A stark reality rocked me: What do I have to offer?
I'd never been in a tech company before.
Five and a half years ago, I had never heard of the "sharing economy," nor did I have an Uber or Lyft app on my phone.
This was not my natural habitat.
So, I decided at that moment that I could either run for the hills, or cast judgment on these young geniuses, or instead, turn the judgment into curiosity and actually see if I could match my wise eyes with their fresh eyes.
I fancied myself a modern Margaret Mead amongst the millennials, and I quickly learned that I had as much to offer them as they did to me.
The more I've seen and learned about our respective generations, the more I realize that we often don't trust each other enough to actually share our respective wisdom.
We may share a border, but we don't necessarily trust each other enough to share that respective wisdom.
I believe, looking at the modern workplace, that the trade agreement of our time is opening up these intergenerational pipelines of wisdom so that we can all learn from each other.
Almost 40 percent of us in the United States have a boss that's younger than us, and that number is growing quickly.
Power is cascading to the young like never before because of our increasing reliance on DQ: digital intelligence.
We're seeing young founders of companies in their early 20s scale them up to global giants by the time they get to 30, and yet, we expect these young digital leaders to somehow miraculously embody the relationship wisdoms we older workers have had decades to learn.
It's hard to microwave your emotional intelligence.
There's ample evidence that gender- and ethnically diverse companies are more effective.
But what about age?
This is a very important question, because for the first time ever, we have five generations in the workplace at the same time, unintentionally.
Maybe it's time we got a little more intentional about how we work collectively.
There have been a number of European studies that have shown that age-diverse teams are more effective and successful.
So why is that only eight percent of the companies that have a diversity and inclusion program have actually expanded that strategy to include age as just as important of a demographic as gender or race?
Maybe they didn't get the memo: the world is getting older!
One of the paradoxes of our time is that baby boomers are more vibrant and healthy longer into life, we're actually working later into life, and yet we're feeling less and less relevant.
Some of us feel like a carton of milk -- an old carton of milk -- with an expiration date stamped on our wrinkled foreheads.
For many of us in midlife, this isn't just a feeling, it is a harsh reality, when we suddenly lose our job and the phone stops ringing.
For many of us, justifiably, we worry that people see our experience as a liability, not an asset.
You've heard of the old phrase -- or maybe the relatively new phrase -- "Sixty is the new forty, physically."
Right?
When it comes to power in the workplace today, 30 is the new 50.
All right, well, this is all pretty exciting, right?
(Laughter) Truthfully, power is moving 10 years younger.
We're all going to live 10 years longer.
Do the math.
Society has created a new 20-year irrelevancy gap.
Midlife used to be 45 to 65, but I would suggest it now stretches into a midlife marathon 40 years long, from 35 to 75.
But wait -- there is a bright spot.
Why is it that we actually get smarter and wiser about our humanity as we age?
Our physical peak may be our 20s, our financial and salary peak may be age 50, but our emotional peak is in midlife and beyond, because we have developed pattern recognition about ourselves and others.
So how can we get companies to tap into that wisdom of the midlife folks, just as they nurture their digital young geniuses as well?
The most successful companies today and in the future will actually learn how to create a powerful alchemy of the two.
Here's how the alchemy worked for me at Airbnb: I was assigned a young, smart partner, who helped me develop a hospitality department.
Early on, Laura Hughes could see that I was a little lost in this habitat, so she often sat right next to me in meetings so she could be my tech translator, and I could write her notes and she could tell me, "That's what that means."
Laura was 27 years old, she'd worked for Google for four years and then for a year and a half at Airbnb when I met her.
Like many of her millennial cohorts, she had actually grown into a managerial role before she'd gotten any formal leadership training.
I don't care if you're in the B-to-B world, the B-to-C world, the C-to-C world or the A-to-Z world, business is fundamentally H-to-H: human to human.
And yet, Laura's approach to leadership was really formed in the technocratic world, and it was purely metric driven.
One of the things she said to me in the first few months was, "I love the fact that your approach to leadership is to create a compelling vision that becomes a North Star for us."
Now, my fact knowledge, as in, how many rooms a maid cleans in an eight-hour shift, might not be all that important in a home-sharing world.
My process knowledge of "How do you get things done?"
based upon understanding the underlying motivations of everybody in the room, was incredibly valuable, in a company where most people didn't have a lot of organizational experience.
As I spent more time at Airbnb, I realized it's possible a new kind of elder was emerging in the workplace.
Not the elder of the past, who actually was regarded with reverence.
No, what is striking about the modern elder is their relevance, their ability to use timeless wisdom and apply it to modern-day problems.
Maybe it's time we actually valued wisdom as much as we do disruption.
And maybe it's time -- not just maybe, it is time -- for us to definitely reclaim the word "elder" and give it a modern twist.
The modern elder is as much an intern as they are a mentor, because they realize, in a world that is changing so quickly, their beginners' mind and their catalytic curiosity is a life-affirming elixir, not just for themselves but for everyone around them.
Intergenerational improv has been known in music and the arts: think Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga or Wynton Marsalis and the Young Stars of Jazz.
This kind of riffing in the business world is often called "mutual mentorship": millennial DQ for Gen X and boomer EQ.
I got to experience that kind of intergenerational reciprocity with Laura and our stellar data science team when we were actually remaking and evolving the Airbnb peer-to-peer review system, using Laura's analytical mind and my human-centered intuition.
With that perfect alchemy of algorithm and people wisdom, we were able to create and instantaneous feedback loop that helped our hosts better understand the needs of our guests.
High tech meets high touch.
At Airbnb, I also learned as a modern elder that my role was to intern publicly and mentor privately.
Search engines are brilliant at giving you an answer, but a wise, sage guide can offer you just the right question.
Google does not understand, at least not yet, nuance like a finely attuned human heart and mind.
Over time, to my surprise, dozens and dozens of young employees at Airbnb sought me out for private mentoring sessions.
But in reality, we were often just mentoring each other.
In sum, CEO Brian Chesky brought me in for my industry knowledge, but what I really offered was my well-earned wisdom.
Maybe it's time we retire the term "knowledge worker" and replaced it with "wisdom worker."
We have five generations in the workplace today, and we can operate like separate isolationist countries, or we can actually start to find a way to bridge these generational borders.
And it's time for us to actually look at how to change up the physics of wisdom so it actually flows in both directions, from old to young and from young to old.
How can you apply this in your own life?
Personally, who can you reach out to to create a mutual mentorship relationship?
And organizationally, how can you create the conditions to foster an intergenerational flow of wisdom?
This is the new sharing economy.
Thank you.
(Applause)
June 29, 2016.
My dear fellow citizen: I write to you today, to you who have lost in this era.
At this moment in our common life, when the world is full of breaking and spite and fear, I address this letter simply to you, even though we both know there are many of you behind this "you," and many of me behind this "I."
I write to you because at present, this quaking world we share scares me.
I gather it scares you, too.
Some of what we fear, I suspect, we fear in common.
But much of what we fear seems to be each other.
You fear the world I want to live in, and I fear your visions in turn.
Do you know that feeling you get when you know it's going to storm before it storms?
Do you also feel that now, fellow citizen?
That malaise and worry that some who know feel reminds them of the 1930s?
Perhaps you don't, because our fears of each other are not in sync.
In this round, I sense that your fears of me, of the world that I have insisted is right for us both, has gathered over a generation.
It took time for your fears to trigger my fears, not least because at first, I never thought I needed to fear you.
I heard you but did not listen, all these years when you said that this amazing new world wasn't amazing for you, for many of you, across the industrialized world; that the open, liquid world I relished, of people and goods and technologies flowing freely, going where they pleased, globally, was not, for you, an emancipation.
I have walked through your towns and, while looking, failed to see.
I did notice in Stephenville, Texas, that the town square was dominated by one lawyer's office after another, because of all the people rotating in and out of the prison.
I did notice the barren shops in Wagner, South Dakota, and the VFW gathering hall that stood in mockery of a community's dream to endure.
I did notice at the Lancaster, Pennsylvania Wal-Mart, that far too many people in their 20s and 30s looked a decade or two from death, with patchy, flared-up skin and thinning, stringy hair and browning, ground-down teeth and a lostness in their eyes.
I did notice that the young people I encountered in Paris, in Florence, in Barcelona, had degrees but no place to take them, living on internships well into their 30s, their lives prevented from launching, because of an economy that creates wealth -- just not jobs.
I did notice the news about those parts of London becoming ghost quarters, where the global super-rich turn fishy money into empty apartments and price lifelong residents of a city, young couples starting out, out of their own home.
And I heard that the fabric of your life was tearing.
You used to be able to count on work, and now you couldn't.
You used to be able to nourish your children, and guarantee that they would climb a little bit further in life than you had, and now you couldn't.
You used to be made to feel dignity in your work, and now you didn't.
It used to be normal for people like you to own a home, and now it wasn't.
I cannot say I didn't know these things, but I was distracted creating a future in which we could live on Mars, even as you struggled down here on Earth.
I was distracted innovating immortality, even as many of you began to live shorter lives than your parents had.
I heard all of these things, but I didn't listen.
I looked but didn't see.
I read, didn't understand.
I paid attention only when you began to vote and shout, and when your voting and shouting, when the substance of it, began to threaten me.
I listened only when you moved toward shattering continental unions and electing vulgar demagogues.
Only then did your pain become of interest to me.
I know that feeling hurt is often prologue to dealing hurt.
I wonder now if you would be less eager to deal it if I had stood with you when you merely felt it.
I ask myself why I didn't stand with you then.
One reason is that I became entranced by the gurus of change, became a worshiper of the religion of the new for novelty's sake, and of globalization and open borders and kaleidoscopic diversity.
Once change became my totalizing faith, I could be blind.
I could fail to see change's consequences.
I could overlook the importance of roots, traditions, rituals, stability -- and belonging.
And the more fundamentalist I became in my worship of change and openness, the more I drove you towards the other polarity, to cling, to freeze, to close, to belong.
I now see as I didn't before that not having the right skin or right organ is not the only varietal of disadvantage.
There is a subtler, quieter disadvantage in having those privileged traits and yet feeling history to be moving away from you; that while the past was hospitable to people like you, the future will be more hospitable to others; that the world is growing less familiar, less yours day by day.
I will not concede for a moment that old privileges should not dwindle.
They cannot dwindle fast enough.
It is for you to learn to live in a new century in which there are no bonuses for showing up with the right skin and right organs.
If and when your anger turns to hate, please know that there is no space for that in our shared home.
But I will admit, fellow citizen, that I have discounted the burden of coping with the loss of status.
I have forgotten that what is socially necessary can also be personally gruelling.
A similar thing happened with the economy that you and I share.
Just as I cannot and don't wish to turn back to the clock on equality and diversity, and yet must understand the sense of loss they can inspire, so, too, I refuse and could not if I wished turn back the clock on an ever more closely knit, interdependent world, and on inventions that won't stop being invented.
And yet I must understand your experience of these things.
You have for years been telling me that your experience of these things is not as good as my theories forecast.
Yet before you could finish a complaining sentence about the difficulty of living with erratic hours, volatile pay, vanishing opportunities, about the pain of dropping your children off at 24-hour day care to make your 3am shift, I shot back at you -- before you could finish your sentence -- my dogma, about how what you are actually experiencing was flexibility and freedom.
Language is one of the only things that we truly share, and I sometimes used this joint inheritance to obfuscate and deflect and justify myself; to re-brand what was good for me as something appearing good for us both, when I threw around terms like "the sharing economy," and "disruption" and "global resourcing."
I see now that what I was really doing, at times, was buying your pain on the cheap, sprucing it up and trying to sell it back to you as freedom.
I have wanted to believe and wanted you to believe that the system that has been good to me, that has made my life ever more seamless, is also the best system for you.
I have condescended to you with the idea that you are voting against your economic interests -- voting against your interests, as if I know your interests.
That is just my dogmatic economism talking.
I have a weakness for treating people's economic interests as their only interest, ignoring things like belonging and pride and the desire to send a message to those who ignore you.
So here we are, in a scary but not inexplicable moment of demagoguery, fracture, xenophobia, resentment and fear.
And I worry for us both if we continue down this road, me not listening, you feeling unheard, you shouting to get me to listen.
I worry when each of us is seduced by visions of the future that have no place for the other.
If this goes on, if this goes on, there may be blood.
There are already hints of this blood in newspapers every day.
There may be roundups, raids, deportations, camps, secessions.
And no, I do not think that I exaggerate.
There may be even talk of war in places that were certain they were done with it.
There is always the hope of redemption.
But it will not be a cheap, shallow redemption that comes through blather about us all being in it together.
This will take more.
It will take accepting that we both made choices to be here.
We create our "others."
As parents, as neighbors, as citizens, we witness and sometimes ignore each other into being.
You were not born vengeful.
I have some role in whatever thirst you now feel for revenge, and that thirst now tempts me to plot ever more elaborate escapes from our common life, from the schools and neighborhoods and airports and amusement parks that we used to share.
We face, then, a problem not of these large, impersonal forces.
We face a problem of your and my relations.
We chose ways of relating to each other that got us here.
We can choose ways of relating that get us out.
But there are things we might have to let go of, fellow citizen, starting with our own cherished versions of reality.
Imagine if you let go of fantasies of a society purged of these or those people.
Imagine if I let go of my habit of saving the world behind your back, of deliberating on the future of your work, your food, your schools, in places where you couldn't get past security.
We can do this only if we first accept that we have neglected each other.
If there is hope to summon in this ominous hour, it is this.
We have, for too long, chased various shimmering dreams at the cost of attention to the foundational dream of each other, the dream of tending to each other, of unleashing each other's wonders, of moving through history together.
We could dare to commit to the dream of each other as the thing that matters before every neon thing.
Let us dare.
Sincerely yours, a fellow citizen.
(Applause)
How do we build a society without fossil fuels?
This is a very complex challenge, and I believe developing countries could take the lead in this transition.
And I'm aware that this is a contentious statement, but the reality is that so much is at stake in our countries if we let fossil fuels stay at the center of our development.
We can do it differently.
And it's time, it really is time, to debunk the myth that a country has to choose between development on the one hand and environmental protection, renewables, quality of life, on the other.
I come from Costa Rica, a developing country.
We are nearly five million people, and we live right in the middle of the Americas, so it's very easy to remember where we live.
Nearly 100 percent of our electricity comes from renewable sources, five of them.
(Applause) Hydropower, geothermal, wind, solar, biomass.
Did you know that last year, for 299 days, we did not use any fossil fuels in order to generate all our electricity?
It's a fantastic achievement, and yet, it hides a paradox, which is that nearly 70 percent of all our energy consumption is oil.
Why?
Because of our transportation system, which is totally dependent on fossil fuels, like it is in most countries.
So if we think of the energy transition as a marathon, the question is, how do we get to the finish line, how do we decarbonize the rest of the economy?
And it's fair to say that if we don't succeed, it's difficult to see who will.
So that is why I want to talk to you about Costa Rica, because I believe we are a great candidate in pioneering a vision for development without fossil fuels.
If you know one thing about our country, it's that we don't have an army.
So I'm going to take you back to 1948.
That year, the country was coming out of civil war.
Thousands of Costa Ricans had died, and families were bitterly split.
And yet, a surprising idea won the hearts and minds: we would reboot the country, and that Second Republic would have no army.
So we abolished it.
And the president at the time, José Figueres, found a powerful way by smashing the walls of an army base.
The following year, 1949, we made that decision permanent in the new constitution, and that is why I can tell you that story nearly 70 years later.
And I'm grateful.
I'm grateful they made that decision before I was born, because it allowed me and millions of others to live in a very stable country.
And you might be thinking that it was good luck, but it wasn't.
There was a pattern of deliberate choices.
In the '40s, Costa Ricans were given free education and free health care.
We called that social guarantees.
By abolishing the army, we were able to turn military spending into social spending, and that was a driver of stability.
In the '50s -- (Applause) In the '50s, we started investing in hydropower, and that kept us away from the trap of using fossil fuels for electricity generation, which is what the world is struggling with today.
In the '70s we invested in national parks, and that kept us away from the deeply flawed logic of growth, growth, growth at any cost that you see others embracing, especially in the developing world.
In the '90s, we pioneered payments for ecosystem services, and that helped us reverse deforestation and boosted ecotourism, which today is a key engine of growth.
So investing in environmental protection did not hurt our economy.
Quite the opposite.
And it doesn't mean we are perfect, and it doesn't mean we don't have contradictions.
That's not the point.
The point is that, by making our own choices, we were able to develop resilience in dealing with development problems.
Also, if you take a country like ours, the GDP per capita is around 11,000 dollars, depending on how you measure it.
But according to the Social Progress Index, we are an absolute outlier when it comes to turning GDP into social progress.
Abolishing the army, investing in nature and people, did something very powerful, too.
It shaped the narrative, the narrative of a small country with big ideas, and it was very empowering to grow up with that narrative.
So the question is, what is the next big idea for this generation?
And I believe what comes next is for this generation to let go of fossil fuels for good, just as we did with the army.
Fossil fuels create climate change.
We know that, and we know how vulnerable we are to the impacts of climate change.
So as a developing country, it is in our best interest to build development without fossil fuels that harm people in the first place.
Because why would we continue importing oil for transportation if we can use electricity instead?
Remember, this is the country where electricity comes from water in our rivers, heat from volcanoes, wind turbines, solar panels, biowaste.
Abolishing fossil fuels means disrupting our transportation system so that we can power our cars, buses and trains with electricity instead of dirty energy.
And transportation, let me tell you, has become an existential issue for us Costa Ricans, because the model we have is not working for us.
It's hurting people, it's hurting companies, and it's hurting our health.
Because when policies and infrastructure fail, this is what happens on a daily basis.
Two hours in the morning, two hours in the evening.
I don't understand why we have to accept this as normal.
It's offensive to have to waste our time like this every single day.
And this highway is actually quite good compared to what you see in other countries where traffic is exploding.
You know, Costa Ricans call this "presa."
Presa means "imprisoned."
And people are turning violent in a country that is otherwise happy in pura vida.
It's happening.
So a lot is at stake.
The good news is that when we talk about clean transportation and different mobility, we're not talking about some distant utopia out there.
We're talking about electric mobility that is happening today.
By 2022, electric cars and conventional cars are expected to cost the same, and cities are already trying electric buses.
And these really cool creatures are saving money, and they reduce pollution.
So if we want to get rid of oil-based transportation, we can, because we have options now that we didn't have before.
It's really exciting.
But of course, some get very uncomfortable with this idea, and they will come and they will tell you that the world is stuck with oil, and so is Costa Rica, so get real.
That's what they tell you.
And you know what the answer to that argument is?
That in 1948, we didn't say the world is stuck with armies, so let's keep our army, too.
No, we made a very brave choice, and that choice made the whole difference.
So it's time for this generation to be brave again and abolish fossil fuels for good.
And I'll give you three reasons why we have to do this.
First, our model of transportation and urbanization is broken, so this is the best moment to redefine our urban and mobility future.
We don't want cities that are built for cars.
We want cities for people where we can walk and we can use bikes.
And we want public transportation, lots of it, public transportation that is clean and dignifying.
Because if we continue adding fleets of conventional cars, our cities will become unbearable.
Second, we have to change, but incremental change is not going to be sufficient.
We need transformational change.
And there are some incremental projects in my country, and I am the first one to celebrate them.
But let's not kid ourselves.
We're not talking about ending up with really beautiful electric cars here and a few electric buses there while we keep investing in the same kind of infrastructure, more cars, more roads, more oil.
We're talking about breaking free from oil, and you cannot get there through incrementalism.
Third, and you know this one, the world is hungry for inspiration.
It craves stories of success in dealing with complex issues, especially in developing countries.
So I believe Costa Rica can be an inspiration to others, as we did last year when we disclosed that for so many days we were not using any fossil fuels in order to generate all our electricity.
The news went viral around the world.
Also, and this makes me extremely proud, a Costa Rican woman, Christiana Figueres, played a decisive role in the negotiations of the Paris climate agreement.
So we have to protect that legacy and be an example.
So what comes next?
The people.
How do we get people to own this?
How do we get people to believe that it's possible to build a society without fossil fuels?
A lot of work from the ground up is needed.
That is why, in 2014, we created Costa Rica Limpia.
"Limpia" means "clean," because we want to empower and we want to inspire citizens.
If citizens don't get engaged, clean transportation decisions will be bogged down by endless, and I mean endless, technical discussions, and by avalanches of lobbying by various established interests.
Wanting to be a green country powered by renewables is already part of our story.
We should not let anybody take that away from us.
Last year, we brought people from our seven provinces to talk about climate change in terms that matter to them, and we also brought this year another group of Costa Ricans to talk about renewable energy.
And you know what?
These people disagree on almost everything except on renewable energy and clean transportation and clean air.
It brings people together.
And the key to real participation is to help people not to feel small.
People feel powerless, and they are tired of not being heard.
So what we do is concrete things, and we translate technical issues into citizen language to show that citizens have a role to play and can play it together.
For the first time, we're tracking the promises that were made on clean transportation, and politicos know that they have to deliver it, but the tipping point will come when we form coalitions -- citizens, companies, champions of public transportation -- that will make electric mobility the new normal, especially in a developing country.
By the time the next election comes, I believe every candidate will have to disclose where they stand on the abolition of fossil fuels.
Because this question has to enter our mainstream politics.
And I'm telling you, this is not a question of climate policy or environmental agenda.
It's about the country that we want and the cities that we have and the cities that we want and who makes that choice.
Because at the end of the day, what we have to show is that development with renewable energy is good for the people, for Costa Ricans that are alive today and especially for those who haven't been born.
This is our National Museum today.
It's bright and peaceful, and when you stand up in front of it, it's really hard to believe these were military barracks at the end of the '40s.
We started a new life without an army in this place, and here is where our abolition of fossil fuels will be announced one day.
And we will make history again.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Guys, we have an issue.
(Laughter) Growth is fading away, and it's a big deal.
Our global economy stops growing.
And it's not new.
Growth has actually declined for the last 50 years.
If we continue like this, we need to learn how to live in a world with no growth in the next decade.
This is scary because when the economy doesn't grow, our children don't get better lives.
What's even scarier is that when the pie does not grow, each of us get a smaller piece.
We're then ready to fight for a bigger one.
This creates tensions and serious conflicts.
Growth matters a lot.
If we look at the history of growth, times of big growth have always been fueled by big manufacturing revolutions.
It happened three times, every 50-60 years.
The steam engine in the middle of the 19th century, the mass-production model in the beginning of the 20th century -- thanks, Mr. Ford.
And the first automation wave in the 1970s.
Why did these manufacturing revolutions create huge growth in our economies?
Because they have injected huge productivity improvement.
It's rather simple: in order to grow, you need to be producing more, putting more into our economy.
This means either more labor or more capital or more productivity.
Each time, productivity has been the growth lever.
I'm here today to tell you that we are on the verge of another huge change, and that this change, surprisingly enough, is going to come from manufacturing, again.
It will get us out of our growth slump and it will change radically the way globalization has been shaped over the last decade.
I'm here to tell you about the amazing fourth manufacturing revolution that is currently underway.
It's not as if we've done nothing with manufacturing since the last revolution.
Actually, we've made some pretty lame attempts to try to revitalize it.
But none of them have been the big overhaul we really need to get us growing again.
For example, we've tried to relocate our factories offshore in order to reduce cost and take advantage of cheap labor.
Not only did this not inspire productivity, but it only saved money for a short period of time, because cheap labor didn't stay cheap for long.
Then, we've tried to make our factories larger and we specialized them by product.
The idea was that we can make a lot of one product and stockpile it to be sold with demand.
This did help productivity for a while.
But it introduced a lot of rigidities in our supply chain.
Let's take fashion retail.
Traditional clothing companies have built offshore, global, rigid supply chains.
When fast-fashion competitors like Zara started replenishing their stocks faster from two collections a year to one collection a month, none of them have been able to keep up with the pace.
Most of them are in great difficulties today.
Yet, with all of their shortcomings, those are the factories we know today.
When you open the doors, they look the same as they did 50 years ago.
We've just changed the location, the size, the way they operate.
Can you name anything else that looks the same as it did 50 years ago?
It's crazy.
We've made all the tweaks to the model that we could, and now we hit its limits.
After all of our attempts to fix the manufacturing model failed, we thought growth could come from elsewhere.
We turned to the tech sector -- there's been quite a lot of innovations there.
Just to name one: the Internet.
We hoped it could produce growth.
And indeed, it changed our lives.
It made big waves in the media, the service, the entertainment spaces.
But it hasn't done much for productivity.
Actually, what's surprising is that productivity is on the decline despite all of those innovation efforts.
Imagine that -- sitting at work, scrolling through Facebook, watching videos on YouTube has made us less productive.
Weird.
(Laughter) This is why we are not growing.
We failed at reinventing the manufacturing space, and large technological innovations have played away from it.
But what if we could combine those forces?
What if the existing manufacturing and large technological innovation came together to create the next big manufacturing reinvention.
Bingo!
This is the fourth manufacturing revolution, and it's happening right now.
Major technologies are entering the manufacturing space, big time.
They will boost industrial productivity by more than a third.
This is massive, and it will do a lot in creating growth.
Let me tell you about some of them.
Have you already met advanced manufacturing robots?
They are the size of humans, they actually collaborate with them, and they can be programmed in order to perform complex, non-repetitive tasks.
Today in our factories, only 8 percent of the tasks are automated.
The less complex, the more repetitive ones.
It will be 25 percent in 10 years.
It means that by 2025, advanced robots will complement workers to be, together, 20 percent more productive, to manufacture 20 percent more outputs, to achieve 20 percent additional growth.
This isn't some fancy, futuristic idea.
These robots are working for us right now.
Last year in the US, they helped Amazon prepare and ship all the products required for Cyber Monday, the annual peak of online retail.
Last year in the US, it was the biggest online shopping day of the year and of history.
Consumers spent 3 billion dollars on electronics that day.
That's real economic growth.
Then there's additive manufacturing, 3D printing.
3D printing has already improved plastic manufacturing and it's now making its way through metal.
Those are not small industries.
Plastic and metals represent 25 percent of global manufacturing production.
Let's take a real example.
In the aerospace industry, fuel nozzles are some of the most complex parts to manufacture, for one reason: they are made up of 20 different parts that need to be separately produced and then painstakingly assembled.
Aerospace companies are now using 3D printing, which allows them to turn those 20 different parts into just one.
The results?
40 percent more productivity, 40 percent more output produced, 40 percent more growth for this specific industry.
But actually, the most exciting part of this new manufacturing revolution goes much beyond productivity.
It's about producing better, smarter products.
It's about scale customization.
Imagine a world where you can buy the exact products you want with the functionalities you need, with the design you want, with the same cost and lead time as a product that's been mass produced, like your car, or your clothes or your cell phone.
The new manufacturing revolution makes it possible.
Advanced robots can be programmed in order to perform any product configuration without any setup time or ramp up.
3D printers instantaneously produce any customized design.
We are now able to produce a batch of one product, your product, at the same cost and lead time as a batch of many.
Those are only a few examples of the manufacturing revolution at play.
Not only will manufacturing become more productive, it will also become more flexible, and those were exactly the elements of growth that we are missing.
But actually, there are even some bigger implications for all of us when manufacturing will find its way back into the limelight.
It will create a huge macroeconomic shift.
First, our factories will be relocated into our home markets.
In the world of scale customization, consumer proximity is the new norm.
Then, our factories will be smaller, agile.
Scale does not matter anymore, flexibility does.
They will be operating on a multi-product, made-to-order basis.
The change will be drastic.
Globalization will enter a new era.
The East-to-West trade flows will be replaced by regional trade flows.
East for East, West for West.
When you think about that, the old model was pretty much insane.
Piling up stocks, making products travel the whole world before they reach their end consumers.
The new model, producing just next to the consumer market, will be much cleaner, much better for our environment.
In mature economies, manufacturing will be back home, creating more employment, more productivity and more growth.
Good news, isn't it?
But here's the thing with growth -- it does not come automatically.
Mature economies will have to seize it.
We'll have to massively re-train our workforce.
In most countries, like in my country, France, we've told our children that manufacturing had no future.
That it was something happening far away.
We need to reverse that and teach manufacturing again at university.
Only the countries that will boldly transform will be able to seize this growth.
It's also a chance for developing economies.
Of course China and other emerging economies won't be the factory of the world anymore.
Actually, it was not a sustainable model in the long term, as those countries are becoming richer.
Last year, it was already as expensive to produce in Brazil as to produce in France.
By 2018, manufacturing costs in China will be on par with the US.
The new manufacturing revolution will accelerate the transition of those emerging economies towards a model driven by domestic consumption.
And this is good, because this is where growth will be created.
In the next five years, the next billion consumers in China will inject more growth in our economies than the top five European markets together.
This fourth manufacturing revolution is a chance for all of us.
If we play it right, we'll see sustainable growth in all of our economies.
This means more wealth distributed to all of us and a better future for our children.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a palliative care physician and I would like to talk to you today about health care.
I'd like to talk to you about the health and care of the most vulnerable population in our country -- those people dealing with the most complex serious health issues.
I'd like to talk to you about economics as well.
And the intersection of these two should scare the hell out of you -- it scares the hell out of me.
I'd also like to talk to you about palliative medicine: a paradigm of care for this population, grounded in what they value.
Patient-centric care based on their values that helps this population live better and longer.
It's a care model that tells the truth and engages one-on-one and meets people where they're at.
I'd like to start by telling the story of my very first patient.
It was my first day as a physician, with the long white coat ...
I stumbled into the hospital and right away there's a gentleman, Harold, 68 years old, came to the emergency department.
He had had headaches for about six weeks that got worse and worse and worse and worse.
Evaluation revealed he had cancer that had spread to his brain.
The attending physician directed me to go share with Harold and his family the diagnosis, the prognosis and options of care.
Five hours into my new career, I did the only thing I knew how.
I walked in, sat down, took Harold's hand, took his wife's hand and just breathed.
He said, "It's not good news is it, sonny?"
I said, "No."
And so we talked and we listened and we shared.
And after a while I said, "Harold, what is it that has meaning to you?
What is it that you hold sacred?"
And he said, "My family."
I said, "What do you want to do?"
He slapped me on the knee and said, "I want to go fishing."
I said, "That, I know how to do."
Harold went fishing the next day.
He died a week later.
As I've gone through my training in my career, I think back to Harold.
And I think that this is a conversation that happens far too infrequently.
And it's a conversation that had led us to crisis, to the biggest threat to the American way of life today, which is health care expenditures.
So what do we know?
We know that this population, the most ill, takes up 15 percent of the gross domestic product -- nearly 2.3 trillion dollars.
So the sickest 15 percent take up 15 percent of the GDP.
If we extrapolate this out over the next two decades with the growth of baby boomers, at this rate it is 60 percent of the GDP.
Sixty percent of the gross domestic product of the United States of America -- it has very little to do with health care at that point.
It has to do with a gallon of milk, with college tuition.
It has to do with every thing that we value and every thing that we know presently.
It has at stake the free-market economy and capitalism of the United States of America.
Let's forget all the statistics for a minute, forget the numbers.
Let's talk about the value we get for all these dollars we spend.
Well, the Dartmouth Atlas, about six years ago, looked at every dollar spent by Medicare -- generally this population.
We found that those patients who have the highest per capita expenditures had the highest suffering, pain, depression.
And, more often than not, they die sooner.
How can this be?
We live in the United States, it has the greatest health care system on the planet.
We spend 10 times more on these patients than the second-leading country in the world.
That doesn't make sense.
But what we know is, out of the top 50 countries on the planet with organized health care systems, we rank 37th.
Former Eastern Bloc countries and sub-Saharan African countries rank higher than us as far as quality and value.
Something I experience every day in my practice, and I'm sure, something many of you on your own journeys have experienced: more is not more.
Those individuals who had more tests, more bells, more whistles, more chemotherapy, more surgery, more whatever -- the more that we do to someone, it decreases the quality of their life.
And it shortens it, most often.
So what are we going to do about this?
What are we doing about this?
And why is this so?
The grim reality, ladies and gentlemen, is that we, the health care industry -- long white-coat physicians -- are stealing from you.
Stealing from you the opportunity to choose how you want to live your lives in the context of whatever disease it is.
We focus on disease and pathology and surgery and pharmacology.
We miss the human being.
How can we treat this without understanding this?
We do things to this; we need to do things for this.
The triple aim of healthcare: one, improve patient experience.
Two, improve the population health.
Three, decrease per capita expenditure across a continuum.
Our group, palliative care, in 2012, working with the sickest of the sick -- cancer, heart disease, lung disease, renal disease, dementia -- how did we improve patient experience?
"I want to be at home, Doc."
"OK, we'll bring the care to you."
Quality of life, enhanced.
Think about the human being.
Two: population health.
How did we look at this population differently, and engage with them at a different level, a deeper level, and connect to a broader sense of the human condition than my own?
How do we manage this group, so that of our outpatient population, 94 percent, in 2012, never had to go to the hospital?
Not because they couldn't.
But they didn't have to.
We brought the care to them.
We maintained their value, their quality.
Number three: per capita expenditures.
For this population, that today is 2.3 trillion dollars and in 20 years is 60 percent of the GDP, we reduced health care expenditures by nearly 70 percent.
They got more of what they wanted based on their values, lived better and are living longer, for two-thirds less money.
While Harold's time was limited, palliative care's is not.
Palliative care is a paradigm from diagnosis through the end of life.
The hours, weeks, months, years, across a continuum -- with treatment, without treatment.
Meet Christine.
Stage III cervical cancer, so, metastatic cancer that started in her cervix, spread throughout her body.
She's in her 50s and she is living.
This is not about end of life, this is about life.
This is not just about the elderly, this is about people.
This is Richard.
End-stage lung disease.
"Richard, what is it that you hold sacred?"
"My kids, my wife and my Harley."
(Laughter) "Alright!
I can't drive you around on it because I can barely pedal a bicycle, but let's see what we can do."
Richard came to me, and he was in rough shape.
He had this little voice telling him that maybe his time was weeks to months.
And then we just talked.
And I listened and tried to hear -- big difference.
Use these in proportion to this.
I said, "Alright, let's take it one day at a time," like we do in every other chapter of our life.
And we have met Richard where Richard's at day-to-day.
And it's a phone call or two a week, but he's thriving in the context of end-stage lung disease.
Now, palliative medicine is not just for the elderly, it is not just for the middle-aged.
It is for everyone.
Meet my friend Jonathan.
We have the honor and pleasure of Jonathan and his father joining us here today.
Jonathan is in his 20s, and I met him several years ago.
He was dealing with metastatic testicular cancer, spread to his brain.
He had a stroke, he had brain surgery, radiation, chemotherapy.
Upon meeting him and his family, he was a couple of weeks away from a bone marrow transplant, and in listening and engaging, they said, "Help us understand -- what is cancer?"
How did we get this far without understanding what we're dealing with?
How did we get this far without empowering somebody to know what it is they're dealing with, and then taking the next step and engaging in who they are as human beings to know if that is what we should do?
Lord knows we can do any kind of thing to you.
But should we?
And don't take my word for it.
All the evidence that is related to palliative care these days demonstrates with absolute certainty people live better and live longer.
There was a seminal article out of the New England Journal of Medicine in 2010.
A study done at Harvard by friends of mine, colleagues.
End-stage lung cancer: one group with palliative care, a similar group without.
The group with palliative care reported less pain, less depression.
They needed fewer hospitalizations.
And, ladies and gentlemen, they lived three to six months longer.
If palliative care were a cancer drug, every cancer doctor on the planet would write a prescription for it.
Why don't they?
Again, because we goofy, long white-coat physicians are trained and of the mantra of dealing with this, not with this.
This is a space that we will all come to at some point.
But this conversation today is not about dying, it is about living.
Living based on our values, what we find sacred and how we want to write the chapters of our lives, whether it's the last or the last five.
What we know, what we have proven, is that this conversation needs to happen today -- not next week, not next year.
What is at stake is our lives today and the lives of us as we get older and the lives of our children and our grandchildren.
Not just in that hospital room or on the couch at home, but everywhere we go and everything we see.
Palliative medicine is the answer to engage with human beings, to change the journey that we will all face, and change it for the better.
To my colleagues, to my patients, to my government, to all human beings, I ask that we stand and we shout and we demand the best care possible, so that we can live better today and ensure a better life tomorrow.
We need to shift today so that we can live tomorrow.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In July of 1911, a 35-year-old Yale graduate and professor set out from his rainforest camp with his team.
After climbing a steep hill and wiping the sweat from his brow, he described what he saw beneath him.
He saw rising from the dense rainforest foliage this incredible interlocking maze of structures built of granite, beautifully put together.
What's amazing about this project is that it was the first funded by National Geographic, and it graced the front cover of its magazine in 1912.
This professor used state-of-the-art photography equipment to record the site, forever changing the face of exploration.
The site was Machu Picchu, discovered and explored by Hiram Bingham.
When he saw the site, he asked, "This is an impossible dream.
What could it be?"
So today, 100 years later, I invite you all on an incredible journey with me, a 37-year-old Yale graduate and professor.
(Cheers) We will do nothing less than use state-of-the-art technology to map an entire country.
This is a dream started by Hiram Bingham, but we are expanding it to the world, making archaeological exploration more open, inclusive, and at a scale simply not previously possible.
This is why I am so excited to share with you all today that we will begin the 2016 TED Prize platform in Latin America, more specifically Peru.
(Applause) Thank you.
We will be taking Hiram Bingham's impossible dream and turning it into an amazing future that we can all share in together.
So Peru doesn't just have Machu Picchu.
It has absolutely stunning jewelry, like what you can see here.
It has amazing Moche pottery of human figures.
It has the Nazca Lines and amazing textiles.
So as part of the TED Prize platform, we are going to partnering with some incredible organizations, first of all with DigitalGlobe, the world's largest provider of high-resolution commercial satellite imagery.
They're going to be helping us build out this amazing crowdsourcing platform they have.
Maybe some of you used it with the MH370 crash and search for the airplane.
Of course, they'll also be providing us with the satellite imagery.
National Geographic will be helping us with education and of course exploration.
As well, they'll be providing us with rich content for the platform, including some of the archival imagery like you saw at the beginning of this talk and some of their documentary footage.
We've already begun to build and plan the platform, and I'm just so excited.
So here's the cool part.
My team, headed up by Chase Childs, is already beginning to look at some of the satellite imagery.
Of course, what you can see here is 0.3-meter data.
This is site called Chan Chan in northern Peru.
It dates to 850 AD.
It's a really amazing city, but let's zoom in.
This is the type and quality of data that you all will get to see.
You can see individual structures, individual buildings.
And we've already begun to find previously unknown sites.
What we can say already is that as part of the platform, you will all help discover thousands of previously unknown sites, like this one here, and this potentially large one here.
Unfortunately, we've also begun to uncover large-scale looting at sites, like what you see here.
So many sites in Peru are threatened, but the great part is that all of this data is going to be shared with archaeologists on the front lines of protecting these sites.
So I was just in Peru, meeting with their Minister of Culture as well as UNESCO.
We'll be collaborating closely with them.
Just so you all know, the site is going to be in both English and Spanish, which is absolutely essential to make sure that people in Peru and across Latin America can participate.
Our main project coprincipal investigator is the gentleman you see here, Dr. Luis Jaime Castillo, professor at Catholic University.
As a respected Peruvian archaeologist and former vice-minister, Dr. Castillo will be helping us coordinate and share the data with archaeologists so they can explore these sites on the ground.
He also runs this amazing drone mapping program, some of the images of which you can see behind me here and here.
And this data will be incorporated into the platform, and also he'll be helping to image some of the new sites you help find.
Our on-the-ground partner who will be helping us with education, outreach, as well as site preservation components, is the Sustainable Preservation Initiative, led by Dr. Larry Coben.
Some of you may not be aware that some of the world's poorest communities coexist with some of the world's most well-known archaeological sites.
What SPI does is it helps to empower these communities, in particular women, with new economic approaches and business training.
So it helps to teach them to create beautiful handicrafts which are then sold on to tourists.
This empowers the women to treasure their cultural heritage and take ownership of it.
I had the opportunity to spend some time with 24 of these women at a well-known archaeological site called Pachacamac, just outside Lima.
These women were unbelievably inspiring, and what's great is that SPI will help us transform communities near some of the sites that you help to discover.
Peru is just the beginning.
We're going to be expanding this platform to the world, but already I've gotten thousands of emails from people all across the world -- professors, educators, students, and other archaeologists -- who are so excited to help participate.
In fact, they're already suggesting amazing places for us to help discover, including Atlantis.
I don't know if we're going to be looking for Atlantis, but you never know.
So I'm just so excited to launch this platform.
It's going to be launched formally by the end of the year.
And I have to say, if what my team has already discovered in the past few weeks are any indication, what the world discovers is just going to be beyond imagination.
Make sure to hold on to your alpacas.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
There's a big question at the center of life in our democracies today: How do we fight terror without destroying democracies, without trampling human rights?
I've spent much of my career working with journalists, with bloggers, with activists, with human rights researchers all around the world, and I've come to the conclusion that if our democratic societies do not double down on protecting and defending human rights, freedom of the press and a free and open internet, radical extremist ideologies are much more likely to persist.
(Applause) OK, all done. Thank you very much.
No, just joking.
(Laughter) I actually want to drill down on this a little bit.
So, one of the countries that has been on the frontlines of this issue is Tunisia, which was the only country to come out of the Arab Spring with a successful democratic revolution.
Five years later, they're struggling with serious terror attacks and rampant ISIS recruitment.
And many Tunisians are calling on their government to do whatever it takes to keep them safe.
Tunisian cartoonist Nadia Khiari has summed up the situation with this character who says, "I don't give a damn about human rights.
I don't give a damn about the revolution.
I don't give a damn about democracy and liberty.
I just want to be safe."
"Satisfied?" asked his jailer.
"You're safe now."
If the Tunisian people can figure out how to deal with their terrorism problem without ending up in this place, they will be a model not only for their region, but for all of us.
The reality is that civil society, journalists and activists are coming under attack from extremist groups on the one hand, and, in many countries, also from their own governments.
We're seeing bloggers and journalists being jailed, charged and intimidated by their own governments, many of which are allies with the West in the war on terror.
Just three examples.
A friend and former colleague of mine, Hisham Almiraat, has been charged with threatening state security, along with six other activists in Morocco.
The Saudi blogger Raif Badawi has been jailed and flogged for insulting Islam and criticizing the Saudi regime on his blog.
More recently, the Turkish representative for Reporters Without Borders, Erol Önderoglu, has been detained and charged with spreading terrorist propaganda, because he and some other activists have been supporting Kurdish media.
Anti-terror measures quickly turn into state repression without strong protection for minority communities and for peaceful debate; this needs to be supported by a robust, independent local media.
But while that's not really happening, Washington is teaming up with Silicon Valley and with Hollywood to pour millions -- hundreds of millions of dollars -- into what's called "counter-messaging," a fancy word for propaganda.
To counter the terrorist propaganda spreading all over the internet, in Europe, Internet Referral Units are being set up, so that people can report on extremist content that they find and get it censored.
The problem is, that all of this propaganda, monitoring and censorship completely fails to make up for the fact that the people who are the most credible voices, who can present credible ideas and alternative solutions to real economic, social and political problems in their community that are causing people to turn to extremism in the first place, are being silenced by their own governments.
This is all adding up to a decrease in freedom across the world.
Freedom House, the human rights organization, reports that 2015 marks the 10th straight year in a row of decline in freedom worldwide.
And this is not just because of the actions of authoritarian governments.
It's also because democratic governments are increasingly cracking down on dissenters, whistle-blowers and investigative journalists.
UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon has warned that "preventing extremism and promoting human rights go hand-in-hand."
It's not to say that governments shouldn't keep us safe -- of course they should -- but we need public oversight, transparency and accountability to the rule of law.
Meanwhile, extremists are literally killing off civil society in some countries.
Since 2013 in Bangladesh, over a dozen secular bloggers and community activists have been literally slaughtered by extremists while the government has done very little.
From the city of Raqqa in Syria, people like Ruqia Hassan and Naji Jerf have been assassinated for their reporting out of ISIS-controlled territory.
The citizen media group called Raqqa is Being Slaughtered Silently relies on strong encryption to send out their reports and shield themselves from interception and surveillance.
Yet authorities in countries like the United States, the United Kingdom and many other democracies are seeking to use the law to either weaken or outright ban strong encryption, because the bad guys are using it, too.
We have got to fight for the right of citizens to use strong encryption.
Otherwise, dissent and investigative journalism are going to become even more difficult in even more places.
And the bad guys -- the criminals and terrorists -- are still going to find ways to communicate.
Kudos to the companies that are standing up for their users' right to use encryption.
But when it comes to censorship, the picture is much more troubling.
Yes, there's a real problem of extremist content spreading all over the internet.
And Facebook, YouTube and Twitter are among the many companies who report having taken down hundreds of thousands of pieces of content and deactivating accounts that are connected to the extremist's speech.
The problem is their enforcement mechanisms are a complete black box, and there is collateral damage.
Take, for example, Iyad el-Baghdadi, an activist who makes fun of ISIS on Twitter.
He had his account deactivated, because he shares a surname with a prominent ISIS leader.
Last December, a number of women named Isis, which also happens to be the name of an Egyptian goddess, had their accounts deactivated.
And this woman, who lives in the United States and is a computer programmer, reported on Twitter about her deactivation on Facebook, managed to get enough media attention to have her account reinstated.
But that's the thing -- she had to get media attention.
And journalists aren't immune.
David Thomson, an expert on terrorism and reporter for Radio France International, had reports deleted from his Facebook account and had his account deactivated for several days, because they contained pictures of ISIS flags, even though he was just reporting on ISIS, not promoting it.
And then we have stories from people like this Egyptian man, Ahmed Abdellahy, who reported recently in an event in Washington DC that some of his arguments with extremists -- he now spends his time on social media arguing with ISIS followers, trying to get them to turn away -- some of his arguments with these extremists get deleted, which he believes has the effect of shielding them from alternative points of view.
It's unclear whether Facebook even knows the extent of the collateral damage, or the other companies as well.
But we do know that journalism, activism and public debate are being silenced in the effort to stamp out extremist speech.
So with these companies having so much power over the public discourse, they need to be held accountable.
They need to carry out impact assessment to identify and fix the problems that we're clearly seeing.
They need to be more transparent about their enforcement mechanisms, and they need to have clear appeal and grievance mechanisms, so people can get their content reinstated.
Now, I've been talking for the last 10 minutes about how governments and companies are making it more difficult for people like these.
This is a picture of members of the citizen media network, Global Voices, that I helped to cofound over 10 years ago with my friend, Ethan Zuckerman.
Interestingly, about 5 years ago, right after the Arab Spring, the data scientist Gilad Lotan created a network map of the people in Global Voices who were heavy users of Twitter during the Arab Spring.
And he found that many of these people served as key information nodes between activists and journalists throughout the Tunisian and Egyptian revolution.
We've got to make sure that these people not only survive, but are able to continue to thrive.
Many of them are still active, other than the ones who have gone to jail or have been driven into hiding or exile.
All around the world, people who are sick and tired of fear and oppression are linking up in their communities and across borders.
We've got to do everything we can to push our governments and companies to do a better job of protecting their rights.
We've also got to be more mindful about how our own personal, political, consumer and business choices affect people like these around the world.
Also, if you follow the news, it's pretty clear that that alone isn't going to be enough.
We've got to take personal responsibility by joining -- or at very least, actively supporting -- the growing ecosystem of individuals and groups who are fighting for social justice, environmental sustainability, government accountability, human rights, freedom of the press and a free and open internet, all around the world.
I believe that, ultimately, we can overcome the digitally empowered networks of extremism, demagoguery and hate.
But ...
we've got to do this by really beefing up the global networks of citizens around the world, powered by people who are working hard every day, and taking personal risk for a future world that is more peaceful, just, open and free.
Thanks very much for listening.
(Applause)
Hello. I'd like to show you guys 30 seconds of the best day of my life.
(Applause) So that was El Capitan in California's Yosemite National Park, and in case you couldn't tell, I was climbing by myself without a rope, a style of a climbing known as free soloing.
That was the culmination of a nearly decade-long dream, and in the video I'm over 2,500 feet off the ground.
Seems scary? Yeah, it is, which is why I spent so many years dreaming about soloing El Cap and not actually doing it.
But on the day that that video was taken, it didn't feel scary at all.
It felt as comfortable and natural as a walk in the park, which is what most folks were doing in Yosemite that day.
Today I'd like to talk about how I was able to feel so comfortable and how I overcame my fear.
I'll start with a very brief version of how I became a climber, and then tell the story of my two most significant free solos.
They were both successful, which is why I'm here.
(Laughter) But the first felt largely unsatisfying, whereas the second, El Cap, was by far the most fulfilling day of my life.
Through these two climbs, you'll see my process for managing fear.
So I started climbing in a gym when I was around 10 years old, which means that my life has been centered on climbing for more than 20 years.
After nearly a decade of climbing mostly indoors, I made the transition to the outdoors and gradually started free soloing.
I built up my comfort over time and slowly took on bigger and more challenging walls.
And there have been many free soloists before me, so I had plenty of inspiration to draw from.
But by 2008, I'd repeated most of their previous solos in Yosemite and was starting to imagine breaking into new terrain.
The obvious first choice was Half Dome, an iconic 2,000-foot wall that lords over the east end of the valley.
The problem, though also the allure, was that it was too big.
I didn't really know how to prepare for a potential free solo.
So I decided to skip the preparations and just go up there and have an adventure.
I figured I would rise to the occasion, which, unsurprisingly, was not the best strategy.
I did at least climb the route roped up with a friend two days before just to make sure that I knew roughly where to go and that I could physically do it.
But when I came back by myself two days later, I decided that I didn't want to go that way.
I knew that there was a 300-foot variation that circled around one of the hardest parts of the climb.
I suddenly decided to skip the hard part and take the variation, even though I'd never climbed it before, but I immediately began to doubt myself.
Imagine being by yourself in the dead center of a 2,000-foot face, wondering if you're lost.
(Laughter) Thankfully, it was pretty much the right way and I circled back to the route.
I was slightly rattled, I was pretty rattled, but I tried not to let it bother me too much because I knew that all the hardest climbing was up at the top.
I needed to stay composed.
It was a beautiful September morning, and as I climbed higher, I could hear the sounds of tourists chatting and laughing on the summit.
They'd all hiked up the normal trail on the back, which I was planning on using for my descent.
But between me and the summit lay a blank slab of granite.
There were no cracks or edges to hold on to, just small ripples of texture up a slightly less than vertical wall.
I had to trust my life to the friction between my climbing shoes and the smooth granite.
I carefully balanced my way upward, shifting my weight back and forth between the small smears.
But then I reached a foothold that I didn't quite trust.
Two days ago, I'd have just stepped right up on it, but that would have been with a rope on.
Now it felt too small and too slippery.
I doubted that my foot would stay on if I weighted it.
I considered a foot further to the side, which seemed worse.
I switched my feet and tried a foot further out.
It seemed even worse.
I started to panic.
I could hear people laughing on the summit just above me.
I wanted to be anywhere but on that slab.
My mind was racing in every direction.
I knew what I had to do, but I was too afraid to do it.
I just had to stand up on my right foot.
And so after what felt like an eternity, I accepted what I had to do and I stood up on the right foot, and it didn't slip, and so I didn't die, and that move marked the end of the hardest climbing.
And so I charged from there towards the summit.
And so normally when you summit Half Dome, you have a rope and a bunch of climbing gear on you, and tourists gasp and they flock around you for photos.
This time I popped over the edge shirtless, panting, jacked.
I was amped, but nobody batted an eye.
(Laughter) I looked like a lost hiker that was too close to the edge.
I was surrounded by people talking on cell phones and having picnics.
I felt like I was in a mall.
(Laughter) I took off my tight climbing shoes and started hiking back down, and that's when people stopped me.
"You're hiking barefoot? That's so hard-core."
(Laughter) I didn't bother to explain, but that night in my climbing journal, I duly noted my free solo of Half Dome, but I included a frowny face and a comment, "Do better?"
I'd succeeded in the solo and it was celebrated as a big first in climbing.
Some friends later made a film about it.
But I was unsatisfied.
I was disappointed in my performance, because I knew that I had gotten away with something.
I didn't want to be a lucky climber. I wanted to be a great climber.
I actually took the next year or so off from free soloing, because I knew that I shouldn't make a habit of relying on luck.
But even though I wasn't soloing very much, I'd already started to think about El Cap.
It was always in the back of my mind as the obvious crown jewel of solos.
It's the most striking wall in the world.
Each year, for the next seven years, I'd think, "This is the year that I'm going to solo El Cap."
And then I would drive into Yosemite, look up at the wall, and think, "No frickin' way."
(Laughter) It's too big and too scary.
But eventually I came to accept that I wanted to test myself against El Cap.
It represented true mastery, but I needed it to feel different.
I didn't want to get away with anything or barely squeak by.
This time I wanted to do it right.
The thing that makes El Cap so intimidating is the sheer scale of the wall.
Most climbers take three to five days to ascend the 3,000 feet of vertical granite.
The idea of setting out up a wall of that size with nothing but shoes and a chalk bag seemed impossible.
3,000 feet of climbing represents thousands of distinct hand and foot movements, which is a lot to remember.
Many of the moves I knew through sheer repetition.
I'd climbed El Cap maybe 50 times over the previous decade with a rope.
But this photo shows my preferred method of rehearsing the moves.
I'm on the summit, about to rappel down the face with over a thousand feet of rope to spend the day practicing.
Once I found sequences that felt secure and repeatable, I had to memorize them.
I had to make sure that they were so deeply ingrained within me that there was no possibility of error.
I didn't want to be wondering if I was going the right way or using the best holds.
Climbing with a rope is a largely physical effort.
You just have to be strong enough to hold on and make the movements upward.
But free soloing plays out more in the mind.
The physical effort is largely the same.
Your body is still climbing the same wall.
But staying calm and performing at your best when you know that any mistake could mean death requires a certain kind of mindset.
(Laughter) That's not supposed to be funny, but if it is, it is.
(Laughter) I worked to cultivate that mindset through visualization, which basically just means imagining the entire experience of soloing the wall.
Partially, that was to help me remember all the holds, but mostly visualization was about feeling the texture of each hold in my hand and imagining the sensation of my leg reaching out and placing my foot just so.
I'd imagine it all like a choreographed dance thousands of feet up.
The most difficult part of the whole route was called the Boulder Problem.
It was about 2,000 feet off the ground and consisted of the hardest physical moves on the whole route: long pulls between poor handholds with very small, slippery feet.
This is what I mean by a poor handhold: an edge smaller than the width of a pencil but facing downward that I had to press up into with my thumb.
But that wasn't even the hardest part.
The crux culminated in a karate kick with my left foot over to the inside of an adjacent corner, a maneuver that required a high degree of precision and flexibility, enough so that I'd been doing a nightly stretching routine for a full year ahead of time to make sure that I could comfortably make the reach with my leg.
As I practiced the moves, my visualization turned to the emotional component of a potential solo.
Basically, what if I got up there and it was too scary?
What if I was too tired?
What if I couldn't quite make the kick?
I had to consider every possibility while I was safely on the ground, so that when the time came and I was actually making the moves without a rope, there was no room for doubt to creep in.
Doubt is the precursor to fear, and I knew that I couldn't experience my perfect moment if I was afraid.
I had to visualize and rehearse enough to remove all doubt.
But beyond that, I also visualized how it would feel if it never seemed doable.
What if, after so much work, I was afraid to try?
What if I was wasting my time and I would never feel comfortable in such an exposed position?
There were no easy answers, but El Cap meant enough to me that I would put in the work and find out.
Some of my preparations were more mundane.
This is a photo of my friend Conrad Anker climbing up the bottom of El Cap with an empty backpack.
We spent the day climbing together to a specific crack in the middle of the wall that was choked with loose rocks that made that section difficult and potentially dangerous, because any missed step might knock a rock to the ground and kill a passing climber or hiker.
So we carefully removed the rocks, loaded them into the pack and rappelled back down.
Take a second to imagine how ridiculous it feels to climb 1,500 feet up a wall just to fill a backpack full of rocks.
(Laughter) It's never that easy to carry a pack full of rocks around.
It's even harder on the side of a cliff.
It may have felt silly, but it still had to get done.
I needed everything to feel perfect if I was ever going to climb the route without a rope.
After two seasons of working specifically toward a potential free solo of El Cap, I finally finished all my preparations.
I knew every handhold and foothold on the whole route, and I knew exactly what to do.
Basically, I was ready.
It was time to solo El Cap.
On June 3, 2017, I woke up early, ate my usual breakfast of muesli and fruit and made it to the base of the wall before sunrise.
I felt confident as I looked up the wall.
I felt even better as I started climbing.
About 500 feet up, I reached a slab very similar to the one that had given me so much trouble on Half Dome, but this time was different.
I'd scouted every option, including hundreds of feet of wall to either side.
I knew exactly what to do and how to do it.
I had no doubts. I just climbed right through.
Even the difficult and strenuous sections passed by with ease.
I was perfectly executing my routine.
I rested for a moment below the Boulder Problem and then climbed it just as I had practiced so many times with the rope on.
My foot shot across to the wall on the left without hesitation, and I knew that I had done it.
Climbing Half Dome had been a big goal and I did it, but I didn't get what I really wanted.
I didn't achieve mastery.
I was hesitant and afraid, and it wasn't the experience that I wanted.
But El Cap was different.
With 600 feet to go, I felt like the mountain was offering me a victory lap.
I climbed with a smooth precision and enjoyed the sounds of the birds swooping around the cliff.
It all felt like a celebration.
And then I reached the summit after three hours and 56 minutes of glorious climbing.
It was the climb that I wanted, and it felt like mastery.
Thank you.
I once had this nightmare: I'm standing in the middle of a deserted field full of land mines.
In real life, I love to hike, but every time I want to go on a hike, it makes me nervous.
I have this thought in the back of my mind that I might lose a limb.
This underlying fear started 10 years ago, after I met Mohammed, a cluster bomb survivor of the summer 2006 Israel-Hezbollah War in Lebanon.
Mohammed, like so many other survivors all around the world, had to live through the horrifying repercussions of cluster munitions on a daily basis.
When the one-month conflict started in Lebanon, I was still working at Agence France-Presse in Paris.
I remember how I was glued to the screens, anxiously following the news.
I wanted to reassure myself that the falling bombs missed my parents' home.
When I arrived in Beirut on assignment to cover that war, I was relieved to be united with my family, after they had finally managed to escape southern Lebanon.
The day the war was over, I remember seeing this image -- one of blocked roads, of displaced people eagerly rushing south, back to their homes, regardless of what they would find.
An estimated four million cluster submunitions were spread in Lebanon during the 34-day conflict.
Mohammed lost both legs during the last week of the conflict.
The fact that he lives a five-minute drive from my parents' home made it easier to follow him through the years.
It was now almost 10 years since we first met.
I saw the young boy who had to endure physical and emotional trauma.
I saw the teenager who tried to offer his friends tattoos, in return for a set fee of five dollars.
And I know the young, jobless man who spends hours surfing the Internet trying to meet a girl who might become his girlfriend.
His fate and the effects of losing his legs are now his daily reality.
Survivors of bomb trauma like Mohammed have to deal with so many details that never occur to us.
Who would have imagined that so many daily tasks we do or take for granted, such as going to the beach or even picking up something from the floor, would become sources of stress and anxiety?
Well, that's what eventually became of Mohammed, due to his inflexible prosthetic legs.
Ten years ago, I had no clue what a cluster bomb was, nor its horrifying implications.
I learned that this indiscriminate weapon was used in so many parts of the world and continues to kill on a regular basis, without distinguishing between a military target or a child.
I naively asked myself, "But seriously, who made those weapons?
And what for?"
Let me explain to you what a cluster bomb is.
It's a large canister filled with bomblets.
When it's dropped from the air, it opens up in midair to release hundreds of bomblets.
They scatter around wide areas and on impact, many fail to explode.
Those unexploded ones end up just like landmines -- sitting on the ground, waiting for their next target.
If someone steps on them by accident or picks them up, they can explode.
These weapons are extremely unpredictable, which makes the threat even bigger.
One day, a farmer can work his land without a problem.
The next day, he can make fire and burn some branches, and the submunitions close by could be set off because of the heat.
The problem is children mistake those bomblets for toys, because they can look like bouncy balls or soda cans.
Being a documentary photographer, I decided to go back to Lebanon a few months after the conflict ended to meet cluster bomb survivors.
And I met a few -- Hussein and Rasha, who both lost a leg to submunitions.
Their stories are similar to so many other kids' stories across the world and are a testimony to the horrifying implications of the continuous use of such weapons.
That's when I met Mohammed, in January 2007.
He was 11 years old, and I met him exactly four months after his accident.
When I first saw him, he was going through painful physiotherapy to recover from his fresh wounds.
Still in shock at such a young age, Mohammed was struggling to get used to his new body.
He would even wake up sometimes at night wanting to scratch his lost feet.
What drew me closer to his story was my instant realization of the difficulties Mohammed was likely to face in the future -- that what he has been suffering while adjusting to his injury at the age of 11, would increase manyfold.
Even before his disability, Mohammed's life wasn't easy.
He was born in the Rashidieh Camp for Palestinian refugees, and this is where he still lives.
Lebanon holds some 400,000 Palestinian refugees, and they suffer from discriminatory laws.
They're not allowed to work in the public sector or practice certain professions and are denied the right to own property.
This is one of the reasons why Mohammed doesn't really regret dropping out of school right after his injury.
He said, "What's the point of a university degree when I can't find a job to start with?"
Cluster bomb use creates a vicious circle of impact on communities, and not only the lives of their victims.
Many who get injured by this weapon drop out of school, can't find jobs or even lose their jobs, therefore losing the ability to provide for their families.
This is not to mention the continuous physical pain and the experience of feeling isolated.
These weapons affect the poorest of the poor.
The high medical cost is a burden to the families.
They end up relying on humanitarian agencies, which is insufficient and unsustainable, especially when injuries require lifelong support to the injured.
Ten years after Mohammed's injury, he is still unable to afford proper prosthetic legs.
He's very cautious with his steps, as a couple of falls over the years brought him embarrassment among his friends.
He joked that since he doesn't have legs, some days he tries to walk on his hands.
One of the worst yet invisible impacts of the weapon is the psychological scars it leaves.
In one of Mohammed's early medical reports, he was diagnosed with signs of PTSD.
He suffered from anxiety, poor appetite, sleep disturbance and showed signs of anger.
The reality is Mohammed never received proper help to fully recover.
His current obsession is to leave Lebanon at any cost -- even if it meant embarking on a hazardous journey along with refugees drifting towards Europe today through the Mediterranean.
Knowing how risky such a journey would be, he said, "If I were to die on the way, it doesn't matter."
To Mohammed, he is dead here, anyway.
Cluster bombs are a world problem, as this munition keeps destroying and hurting whole communities for generations to come.
In an online interview with the director of the Mines Advisory Group, Jamie Franklin, he said, "The US forces dropped over two million tons of munitions over Laos.
If they couldn't find their targets in Vietnam, there were free-drop areas in Laos where planes would drop their loads before going back to base, because it's dangerous to land with loaded planes."
According to the International Committee of the Red Cross, in Laos alone -- one of the poorest countries in the world -- nine to 27 million unexploded submunitions remain.
Some 11,000 people have been killed or injured since 1973.
This lethal weapon has been used by over 20 states during armed conflicts in over 35 countries, such as Ukraine, Iraq and Sudan.
So far, 119 states have joined an international treaty banning cluster bombs, which is officially called the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
But some of the biggest producers of cluster munitions -- namely, the United States, Russia and China -- remain outside of this lifesaving treaty and continue to produce them, reserve the right to produce them in the future, keep those harmful weapons in their stockpiles and even possibly use them in the future.
Cluster bombs have reportedly been used most recently in the ongoing conflicts in Yemen and Syria.
According to research on the worldwide investments in cluster munitions producers by Pax, a Dutch-based NGO, financial institutions invested billions of US dollars into companies that make cluster munitions.
The majority of these institutions are based in countries that have not yet signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
Getting back to Mohammed, one of the few jobs he was able to find was picking lemons.
When I ask him if it's safe to work in the field he said, "I'm not sure."
Research shows that cluster munitions often contaminate areas where agriculture is the main source of income.
According to Handicap International's research, 98 percent of those killed or injured by cluster munitions are civilians.
Eighty-four percent of casualties are males.
In countries where these people have no choice but to work in those fields, they simply do it and risk it.
Mohammed is the only male to three sisters.
Culturally, he's expected to provide for his family, but he simply can't.
He tried to have so many different jobs, but he couldn't keep any due to his physical disability and the less-than-friendly environment to people with disabilities, to say the least.
It hurts him a lot when he goes out looking for a job, and he's turned away with a small amount of money paid to him out of pity.
He said, "I'm not here to beg for money, I just want to earn it."
Mohammed today is 21 years old.
He's illiterate, and he communicates with voice messages.
Here is one of his messages.
(Audio) Mohammed: (Speaking in Arabic) Laura Boushnak: He said, "My dream is to run, and I'm pretty sure once I start running, I would never stop."
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine that you're a pig farmer.
You live on a small farm in the Philippines.
Your animals are your family's sole source of income -- as long as they're healthy.
You know that any day, one of your pigs can catch the flu, the swine flu.
Living in tight quarters, one pig coughing and sneezing may soon lead to the next pig coughing and sneezing, until an outbreak of swine flu has taken over your farm.
If it's a bad enough virus, the health of your herd may be gone in the blink of an eye.
If you called in a veterinarian, he or she would visit your farm and take samples from your pigs' noses and mouths.
But then they would have to drive back into the city to test those samples in their central lab.
Two weeks later, you'd hear back the results.
Two weeks may be just enough time for infection to spread and take away your way of life.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
Today, farmers can take those samples themselves.
They can jump right into the pen and swab their pigs' noses and mouths with a little filter paper, place that little filter paper in a tiny tube, and mix it with some chemicals that will extract genetic material from their pigs' noses and mouths.
And without leaving their farms, they take a drop of that genetic material and put it into a little analyzer smaller than a shoebox, program it to detect DNA or RNA from the swine flu virus, and within one hour get back the results, visualize the results.
This reality is possible because today we're living in the era of personal DNA technology.
Every one of us can actually test DNA ourselves.
DNA is the fundamental molecule the carries genetic instructions that help build the living world.
Humans have DNA.
Pigs have DNA.
Even bacteria and some viruses have DNA too.
The genetic instructions encoded in DNA inform how our bodies develop, grow, function.
And in many cases, that same information can trigger disease.
Your genetic information is strung into a long and twisted molecule, the DNA double helix, that has over three billion letters, beginning to end.
But the lines that carry meaningful information are usually very short -- a few dozen to several thousand letters long.
So when we're looking to answer a question based on DNA, we actually don't need to read all those three billion letters, typically.
That would be like getting hungry at night and having to flip through the whole phone book from cover to cover, pausing at every line, just to find the nearest pizza joint.
(Laughter) Luckily, three decades ago, humans started to invent tools that can find any specific line of genetic information.
These DNA machines are wonderful.
They can find any line in DNA.
But once they find it, that DNA is still tiny, and surrounded by so much other DNA, that what these machines then do is copy the target gene, and one copy piles on top of another, millions and millions and millions of copies, until that gene stands out against the rest; until we can visualize it, interpret it, read it, understand it, until we can answer: Does my pig have the flu?
Or other questions buried in our own DNA: Am I at risk of cancer?
Am I of Irish descent?
Is that child my son?
(Laughter) This ability to make copies of DNA, as simple as it sounds, has transformed our world.
Scientists use it every day to detect and address disease, to create innovative medicines, to modify foods, to assess whether our food is safe to eat or whether it's contaminated with deadly bacteria.
Even judges use the output of these machines in court to decide whether someone is innocent or guilty based on DNA evidence.
The inventor of this DNA-copying technique was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1993.
But for 30 years, the power of genetic analysis has been confined to the ivory tower, or bigwig PhD scientist work.
Well, several companies around the world are working on making this same technology accessible to everyday people like the pig farmer, like you.
I cofounded one of these companies.
Three years ago, together with a fellow biologist and friend of mine, Zeke Alvarez Saavedra, we decided to make personal DNA machines that anyone could use.
Our goal was to bring DNA science to more people in new places.
We started working in our basements.
We had a simple question: What could the world look like if everyone could analyze DNA?
We were curious, as curious as you would have been if I had shown you this picture in 1980.
(Laughter) You would have thought, "Wow!
I can now call my Aunt Glenda from the car and wish her a happy birthday.
I can call anyone, anytime.
This is the future!"
Little did you know, you would tap on that phone to make dinner reservations for you and Aunt Glenda to celebrate together.
With another tap, you'd be ordering her gift.
And yet one more tap, and you'd be "liking" Auntie Glenda on Facebook.
And all of this, while sitting on the toilet.
(Laughter) It is notoriously hard to predict where new technology might take us.
And the same is true for personal DNA technology today.
For example, I could never have imagined that a truffle farmer, of all people, would use personal DNA machines.
Dr. Paul Thomas grows truffles for a living.
We see him pictured here, holding the first UK-cultivated truffle in his hands, on one of his farms.
Truffles are this delicacy that stems from a fungus growing on the roots of living trees.
And it's a rare fungus.
Some species may fetch 3,000, 7,000, or more dollars per kilogram.
I learned from Paul that the stakes for a truffle farmer can be really high.
When he sources new truffles to grow on his farms, he's exposed to the threat of knockoffs -- truffles that look and feel like the real thing, but they're of lower quality.
But even to a trained eye like Paul's, even when looked at under a microscope, these truffles can pass for authentic.
So in order to grow the highest quality truffles, the ones that chefs all over the world will fight over, Paul has to use DNA analysis.
Isn't that mind-blowing?
I bet you will never look at that black truffle risotto again without thinking of its genes.
(Laughter) But personal DNA machines can also save human lives.
Professor Ian Goodfellow is a virologist at the University of Cambridge.
Last year he traveled to Sierra Leone.
When the Ebola outbreak broke out in Western Africa, he quickly realized that doctors there lacked the basic tools to detect and combat disease.
Results could take up to a week to come back -- that's way too long for the patients and the families who are suffering.
Ian decided to move his lab into Makeni, Sierra Leone.
Here we see Ian Goodfellow moving over 10 tons of equipment into a pop-up tent that he would equip to detect and diagnose the virus and sequence it within 24 hours.
But here's a surprise: the same equipment that Ian could use at his lab in the UK to sequence and diagnose Ebola, just wouldn't work under these conditions.
We're talking 35 Celsius heat and over 90 percent humidity here.
But instead, Ian could use personal DNA machines small enough to be placed in front of the air-conditioning unit to keep sequencing the virus and keep saving lives.
This may seem like an extreme place for DNA analysis, but let's move on to an even more extreme environment: outer space.
Let's talk about DNA analysis in space.
When astronauts live aboard the International Space Station, they're orbiting the planet 250 miles high.
They're traveling at 17,000 miles per hour.
Picture that -- you're seeing 15 sunsets and sunrises every day.
You're also living in microgravity, floating.
And under these conditions, our bodies can do funky things.
One of these things is that our immune systems get suppressed, making astronauts more prone to infection.
A 16-year-old girl, a high school student from New York, Anna-Sophia Boguraev, wondered whether changes to the DNA of astronauts could be related to this immune suppression, and through a science competition called "Genes In Space," Anna-Sophia designed an experiment to test this hypothesis using a personal DNA machine aboard the International Space Station.
Here we see Anna-Sophia on April 8, 2016, in Cape Canaveral, watching her experiment launch to the International Space Station.
That cloud of smoke is the rocket that brought Anna-Sophia's experiment to the International Space Station, where, three days later, astronaut Tim Peake carried out her experiment -- in microgravity.
Personal DNA machines are now aboard the International Space Station, where they can help monitor living conditions and protect the lives of astronauts.
A 16-year-old designing a DNA experiment to protect the lives of astronauts may seem like a rarity, the mark of a child genius.
Well, to me, it signals something bigger: that DNA technology is finally within the reach of every one of you.
A few years ago, a college student armed with a personal computer could code an app, an app that is now a social network with more than one billion users.
Could we be moving into a world of one personal DNA machine in every home?
I know families who are already living in this reality.
The Daniels family, for example, set up a DNA lab in the basement of their suburban Chicago home.
This is not a family made of PhD scientists.
This is a family like any other.
They just like to spend time together doing fun, creative things.
By day, Brian is an executive at a private equity firm.
At night and on weekends, he experiments with DNA alongside his kids, ages seven and nine, as a way to explore the living world.
Last time I called them, they were checking out homegrown produce from the backyard garden.
They were testing tomatoes that they had picked, taking the flesh of their skin, putting it in a test tube, mixing it with chemicals to extract DNA and then using their home DNA copier to test those tomatoes for genetically engineered traits.
For the Daniels family, the personal DNA machine is like the chemistry set for the 21st century.
Most of us may not yet be diagnosing genetic conditions in our kitchen sinks or doing at-home paternity testing.
(Laughter) But we've definitely reached a point in history where every one of you could actually get hands-on with DNA in your kitchen.
You could copy, paste and analyze DNA and extract meaningful information from it.
And it's at times like this that profound transformation is bound to happen; moments when a transformative, powerful technology that was before limited to a select few in the ivory tower, finally becomes within the reach of every one of us, from farmers to schoolchildren.
Think about the moment when phones stopped being plugged into the wall by cords, or when computers left the mainframe and entered your home or your office.
The ripples of the personal DNA revolution may be hard to predict, but one thing is certain: revolutions don't go backwards, and DNA technology is already spreading faster than our imagination.
So if you're curious, get up close and personal with DNA -- today.
It is in our DNA to be curious.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
As a lover of human anatomy, I'm so excited that we're finally putting our bodies at the center of focus.
Through practices such as preventive medicine, patient empowerment and self-monitoring -- down to now obsessing over every single step we take in a day.
All of this works to promote a healthy connection between ourselves and our bodies.
Despite all this focus on the healthy self, general public knowledge of the anatomical self is lacking.
Many people don't know the location of their vital organs, or even how they function.
And that's because human anatomy is a difficult and time-intensive subject to learn.
How many of you here made it through anatomy?
Wow, good -- most of you are in medicine.
I, like you, spent countless hours memorizing hundreds of structures.
Something no student of anatomy could do without the help of visuals.
Because at the end of the day, whether you remember every little structure or not, these medical illustrations are what makes studying anatomy so intriguing.
In looking at them, we're actually viewing a manual of our very selves.
But what happens when we're done studying?
These beautiful illustrations are then shut back into the pages of a medical textbook, or an app, referenced only when needed.
And for the public, medical illustrations may only be encountered passively on the walls of a doctor's office.
From the beginnings of modern medicine, medical illustration, and therefore anatomy, have existed primarily within the realm of medical education.
Yet there's something fascinating happening right now.
Artists are breaking anatomy out of the confines of the medical world and are thrusting it into the public space.
For the past nine years, I have been cataloguing and sharing this rise in anatomical art with the public -- all from my perspective as a medical illustrator.
But before I get into showing you how artists are reclaiming anatomy today, it's important to understand how art influenced anatomy in the past.
Now, anatomy is by its very nature a visual science, and the first anatomists to understand this lived during the Renaissance.
They relied on artists to help advertise their discoveries to their peers in the public.
And this drive to not only teach but also to entertain resulted in some of the strangest anatomical illustrations.
Anatomy was caught in a struggle between science, art and culture that lasted for over 500 years.
Artists rendered dissected cadavers as alive, posed in these humorous anatomical stripteases.
Imagine seeing that in your textbooks today.
They also showed them as very much dead -- unwillingly stripped of their skin.
Disembodied limbs were often posed in literal still lives.
And some illustrations even included pop culture references.
This is Clara, a famous rhinoceros that was traveling Europe in the mid-1700s, at a time when seeing a rhino was an exciting rarity.
Including her in this illustration was akin to celebrity sponsorship today.
The introduction of color then brought a whole new depth and clarity to anatomy that made it stunning.
By the early 20th century, the perfect balance of science and art had finally been struck with the emergence of medical illustrators.
They created a universal representation of anatomy -- something that was neither alive nor dead, that was free from those influences of artistic culture.
And this focus on no-frills accuracy was precisely for the benefit of medical education.
And this is what we get to study from today.
But why is it that medical illustration -- both past and present -- captures our imaginations?
Now, we are innately tuned into the beauty of the human body.
And medical illustration is still art.
Nothing can elicit an emotional response -- from joy to complete disgust -- more than the human body.
And today, artists armed with that emotion, are grasping anatomy from the medical world, and are reinvigorating it through art in the most imaginative ways.
A perfect example of this is Spanish contemporary artist Fernando Vicente.
He takes 19th century anatomical illustrations of the male body and envelops them in a female sensuality.
The women in his paintings taunt us to view beyond their surface anatomy, thereby introducing a strong femininity that was previously lacking in the history of anatomical representation.
Artistry can also be seen in the repair and recovery of the human body.
This is an X-ray of a woman who fractured and dislocated her ankle in a roller-skating accident.
As a tribute to her trauma, she commissioned Montreal-based architect Federico Carbajal to construct a wire sculpture of her damaged lower leg.
Now, notice those bright red screws magnified in the sculpture.
These are the actual surgical screws used in reconstructing her ankle.
It's medical hardware that's been repurposed as art.
People often ask me how I choose the art that I showcase online or feature in gallery shows.
And for me it's a balance between the technique and a concept that pushes the boundaries of anatomy as a way to know thyself, which is why the work of Michael Reedy struck me.
His serious figure drawings are often layered in elements of humor.
For instance, take a look at her face.
Notice those red marks.
Michael manifests the consuming insecurity of a skin condition as these maniacal cartoon monsters annoying and out of control in the background.
On the mirrored figure, he renders the full anatomy and covers it in glitter, making it look like candy.
By doing this, Michael downplays the common perception of anatomy so closely tied to just disease and death.
Now, this next concept might not make much sense, but human anatomy is no longer limited to humans.
When you were a child, did you ever wish that your toys could come to life?
Well, Jason Freeny makes those dreams come true with his magical toy dissections.
(Laughter) One might think that this would bring a morbid edge to one's innocent childhood characters, but Jason says of his dissections, "One thing I've never seen in a child's reaction to my work is fear."
It's always wonder, amazement and wanting to explore.
Fear of anatomy and guts is a learned reaction.
This anatomization also extends to politically and socially charged objects.
In Noah Scalin's "Anatomy of War," we see a gun dissected to reveal human organs.
But if you look closely, you'll notice that it lacks a brain.
And if you keep looking, you might also notice that Noah has so thoughtfully placed the rectum at the business end of that gun barrel.
Now, this next artist I've been following for many years, watching him excite the public about anatomy.
Danny Quirk is a young artist who paints his subjects in the process of self-dissection.
He bends the rules of medical illustration by inserting a very dramatic light and shadow.
And this creates a 3-D illusion that lends itself very well to painting directly on the human skin.
Danny makes it look as if a person's skin has actually been removed.
And this effect -- also cool and tattoo-like -- easily transitions into a medical illustration.
Now Danny is currently traveling the world, teaching anatomy to the public via his body paintings, which is why it was so shocking to find out that he was rejected from medical illustration programs.
But he's doing just fine.
Then there are artists who are extracting anatomy from both the medical world and the art world and are placing it directly on the streets.
London-based SHOK-1 paints giant X-rays of pop culture icons.
His X-rays show how culture can come to have an anatomy of its own, and conversely how culture can become part of the anatomy of a person.
You come to admire his work because reproducing X-rays by hand, let alone with spray paint, is extremely difficult.
But then again this is a street artist, who also happens to hold a degree in applied chemistry.
Nychos, an Austrian street artist, takes the term "exploded view" to a whole new level, splattering human and animal dissections on walls all over the world.
Influenced by comics and heavy metal, Nychos inserts a very youthful and enticing energy into anatomy that I just love.
Street artists believe that art belongs to the public.
And this street anatomy is so captivating because it is the furthest removed from the medical world.
It forces you to look at it, and confront your own perceptions about anatomy, whether you find it beautiful, gross, morbid or awe-inspiring, like I do.
That it elicits these responses at all is due to our intimate and often changing relationship with it.
All of the artists that I showed you here today referenced medical illustrations for their art.
But for them, anatomy isn't just something to memorize, but a base from which to understand the human body on a meaningful level; to depict it in ways that we can relate, whether it be through cartoons, body painting or street art.
Anatomical art has the power to reach far beyond the pages of a medical textbook, to ignite an excitement in the public, and reinvigorate an enthusiasm in the medical world, ultimately connecting our innermost selves with our bodies through art.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I had about five minutes before I was set to deliver a talk to a bunch of business owners about visibility and being on camera.
After all, I was the so-called expert there, the former 20-year television news anchor and life and business coach.
I happened to take a look down at my cell phone just to catch the time, and I noticed that I had a missed call from my ex-husband.
I can still hear his voice.
"Darieth, what is going on?
I just got a call from some strange man who told me to go to this website, and now I'm looking at all of these photos of you naked.
Your private parts are all over this website.
Who's seen this?"
I couldn't think. I couldn't breathe.
I was so humiliated and so embarrassed and so ashamed.
I felt like my world was coming to an end.
And yet, this began for me months of pain and depression and anger and confusion and silence.
My manipulative, jealous, stalker ex-boyfriend did exactly what he said he would do: he put up a website with my name on it, and he posted this.
And this.
And several explicit photos that he had taken of me while I was asleep, living with him in Jamaica.
For months prior to that, he had been sending me threatening text messages like this.
He was trying to make me out to be some sleazy, low-life slut.
He had even threatened to kill me.
He told me that he would shoot me in my head and stab me in my heart, simply because I wanted to end the controlling relationship.
I couldn't believe this was happening to me.
I didn't even know what to call it.
You might know it as cyberharassment or cyberbullying.
The media calls it "revenge porn."
I now call it "digital domestic violence."
It typically stems from a relationship gone bad, where a controlling, jilted ex-lover can't handle rejection, so when they can't physically put their hands on you, they use different weapons: cell phones and laptops.
The ammunition?
Photos, videos, explicit information, content -- all posted online, without your consent.
I mean, let's face it -- we all live our lives online.
And the internet is a really small world.
We show off our baby photos, we start and grow our businesses, we make new relationships, we let the world in, one Facebook like at a time.
And you know what I found?
An even smaller world.
One in 25 women say they have been impacted by revenge porn.
For women under the age of 30, that number looks like one in 10.
And that leaves a few of you in this audience as potential victims.
You want to know what's even more alarming?
Lack of legislation and laws to adequately protect victims and punish perpetrators.
There's only one federal bill pending; it's called the ENOUGH Act, by Senator Kamala Harris.
It would criminalize revenge porn.
But that could take years to pass.
So what are we left with in the meantime?
Flimsy civil misdemeanors.
Currently, only 40 states and DC have some laws in place for revenge porn.
And those penalties vary -- we're talking $500 fines.
Five hundred dollars?
Are you kidding me?
Women are losing their jobs.
They're suffering from damaged relationships and damaged reputations.
They're falling into illness and depression.
And the suicide rates are climbing.
You're looking at a woman who spent 11 months in court, thirteen trips to the courthouse and thousands of dollars in legal fees, just to get two things: a protection from cyberstalking and cyberabuse, otherwise known as a PFA, and language from a judge that would force a third-party internet company to remove the content.
It's expensive, complicated and confusing.
And worse, legal loopholes and jurisdictional issues drag this out for months, while my private parts were on display for months.
How would you feel if your naked body was exposed for the world to see, and you waited helplessly for the content to be removed?
Eventually, I stumbled upon a private company to issue a DMCA notice to shut the website down.
DMCA -- Digital Millennium Copyright Act.
It's a law that regulates digital material and content.
Broadly, the aim of the DMCA is to protect both copyright owners and consumers.
So get this: people who take and share nude photos own the rights to those selfies, so they should be able to issue a DMCA to have the content removed.
But not so fast -- because the other fight we're dealing with is noncompliant and nonresponsive third-party internet companies.
And oh -- by the way, even in consenting relationships, just because you get a nude photo or a naked pic, does not give you the right to share it, even [without] the intent to do harm.
Back to my case, which happens to be further complicated because he was stalking and harassing me from another country, making it nearly impossible to get help here.
But wait a minute -- isn't the internet international?
Shouldn't we have some sort of policy in place that broadly protects us, regardless to borders or restrictions?
I just couldn’t give up; I had to keep fighting.
So I willingly, on three occasions, allowed for the invasion of both my cell phone and my laptop by the Department of Homeland Security and the Jamaican Embassy for thorough forensic investigation, because I had maintained all of the evidence.
I painstakingly shared my private parts with the all-male investigative team.
And it was an embarrassing, humiliating additional hoop to jump through.
But then something happened.
Jamaican authorities actually arrested him.
He's now facing charges under their malicious communications act, and if found guilty, could face thousands of dollars in fines and up to 10 years in prison.
And I've also learned that my case is making history -- it is the first international case under this new crime.
Wow, finally some justice.
But this got me to thinking.
Nobody deserves this.
Nobody deserves this level of humiliation and having to jump through all of these hoops.
Our cyber civil rights are at stake.
Here in the United States, we need to have clear, tough enforcement; we need to demand the accountability and responsiveness from online companies; we need to promote social responsibilities for posting, sharing and texting; and we need to restore dignity to victims.
And what about victims who neither have the time, money or resources to wage war, who are left disempowered, mislabeled and broken?
Two things: release the shame and end the silence.
Shame is at the core of all of this.
And for every silent prisoner of shame, it's the fear of judgment that's holding you hostage.
And the price to pay is the stripping away of your self-worth.
The day I ended my silence, I freed myself from shame.
And I freed myself from the fear of judgment from the one person who I thought would judge me the most -- my son, who actually told me, "Mom, you are the strongest person that I know.
You can get through this.
And besides, mom -- he chose the wrong woman to mess with."
(Laughter) (Applause) It was on that day that I decided to use my platform and my story and my voice.
And to get started, I asked myself this one simple question: Who do I need to become now?
That question, in the face of everything that I was challenged with, transformed my life and had me thinking about all kinds of possibilities.
I now own my story, I speak my truth, and I'm narrating a new chapter in my life.
It's called "50 Shades of Silence."
It's a global social justice project, and we're working to film an upcoming documentary to give voice and dignity to victims.
If you are a victim or you know someone who is, know this: in order to be empowered, you have to take care of yourself, and you have to love yourself.
You have to turn your anger into action, your pain into power and your setback into a setup for what's next for your life.
This is a process, and it's a journey of self-discovery that might include forgiveness.
But it definitely requires bravery, confidence and conviction.
I call it: finding your everyday courage.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The technology likely to have the greatest impact on the next few decades has arrived.
And it's not social media.
It's not big data.
It's not robotics.
It's not even AI.
You'll be surprised to learn that it's the underlying technology of digital currencies like Bitcoin.
It's called the blockchain. Blockchain.
Now, it's not the most sonorous word in the world, but I believe that this is now the next generation of the internet, and that it holds vast promise for every business, every society and for all of you, individually.
You know, for the past few decades, we've had the internet of information.
And when I send you an email or a PowerPoint file or something, I'm actually not sending you the original, I'm sending you a copy.
And that's great.
This is democratized information.
But when it comes to assets -- things like money, financial assets like stocks and bonds, loyalty points, intellectual property, music, art, a vote, carbon credit and other assets -- sending you a copy is a really bad idea.
If I send you 100 dollars, it's really important that I don't still have the money -- (Laughter) and that I can't send it to you.
This has been called the "double-spend" problem by cryptographers for a long time.
So today, we rely entirely on big intermediaries -- middlemen like banks, government, big social media companies, credit card companies and so on -- to establish trust in our economy.
And these intermediaries perform all the business and transaction logic of every kind of commerce, from authentication, identification of people, through to clearing, settling and record keeping.
And overall, they do a pretty good job.
But there are growing problems.
To begin, they're centralized.
That means they can be hacked, and increasingly are -- JP Morgan, the US Federal Government, LinkedIn, Home Depot and others found that out the hard way.
They exclude billions of people from the global economy, for example, people who don't have enough money to have a bank account.
They slow things down.
It can take a second for an email to go around the world, but it can take days or weeks for money to move through the banking system across a city.
And they take a big piece of the action -- 10 to 20 percent just to send money to another country.
They capture our data, and that means we can't monetize it or use it to better manage our lives.
Our privacy is being undermined.
And the biggest problem is that overall, they've appropriated the largesse of the digital age asymmetrically: we have wealth creation, but we have growing social inequality.
So what if there were not only an internet of information, what if there were an internet of value -- some kind of vast, global, distributed ledger running on millions of computers and available to everybody.
And where every kind of asset, from money to music, could be stored, moved, transacted, exchanged and managed, all without powerful intermediaries?
What if there were a native medium for value?
Well, in 2008, the financial industry crashed and, perhaps propitiously, an anonymous person or persons named Satoshi Nakamoto created a paper where he developed a protocol for a digital cash that used an underlying cryptocurrency called Bitcoin.
And this cryptocurrency enabled people to establish trust and do transactions without a third party.
And this seemingly simple act set off a spark that ignited the world, that has everyone excited or terrified or otherwise interested in many places.
Now, don't be confused about Bitcoin -- Bitcoin is an asset; it goes up and down, and that should be of interest to you if you're a speculator.
More broadly, it's a cryptocurrency.
It's not a fiat currency controlled by a nation-state.
And that's of greater interest.
But the real pony here is the underlying technology.
It's called blockchain.
So for the first time now in human history, people everywhere can trust each other and transact peer to peer.
And trust is established, not by some big institution, but by collaboration, by cryptography and by some clever code.
And because trust is native to the technology, I call this, "The Trust Protocol."
Now, you're probably wondering: How does this thing work?
Fair enough.
Assets -- digital assets like money to music and everything in between -- are not stored in a central place, but they're distributed across a global ledger, using the highest level of cryptography.
And when a transaction is conducted, it's posted globally, across millions and millions of computers.
And out there, around the world, is a group of people called "miners."
These are not young people, they're Bitcoin miners.
They have massive computing power at their fingertips -- 10 to 100 times bigger than all of Google worldwide.
These miners do a lot of work.
And every 10 minutes, kind of like the heartbeat of a network, a block gets created that has all the transactions from the previous 10 minutes.
Then the miners get to work, trying to solve some tough problems.
And they compete: the first miner to find out the truth and to validate the block, is rewarded in digital currency, in the case of the Bitcoin blockchain, with Bitcoin.
And then -- this is the key part -- that block is linked to the previous block and the previous block to create a chain of blocks.
And every one is time-stamped, kind of like with a digital waxed seal.
So if I wanted to go and hack a block and, say, pay you and you with the same money, I'd have to hack that block, plus all the preceding blocks, the entire history of commerce on that blockchain, not just on one computer but across millions of computers, simultaneously, all using the highest levels of encryption, in the light of the most powerful computing resource in the world that's watching me.
Tough to do.
This is infinitely more secure than the computer systems that we have today.
Blockchain. That's how it works.
So the Bitcoin blockchain is just one.
The Ethereum blockchain was developed by a Canadian named Vitalik Buterin.
He's [22] years old, and this blockchain has some extraordinary capabilities.
One of them is that you can build smart contracts.
It's kind of what it sounds like.
It's a contract that self-executes, and the contract handles the enforcement, the management, performance and payment -- the contract kind of has a bank account, too, in a sense -- of agreements between people.
And today, on the Ethereum blockchain, there are projects underway to do everything from create a new replacement for the stock market to create a new model of democracy, where politicians are accountable to citizens.
(Applause) So to understand what a radical change this is going to bring, let's look at one industry, financial services.
Recognize this?
Rube Goldberg machine.
It's a ridiculously complicated machine that does something really simple, like crack an egg or shut a door.
Well, it kind of reminds me of the financial services industry, honestly.
I mean, you tap your card in the corner store, and a bitstream goes through a dozen companies, each with their own computer system, some of them being 1970s mainframes older than many of the people in this room, and three days later, a settlement occurs.
Well, with a blockchain financial industry, there would be no settlement, because the payment and the settlement is the same activity, it's just a change in the ledger.
So Wall Street and all around the world, the financial industry is in a big upheaval about this, wondering, can we be replaced, or how do we embrace this technology for success?
Now, why should you care?
Well, let me describe some applications.
Prosperity.
The first era of the internet, the internet of information, brought us wealth but not shared prosperity, because social inequality is growing.
And this is at the heart of all of the anger and extremism and protectionism and xenophobia and worse that we're seeing growing in the world today, Brexit being the most recent case.
So could we develop some new approaches to this problem of inequality?
Because the only approach today is to redistribute wealth, tax people and spread it around more.
Could we pre-distribute wealth?
Could we change the way that wealth gets created in the first place by democratizing wealth creation, engaging more people in the economy, and then ensuring that they got fair compensation?
Let me describe five ways that this can be done.
Number one: Did you know that 70 percent of the people in the world who have land have a tenuous title to it?
So, you've got a little farm in Honduras, some dictator comes to power, he says, "I know you've got a piece of paper that says you own your farm, but the government computer says my friend owns your farm."
This happened on a mass scale in Honduras, and this problem exists everywhere.
Hernando de Soto, the great Latin American economist, says this is the number one issue in the world in terms of economic mobility, more important than having a bank account, because if you don't have a valid title to your land, you can't borrow against it, and you can't plan for the future.
So today, companies are working with governments to put land titles on a blockchain.
And once it's there, this is immutable.
You can't hack it.
This creates the conditions for prosperity for potentially billions of people.
Secondly: a lot of writers talk about Uber and Airbnb and TaskRabbit and Lyft and so on as part of the sharing economy.
This is a very powerful idea, that peers can come together and create and share wealth.
My view is that ...
these companies are not really sharing.
In fact, they're successful precisely because they don't share.
They aggregate services together, and they sell them.
What if, rather than Airbnb being a $25 billion corporation, there was a distributed application on a blockchain, we'll call it B-Airbnb, and it was essentially owned by all of the people who have a room to rent.
And when someone wants to rent a room, they go onto the blockchain database and all the criteria, they sift through, it helps them find the right room, and then the blockchain helps with the contracting, it identifies the party, it handles the payments just through digital payments -- they're built into the system.
And it even handles reputation, because if she rates a room as a five-star room, that room is there, and it's rated, and it's immutable.
So, the big sharing-economy disruptors in Silicon Valley could be disrupted, and this would be good for prosperity.
Number three: the biggest flow of funds from the developed world to the developing world is not corporate investment, and it's not even foreign aid.
It's remittances.
This is the global diaspora; people have left their ancestral lands, and they're sending money back to their families at home.
This is 600 billion dollars a year, and it's growing, and these people are getting ripped off.
Analie Domingo is a housekeeper.
She lives in Toronto, and every month she goes to the Western Union office with some cash to send her remittances to her mom in Manila.
It costs her around 10 percent; the money takes four to seven days to get there; her mom never knows when it's going to arrive.
It takes five hours out of her week to do this.
Six months ago, Analie Domingo used a blockchain application called Abra.
And from her mobile device, she sent 300 bucks.
It went directly to her mom's mobile device without going through an intermediary.
And then her mom looked at her mobile device -- it's kind of like an Uber interface, there's Abra "tellers" moving around.
She clicks on a teller that's a five-star teller, who's seven minutes away.
The guy shows up at the door, gives her Filipino pesos, she puts them in her wallet.
The whole thing took minutes, and it cost her two percent.
This is a big opportunity for prosperity.
Number four: the most powerful asset of the digital age is data.
And data is really a new asset class, maybe bigger than previous asset classes, like land under the agrarian economy, or an industrial plant, or even money.
And all of you -- we -- create this data.
We create this asset, and we leave this trail of digital crumbs behind us as we go throughout life.
And these crumbs are collected into a mirror image of you, the virtual you.
And the virtual you may know more about you than you do, because you can't remember what you bought a year ago, or said a year ago, or your exact location a year ago.
And the virtual you is not owned by you -- that's the big problem.
So today, there are companies working to create an identity in a black box, the virtual you owned by you.
And this black box moves around with you as you travel throughout the world, and it's very, very stingy.
It only gives away the shred of information that's required to do something.
A lot of transactions, the seller doesn't even need to know who you are.
They just need to know that they got paid.
And then this avatar is sweeping up all of this data and enabling you to monetize it.
And this is a wonderful thing, because it can also help us protect our privacy, and privacy is the foundation of a free society.
Let's get this asset that we create back under our control, where we can own our own identity and manage it responsibly.
Finally -- (Applause) Finally, number five: there are a whole number of creators of content who don't receive fair compensation, because the system for intellectual property is broken.
It was broken by the first era of the internet.
Take music.
Musicians are left with crumbs at the end of the whole food chain.
You know, if you were a songwriter, 25 years ago, you wrote a hit song, it got a million singles, you could get royalties of around 45,000 dollars.
Today, you're a songwriter, you write a hit song, it gets a million streams, you don't get 45k, you get 36 dollars, enough to buy a nice pizza.
So Imogen Heap, the Grammy-winning singer-songwriter, is now putting music on a blockchain ecosystem.
She calls it "Mycelia."
And the music has a smart contract surrounding it.
And the music protects her intellectual property rights.
You want to listen to the song?
It's free, or maybe a few micro-cents that flow into a digital account.
You want to put the song in your movie, that's different, and the IP rights are all specified.
You want to make a ringtone? That's different.
She describes that the song becomes a business.
It's out there on this platform marketing itself, protecting the rights of the author, and because the song has a payment system in the sense of bank account, all the money flows back to the artist, and they control the industry, rather than these powerful intermediaries.
Now, this is -- (Applause) This is not just songwriters, it's any creator of content, like art, like inventions, scientific discoveries, journalists.
There are all kinds of people who don't get fair compensation, and with blockchains, they're going to be able to make it rain on the blockchain.
And that's a wonderful thing.
So, these are five opportunities out of a dozen to solve one problem, prosperity, which is one of countless problems that blockchains are applicable to.
Now, technology doesn't create prosperity, of course -- people do.
But my case to you is that, once again, the technology genie has escaped from the bottle, and it was summoned by an unknown person or persons at this uncertain time in human history, and it's giving us another kick at the can, another opportunity to rewrite the economic power grid and the old order of things, and solve some of the world's most difficult problems, if we will it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
There are things we say when we catch the eye of a stranger or a neighbor walking by.
We say, "Hello, how are you?
It's a beautiful day.
How do you feel?"
These sound kind of meaningless, right? And, in some ways, they are.
They have no semantic meaning.
It doesn't matter how you are or what the day is like.
They have something else.
They have social meaning.
What we mean when we say those things is: I see you there.
I'm obsessed with talking to strangers.
I make eye contact, say hello, I offer help, I listen.
I get all kinds of stories.
About seven years ago, I started documenting my experiences to try to figure out why.
What I found was that something really beautiful was going on.
This is almost poetic.
These were really profound experiences.
They were unexpected pleasures.
They were genuine emotional connections.
They were liberating moments.
So one day, I was standing on a corner waiting for the light to change, which, I'm a New Yorker, so that means I was actually standing in the street on the storm drain, as if that could get me across faster.
And there's an old man standing next to me.
So he's wearing, like, a long overcoat and sort of an old-man hat, and he looked like somebody from a movie.
And he says to me, "Don't stand there. You might disappear."
So this is absurd, right?
But I did what he said. I stepped back onto the sidewalk.
And he smiled, and he said, "Good. You never know.
I might have turned around, and zoop, you're gone."
This was weird, and also really wonderful.
He was so warm, and he was so happy that he'd saved me.
We had this little bond.
For a minute, I felt like my existence as a person had been noticed, and I was worth saving.
The really sad thing is, in many parts of the world, we're raised to believe that strangers are dangerous by default, that we can't trust them, that they might hurt us.
But most strangers aren't dangerous.
We're uneasy around them because we have no context.
We don't know what their intentions are.
So instead of using our perceptions and making choices, we rely on this category of "stranger."
I have a four-year-old.
When I say hello to people on the street, she asks me why.
She says, "Do we know them?"
I say, "No, they're our neighbor."
"Are they our friend?"
"No, it's just good to be friendly."
I think twice every time I say that to her, because I mean it, but as a woman, particularly, I know that not every stranger on the street has the best intentions.
It is good to be friendly, and it's good to learn when not to be, but none of that means we have to be afraid.
There are two huge benefits to using our senses instead of our fears.
The first one is that it liberates us.
When you think about it, using perception instead of categories is much easier said than done.
Categories are something our brains use.
When it comes to people, it's sort of a shortcut for learning about them.
We see male, female, young, old, black, brown, white, stranger, friend, and we use the information in that box.
It's quick, it's easy and it's a road to bias.
And it means we're not thinking about people as individuals.
I know an American researcher who travels frequently in Central Asia and Africa, alone.
She's entering into towns and cities as a complete stranger.
She has no bonds, no connections.
She's a foreigner.
Her survival strategy is this: get one stranger to see you as a real, individual person.
If you can do that, it'll help other people see you that way, too.
The second benefit of using our senses has to do with intimacy.
I know it sounds a little counterintuitive, intimacy and strangers, but these quick interactions can lead to a feeling that sociologists call "fleeting intimacy."
So, it's a brief experience that has emotional resonance and meaning.
It's the good feeling I got from being saved from the death trap of the storm drain by the old man, or how I feel like part of a community when I talk to somebody on my train on the way to work.
Sometimes it goes further.
Researchers have found that people often feel more comfortable being honest and open about their inner selves with strangers than they do with their friends and their families -- that they often feel more understood by strangers.
This gets reported in the media with great lament.
"Strangers communicate better than spouses!"
It's a good headline, right?
I think it entirely misses the point.
The important thing about these studies is just how significant these interactions can be; how this special form of closeness gives us something we need as much as we need our friends and our families.
So how is it possible that we communicate so well with strangers?
There are two reasons.
The first one is that it's a quick interaction.
It has no consequences.
It's easy to be honest with someone you're never going to see again, right?
That makes sense.
The second reason is where it gets more interesting.
We have a bias when it comes to people we're close to.
We expect them to understand us.
We assume they do, and we expect them to read our minds.
So imagine you're at a party, and you can't believe that your friend or your spouse isn't picking up on it that you want to leave early.
And you're thinking, "I gave you the look."
With a stranger, we have to start from scratch.
We tell the whole story, we explain who the people are, how we feel about them; we spell out all the inside jokes.
And guess what?
Sometimes they do understand us a little better.
OK.
So now that we know that talking to strangers matters, how does it work?
There are unwritten rules we tend to follow.
The rules are very different depending on what country you're in, what culture you're in.
In most parts of the US, the baseline expectation in public is that we maintain a balance between civility and privacy.
This is known as civil inattention.
So, imagine two people are walking towards each other on the street.
They'll glance at each other from a distance.
That's the civility, the acknowledgment.
And then as they get closer, they'll look away, to give each other some space.
In other cultures, people go to extraordinary lengths not to interact at all.
People from Denmark tell me that many Danes are so averse to talking to strangers, that they would rather miss their stop on the bus than say "excuse me" to someone that they need to get around.
Instead, there's this elaborate shuffling of bags and using your body to say that you need to get past, instead of using two words.
In Egypt, I'm told, it's rude to ignore a stranger, and there's a remarkable culture of hospitality.
Strangers might ask each other for a sip of water.
Or, if you ask someone for directions, they're very likely to invite you home for coffee.
We see these unwritten rules most clearly when they're broken, or when you're in a new place and you're trying to figure out what the right thing to do is.
Sometimes breaking the rules a little bit is where the action is.
In case it's not clear, I really want you to do this. OK?
So here's how it's going to go.
Find somebody who is making eye contact.
That's a good signal.
The first thing is a simple smile.
If you're passing somebody on the street or in the hallway here, smile.
See what happens.
Another is triangulation.
There's you, there's a stranger, there's some third thing that you both might see and comment on, like a piece of public art or somebody preaching in the street or somebody wearing funny clothes.
Give it a try.
Make a comment about that third thing, and see if starts a conversation.
Another is what I call noticing.
This is usually giving a compliment.
I'm a big fan of noticing people's shoes.
I'm actually not wearing fabulous shoes right now, but shoes are fabulous in general.
And they're pretty neutral as far as giving compliments goes.
People always want to tell you things about their awesome shoes.
You may have already experienced the dogs and babies principle.
It can be awkward to talk to someone on the street; you don't know how they're going to respond.
But you can always talk to their dog or their baby.
The dog or the baby is a social conduit to the person, and you can tell by how they respond whether they're open to talking more.
The last one I want to challenge you to is disclosure.
This is a very vulnerable thing to do, and it can be very rewarding.
So next time you're talking to a stranger and you feel comfortable, tell them something true about yourself, something really personal.
You might have that experience I talked about of feeling understood.
Sometimes in conversation, it comes up, people ask me, "What does your dad do?" or, "Where does he live?"
And sometimes I tell them the whole truth, which is that he died when I was a kid.
Always in those moments, they share their own experiences of loss.
We tend to meet disclosure with disclosure, even with strangers.
So, here it is.
When you talk to strangers, you're making beautiful interruptions into the expected narrative of your daily life and theirs.
You're making unexpected connections.
If you don't talk to strangers, you're missing out on all of that.
We spend a lot of time teaching our children about strangers.
What would happen if we spent more time teaching ourselves?
We could reject all the ideas that make us so suspicious of each other.
We could make a space for change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Concrete is the most widely used construction material in the world.
It can be found in swathes of city pavements, bridges that span vast rivers, and the tallest skyscrapers on earth.
But this sturdy substance does have a weakness: it’s prone to catastrophic cracking that costs tens of billions of dollars to repair each year.
But what if we could avoid that problem, by creating concrete that heals itself?
This idea isn’t as far-fetched as it may seem.
It boils down to an understanding of how concrete forms, and how to exploit that process to our benefit.
Concrete is a combination of coarse stone and sand particles, called aggregates, that mix with cement, a powdered blend of clay and limestone.
When water gets added to this mix, the cement forms a paste and coats the aggregates, quickly hardening through a chemical reaction called hydration.
Eventually, the resulting material grows strong enough to prop up buildings that climb hundreds of meters into the sky.
While people have been using a variety of recipes to produce cement for over 4,000 years, concrete itself has a surprisingly short lifespan.
After 20 to 30 years, natural processes like concrete shrinkage, excessive freezing and thawing, and heavy loads can trigger cracking.
And it’s not just big breaks that count: tiny cracks can be just as dangerous.
Concrete is often used as a secondary support around steel reinforcements.
In this concrete, even small cracks can channel water, oxygen, and carbon dioxide that corrode the steel and lead to disastrous collapse.
On structures like bridges and highways that are constantly in use, detecting these problems before they lead to catastrophe becomes a huge and costly challenge.
But not doing so would also endanger thousands of lives.
Fortunately, we’re already experimenting with ways this material could start fixing itself.
And some of these solutions are inspired by concrete’s natural self-healing mechanism.
When water enters these tiny cracks, it hydrates the concrete’s calcium oxide.
The resulting calcium hydroxide reacts with carbon dioxide in the air, starting a process called autogenous healing, where microscopic calcium carbonate crystals form and gradually fill the gap.
Unfortunately, these crystals can only do so much, healing cracks that are less than 0.3mm wide.
Material scientists have figured out how to heal cracks up to twice that size by adding hidden glue into the concrete mix.
If we put adhesive-filled fibers and tubes into the mixture, they’ll snap open when a crack forms, releasing their sticky contents and sealing the gap.
But adhesive chemicals often behave very differently from concrete, and over time, these adhesives can lead to even worse cracks.
So perhaps the best way to heal large cracks is to give concrete the tools to help itself.
Scientists have discovered that some bacteria and fungi can produce minerals, including the calcium carbonate found in autogenous healing.
Experimental blends of concrete include these bacterial or fungal spores alongside nutrients in their concrete mix, where they could lie dormant for hundreds of years.
When cracks finally appear and water trickles into the concrete, the spores germinate, grow, and consume the nutrient soup that surrounds them, modifying their local environment to create the perfect conditions for calcium carbonate to grow.
These crystals gradually fill the gaps, and after roughly three weeks, the hard-working microbes can completely repair cracks up to almost 1mm wide.
When the cracks seal, the bacteria or fungi will make spores and go dormant once more— ready to start a new cycle of self-healing when cracks form again.
Although this technique has been studied extensively, we still have a ways to go before incorporating it in the global production of concrete.
But, these spores have huge potential to make concrete more resilient and long-lasting— which could drastically reduce the financial and environmental cost of concrete production.
Eventually, these microorganisms may force us to reconsider the way we think about our cities, bringing our inanimate concrete jungles to life.
The conventional wisdom about our world today is that this is a time of terrible decline.
And that's not surprising, given the bad news all around us, from ISIS to inequality, political dysfunction, climate change, Brexit, and on and on.
But here's the thing, and this may sound a little weird.
I actually don't buy this gloomy narrative, and I don't think you should either.
Look, it's not that I don't see the problems.
I read the same headlines that you do.
What I dispute is the conclusion that so many people draw from them, namely that we're all screwed because the problems are unsolvable and our governments are useless.
Now, why do I say this?
It's not like I'm particularly optimistic by nature.
But something about the media's constant doom-mongering with its fixation on problems and not on answers has always really bugged me.
So a few years ago I decided, well, I'm a journalist, I should see if I can do any better by going around the world and actually asking folks if and how they've tackled their big economic and political challenges.
And what I found astonished me.
It turns out that there are remarkable signs of progress out there, often in the most unexpected places, and they've convinced me that our great global challenges may not be so unsolvable after all.
Not only are there theoretical fixes; those fixes have been tried.
They've worked.
And they offer hope for the rest of us.
I'm going to show you what I mean by telling you about how three of the countries I visited -- Canada, Indonesia and Mexico -- overcame three supposedly impossible problems.
Their stories matter because they contain tools the rest of us can use, and not just for those particular problems, but for many others, too.
When most people think about my homeland, Canada, today, if they think about Canada at all, they think cold, they think boring, they think polite.
They think we say "sorry" too much in our funny accents.
And that's all true.
(Laughter) Sorry.
(Laughter) But Canada's also important because of its triumph over a problem currently tearing many other countries apart: immigration.
Consider, Canada today is among the world's most welcoming nations, even compared to other immigration-friendly countries.
Its per capita immigration rate is four times higher than France's, and its percentage of foreign-born residents is double that of Sweden.
Meanwhile, Canada admitted 10 times more Syrian refugees in the last year than did the United States.
(Applause) And now Canada is taking even more.
And yet, if you ask Canadians what makes them proudest of their country, they rank "multiculturalism," a dirty word in most places, second, ahead of hockey.
Hockey.
(Laughter) In other words, at a time when other countries are now frantically building new barriers to keep foreigners out, Canadians want even more of them in.
Now, here's the really interesting part.
Canada wasn't always like this.
Until the mid-1960s, Canada followed an explicitly racist immigration policy.
They called it "White Canada," and as you can see, they were not just talking about the snow.
So how did that Canada become today's Canada?
Well, despite what my mom in Ontario will tell you, the answer had nothing to do with virtue.
Canadians are not inherently better than anyone else.
The real explanation involves the man who became Canada's leader in 1968, Pierre Trudeau, who is also the father of the current prime minister.
(Applause) The thing to know about that first Trudeau is that he was very different from Canada's previous leaders.
He was a French speaker in a country long-dominated by its English elite.
He was an intellectual.
He was even kind of groovy.
I mean, seriously, the guy did yoga.
He hung out with the Beatles.
(Laughter) And like all hipsters, he could be infuriating at times.
But he nevertheless pulled off one of the most progressive transformations any country has ever seen.
His formula, I've learned, involved two parts.
First, Canada threw out its old race-based immigration rules, and it replaced them with new color-blind ones that emphasized education, experience and language skills instead.
And what that did was greatly increase the odds that newcomers would contribute to the economy.
Then part two, Trudeau created the world's first policy of official multiculturalism to promote integration and the idea that diversity was the key to Canada's identity.
Now, in the years that followed, Ottawa kept pushing this message, but at the same time, ordinary Canadians soon started to see the economic, the material benefits of multiculturalism all around them.
And these two influences soon combined to create the passionately open-minded Canada of today.
Let's now turn to another country and an even tougher problem, Islamic extremism.
In 1998, the people of Indonesia took to the streets and overthrew their longtime dictator, Suharto.
It was an amazing moment, but it was also a scary one.
With 250 million people, Indonesia is the largest Muslim-majority country on Earth.
It's also hot, huge and unruly, made up of 17,000 islands, where people speak close to a thousand languages.
Now, Suharto had been a dictator, and a nasty one.
But he'd also been a pretty effective tyrant, and he'd always been careful to keep religion out of politics.
So experts feared that without him keeping a lid on things, the country would explode, or religious extremists would take over and turn Indonesia into a tropical version of Iran.
And that's just what seemed to happen at first.
In the country's first free elections, in 1999, Islamist parties scored 36 percent of the vote, and the islands burned as riots and terror attacks killed thousands.
Since then, however, Indonesia has taken a surprising turn.
While ordinary folks have grown more pious on a personal level -- I saw a lot more headscarves on a recent visit than I would have a decade ago -- the country's politics have moved in the opposite direction.
Indonesia is now a pretty decent democracy.
And yet, its Islamist parties have steadily lost support, from a high of about 38 percent in 2004 down to 25 percent in 2014.
As for terrorism, it's now extremely rare.
And while a few Indonesians have recently joined ISIS, their number is tiny, far fewer in per capita terms than the number of Belgians.
Try to think of one other Muslim-majority country that can say all those same things.
In 2014, I went to Indonesia to ask its current president, a soft-spoken technocrat named Joko Widodo, "Why is Indonesia thriving when so many other Muslim states are dying?"
"Well, what we realized," he told me, "is that to deal with extremism, we needed to deal with inequality first."
See, Indonesia's religious parties, like similar parties elsewhere, had tended to focus on things like reducing poverty and cutting corruption.
So that's what Joko and his predecessors did too, thereby stealing the Islamists' thunder.
They also cracked down hard on terrorism, but Indonesia's democrats have learned a key lesson from the dark years of dictatorship, namely that repression only creates more extremism.
So they waged their war with extraordinary delicacy.
They used the police instead of the army.
They only detained suspects if they had enough evidence.
They held public trials.
They even sent liberal imams into the jails to persuade the jihadists that terror is un-Islamic.
And all of this paid off in spectacular fashion, creating the kind of country that was unimaginable 20 years ago.
So at this point, my optimism should, I hope, be starting to make a bit more sense.
Neither immigration nor Islamic extremism are impossible to deal with.
Join me now on one last trip, this time to Mexico.
Now, of our three stories, this one probably surprised me the most, since as you all know, the country is still struggling with so many problems.
And yet, a few years ago, Mexico did something that many other countries from France to India to the United States can still only dream of.
It shattered the political paralysis that had gripped it for years.
To understand how, we need to rewind to the year 2000, when Mexico finally became a democracy.
Rather than use their new freedoms to fight for reform, Mexico's politicians used them to fight one another.
Congress deadlocked, and the country's problems -- drugs, poverty, crime, corruption -- spun out of control.
Things got so bad that in 2008, the Pentagon warned that Mexico risked collapse.
Then in 2012, this guy named Enrique Peña Nieto somehow got himself elected president.
Now, this Peña hardly inspired much confidence at first.
Sure, he was handsome, but he came from Mexico's corrupt old ruling party, the PRI, and he was a notorious womanizer.
In fact, he seemed like such a pretty boy lightweight that women called him "bombón," sweetie, at campaign rallies.
And yet this same bombón soon surprised everyone by hammering out a truce between the country's three warring political parties.
And over the next 18 months, they together passed an incredibly comprehensive set of reforms.
They busted open Mexico's smothering monopolies.
They liberalized its rusting energy sector.
They restructured its failing schools, and much more.
To appreciate the scale of this accomplishment, try to imagine the US Congress passing immigration reform, campaign finance reform and banking reform.
Now, try to imagine Congress doing it all at the same time.
That's what Mexico did.
Not long ago, I met with Peña and asked how he managed it all.
The President flashed me his famous twinkly smile -- (Laughter) and told me that the short answer was "compromiso," compromise.
Of course, I pushed him for details, and the long answer that came out was essentially "compromise, compromise and more compromise."
See, Peña knew that he needed to build trust early, so he started talking to the opposition just days after his election.
To ward off pressure from special interests, he kept their meetings small and secret, and many of the participants later told me that it was this intimacy, plus a lot of shared tequila, that helped build confidence.
So did the fact that all decisions had to be unanimous, and that Peña even agreed to pass some of the other party's priorities before his own.
As Santiago Creel, an opposition senator, put it to me, "Look, I'm not saying that I'm special or that anyone is special, but that group, that was special."
The proof?
When Peña was sworn in, the pact held, and Mexico moved forward for the first time in years.
Bueno.
So now we've seen how these three countries overcame three of their great challenges.
And that's very nice for them, right?
But what good does it do the rest of us?
Well, in the course of studying these and a bunch of other success stories, like the way Rwanda pulled itself back together after civil war or Brazil has reduced inequality, or South Korea has kept its economy growing faster and for longer than any other country on Earth, I've noticed a few common threads.
Now, before describing them, I need to add a caveat.
I realize, of course, that all countries are unique.
So you can't simply take what worked in one, port it to another and expect it to work there too.
Nor do specific solutions work forever.
You've got to adapt them as circumstances change.
That said, by stripping these stories to their essence, you absolutely can distill a few common tools for problem-solving that will work in other countries and in boardrooms and in all sorts of other contexts, too.
Number one, embrace the extreme.
In all the stories we've just looked at, salvation came at a moment of existential peril.
And that was no coincidence.
Take Canada: when Trudeau took office, he faced two looming dangers.
First, though his vast, underpopulated country badly needed more bodies, its preferred source for white workers, Europe, had just stopped exporting them as it finally recovered from World War II.
The other problem was that Canada's long cold war between its French and its English communities had just become a hot one.
Quebec was threatening to secede, and Canadians were actually killing other Canadians over politics.
Now, countries face crises all the time. Right?
That's nothing special.
But Trudeau's genius was to realize that Canada's crisis had swept away all the hurdles that usually block reform.
Canada had to open up. It had no choice.
And it had to rethink its identity.
Again, it had no choice.
And that gave Trudeau a once-in-a-generation opportunity to break the old rules and write new ones.
And like all our other heroes, he was smart enough to seize it.
Number two, there's power in promiscuous thinking.
Another striking similarity among good problem-solvers is that they're all pragmatists.
They'll steal the best answers from wherever they find them, and they don't let details like party or ideology or sentimentality get in their way.
As I mentioned earlier, Indonesia's democrats were clever enough to steal many of the Islamists' best campaign promises for themselves.
They even invited some of the radicals into their governing coalition.
Now, that horrified a lot of secular Indonesians.
But by forcing the radicals to actually help govern, it quickly exposed the fact that they weren't any good at the job, and it got them mixed up in all of the grubby compromises and petty humiliations that are part of everyday politics.
And that hurt their image so badly that they've never recovered.
Number three, please all of the people some of the time.
I know I just mentioned how crises can grant leaders extraordinary freedoms.
And that's true, but problem-solving often requires more than just boldness.
It takes showing restraint, too, just when that's the last thing you want to do.
Take Trudeau: when he took office, he could easily have put his core constituency, that is Canada's French community, first.
He could have pleased some of the people all of the time.
And Peña could have used his power to keep attacking the opposition, as was traditional in Mexico.
Yet he chose to embrace his enemies instead, while forcing his own party to compromise.
And Trudeau pushed everyone to stop thinking in tribal terms and to see multiculturalism, not language and not skin color, as what made them quintessentially Canadian.
Nobody got everything they wanted, but everyone got just enough that the bargains held.
So at this point you may be thinking, "OK, Tepperman, if the fixes really are out there like you keep insisting, then why aren't more countries already using them?"
It's not like they require special powers to pull off.
I mean, none of the leaders we've just looked at were superheroes.
They didn't accomplish anything on their own, and they all had plenty of flaws.
Take Indonesia's first democratic president, Abdurrahman Wahid.
This man was so powerfully uncharismatic that he once fell asleep in the middle of his own speech.
(Laughter) True story.
So what this tells us is that the real obstacle is not ability, and it's not circumstances.
It's something much simpler.
Making big changes involves taking big risks, and taking big risks is scary.
Overcoming that fear requires guts, and as you all know, gutsy politicians are painfully rare.
But that doesn't mean we voters can't demand courage from our political leaders.
I mean, that's why we put them in office in the first place.
And given the state of the world today, there's really no other option.
The answers are out there, but now it's up to us to elect more women and men brave enough to find them, to steal them and to make them work.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The good news is that your experimental robo-ants are a success!
The bad news is that you accidentally just gave them the ability to shoot deadly lasers …and you can’t turn it off.
You have five minutes to stop them before the lasers go online.
Until then, all of your robo-ants will walk inside their habitat at a speed of exactly 1 meter per minute.
If they bump into each other or hit a dead end, they’ll instantly turn around and walk back the way they came.
When five minutes are up, they’ll turn on their lasers, break free, and stream out into the world, carving a path of destruction as they go.
Your one chance to stop them is to insert the two emergency vacuum nozzles into the habitat and suck the ants up before they break free.
The nozzles can press into any one location in the habitat through a membrane covering its front side, and any ants that walk past will be sucked up and deactivated.
You can’t move the nozzles once they’re placed without leaving a hole that the robo-ants would pour out of, so choosing the right spots will be key.
The habitat is made out of meter-long tubes.
When the robots reach an intersection, they will pick randomly whether to go left, right, or forward.
They only go backward if they hit hit another robo-ant or a dead end.
Unfortunately, there are hundreds of them inside the habitat, and if even one escapes, it’ll do a lot of damage.
With just less than five minutes remaining, where should you place the 2 vacuum nozzles to suck up all the robo-ants?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 With robo-ants ricocheting all over the habitat, it might seem impossible to stop them before they break free.
But this situation is simpler than it seems.
Here's why.
Imagine just two robo-ants crawling toward each other.
When they collide, they immediately reverse directions.
And what would that sequence of events look like if they crawled past each other instead?
It would look exactly the same before and after their collision, but with their positions swapped.
This is true every time a pair of robo-ants meet.
Because the identities of individual ants don’t matter, you just need to figure out where you should put the nozzles to capture any single ant walking without interruption for less than 5 minutes, starting from any point in the habitat.
That’s much easier to conceptualize and solve.
Placing the nozzles at intersections where three or four tubes meet seems like your best bet since that’s where the robo-ants might otherwise change directions and miss your nozzles.
There are only four intersections… which two should you pick?
The top right intersection has to be one of them.
If it isn’t, an ant crawling down from this intersection toward the dead end would crawl for four minutes to get back to the intersection, and then go in any of three directions, walking for at least another minute.
Once you’ve placed a nozzle in the top right, the only other choice that has a chance to work is the bottom left.
To see that this works, imagine an ant anywhere else in the habitat.
Worst case scenario, the ant would start right next to the vacuum nozzle, marching away from it.
But in all those worst cases, the ant would march for at most 4 meters before being sucked up into the vacuum.
No other choice of two intersection points is guaranteed to get all the robo-ants within five minutes.
Having vacuumed them all up, you’ve averted a major crisis.
Before you mess with robo-ants again, you’ll want to have a robo-anteater ready.
And wouldn’t it be cool if it could fly and breathe fire?
There’s no way that could go wrong!
(Music) Rainn Wilson: It takes its toll, being alone.
I'm a little bit lost, and it's finally time to make a real connection.
Who am I?
(Drums) I'm a single white male, 45 years of age.
I love animals.
Gainfully employed.
I'm a people person.
I keep fit.
Who am I looking for?
I'm looking for my idea mate.
Are you that idea that matches with who I really am?
(Video) Ron Finley: How would you feel if you had no access to healthy food?
Gardening is the most therapeutic and defiant act you can do.
RW: Wow, we sure are getting our fingers dirty for a first date, huh?
RF: Gardening is the most therapeutic and defiant act you can do.
People in these areas -- they're exposed to crappy food.
I want people to know that growing your own food is like printing your own money.
RW: You're like a food superhero!
RF: Food is the problem and food is the solution.
(Music) Erin McKean: I'm a lexicographer.
My job is to put every word possible into the dictionary.
RW: I love words, too -- just as much as any lexi-ta-tographer.
What if you love a word that you've just made up, like -- I don't know -- "scuberfinkles"?
Beau Lotto: Do you think you see reality?
RW: Well, I'm a little nearsighted, but yeah.
BL: Well, you can't -- I mean, your brain has no access to this world.
In fact, even the sensory information that your eyes are receiving, your ears are receiving, is completely meaningless because it could mean anything.
That tree could be a large object far away or a small object up close, and your brain has no way of knowing.
RW: Once I thought I saw Bigfoot but it was just a German shepherd.
Isabel Behncke Izquierdo: Bonobos are, together with chimpanzees, your closest living relatives.
Bonobos have frequent and promiscuous sex to manage conflict and solve social issues.
RW: I'm just curious: Do we have any conflict that needs managing or social issues to resolve?
IBI: Remember -- you're on a date with my idea, not me.
Jane McGonigal: This is the face of someone who, against all odds, is on the verge of an epic win.
RW: An epic win?
JM: An epic win is an outcome so extraordinarily positive, you didn't even know it was possible until you achieved it.
You're not making the face.
You're making the "I'm not good at life" face.
RW: Arthur, I want to be really honest with you.
I am seeing other ideas. OK?
I'm dating around.
That's the situation.
Arthur Benjamin: I'd say this: Mathematics is not just solving for x, it's also figuring out why.
RW: Do you want to get some pie?
AB: Pi?
3.14159265358979 -- Reggie Watts: If we're going to do something, we've got to just make a decision.
Because without a decision we're left powerless.
Without power, we have nothing to supply the chain of those who are truly curious to solve all of our current conditions.
RW: And, "If you choose not to decide, you still have made a choice" -- Rush.
JM: Yes!
This is the face we need to see on millions of problem solvers worldwide, as we try to tackle the challenges of the next century.
RW: So, are we going Dutch?
AB: 3846264338327950 28841...
971?
RW: One night, want to go to a movie or something?
RF: Hell, no! Let's go plant some shit!
RW: Let's plant some shit!
Good, now what is this that I'm planting?
Bonobos!
IBI: Bonobos! (Laughs) Bonobos.
RWatts: Um, interested much?
RW: I want to have your idea baby.
RWatts: Well, you know what they say in Russia.
RW: Hm?
RWatts: "scuberfinckle."
(Bottles clink)
It's funny the things you forget.
I went to see my mother the other day, and she told me this story that I'd completely forgotten about how, when we were driving together, she would pull the car over, and by the time she had gotten out of the car, and gone around the car to let me out of the car, I would have already gotten out of the car and pretended to have died.
(Laughter) (Applause) Because that's how you die.
(Laughter) And I remember, that was a game I used to play with myself to entertain myself whenever I was bored or frustrated.
(Laughter) Settle down.
(Laughter) People say we live in an age of information overload. Right?
I don't know about that, but I just know that I get too many marketing emails.
I got a marketing email from a supermarket firm, which will remain nameless for predominantly legal reasons, but which I'm going to call "SafeMart."
(Laughter) I got an email from them, and it went like this, it said: "Just three weeks until SafeMart at King's Cross opens!!!"
And I resented this, because not only do I not remember signing up to that, but I resent the fact that they appear to think that I should be excited about a shop opening.
So what I did was I scrolled down to the bottom of the email, and I pressed, "Unsubscribe."
And I thought that'd be the end of it.
But a week later, I got another one that said, "Just two weeks until SafeMart at King's Cross opens!!!"
And I thought, obviously, I haven't clicked hard enough.
So I tried it again. Right?
Lo and behold, a week passes, you guessed it, "Just one week until SafeMart at King's Cross opens!!!"
And here's the problem: The internet gave us access to everything; but it also gave everything access to us.
It's hard enough to discriminate between the things that genuinely matter in this world and the minutiae of life, without having emails about supermarket chains and Candy Crush Saga.
And I was really annoyed with them, and I thought, OK, I was about to write a strongly worded email, which I can do quite well.
(Laughter) And I thought, no -- I'm going to find the game.
So I replied to it, and I said, "I literally cannot wait!!!!"
(Laughter) "What do you need from me?"
They got back to me; a guy called Dan said, "Hi James. I've asked a colleague to help me with your query."
(Laughter) Like it needs help.
And I said, "What's the plan, Dan?
I'm thinking fireworks, bouncy castle ..."
(Laughter) "I'm not sure what you mean."
(Laughter) I said, "I'm just tremendously excited about the opening!"
(Laughter) "Do you want to book the bouncy castle or shall I?"
He said, "I think you have misunderstood."
(Laughter) "A new store is opening, but there is no celebration planned."
I said, "But what was all the 'Three weeks until,' 'Two weeks until' emails?
I was getting excited."
(Laughter) "I'm sorry you're disappointed."
(Laughter) I said, "Not to worry.
Let's do something anyway!
Besides, the deposit on the bouncy castle was non-refundable."
(Laughter) "If we don't use it, we're out a few hundred quid, Dan."
(Laughter) He said, "Mr. Veitch, I'm not responsible for anything you have ordered."
I said, "Let's not get into who did what.
Bottom line: you and I are in this together."
(Laughter) (Applause) "Question: Will you be there to make sure people take their shoes off?"
(Laughter) I'll be honest, then my relationship with Dan deteriorated somewhat, because the next email I got was this: "Thanks for your email - your Case Number is ..."
(Laughter) That's outrageous.
I said, "Dan?"
(Laughter) And I got -- and I was just like, this is ... -- and I, I ....
And I said, "Danny?"
And I thought, this is terrible. All I'm doing is collecting case numbers.
I said, "D-Dog?"
(Laughter) "The store is now open."
(Laughter) I said, "But Dan, they must have wondered why there was no bouncy castle."
And then we were back to this.
And that might have been the end of the story, but I remembered that anything -- everything -- even something as mundane as getting out of a car, can be fun if you find the right game.
So, this is what I replied: [Thanks for your email - your Case Number is #0000001.] (Laughter) (Applause) And we just, uh ...
(Laughter) It was like we were dancing.
It was just a beautiful relationship.
We just kept going.
It was lovely.
But to be honest, guys, it was quite labor-intensive, and I had other stuff to do, believe it or not.
So what I did is I have a little email auto-replier program.
And I set it up so every time it receives an email from SafeMart, it just pings one back.
So I set it up, and it says, "Thanks for your email - your Case Number is ..."
Then it has a little formula that I wrote to up the case number every time.
And I put it on the server and set it running.
(Laughter) I'll be honest, guys -- then I forgot about it.
(Laughter) I checked back on it the other day, and it appears there have been a number of emails going back and forth.
We're on 21,439.
(Applause) It gives me an immense sense of satisfaction to know that these computer programs are just going to be pinging one another for eternity.
And as legacies go, I don't think that's bad.
So guys, just remember: if ever you feel weighed down by the bureaucracy and often mundanity of modern life, don't fight the frustration.
Let it be the catalyst for whimsy.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Twelve years ago, I picked up a camera for the first time to film the olive harvest in a Palestinian village in the West Bank.
I thought I was there to make a single documentary and would then move on to some other part of the world.
But something kept bringing me back.
Now, usually, when international audiences hear about that part of the world, they often just want that conflict to go away.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is bad, and we wish it could just disappear.
We feel much the same way about other conflicts around the world.
But every time we turn our attention to the news, it seems like one more country has gone up in flames.
So I've been wondering whether we should not start looking at conflict in a different way -- whether instead of simply wishing to end conflict, we focus instead on how to wage conflict.
This has been a big question for me, one I've pursued together with my team at the nonprofit Just Vision.
After witnessing several different kinds of struggles in the Middle East, I started noticing some patterns on the more successful ones.
I wondered whether these variables held across cases, and if they did, what lessons we could glean for waging constructive conflict, in Palestine, Israel and elsewhere.
There is some science about this.
In a study of 323 major political conflicts from 1900 to 2006, Maria Stephan and Erica Chenoweth found that nonviolent campaigns were almost 100 percent more likely to lead to success than violent campaigns.
Nonviolent campaigns are also less likely to cause physical harm to those waging the campaign, as well as their opponents.
And, critically, they typically lead to more peaceful and democratic societies.
In other words, nonviolent resistance is a more effective and constructive way of waging conflict.
But if that's such an easy choice, why don't more groups use it?
Political scientist Victor Asal and colleagues have looked at several factors that shape a political group's choice of tactics.
And it turns out that the greatest predictor of a movement's decision to adopt nonviolence or violence is not whether that group is more left-wing or right-wing, not whether the group is more or less influenced by religious beliefs, not whether it's up against a democracy or a dictatorship, and not even the levels of repression that that group is facing.
The greatest predictor of a movement's decision to adopt nonviolence is its ideology regarding the role of women in public life.
(Applause) When a movement includes in its discourse language around gender equality, it increases dramatically the chances it will adopt nonviolence, and thus, the likelihood it will succeed.
The research squared up with my own documentation of political organizing in Israel and Palestine.
I've noticed that movements which welcome women into leadership positions, such as the one I documented in a village called Budrus, were much more likely to achieve their goals.
This village was under a real threat of being wiped off the map when Israel started building the separation barrier.
The proposed route would require the destruction of this community's olive groves, their cemeteries and would ultimately enclose the village from all sides.
Through inspired local leadership, they launched a nonviolent resistance campaign to stop that from happening.
The odds were massively stacked against them.
But they had a secret weapon: a 15-year-old girl who courageously jumped in front of a bulldozer which was about to uproot an olive tree, stopping it.
In that moment, the community of Budrus realized what was possible if they welcomed and encouraged women to participate in public life.
And so it was that the women of Budrus went to the front lines day after day, using their creativity and acumen to overcome multiple obstacles they faced in a 10-month unarmed struggle.
And as you can probably tell at this point, they win at the end.
The separation barrier was changed completely to the internationally recognized green line, and the women of Budrus came to be known across the West Bank for their indomitable energy.
(Applause) Thank you.
I want to pause for a second, which you helped me do, because I do want to tackle two very serious misunderstandings that could happen at this point.
The first one is that I don't believe women are inherently or essentially more peaceful than men.
But I do believe that in today's world, women experience power differently.
Having had to navigate being in the less powerful position in multiple aspects of their lives, women are often more adept at how to surreptitiously pressure for change against large, powerful actors.
The term "manipulative," often charged against women in a derogatory way, reflects a reality in which women have often had to find ways other than direct confrontation to achieve their goals.
And finding alternatives to direct confrontation is at the core of nonviolent resistance.
Now to the second potential misunderstanding.
I've been talking a lot about my experiences in the Middle East, and some of you might be thinking now that the solution then is for us to educate Muslim and Arab societies to be more inclusive of their women.
If we were to do that, they would be more successful.
They do not need this kind of help.
Women have been part of the most influential movements coming out of the Middle East, but they tend to be invisible to the international community.
Our cameras are largely focused on the men who often end up involved in the more confrontational scenes that we find so irresistible in our news cycle.
And we end up with a narrative that not only erases women from the struggles in the region but often misrepresents the struggles themselves.
In the late 1980s, an uprising started in Gaza, and quickly spread to the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
It came to be known as the First Intifada, and people who have any visual memory of it generally conjure up something like this: Palestinian men throwing rocks at Israeli tanks.
The news coverage at the time made it seem like stones, Molotov cocktails and burning tires were the only activities taking place in the Intifada.
This period, though, was also marked by widespread nonviolent organizing in the forms of strikes, sit-ins and the creation of parallel institutions.
During the First Intifada, whole sectors of the Palestinian civilian population mobilized, cutting across generations, factions and class lines.
They did this through networks of popular committees, and their use of direct action and communal self-help projects challenged Israel's very ability to continue ruling the West Bank and Gaza.
According to the Israeli Army itself, 97 percent of activities during the First Intifada were unarmed.
And here's another thing that is not part of our narrative about that time.
For 18 months in the Intifada, women were the ones calling the shots behind the scenes: Palestinian women from all walks of life in charge of mobilizing hundreds of thousands of people in a concerted effort to withdraw consent from the occupation.
Naela Ayesh, who strived to build a self-sufficient Palestinian economy by encouraging women in Gaza to grow vegetables in their backyards, an activity deemed illegal by the Israeli authorities at that time; Rabeha Diab, who took over decision-making authority for the entire uprising when the men who had been running it were deported; Fatima Al Jaafari, who swallowed leaflets containing the uprising's directives in order to spread them across the territories without getting caught; and Zahira Kamal, who ensured the longevity of the uprising by leading an organization that went from 25 women to 3,000 in a single year.
Despite their extraordinary achievements, none of these women have made it into our narrative of the First Intifada.
We do this in other parts of the globe, too.
In our history books, for instance, and in our collective consciousness, men are the public faces and spokespersons for the 1960s struggle for racial justice in the United States.
But women were also a critical driving force, mobilizing, organizing, taking to the streets.
How many of us think of Septima Clark when we think of the United States Civil Rights era?
Remarkably few.
But she played a crucial role in every phase of the struggle, particularly by emphasizing literacy and education.
She's been omitted, ignored, like so many other women who played critical roles in the United States Civil Rights Movement.
This is not about getting credit.
It's more profound than that.
The stories we tell matter deeply to how we see ourselves, and to how we believe movements are run and how movements are won.
The stories we tell about a movement like the First Intifada or the United States Civil Rights era matter deeply and have a critical influence in the choices Palestinians, Americans and people around the world will make next time they encounter an injustice and develop the courage to confront it.
If we do not lift up the women who played critical roles in these struggles, we fail to offer up role models to future generations.
Without role models, it becomes harder for women to take up their rightful space in public life.
And as we saw earlier, one of the most critical variables in determining whether a movement will be successful or not is a movement's ideology regarding the role of women in public life.
This is a question of whether we're moving towards more democratic and peaceful societies.
In a world where so much change is happening, and where change is bound to continue at an increasingly faster pace, it is not a question of whether we will face conflict, but rather a question of which stories will shape how we choose to wage conflict.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here today to talk about the two ideas that, at least based on my observations at Khan Academy, are kind of the core, or the key leverage points for learning.
And it's the idea of mastery and the idea of mindset.
I saw this in the early days working with my cousins.
A lot of them were having trouble with math at first, because they had all of these gaps accumulated in their learning.
And because of that, at some point they got to an algebra class and they might have been a little bit shaky on some of the pre-algebra, and because of that, they thought they didn't have the math gene.
Or they'd get to a calculus class, and they'd be a little bit shaky on the algebra.
I saw it in the early days when I was uploading some of those videos on YouTube, and I realized that people who were not my cousins were watching.
(Laughter) And at first, those comments were just simple thank-yous.
I thought that was a pretty big deal.
I don't know how much time you all spend on YouTube.
Most of the comments are not "Thank you."
(Laughter) They're a little edgier than that.
But then the comments got a little more intense, student after student saying that they had grown up not liking math.
It was getting difficult as they got into more advanced math topics.
By the time they got to algebra, they had so many gaps in their knowledge they couldn't engage with it.
They thought they didn't have the math gene.
But when they were a bit older, they took a little agency and decided to engage.
They found resources like Khan Academy and they were able to fill in those gaps and master those concepts, and that reinforced their mindset that it wasn't fixed; that they actually were capable of learning mathematics.
And in a lot of ways, this is how you would master a lot of things in life.
It's the way you would learn a martial art.
In a martial art, you would practice the white belt skills as long as necessary, and only when you've mastered it you would move on to become a yellow belt.
It's the way you learn a musical instrument: you practice the basic piece over and over again, and only when you've mastered it, you go on to the more advanced one.
But what we point out -- this is not the way a traditional academic model is structured, the type of academic model that most of us grew up in.
In a traditional academic model, we group students together, usually by age, and around middle school, by age and perceived ability, and we shepherd them all together at the same pace.
And what typically happens, let's say we're in a middle school pre-algebra class, and the current unit is on exponents, the teacher will give a lecture on exponents, then we'll go home, do some homework.
The next morning, we'll review the homework, then another lecture, homework, lecture, homework.
That will continue for about two or three weeks, and then we get a test.
On that test, maybe I get a 75 percent, maybe you get a 90 percent, maybe you get a 95 percent.
And even though the test identified gaps in our knowledge, I didn't know 25 percent of the material.
Even the A student, what was the five percent they didn't know?
Even though we've identified the gaps, the whole class will then move on to the next subject, probably a more advanced subject that's going to build on those gaps.
It might be logarithms or negative exponents.
And that process continues, and you immediately start to realize how strange this is.
I didn't know 25 percent of the more foundational thing, and now I'm being pushed to the more advanced thing.
And this will continue for months, years, all the way until at some point, I might be in an algebra class or trigonometry class and I hit a wall.
And it's not because algebra is fundamentally difficult or because the student isn't bright.
It's because I'm seeing an equation and they're dealing with exponents and that 30 percent that I didn't know is showing up.
And then I start to disengage.
To appreciate how absurd that is, imagine if we did other things in our life that way.
Say, home-building.
(Laughter) So we bring in the contractor and say, "We were told we have two weeks to build a foundation.
Do what you can."
(Laughter) So they do what they can.
Maybe it rains.
Maybe some of the supplies don't show up.
And two weeks later, the inspector comes, looks around, says, "OK, the concrete is still wet right over there, that part's not quite up to code ...
I'll give it an 80 percent."
(Laughter) You say, "Great! That's a C. Let's build the first floor."
(Laughter) Same thing.
We have two weeks, do what you can, inspector shows up, it's a 75 percent.
Second floor, third floor, and all of a sudden, while you're building the third floor, the whole structure collapses.
And if your reaction is the reaction you typically have in education, or that a lot of folks have, you might say, maybe we had a bad contractor, or maybe we needed better inspection or more frequent inspection.
But what was really broken was the process.
We were artificially constraining how long we had to something, pretty much ensuring a variable outcome, and we took the trouble of inspecting and identifying those gaps, but then we built right on top of it.
So the idea of mastery learning is to do the exact opposite.
Instead of artificially constraining, fixing when and how long you work on something, pretty much ensuring that variable outcome, the A, B, C, D, F -- do it the other way around.
What's variable is when and how long a student actually has to work on something, and what's fixed is that they actually master the material.
And it's important to realize that not only will this make the student learn their exponents better, but it'll reinforce the right mindset muscles.
It makes them realize that if you got 20 percent wrong on something, it doesn't mean that you have a C branded in your DNA somehow.
It means that you should just keep working on it.
You should have grit; you should have perseverance; you should take agency over your learning.
Now, a lot of skeptics might say, well, hey, this is all great, philosophically, this whole idea of mastery-based learning and its connection to mindset, students taking agency over their learning.
It makes a lot of sense, but it seems impractical.
To actually do it, every student would be on their own track.
It would have to be personalized, you'd have to have private tutors and worksheets for every student.
And these aren't new ideas -- there were experiments in Winnetka, Illinois, 100 years ago, where they did mastery-based learning and saw great results, but they said it wouldn't scale because it was logistically difficult.
The teacher had to give different worksheets to every student, give on-demand assessments.
But now today, it's no longer impractical.
We have the tools to do it.
Students see an explanation at their own time and pace?
There's on-demand video for that.
They need practice? They need feedback?
There's adaptive exercises readily available for students.
And when that happens, all sorts of neat things happen.
One, the students can actually master the concepts, but they're also building their growth mindset, they're building grit, perseverance, they're taking agency over their learning.
And all sorts of beautiful things can start to happen in the actual classroom.
Instead of it being focused on the lecture, students can interact with each other.
They can get deeper mastery over the material.
They can go into simulations, Socratic dialogue.
To appreciate what we're talking about and the tragedy of lost potential here, I'd like to give a little bit of a thought experiment.
If we were to go 400 years into the past to Western Europe, which even then, was one of the more literate parts of the planet, you would see that about 15 percent of the population knew how to read.
And I suspect that if you asked someone who did know how to read, say a member of the clergy, "What percentage of the population do you think is even capable of reading?"
They might say, "Well, with a great education system, maybe 20 or 30 percent."
But if you fast forward to today, we know that that prediction would have been wildly pessimistic, that pretty close to 100 percent of the population is capable of reading.
But if I were to ask you a similar question: "What percentage of the population do you think is capable of truly mastering calculus, or understanding organic chemistry, or being able to contribute to cancer research?"
A lot of you might say, "Well, with a great education system, maybe 20, 30 percent."
But what if that estimate is just based on your own experience in a non-mastery framework, your own experience with yourself or observing your peers, where you're being pushed at this set pace through classes, accumulating all these gaps?
Even when you got that 95 percent, what was that five percent you missed?
And it keeps accumulating -- you get to an advanced class, all of a sudden you hit a wall and say, "I'm not meant to be a cancer researcher; not meant to be a physicist; not meant to be a mathematician."
I suspect that that actually is the case, but if you were allowed to be operating in a mastery framework, if you were allowed to really take agency over your learning, and when you get something wrong, embrace it -- view that failure as a moment of learning -- that number, the percent that could really master calculus or understand organic chemistry, is actually a lot closer to 100 percent.
And this isn't even just a "nice to have."
I think it's a social imperative.
We're exiting what you could call the industrial age and we're going into this information revolution.
And it's clear that some things are happening.
In the industrial age, society was a pyramid.
At the base of the pyramid, you needed human labor.
In the middle of the pyramid, you had an information processing, a bureaucracy class, and at the top of the pyramid, you had your owners of capital and your entrepreneurs and your creative class.
But we know what's happening already, as we go into this information revolution.
The bottom of that pyramid, automation, is going to take over.
Even that middle tier, information processing, that's what computers are good at.
So as a society, we have a question: All this new productivity is happening because of this technology, but who participates in it?
Is it just going to be that very top of the pyramid, in which case, what does everyone else do?
Or do we do something that's more aspirational?
Do we actually attempt to invert the pyramid, where you have a large creative class, where almost everyone can participate as an entrepreneur, an artist, as a researcher?
And I don't think that this is utopian.
I really think that this is all based on the idea that if we let people tap into their potential by mastering concepts, by being able to exercise agency over their learning, that they can get there.
And when you think of it as just a citizen of the world, it's pretty exciting.
I mean, think about the type of equity we can we have, and the rate at which civilization could even progress.
And so, I'm pretty optimistic about it.
I think it's going to be a pretty exciting time to be alive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I love a challenge, and saving the Earth is probably a good one.
We all know the Earth is in trouble.
We have now entered in the 6X, the sixth major extinction on this planet.
I often wondered, if there was a United Organization of Organisms -- otherwise known as "Uh-Oh" -- (Laughter) -- and every organism had a right to vote, would we be voted on the planet, or off the planet?
I think that vote is occurring right now.
I want to present to you a suite of six mycological solutions, using fungi, and these solutions are based on mycelium.
The mycelium infuses all landscapes, it holds soils together, it's extremely tenacious.
This holds up to 30,000 times its mass.
They're the grand molecular disassemblers of nature -- the soil magicians.
They generate the humus soils across the landmasses of Earth.
We have now discovered that there is a multi-directional transfer of nutrients between plants, mitigated by the mcyelium -- so the mycelium is the mother that is giving nutrients from alder and birch trees to hemlocks, cedars and Douglas firs.
Dusty and I, we like to say, on Sunday, this is where we go to church.
I'm in love with the old-growth forest, and I'm a patriotic American because we have those.
Most of you are familiar with Portobello mushrooms.
And frankly, I face a big obstacle.
When I mention mushrooms to somebody, they immediately think Portobellos or magic mushrooms, their eyes glaze over, and they think I'm a little crazy.
So, I hope to pierce that prejudice forever with this group.
We call it mycophobia, the irrational fear of the unknown, when it comes to fungi.
Mushrooms are very fast in their growth.
Day 21, day 23, day 25.
Mushrooms produce strong antibiotics.
In fact, we're more closely related to fungi than we are to any other kingdom.
A group of 20 eukaryotic microbiologists published a paper two years ago erecting opisthokonta -- a super-kingdom that joins animalia and fungi together.
We share in common the same pathogens.
Fungi don't like to rot from bacteria, and so our best antibiotics come from fungi.
But here is a mushroom that's past its prime.
After they sporulate, they do rot.
But I propose to you that the sequence of microbes that occur on rotting mushrooms are essential for the health of the forest.
They give rise to the trees, they create the debris fields that feed the mycelium.
And so we see a mushroom here sporulating.
And the spores are germinating, and the mycelium forms and goes underground.
In a single cubic inch of soil, there can be more than eight miles of these cells.
My foot is covering approximately 300 miles of mycelium.
This is photomicrographs from Nick Read and Patrick Hickey.
And notice that as the mycelium grows, it conquers territory and then it begins the net.
I've been a scanning electron microscopist for many years, I have thousands of electron micrographs, and when I'm staring at the mycelium, I realize that they are microfiltration membranes.
We exhale carbon dioxide, so does mycelium.
It inhales oxygen, just like we do.
But these are essentially externalized stomachs and lungs.
And I present to you a concept that these are extended neurological membranes.
And in these cavities, these micro-cavities form, and as they fuse soils, they absorb water.
These are little wells.
And inside these wells, then microbial communities begin to form.
And so the spongy soil not only resists erosion, but sets up a microbial universe that gives rise to a plurality of other organisms.
I first proposed, in the early 1990s, that mycelium is Earth's natural Internet.
When you look at the mycelium, they're highly branched.
And if there's one branch that is broken, then very quickly, because of the nodes of crossing -- Internet engineers maybe call them hot points -- there are alternative pathways for channeling nutrients and information.
The mycelium is sentient.
It knows that you are there.
When you walk across landscapes, it leaps up in the aftermath of your footsteps trying to grab debris.
So, I believe the invention of the computer Internet is an inevitable consequence of a previously proven, biologically successful model.
The Earth invented the computer Internet for its own benefit, and we now, being the top organism on this planet, are trying to allocate resources in order to protect the biosphere.
Going way out, dark matter conforms to the same mycelial archetype.
I believe matter begets life; life becomes single cells; single cells become strings; strings become chains; chains network.
And this is the paradigm that we see throughout the universe.
Most of you may not know that fungi were the first organisms to come to land.
They came to land 1.3 billion years ago, and plants followed several hundred million years later.
How is that possible?
It's possible because the mycelium produces oxalic acids, and many other acids and enzymes, pockmarking rock and grabbing calcium and other minerals and forming calcium oxalates.
Makes the rocks crumble, and the first step in the generation of soil.
Oxalic acid is two carbon dioxide molecules joined together.
So, fungi and mycelium sequester carbon dioxide in the form of calcium oxalates.
And all sorts of other oxalates are also sequestering carbon dioxide through the minerals that are being formed and taken out of the rock matrix.
This was first discovered in 1859.
This is a photograph by Franz Hueber.
This photograph's taken 1950s in Saudi Arabia.
420 million years ago, this organism existed.
It was called Prototaxites.
Prototaxites, laying down, was about three feet tall.
The tallest plants on Earth at that time were less than two feet.
Dr. Boyce, at the University of Chicago, published an article in the Journal of Geology this past year determining that Prototaxites was a giant fungus, a giant mushroom.
Across the landscapes of Earth were dotted these giant mushrooms.
All across most land masses.
And these existed for tens of millions of years.
Now, we've had several extinction events, and as we march forward -- 65 million years ago -- most of you know about it -- we had an asteroid impact.
The Earth was struck by an asteroid, a huge amount of debris was jettisoned into the atmosphere.
Sunlight was cut off, and fungi inherited the Earth.
Those organisms that paired with fungi were rewarded, because fungi do not need light.
More recently, at Einstein University, they just determined that fungi use radiation as a source of energy, much like plants use light.
So, the prospect of fungi existing on other planets elsewhere, I think, is a forgone conclusion, at least in my own mind.
The largest organism in the world is in Eastern Oregon.
I couldn't miss it. It was 2,200 acres in size: 2,200 acres in size, 2,000 years old.
The largest organism on the planet is a mycelial mat, one cell wall thick.
How is it that this organism can be so large, and yet be one cell wall thick, whereas we have five or six skin layers that protect us?
The mycelium, in the right conditions, produces a mushroom -- it bursts through with such ferocity that it can break asphalt.
We were involved with several experiments.
I'm going to show you six, if I can, solutions for helping to save the world.
Battelle Laboratories and I joined up in Bellingham, Washington.
There were four piles saturated with diesel and other petroleum waste: one was a control pile; one pile was treated with enzymes; one pile was treated with bacteria; and our pile we inoculated with mushroom mycelium.
The mycelium absorbs the oil.
The mycelium is producing enzymes -- peroxidases -- that break carbon-hydrogen bonds.
These are the same bonds that hold hydrocarbons together.
So, the mycelium becomes saturated with the oil, and then, when we returned six weeks later, all the tarps were removed, all the other piles were dead, dark and stinky.
We came back to our pile, it was covered with hundreds of pounds of oyster mushrooms, and the color changed to a light form.
The enzymes remanufactured the hydrocarbons into carbohydrates -- fungal sugars.
Some of these mushrooms are very happy mushrooms.
They're very large.
They're showing how much nutrition that they could've obtained.
But something else happened, which was an epiphany in my life.
They sporulated, the spores attract insects, the insects laid eggs, eggs became larvae.
Birds then came, bringing in seeds, and our pile became an oasis of life.
Whereas the other three piles were dead, dark and stinky, and the PAH's -- the aromatic hydrocarbons -- went from 10,000 parts per million to less than 200 in eight weeks.
The last image we don't have.
The entire pile was a green berm of life.
These are gateway species, vanguard species that open the door for other biological communities.
So I invented burlap sacks, bunker spawn -- and putting the mycelium -- using storm blown debris, you can take these burlap sacks and put them downstream from a farm that's producing E. coli, or other wastes, or a factory with chemical toxins, and it leads to habitat restoration.
So, we set up a site in Mason County, Washington, and we've seen a dramatic decrease in the amount of coliforms.
And I'll show you a graph here.
This is a logarithmic scale, 10 to the eighth power.
There's more than a 100 million colonies per gram, and 10 to the third power is around 1,000.
In 48 hours to 72 hours, these three mushroom species reduced the amount of coliform bacteria 10,000 times.
Think of the implications.
This is a space-conservative method that uses storm debris -- and we can guarantee that we will have storms every year.
So, this one mushroom, in particular, has drawn our interest over time.
This is my wife Dusty, with a mushroom called Fomitopsis officinalis -- Agarikon.
It's a mushroom exclusive to the old-growth forest that Dioscorides first described in 65 A.D.
as a treatment against consumption.
This mushroom grows in Washington State, Oregon, northern California, British Columbia, now thought to be extinct in Europe.
May not seem that large -- let's get closer.
This is extremely rare fungus.
Our team -- and we have a team of experts that go out -- we went out 20 times in the old-growth forest last year.
We found one sample to be able to get into culture.
Preserving the genome of these fungi in the old-growth forest I think is absolutely critical for human health.
I've been involved with the U.S. Defense Department BioShield program.
We submitted over 300 samples of mushrooms that were boiled in hot water, and mycelium harvesting these extracellular metabolites.
And a few years ago, we received these results.
We have three different strains of Agarikon mushrooms that were highly active against poxviruses.
Dr. Earl Kern, who's a smallpox expert of the U.S. Defense Department, states that any compounds that have a selectivity index of two or more are active.
10 or greater are considered to be very active.
Our mushroom strains were in the highly active range.
There's a vetted press release that you can read -- it's vetted by DOD -- if you Google "Stamets" and "smallpox."
Or you can go to NPR.org and listen to a live interview.
So, encouraged by this, naturally we went to flu viruses.
And so, for the first time, I am showing this.
We have three different strains of Agarikon mushrooms highly active against flu viruses.
Here's the selectivity index numbers -- against pox, you saw 10s and 20s -- now against flu viruses, compared to the ribavirin controls, we have an extraordinarily high activity.
And we're using a natural extract within the same dosage window as a pure pharmaceutical.
We tried it against flu A viruses -- H1N1, H3N2 -- as well as flu B viruses.
So then we tried a blend, and in a blend combination we tried it against H5N1, and we got greater than 1,000 selectivity index.
(Applause) I then think that we can make the argument that we should save the old-growth forest as a matter of national defense.
(Applause) I became interested in entomopathogenic fungi -- fungi that kill insects.
Our house was being destroyed by carpenter ants.
So, I went to the EPA homepage, and they were recommending studies with metarhizium species of a group of fungi that kill carpenter ants, as well as termites.
I did something that nobody else had done.
I actually chased the mycelium, when it stopped producing spores.
These are spores -- this is in their spores.
I was able to morph the culture into a non-sporulating form.
And so the industry has spent over 100 million dollars specifically on bait stations to prevent termites from eating your house.
But the insects aren't stupid, and they would avoid the spores when they came close, and so I morphed the cultures into a non-sporulating form.
And I got my daughter's Barbie doll dish, I put it right where a bunch of carpenter ants were making debris fields, every day, in my house, and the ants were attracted to the mycelium, because there's no spores.
They gave it to the queen.
One week later, I had no sawdust piles whatsoever.
And then -- a delicate dance between dinner and death -- the mycelium is consumed by the ants, they become mummified, and, boing, a mushroom pops out of their head.
(Laughter) Now after sporulation, the spores repel.
So, the house is no longer suitable for invasion.
So, you have a near-permanent solution for reinvasion of termites.
And so my house came down, I received my first patent against carpenter ants, termites and fire ants.
Then we tried extracts, and lo and behold, we can steer insects to different directions.
This has huge implications.
I then received my second patent -- and this is a big one.
It's been called an Alexander Graham Bell patent.
It covers over 200,000 species.
This is the most disruptive technology -- I've been told by executives of the pesticide industry -- that they have ever witnessed.
This could totally revamp the pesticide industries throughout the world.
You could fly 100 Ph.D. students under the umbrella of this concept, because my supposition is that entomopathogenic fungi, prior to sporulation, attract the very insects that are otherwise repelled by those spores.
And so I came up with a Life Box, because I needed a delivery system.
The Life Box -- you're gonna be getting a DVD of the TED conference -- you add soil, you add water, you have mycorrhizal and endophytic fungi as well as spores, like of the Agarikon mushroom.
The seeds then are mothered by this mycelium.
And then you put tree seeds in here, and then you end up growing -- potentially -- an old-growth forest from a cardboard box.
I want to reinvent the delivery system, and the use of cardboard around the world, so they become ecological footprints.
If there's a YouTube-like site that you could put up, you could make it interactive, zip code specific -- where people could join together, and through satellite imaging systems, through Virtual Earth or Google Earth, you could confirm carbon credits are being sequestered by the trees that are coming through Life Boxes.
You could take a cardboard box delivering shoes, you could add water -- I developed this for the refugee community -- corns, beans and squash and onions.
I took several containers -- my wife said, if I could do this, anybody could -- and I ended up growing a seed garden.
Then you harvest the seeds -- and thank you, Eric Rasmussen, for your help on this -- and then you're harvesting the seed garden.
Then you can harvest the kernels, and then you just need a few kernels.
I add mycelium to it, and then I inoculate the corncobs.
Now, three corncobs, no other grain -- lots of mushrooms begin to form.
Too many withdrawals from the carbon bank, and so this population will be shut down.
But watch what happens here.
The mushrooms then are harvested, but very importantly, the mycelium has converted the cellulose into fungal sugars.
And so I thought, how could we address the energy crisis in this country?
And we came up with Econol.
Generating ethanol from cellulose using mycelium as an intermediary -- and you gain all the benefits that I've described to you already.
But to go from cellulose to ethanol is ecologically unintelligent, and I think that we need to be econologically intelligent about the generation of fuels.
So, we build the carbon banks on the planet, renew the soils.
These are a species that we need to join with.
I think engaging mycelium can help save the world.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm a journalist, so I like to look for the untold stories, the lives that quietly play out under the scream of headlines.
I've also been going about the business of putting down roots, choosing a partner, making babies.
So for the last few years, I've been trying to understand what constitutes the 21st-century good life, both because I'm fascinated by the moral and philosophical implications, but also because I'm in desperate need of answers myself.
We live in tenuous times.
In fact, for the first time in American history, the majority of parents do not think that their kids will be better off than they were.
This is true of rich and poor, men and women.
Now, some of you might hear this and feel sad.
After all, America is deeply invested in this idea of economic transcendence, that every generation kind of leapfrogs the one before it, earning more, buying more, being more.
We've exported this dream all over the world, so kids in Brazil and China and even Kenya inherit our insatiable expectation for more.
But when I read this historic poll for the first time, it didn't actually make me feel sad.
It felt like a provocation.
"Better off" -- based on whose standards?
Is "better off" finding a secure job that you can count on for the rest of your life?
Those are nearly extinct.
People move jobs, on average, every 4.7 years, and it's estimated that by 2020, nearly half of Americans will be freelancers.
OK, so is better off just a number?
Is it about earning as much as you possibly can?
By that singular measurement, we are failing.
Median per capita income has been flat since about 2000, adjusted for inflation.
All right, so is better off getting a big house with a white picket fence?
Less of us are doing that.
Nearly five million people lost their homes in the Great Recession, and even more of us sobered up about the lengths we were willing to go -- or be tricked into going, in many predatory cases -- to hold that deed.
Home-ownership rates are at their lowest since 1995.
All right, so we're not finding steady employment, we're not earning as much money, and we're not living in big fancy houses.
Toll the funeral bells for everything that made America great.
But, are those the best measurements of a country's greatness, of a life well lived?
What I think makes America great is its spirit of reinvention.
In the wake of the Great Recession, more and more Americans are redefining what "better off" really means.
Turns out, it has more to do with community and creativity than dollars and cents.
Now, let me be very clear: the 14.8 percent of Americans living in poverty need money, plain and simple.
And all of us need policies that protect us from exploitation by employers and financial institutions.
Nothing that follows is meant to suggest that the gap between rich and poor is anything but profoundly immoral.
But, too often we let the conversation stop there.
We talk about poverty as if it were a monolithic experience; about the poor as if they were solely victims.
Part of what I've learned in my research and reporting is that the art of living well is often practiced most masterfully by the most vulnerable.
Now, if necessity is the mother of invention, I've come to believe that recession can be the father of consciousness.
It confronts us with profound questions, questions we might be too lazy or distracted to ask in times of relative comfort.
How should we work?
How should we live?
All of us, whether we realize it or not, seek answers to these questions, with our ancestors kind of whispering in our ears.
My great-grandfather was a drunk in Detroit, who sometimes managed to hold down a factory job.
He had, as unbelievable as it might sound, 21 children, with one woman, my great-grandmother, who died at 47 years old of ovarian cancer.
Now, I'm pregnant with my second child, and I cannot even fathom what she must have gone through.
And if you're trying to do the math -- there were six sets of twins.
So my grandfather, their son, became a traveling salesman, and he lived boom and bust.
So my dad grew up answering the door for debt collectors and pretending his parents weren't home.
He actually took his braces off himself with pliers in the garage, when his father admitted he didn't have money to go back to the orthodontist.
So my dad, unsurprisingly, became a bankruptcy lawyer.
Couldn't write this in a novel, right?
He was obsessed with providing a secure foundation for my brother and I.
So I ask these questions by way of a few generations of struggle.
My parents made sure that I grew up on a kind of steady ground that allows one to question and risk and leap.
And ironically, and probably sometimes to their frustration, it is their steadfast commitment to security that allows me to question its value, or at least its value as we've historically defined it in the 21st century.
So let's dig into this first question: How should we work?
We should work like our mothers.
That's right -- we've spent decades trying to fit women into a work world built for company men.
And many have done backbends to fit in, but others have carved a more unconventional path, creating a patchwork of meaning and money with enough flexibility to do what they need to do for those that they love.
My mom called it "just making it work."
Today I hear life coaches call it "a portfolio career."
Whatever you call it, more and more men are craving these whole, if not harried, lives.
They're waking up to their desire and duty to be present fathers and sons.
Now, artist Ann Hamilton has said, "Labor is a way of knowing."
Labor is a way of knowing.
In other words, what we work on is what we understand about the world.
If this is true, and I think it is, then women who have disproportionately cared for the little ones and the sick ones and the aging ones, have disproportionately benefited from the most profound kind of knowing there is: knowing the human condition.
By prioritizing care, men are, in a sense, staking their claim to the full range of human existence.
Now, this means the nine-to-five no longer works for anyone.
Punch clocks are becoming obsolete, as are career ladders.
Whole industries are being born and dying every day.
It's all nonlinear from here.
So we need to stop asking kids, "What do you want to be when you grow up?"
and start asking them, "How do you want to be when you grow up?"
Their work will constantly change.
The common denominator is them.
So the more they understand their gifts and create crews of ideal collaborators, the better off they will be.
The challenge ahead is to reinvent the social safety net to fit this increasingly fragmented economy.
We need portable health benefits.
We need policies that reflect that everyone deserves to be vulnerable or care for vulnerable others, without becoming destitute.
We need to seriously consider a universal basic income.
We need to reinvent labor organizing.
The promise of a work world that is structured to actually fit our 21st century values, not some archaic idea about bringing home the bacon, is long overdue -- just ask your mother.
Now, how about the second question: How should we live?
We should live like our immigrant ancestors.
When they came to America, they often shared apartments, survival tactics, child care -- always knew how to fill one more belly, no matter how small the food available.
But they were told that success meant leaving the village behind and pursuing that iconic symbol of the American Dream, the white picket fence.
And even today, we see a white picket fence and we think success, self-possession.
But when you strip away the sentimentality, what it really does is divides us.
Many Americans are rejecting the white picket fence and the kind of highly privatized life that happened within it, and reclaiming village life, reclaiming interdependence instead.
Fifty million of us, for example, live in intergenerational households.
This number exploded with the Great Recession, but it turns out people actually like living this way.
Two-thirds of those who are living with multiple generations under one roof say it's improved their relationships.
Some people are choosing to share homes not with family, but with other people who understand the health and economic benefits of daily community.
CoAbode, an online platform for single moms looking to share homes with other single moms, has 50,000 users.
And people over 65 are especially prone to be looking for these alternative living arrangements.
They understand that their quality of life depends on a mix of solitude and solidarity.
Which is true of all of us when you think about it, young and old alike.
For too long, we've pretended that happiness is a king in his castle.
But all the research proves otherwise.
It shows that the healthiest, happiest and even safest -- in terms of both climate change disaster, in terms of crime, all of that -- are Americans who live lives intertwined with their neighbors.
Now, I've experienced this firsthand.
For the last few years, I've been living in a cohousing community.
It's 1.5 acres of persimmon trees, this prolific blackberry bush that snakes around a community garden, all smack-dab, by the way, in the middle of urban Oakland.
The nine units are all built to be different, different sizes, different shapes, but they're meant to be as green as possible.
So big, shiny black solar cells on our roof mean our electricity bill rarely exceeds more than five bucks in a month.
The 25 of us who live there are all different ages and political persuasions and professions, and we live in homes that have everything a typical home would have.
But additionally, we share an industrial-sized kitchen and eating area, where we have common meals twice a week.
Now, people, when I tell them I live like this, often have one of two extreme reactions.
Either they say, "Why doesn't everyone live like this?"
Or they say, "That sounds totally horrifying.
So let me reassure you: there is a sacred respect for privacy among us, but also a commitment to what we call "radical hospitality" -- not the kind advertised by the Four Seasons, but the kind that says that every single person is worthy of kindness, full stop, end of sentence.
The biggest surprise for me of living in a community like this?
You share all the domestic labor -- the repairing, the cooking, the weeding -- but you also share the emotional labor.
Rather than depending only on the idealized family unit to get all of your emotional needs met, you have two dozen other people that you can go to to talk about a hard day at work or troubleshoot how to handle an abusive teacher.
Teenagers in our community will often go to an adult that is not their parent to ask for advice.
It's what bell hooks called "revolutionary parenting," this humble acknowledgment that kids are healthier when they have a wider range of adults to emulate and count on.
Turns out, adults are healthier, too.
It's a lot of pressure, trying to be that perfect family behind that white picket fence.
The "new better off," as I've come to call it, is less about investing in the perfect family and more about investing in the imperfect village, whether that's relatives living under one roof, a cohousing community like mine, or just a bunch of neighbors who pledge to really know and look out for one another.
It's good common sense, right?
And yet, money has often made us dumb about reaching out.
The most reliable wealth is found in relationship.
The new better off is not an individual prospect at all.
In fact, if you're a failure or you think you're a failure, I've got some good news for you: you might be a success by standards you have not yet honored.
Maybe you're a mediocre earner but a masterful father.
Maybe you can't afford your dream home, but you throw legendary neighborhood parties.
If you're a textbook success, the implications of what I'm saying could be more grim for you.
You might be a failure by standards you hold dear but that the world doesn't reward.
Only you can know.
I know that I am not a tribute to my great-grandmother, who lived such a short and brutish life, if I earn enough money to afford every creature comfort.
You can't buy your way out of suffering or into meaning.
There is no home big enough to erase the pain that she must have endured.
I am a tribute to her if I live a life as connected and courageous as possible.
In the midst of such widespread uncertainty, we may, in fact, be insecure.
But we can let that insecurity make us brittle or supple.
We can turn inward, lose faith in the power of institutions to change -- even lose faith in ourselves.
Or we can turn outward, cultivate faith in our ability to reach out, to connect, to create.
Turns out, the biggest danger is not failing to achieve the American Dream.
The biggest danger is achieving a dream that you don't actually believe in.
So don't do that.
Do the harder, more interesting thing, which is to compose a life where what you do every single day, the people you give your best love and ingenuity and energy to, aligns as closely as possible with what you believe.
That, not something as mundane as making money, is a tribute to your ancestors.
That is the beautiful struggle.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The word concussion evokes a fear these days more so than it ever has, and I know this personally.
I played 10 years of football, was struck in the head thousands of times.
And I have to tell you, though, what was much worse than that was a pair of bike accidents I had where I suffered concussions, and I'm still dealing with the effects of the most recent one today as I stand in front of you.
There is a fear around concussion that does have some evidence behind it.
There is information that a repeated history of concussion can lead to early dementia, such as Alzheimer's, and chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
That was the subject of the Will Smith movie "Concussion."
And so everybody is caught up in football and what they see in the military, but you may not know that bike riding is the leading cause of concussion for kids, sports-related concussion, that is.
And so another thing that I should tell you that you may not know is that the helmets that are worn in bicycling and football and many activities, they're not designed or tested for how well they can protect your children against concussion.
They're in fact designed and tested for their ability to protect against skull fracture.
And so I get this question all the time from parents, and they ask me, "Would you let your own child play football?"
Or, "Should I let my child play soccer?"
And I think that as a field, we're a long way from giving an answer with any kind of confidence there.
So I look at that question from a bit of a different lens, and I want to know, how can we prevent concussion?
Is that even possible?
And most experts think that it's not, but the work that we're doing in my lab is starting to reveal more of the details around concussion so that we can have a better understanding.
The reason we're able to prevent skull fracture with helmets is because it's pretty simple. We know how it works.
Concussion has been much more of a mystery.
So to give you a sense of what might be happening in a concussion, I want to show you the video here that you see when you type into Google, "What is a concussion?"
The CDC website comes up, and this video essentially tells the whole story.
What you see is the head moves forward, the brain lags behind, then the brain catches up and smashes into the skull.
It rebounds off the skull and then proceeds to run into the other side of the skull.
And what you'll notice is highlighted in this video from the CDC, which I'll note was funded by the NFL, is that the outer surface of the brain, where it was to have smashed into the skull, looks like it's been damaged or injured, so it's on the outer surface of the brain.
And what I'd like to do with this video is to tell you that there are some aspects that are probably right, indicative of what the scientists think happens with concussion, but there's probably more that's wrong with this video.
So one thing that I do agree with, and I think most experts would, is that the brain does have these dynamics.
It does lag behind the skull and then catch up and move back and forth and oscillate.
That we think is true.
However, the amount of motion you see in the brain in this video is probably not right at all.
There's very little room in the cranial vault, only a few millimeters, and it's filled entirely with cerebral spinal fluid, which acts as a protective layer.
And so the brain as a whole probably moves very little inside the skull.
The other problem with this video is that the brain is shown as a kind of rigid whole as it moves around, and that's not true either.
Your brain is one of the softest substances in your body, and you can think of it kind of like jello.
So as your head is moving back and forth, your brain is twisting and turning and contorting, and the tissue is getting stretched.
And so most experts, I think, would agree that concussion is not likely to be something that's happening on this outer surface of the brain, but rather it's something that's much deeper towards the center of the brain.
Now, the way that we're approaching this problem to try to understand the mechanisms of concussion and to figure out if we can prevent it is we are using a device like this.
It's a mouthguard.
It has sensors in it that are essentially the same that are in your cell phone: accelerometers, gyroscopes, and when someone is struck in the head, it can tell you how their head moved at a thousand samples per second.
The principle behind the mouthguard is this: it fits onto your teeth.
Your teeth are one of the hardest substances in your body.
So it rigidly couples to your skull and gives you the most precise possible measurement of how the skull moves.
People have tried other approaches, with helmets.
We've looked at other sensors that go on your skin, and they all simply move around too much, and so we found that this is the only reliable way to take a good measurement.
So now that we've got this device, we can go beyond studying cadavers, because you can only learn so much about concussion from studying a cadaver, and we want to learn and study live humans.
So where can we find a group of willing volunteers to go out and smash their heads into each other on a regular basis and sustain concussion?
Well, I was one of them, and it's your local friendly Stanford football team.
So this is our laboratory, and I want to show you the first concussion we measured with this device.
One of the things that I should point out is the device has this gyroscope in it, and that allows you to measure the rotation of the head.
Most experts think that that's the critical factor that might start to tell us what is happening in concussion.
So please watch this video.
Announcer: Cougars bring extra people late, but Luck has time, and Winslow is crushed.
I hope he's all right.
(Audience roars) Top of your screen, you'll see him come on just this little post route, get separation, safety.
Here it comes at you in real speed. You'll hear this.
The hit delivered by -- David Camarillo: Sorry, three times is probably a little excessive there.
But you get the idea.
So when you look at just the film here, pretty much the only thing you can see is he got hit really hard and he was hurt.
But when we extract the data out of the mouthguard that he was wearing, we can see much more detail, much richer information.
And one of the things that we noticed here is that he was struck in the lower left side of his face mask.
And so that did something first that was a little counterintuitive.
His head did not move to the right.
In fact, it rotated first to the left.
Then as the neck began to compress, the force of the blow caused it to whip back to the right.
So this left-right motion was sort of a whiplash-type phenomenon, and we think that is probably what led to the brain injury.
Now, this device is only limited in such that it can measure the skull motion, but what we really want to know is what's happening inside of the brain.
So we collaborate with Svein Kleiven's group in Sweden.
They've developed a finite element model of the brain.
And so this is a simulation using the data from our mouthguard from the injury I just showed you, and what you see is the brain -- this is a cross-section right in the front of the brain twisting and contorting as I mentioned.
So you can see this doesn't look a lot like the CDC video.
Now, the colors that you're looking at are how much the brain tissue is being stretched.
And so the red is 50 percent.
That means the brain has been stretched to 50 percent of its original length, the tissue in that particular area.
And the main thing I want to draw your attention to is this red spot.
So the red spot is very close to the center of the brain, and relatively speaking, you don't see a lot of colors like that on the exterior surface as the CDC video showed.
Now, to explain a little more detail about how we think concussion might be happening, one thing I should mention is that we and others have observed that a concussion is more likely when you're struck and your head rotates in this direction.
This is more common in sports like football, but this seems to be more dangerous. So what might be happening there?
Well, one thing that you'll notice in the human brain that is different than other animals is we have these two very large lobes.
We have the right brain and the left brain.
And the key thing to notice in this figure here is that right down the center of the right brain and the left brain there's a large fissure that goes deep into the brain.
And in that fissure, what you can't see in this image, you'll have to trust me, there is a fibrous sheet of tissue.
It's called the falx, and it runs from the front of your head all the way to the back of your head, and it's quite stiff.
And so what that allows for is when you're struck and your head rotates in this left-right direction, forces can rapidly transmit right down to the center of your brain.
Now, what's there at the bottom of this fissure?
It's the wiring of your brain, and in fact this red bundle here at the bottom of that fissure is the single largest fiber bundle that is the wiring that connects the right and left sides of your brain.
It's called the corpus callosum.
And we think that this might be one of the most common mechanisms of concussion, and as the forces move down, they strike the corpus callosum, it causes a dissociation between your right and your left brain and could explain some of the symptoms of concussion.
This finding is also consistent of what we've seen in this brain disease that I mentioned, chronic traumatic encephalopathy.
So this is an image of a middle-aged ex-professional football player, and the thing that I want to point out is if you look at the corpus callosum, and I'll page back here so you can see the size of a normal corpus callosum and the size of the person here who has chronic traumatic encephalopathy, it is greatly atrophied.
And the same goes for all of the space in the ventricles.
These ventricles are much larger.
And so all of this tissue near the center of the brain has died off over time.
So what we're learning is indeed consistent.
Now, there is some good news here, and I hope to give you a sense of hope by the end of this talk.
One of the things that we've noticed, specifically about this mechanism of injury, is although there's a rapid transmission of the forces down this fissure, it still takes a defined amount of time.
And what we think is that if we can slow the head down just enough so that the brain does not lag behind the skull but instead it moves in synchrony with the skull, then we might be able to prevent this mechanism of concussion.
So how can we slow the head down?
(Laughter) A gigantic helmet.
So with more space, you have more time, and this is a bit of a joke, but some of you may have seen this.
This is bubble soccer, and it's a real sport.
In fact, I saw some young adults playing this sport down the street from my house the other day, and as far as I know there have been no reported concussions.
(Laughter) But in all seriousness, this principle does work, but this has gone too far.
This isn't something that's practical for bike riding or playing football.
And so we are collaborating with a company in Sweden called Hövding.
Some of you may have seen their work, and they're using the same principle of air to give you some extra space to prevent concussion.
Kids, don't try this at home please.
This stuntman does not have a helmet.
He instead has a neck collar, and this neck collar has sensors in it, the same type of sensors that are in our mouthguard, and it detects when he's likely to have a fall, and there's an airbag that explodes and triggers, the same way that an airbag works in your car, essentially.
And in the experiments we've done in my lab with their device, we found that it can greatly reduce the risk of concussion in some scenarios compared to a normal bicycle helmet.
So it's a pretty exciting development.
But in order for us to actually realize the benefits of technology that can prevent concussion, it needs to meet regulations.
That's a reality.
And this device is for sale in Europe but is not for sale in the US, and probably won't be any time soon.
So I wanted to tell you why.
There are some good reasons and then there are some not so good reasons.
Bike helmets are federally regulated.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission has been given jurisdiction to approve any bike helmet for sale, and this is the test they use.
This is back to what I was telling you at the beginning about skull fracture.
That's what this test is for.
And that's an important thing to do.
It can save your life, but it's not sufficient, I would say.
So for example, one thing this test doesn't evaluate is it doesn't tell you is that airbag going to trigger at the right time and place, and not trigger when it doesn't need to?
Similarly, it's not going to tell you is this helmet likely to prevent concussion or not?
And if you look at football helmets, which aren't regulated, they still have a very similar test.
They're not regulated by the government, anyway.
They have an industry body, which is the way most industries work.
But this industry body, I can tell you, has been quite resistant to updating their standards.
So in my lab, we are working on not only the mechanism of concussion, but we want to understand how can we have better test standards?
And we hope that the government can use this type of information to encourage innovation by letting consumers know how protected are you with a given helmet.
And I want to bring this back finally to the original question I asked, which is, would I feel comfortable letting my child play football or ride a bicycle?
And this might be just a result of my own traumatic experience.
I'm much more nervous about my daughter, Rose, riding a bicycle.
So she's a year and a half old, and she's already, well, wants to anyway, race down the streets of San Francisco.
This is the bottom of one of these streets.
And so my personal goal is to -- and I believe this is possible -- is to further develop these technologies, and in fact, we're working on something in my lab in particular that really makes optimal use of the given space of a helmet.
And I am confident that we will be able to, before she's ready to ride a two-wheeler, have something available that can in fact really reduce the risk of concussion and comply with regulatory bodies.
And so what I'd like to do -- and I know that this is for some of you of more immediate nature, I've got a couple years here -- is to be able to tell parents and grandparents when I'm asked, it is safe and healthy for your children to engage in these activities.
And I'm very fortunate to have a wonderful team at Stanford that's working hard on this.
So I hope to come back in a few years with the final story, but for now I will tell you, please don't just be afraid when you hear the word concussion.
There is hope.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You know, I didn't set out to be a parenting expert.
In fact, I'm not very interested in parenting, per Se.
It's just that there's a certain style of parenting these days that is kind of messing up kids, impeding their chances to develop into theirselves.
There's a certain style of parenting these days that's getting in the way.
I guess what I'm saying is, we spend a lot of time being very concerned about parents who aren't involved enough in the lives of their kids and their education or their upbringing, and rightly so.
But at the other end of the spectrum, there's a lot of harm going on there as well, where parents feel a kid can't be successful unless the parent is protecting and preventing at every turn and hovering over every happening, and micromanaging every moment, and steering their kid towards some small subset of colleges and careers.
When we raise kids this way, and I'll say we, because Lord knows, in raising my two teenagers, I've had these tendencies myself, our kids end up leading a kind of checklisted childhood.
And here's what the checklisted childhood looks like.
We keep them safe and sound and fed and watered, and then we want to be sure they go to the right schools, that they're in the right classes at the right schools, and that they get the right grades in the right classes in the right schools.
But not just the grades, the scores, and not just the grades and scores, but the accolades and the awards and the sports, the activities, the leadership.
We tell our kids, don't just join a club, start a club, because colleges want to see that.
And check the box for community service.
I mean, show the colleges you care about others.
(Laughter) And all of this is done to some hoped-for degree of perfection.
We expect our kids to perform at a level of perfection we were never asked to perform at ourselves, and so because so much is required, we think, well then, of course we parents have to argue with every teacher and principal and coach and referee and act like our kid's concierge and personal handler and secretary.
And then with our kids, our precious kids, we spend so much time nudging, cajoling, hinting, helping, haggling, nagging as the case may be, to be sure they're not screwing up, not closing doors, not ruining their future, some hoped-for admission to a tiny handful of colleges that deny almost every applicant.
And here's what it feels like to be a kid in this checklisted childhood.
First of all, there's no time for free play.
There's no room in the afternoons, because everything has to be enriching, we think.
It's as if every piece of homework, every quiz, every activity is a make-or-break moment for this future we have in mind for them, and we absolve them of helping out around the house, and we even absolve them of getting enough sleep as long as they're checking off the items on their checklist.
And in the checklisted childhood, we say we just want them to be happy, but when they come home from school, what we ask about all too often first is their homework and their grades.
And they see in our faces that our approval, that our love, that their very worth, comes from A's.
And then we walk alongside them and offer clucking praise like a trainer at the Westminster Dog Show -- (Laughter) coaxing them to just jump a little higher and soar a little farther, day after day after day.
And when they get to high school, they don't say, "Well, what might I be interested in studying or doing as an activity?"
They go to counselors and they say, "What do I need to do to get into the right college?"
And then, when the grades start to roll in in high school, and they're getting some B's, or God forbid some C's, they frantically text their friends and say, "Has anyone ever gotten into the right college with these grades?"
And our kids, regardless of where they end up at the end of high school, they're breathless.
They're brittle.
They're a little burned out.
They're a little old before their time, wishing the grown-ups in their lives had said, "What you've done is enough, this effort you've put forth in childhood is enough."
And they're withering now under high rates of anxiety and depression and some of them are wondering, will this life ever turn out to have been worth it?
Well, we parents, we parents are pretty sure it's all worth it.
We seem to behave -- it's like we literally think they will have no future if they don't get into one of these tiny set of colleges or careers we have in mind for them.
Or maybe, maybe, we're just afraid they won't have a future we can brag about to our friends and with stickers on the backs of our cars.
Yeah.
(Applause) But if you look at what we've done, if you have the courage to really look at it, you'll see that not only do our kids think their worth comes from grades and scores, but that when we live right up inside their precious developing minds all the time, like our very own version of the movie "Being John Malkovich," we send our children the message: "Hey kid, I don't think you can actually achieve any of this without me."
And so with our overhelp, our overprotection and overdirection and hand-holding, we deprive our kids of the chance to build self-efficacy, which is a really fundamental tenet of the human psyche, far more important than that self-esteem they get every time we applaud.
Self-efficacy is built when one sees that one's own actions lead to outcomes, not -- There you go.
(Applause) Not one's parents' actions on one's behalf, but when one's own actions lead to outcomes.
So simply put, if our children are to develop self-efficacy, and they must, then they have to do a whole lot more of the thinking, planning, deciding, doing, hoping, coping, trial and error, dreaming and experiencing of life for themselves.
Now, am I saying every kid is hard-working and motivated and doesn't need a parent's involvement or interest in their lives, and we should just back off and let go?
Hell no.
(Laughter) That is not what I'm saying.
What I'm saying is, when we treat grades and scores and accolades and awards as the purpose of childhood, all in furtherance of some hoped-for admission to a tiny number of colleges or entrance to a small number of careers, that that's too narrow a definition of success for our kids.
And even though we might help them achieve some short-term wins by overhelping -- like they get a better grade if we help them do their homework, they might end up with a longer childhood résumé when we help -- what I'm saying is that all of this comes at a long-term cost to their sense of self.
What I'm saying is, we should be less concerned with the specific set of colleges they might be able to apply to or might get into and far more concerned that they have the habits, the mindset, the skill set, the wellness, to be successful wherever they go.
What I'm saying is, our kids need us to be a little less obsessed with grades and scores and a whole lot more interested in childhood providing a foundation for their success built on things like love and chores.
(Laughter) (Applause) Did I just say chores? Did I just say chores? I really did.
But really, here's why.
The longest longitudinal study of humans ever conducted is called the Harvard Grant Study.
It found that professional success in life, which is what we want for our kids, that professional success in life comes from having done chores as a kid, and the earlier you started, the better, that a roll-up-your-sleeves- and-pitch-in mindset, a mindset that says, there's some unpleasant work, someone's got to do it, it might as well be me, a mindset that says, I will contribute my effort to the betterment of the whole, that that's what gets you ahead in the workplace.
Now, we all know this. You know this.
(Applause) We all know this, and yet, in the checklisted childhood, we absolve our kids of doing the work of chores around the house, and then they end up as young adults in the workplace still waiting for a checklist, but it doesn't exist, and more importantly, lacking the impulse, the instinct to roll up their sleeves and pitch in and look around and wonder, how can I be useful to my colleagues?
How can I anticipate a few steps ahead to what my boss might need?
A second very important finding from the Harvard Grant Study said that happiness in life comes from love, not love of work, love of humans: our spouse, our partner, our friends, our family.
So childhood needs to teach our kids how to love, and they can't love others if they don't first love themselves, and they won't love themselves if we can't offer them unconditional love.
(Applause) Right.
And so, instead of being obsessed with grades and scores when our precious offspring come home from school, or we come home from work, we need to close our technology, put away our phones, and look them in the eye and let them see the joy that fills our faces when we see our child for the first time in a few hours.
And then we have to say, "How was your day?
What did you like about today?"
And when your teenage daughter says, "Lunch," like mine did, and I want to hear about the math test, not lunch, you have to still take an interest in lunch.
You gotta say, "What was great about lunch today?"
They need to know they matter to us as humans, not because of their GPA.
All right, so you're thinking, chores and love, that sounds all well and good, but give me a break.
The colleges want to see top scores and grades and accolades and awards, and I'm going to tell you, sort of.
The very biggest brand-name schools are asking that of our young adults, but here's the good news.
Contrary to what the college rankings racket would have us believe -- (Applause) you don't have to go to one of the biggest brand name schools to be happy and successful in life.
Happy and successful people went to state school, went to a small college no one has heard of, went to community college, went to a college over here and flunked out.
(Applause) The evidence is in this room, is in our communities, that this is the truth.
And if we could widen our blinders and be willing to look at a few more colleges, maybe remove our own egos from the equation, we could accept and embrace this truth and then realize, it is hardly the end of the world if our kids don't go to one of those big brand-name schools.
And more importantly, if their childhood has not been lived according to a tyrannical checklist then when they get to college, whichever one it is, well, they'll have gone there on their own volition, fueled by their own desire, capable and ready to thrive there.
I have to admit something to you.
I've got two kids I mentioned, Sawyer and Avery.
They're teenagers.
And once upon a time, I think I was treating my Sawyer and Avery like little bonsai trees -- (Laughter) that I was going to carefully clip and prune and shape into some perfect form of a human that might just be perfect enough to warrant them admission to one of the most highly selective colleges.
But I've come to realize, after working with thousands of other people's kids -- (Laughter) and raising two kids of my own, my kids aren't bonsai trees.
They're wildflowers of an unknown genus and species -- (Laughter) and it's my job to provide a nourishing environment, to strengthen them through chores and to love them so they can love others and receive love and the college, the major, the career, that's up to them.
My job is not to make them become what I would have them become, but to support them in becoming their glorious selves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you heard the news?
We're in a clean energy revolution.
And where I live in Berkeley, California, it seems like every day I see a new roof with new solar panels going up, electric car in the driveway.
Germany sometimes gets half its power from solar, and India is now committed to building 10 times more solar than we have in California, by the year 2022.
Even nuclear seems to be making a comeback.
Bill Gates is in China working with engineers, there's 40 different companies that are working together to try to race to build the first reactor that runs on waste, that can't melt down and is cheaper than coal.
And so you might start to ask: Is this whole global warming problem going to be a lot easier to solve than anybody imagined?
That was the question we wanted to know, so my colleagues and I decided to take a deep dive into the data.
We were a little skeptical of some parts of the clean energy revolution story, but what we found really surprised us.
The first thing is that clean energy has been increasing.
This is electricity from clean energy sources over the last 20 years.
But when you look at the percentage of global electricity from clean energy sources, it's actually been in decline from 36 percent to 31 percent.
And if you care about climate change, you've got to go in the opposite direction to 100 percent of our electricity from clean energy sources, as quickly as possible.
Now, you might wonder, "Come on, how much could five percentage points of global electricity be?"
Well, it turns out to be quite a bit.
It's the equivalent of 60 nuclear plants the size of Diablo Canyon, California's last nuclear plant, or 900 solar farms the size of Topaz, which is one of the biggest solar farms in the world, and certainly our biggest in California.
A big part of this is simply that fossil fuels are increasing faster than clean energy.
And that's understandable.
There's just a lot of poor countries that are still using wood and dung and charcoal as their main source of energy, and they need modern fuels.
But there's something else going on, which is that one of those clean energy sources in particular has actually been on the decline in absolute terms, not just relatively.
And that's nuclear.
You can see its generation has declined seven percent over the last 10 years.
Now, solar and wind have been making huge strides, so you hear a lot of talk about how it doesn't really matter, because solar and wind is going to make up the difference.
But the data says something different.
When you combine all the electricity from solar and wind, you see it actually barely makes up half of the decline from nuclear.
Let's take a closer look in the United States.
Over the last couple of years -- really 2013, 2014 -- we prematurely retired four nuclear power plants.
They were almost entirely replaced with fossil fuels, and so the consequence was that we wiped out almost as much clean energy electricity that we get from solar.
And it's not unique to us.
People think of California as a clean energy and climate leader, but when we looked at the data, what we found is that, in fact, California reduced emissions more slowly than the national average, between 2000 and 2015.
What about Germany?
They're doing a lot of clean energy.
But when you look at the data, German emissions have actually been going up since 2009, and there's really not anybody who's going to tell you that they're going to meet their climate commitments in 2020.
The reason isn't hard to understand.
Solar and wind provide power about 10 to 20 percent of the time, which means that when the sun's not shining, the wind's not blowing, you still need power for your hospitals, your homes, your cities, your factories.
And while batteries have made some really cool improvements lately, the truth is, they're just never going to be as efficient as the electrical grid.
Every time you put electricity into a battery and take it out, you lose about 20 to 40 percent of the power.
That's why when, in California, we try to deal with all the solar we've brought online -- we now get about 10 percent of electricity from solar -- when the sun goes down, and people come home from work and turn on their air conditioners and their TV sets, and every other appliance in the house, we need a lot of natural gas backup.
So what we've been doing is stuffing a lot of natural gas into the side of a mountain.
And that worked pretty well for a while, but then late last year, it sprung a leak.
This is Aliso Canyon.
So much methane gas was released, it was the equivalent of putting half a million cars on the road.
It basically blew through all of our climate commitments for the year.
Well, what about India?
Sometimes you have to go places to really get the right data, so we traveled to India a few months ago.
We met with all the top officials -- solar, nuclear, the rest -- and what they told us is, "We're actually having more serious problems than both Germany and California.
We don't have backup; we don't have all the natural gas.
And that's just the start of it.
Say we want to get to 100 gigawatts by 2022.
But last year we did just five, and the year before that, we did five."
So, let's just take a closer look at nuclear.
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has looked at the carbon content of all these different fuels, and nuclear comes out really low -- it's actually lower even than solar.
And nuclear obviously provides a lot of power -- 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
During a year, a single plant can provide power 92 percent of the time.
What's interesting is that when you look at countries that have deployed different kinds of clean energies, there's only a few that have done so at a pace consistent with dealing with the climate crisis.
So nuclear seems like a pretty good option, but there's this big problem with it, which all of you, I'm sure, are aware of, which is that people really don't like it.
There was a study, a survey done of people around the world, not just in the United States or Europe, about a year and a half ago.
And what they found is that nuclear is actually one of the least popular forms of energy.
Even oil is more popular than nuclear.
And while nuclear kind of edges out coal, the thing is, people don't really fear coal in the same way they fear nuclear, which really operates on our unconscious.
So what is it that we fear?
There's really three things.
There's the safety of the plants themselves -- the fears that they're going to melt down and cause damage; there's the waste from them; and there's the association with weapons.
And I think, understandably, engineers look at those concerns and look for technological fixes.
That's why Bill Gates is in China developing advanced reactors.
That's why 40 different entrepreneurs are working on this problem.
And I, myself, have been very excited about it.
We did a report: "How to Make Nuclear Cheap."
In particular, the thorium reactor shows a lot of promise.
So when the climate scientist, James Hansen, asked if I wanted to go to China with him and look at the Chinese advanced nuclear program, I jumped at the chance.
We were there with MIT and UC Berkeley engineers.
And I had in my mind that the Chinese would be able to do with nuclear what they did with so many other things -- start to crank out small nuclear reactors on assembly lines, ship them up like iPhones or MacBooks and send them around the world.
I would get one at home in Berkeley.
But what I found was somewhat different.
The presentations were all very exciting and very promising; they have multiple reactors that they're working on.
The time came for the thorium reactor, and a bunch of us were excited.
They went through the whole presentation, they got to the timeline, and they said, "We're going to have a thorium molten salt reactor ready for sale to the world by 2040."
And I was like, "What?"
(Laughter) I looked at my colleagues and I was like, "Excuse me -- can you guys speed that up a little bit?
Because we're in a little bit of a climate crisis right now.
And your cities are really polluted, by the way."
And they responded back, they were like, "I'm not sure what you've heard about our thorium program, but we don't have a third of our budget, and your department of energy hasn't been particularly forthcoming with all that data you guys have on testing reactors."
And I said, "Well, I've got an idea.
You know how you've got 10 years where you're demonstrating that reactor?
Let's just skip that part, and let's just go right to commercializing it.
That will save money and time."
And the engineer just looked at me and said, "Let me ask you a question: Would you buy a car that had never been demonstrated before?"
So what about the other reactors?
There's a reactor that's coming online now, they're starting to sell it.
It's a high-temperature gas reactor.
It can't melt down.
But it's really big and bulky, that's part of the safety, and nobody thinks it's going to ever get cheaper than the reactors that we have.
The ones that use waste as fuel are really cool ideas, but the truth is, we don't actually know how to do that yet.
There's some risk that you'll actually make more waste, and most people think that if you're including that waste part of the process, it's just going to make the whole machine a lot more expensive, it's just adding another complicated step.
The truth is, there's real questions about how much of that we're going to do.
I mean, we went to India and asked about the nuclear program.
The government said before the Paris climate talks that they were going to do something like 30 new nuclear plants.
But when we got there and interviewed people and even looked at the internal documents, they're now saying they're going to do about five.
And in most of the world, especially the rich world, they're not talking about building new reactors.
We're actually talking about taking reactors down before their lifetimes are over.
Germany's actually pressuring its neighbors to do that.
I mentioned the United States -- we could lose half of our reactors over the next 15 years, which would wipe out 40 percent of the emissions reductions we're supposed to get under the Clean Power Plan.
Of course, in Japan, they took all their nuclear plants offline, replaced them with coal, natural gas, oil burning, and they're only expected to bring online about a third to two-thirds.
So when we went through the numbers, and just added that up -- how much nuclear do we see China and India bringing online over the next 15 years, how much do we see at risk of being taken offline -- this was the most startling finding.
What we found is that the world is actually at risk of losing four times more clean energy than we lost over the last 10 years.
In other words: we're not in a clean energy revolution; we're in a clean energy crisis.
So it's understandable that engineers would look for a technical fix to the fears that people have of nuclear.
But when you consider that these are big challenges to do, that they're going to take a long time to solve, there's this other issue, which is: Are those technical fixes really going to solve people's fears?
Let's take safety.
You know, despite what people think, it's hard to figure out how to make nuclear power much safer.
I mean, every medical journal that looks at it -- this is the most recent study from the British journal, "Lancet," one of the most respected journals in the world -- nuclear is the safest way to make reliable power.
Everybody's scared of the accidents.
So you go look at the accident data -- Fukushima, Chernobyl -- the World Health Organization finds the same thing: the vast majority of harm is caused by people panicking, and they're panicking because they're afraid.
In other words, the harm that's caused isn't actually caused by the machines or the radiation.
It's caused by our fears.
And what about the waste?
Everyone worries about the waste.
Well, the interesting thing about the waste is how little of it there is.
This is just from one plant.
If you take all the nuclear waste we've ever made in the United States, put it on a football field, stacked it up, it would only reach 20 feet high.
And people say it's poisoning people or doing something -- it's not, it's just sitting there, it's just being monitored.
There's not very much of it.
By contrast, the waste that we don't control from energy production -- we call it "pollution," and it kills seven million people a year, and it's threatening very serious levels of global warming.
And the truth is that even if we get good at using that waste as fuel, there's always going to be some fuel left over.
That means there's always going to be people that think it's a big problem for reasons that maybe don't have as much to do with the actual waste as we think.
Well, what about the weapons?
Maybe the most surprising thing is that we can't find any examples of countries that have nuclear power and then, "Oh!" decide to go get a weapon.
In fact, it works the opposite.
What we find is the only way we know how to get rid large numbers of nuclear weapons is by using the plutonium in the warheads as fuel in our nuclear power plants.
And so, if you are wanting to get the world rid of nuclear weapons, then we're going to need a lot more nuclear power.
(Applause) As I was leaving China, the engineer that brought Bill Gates there kind of pulled me aside, and he said, "You know, Michael, I appreciate your interest in all the different nuclear supply technologies, but there's this more basic issue, which is that there's just not enough global demand.
I mean, we can crank out these machines on assembly lines, we do know how to make things cheap, but there's just not enough people that want them."
And so, let's do solar and wind and efficiency and conservation.
Let's accelerate the advanced nuclear programs.
I think we should triple the amount of money we're spending on it.
But I just think the most important thing, if we're going to overcome the climate crisis, is to keep in mind that the cause of the clean energy crisis isn't from within our machines, it's from within ourselves.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
There's a man out there, somewhere, who looks a little bit like the actor Idris Elba, or at least he did 20 years ago.
I don't know anything else about him, except that he once saved my life by putting his own life in danger.
This man ran across four lanes of freeway traffic in the middle of the night to bring me back to safety after a car accident that could have killed me.
And the whole thing left me really shaken up, obviously, but it also left me with this kind of burning, gnawing need to understand why he did it, what forces within him caused him to make the choice that I owe my life to, to risk his own life to save the life of a stranger?
In other words, what are the causes of his or anybody else's capacity for altruism?
But first let me tell you what happened.
That night, I was 19 years old and driving back to my home in Tacoma, Washington, down the Interstate 5 freeway, when a little dog darted out in front of my car.
And I did exactly what you're not supposed to do, which is swerve to avoid it.
And I discovered why you're not supposed to do that.
I hit the dog anyways, and that sent the car into a fishtail, and then a spin across the freeway, until finally it wound up in the fast lane of the freeway faced backwards into oncoming traffic and then the engine died.
And I was sure in that moment that I was about to die too, but I didn't because of the actions of that one brave man who must have made the decision within a fraction of a second of seeing my stranded car to pull over and run across four lanes of freeway traffic in the dark to save my life.
And then after he got my car working again and got me back to safety and made sure I was going to be all right, he drove off again.
He never even told me his name, and I'm pretty sure I forgot to say thank you.
So before I go any further, I really want to take a moment to stop and say thank you to that stranger.
(Applause) I tell you all of this because the events of that night changed the course of my life to some degree.
I became a psychology researcher, and I've devoted my work to understanding the human capacity to care for others.
Where does it come from, and how does it develop, and what are the extreme forms that it can take?
These questions are really important to understanding basic aspects of human social nature.
A lot of people, and this includes everybody from philosophers and economists to ordinary people believe that human nature is fundamentally selfish, that we're only ever really motivated by our own welfare.
But if that's true, why do some people, like the stranger who rescued me, do selfless things, like helping other people at enormous risk and cost to themselves?
Answering this question requires exploring the roots of extraordinary acts of altruism, and what might make people who engage in such acts different than other people.
But until recently, very little work on this topic had been done.
The actions of the man who rescued me meet the most stringent definition of altruism, which is a voluntary, costly behavior motivated by the desire to help another individual.
So it's a selfless act intended to benefit only the other.
What could possibly explain an action like that?
One answer is compassion, obviously, which is a key driver of altruism.
But then the question becomes, why do some people seem to have more of it than others?
And the answer may be that the brains of highly altruistic people are different in fundamental ways.
But to figure out how, I actually started from the opposite end, with psychopaths.
A common approach to understanding basic aspects of human nature, like the desire to help other people, is to study people in whom that desire is missing, and psychopaths are exactly such a group.
Psychopathy is a developmental disorder with strongly genetic origins, and it results in a personality that's cold and uncaring and a tendency to engage in antisocial and sometimes very violent behavior.
Once my colleagues and I at the National Institute of Mental Health conducted some of the first ever brain imaging research of psychopathic adolescents, and our findings, and the findings of other researchers now, have shown that people who are psychopathic pretty reliably exhibit three characteristics.
First, although they're not generally insensitive to other people's emotions, they are insensitive to signs that other people are in distress.
And in particular, they have difficulty recognizing fearful facial expressions like this one.
And fearful expressions convey urgent need and emotional distress, and they usually elicit compassion and a desire to help in people who see them, so it makes sense that people who tend to lack compassion also tend to be insensitive to these cues.
The part of the brain that's the most important for recognizing fearful expressions is called the amygdala.
There are very rare cases of people who lack amygdalas completely, and they're profoundly impaired in recognizing fearful expressions.
And whereas healthy adults and children usually show big spikes in amygdala activity when they look at fearful expressions, psychopaths' amygdalas are underreactive to these expressions.
Sometimes they don't react at all, which may be why they have trouble detecting these cues.
Finally, psychopaths' amygdalas are smaller than average by about 18 or 20 percent.
So all of these findings are reliable and robust, and they're very interesting.
But remember that my main interest is not understanding why people don't care about others.
It's understanding why they do.
So the real question is, could extraordinary altruism, which is the opposite of psychopathy in terms of compassion and the desire to help other people, emerge from a brain that is also the opposite of psychopathy?
A sort of antipsychopathic brain, better able to recognize other people's fear, an amygdala that's more reactive to this expression and maybe larger than average as well?
As my research has now shown, all three things are true.
And we discovered this by testing a population of truly extraordinary altruists.
These are people who have given one of their own kidneys to a complete stranger.
So these are people who have volunteered to undergo major surgery so that one of their own healthy kidneys can be removed and transplanted into a very ill stranger that they've never met and may never meet.
"Why would anybody do this?" is a very common question.
And the answer may be that the brains of these extraordinary altruists have certain special characteristics.
They are better at recognizing other people's fear.
They're literally better at detecting when somebody else is in distress.
This may be in part because their amygdala is more reactive to these expressions.
And remember, this is the same part of the brain that we found was underreactive in people who are psychopathic.
And finally, their amygdalas are larger than average as well, by about eight percent.
So together, what these data suggest is the existence of something like a caring continuum in the world that's anchored at the one end by people who are highly psychopathic, and at the other by people who are very compassionate and driven to acts of extreme altruism.
But I should add that what makes extraordinary altruists so different is not just that they're more compassionate than average.
They are, but what's even more unusual about them is that they're compassionate and altruistic not just towards people who are in their own innermost circle of friends and family. Right?
Because to have compassion for people that you love and identify with is not extraordinary.
Truly extraordinary altruists' compassion extends way beyond that circle, even beyond their wider circle of acquaintances to people who are outside their social circle altogether, total strangers, just like the man who rescued me.
And I've had the opportunity now to ask a lot of altruistic kidney donors how it is that they manage to generate such a wide circle of compassion that they were willing to give a complete stranger their kidney.
And I found it's a really difficult question for them to answer.
I say, "How is it that you're willing to do this thing when so many other people don't?
You're one of fewer than 2,000 Americans who has ever given a kidney to a stranger.
What is it that makes you so special?"
And what do they say?
They say, "Nothing.
There's nothing special about me.
I'm just the same as everybody else."
And I think that's actually a really telling answer, because it suggests that the circles of these altruists don't look like this, they look more like this.
They have no center.
These altruists literally don't think of themselves as being at the center of anything, as being better or more inherently important than anybody else.
When I asked one altruist why donating her kidney made sense to her, she said, "Because it's not about me."
Another said, "I'm not different. I'm not unique.
Your study here is going to find out that I'm just the same as you."
I think the best description for this amazing lack of self-centeredness is humility, which is that quality that in the words of St. Augustine makes men as angels.
And why is that?
It's because if there's no center of your circle, there can be no inner rings or outer rings, nobody who is more or less worthy of your care and compassion than anybody else.
And I think that this is what really distinguishes extraordinary altruists from the average person.
But I also think that this is a view of the world that's attainable by many and maybe even most people.
And I think this because at the societal level, expansions of altruism and compassion are already happening everywhere.
The psychologist Steven Pinker and others have shown that all around the world people are becoming less and less accepting of suffering in ever-widening circles of others, which has led to declines of all kinds of cruelty and violence, from animal abuse to domestic violence to capital punishment.
And it's led to increases in all kinds of altruism.
A hundred years ago, people would have thought it was ludicrous how normal and ordinary it is for people to donate their blood and bone marrow to complete strangers today.
Is it possible that a hundred years from now people will think that donating a kidney to a stranger is just as normal and ordinary as we think donating blood and bone marrow is today?
Maybe.
So what's at the root of all these amazing changes?
In part it seems to be increases in wealth and standards of living.
As societies become wealthier and better off, people seem to turn their focus of attention outward, and as a result, all kinds of altruism towards strangers increases, from volunteering to charitable donations and even altruistic kidney donations.
But all of these changes also yield a strange and paradoxical result, which is that even as the world is becoming a better and more humane place, which it is, there's a very common perception that it's becoming worse and more cruel, which it's not.
And I don't know exactly why this is, but I think it may be that we now just know so much more about the suffering of strangers in distant places, and so we now care a lot more about the suffering of those distant strangers.
But what's clear is the kinds of changes we're seeing show that the roots of altruism and compassion are just as much a part of human nature as cruelty and violence, maybe even more so, and while some people do seem to be inherently more sensitive to the suffering of distant others, I really believe that the ability to remove oneself from the center of the circle and expand the circle of compassion outward to include even strangers is within reach for almost everyone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How much do you get paid?
Don't answer that out loud.
But put a number in your head.
Now: How much do you think the person sitting next to you gets paid?
Again, don't answer out loud.
(Laughter) At work, how much do you think the person sitting in the cubicle or the desk next to you gets paid?
Do you know?
Should you know?
Notice, it's a little uncomfortable for me to even ask you those questions.
But admit it -- you kind of want to know.
Most of us are uncomfortable with the idea of broadcasting our salary.
We're not supposed to tell our neighbors, and we're definitely not supposed to tell our office neighbors.
The assumed reason is that if everybody knew what everybody got paid, then all hell would break loose.
There'd be arguments, there'd be fights, there might even be a few people who quit.
But what if secrecy is actually the reason for all that strife?
And what would happen if we removed that secrecy?
What if openness actually increased the sense of fairness and collaboration inside a company?
What would happen if we had total pay transparency?
For the past several years, I've been studying the corporate and entrepreneurial leaders who question the conventional wisdom about how to run a company.
And the question of pay keeps coming up.
And the answers keep surprising.
It turns out that pay transparency -- sharing salaries openly across a company -- makes for a better workplace for both the employee and for the organization.
When people don't know how their pay compares to their peers', they're more likely to feel underpaid and maybe even discriminated against.
Do you want to work at a place that tolerates the idea that you feel underpaid or discriminated against?
But keeping salaries secret does exactly that, and it's a practice as old as it is common, despite the fact that in the United States, the law protects an employee's right to discuss their pay.
In one famous example from decades ago, the management of Vanity Fair magazine actually circulated a memo entitled: "Forbidding Discussion Among Employees of Salary Received."
"Forbidding" discussion among employees of salary received.
Now that memo didn't sit well with everybody.
New York literary figures Dorothy Parker, Robert Benchley and Robert Sherwood, all writers in the Algonquin Round Table, decided to stand up for transparency and showed up for work the next day with their salary written on signs hanging from their neck.
(Laughter) Imagine showing up for work with your salary just written across your chest for all to see.
But why would a company even want to discourage salary discussions?
Why do some people go along with it, while others revolt against it?
It turns out that in addition to the assumed reasons, pay secrecy is actually a way to save a lot of money.
You see, keeping salaries secret leads to what economists call "information asymmetry."
This is a situation where, in a negotiation, one party has loads more information than the other.
And in hiring or promotion or annual raise discussions, an employer can use that secrecy to save a lot of money.
Imagine how much better you could negotiate for a raise if you knew everybody's salary.
Economists warn that information asymmetry can cause markets to go awry.
Someone leaves a pay stub on the copier, and suddenly everybody is shouting at each other.
In fact, they even warn that information asymmetry can lead to a total market failure.
And I think we're almost there.
Here's why: first, most employees have no idea how their pay compares to their peers'.
In a 2015 survey of 70,000 employees, two-thirds of everyone who is paid at the market rate said that they felt they were underpaid.
And of everybody who felt that they were underpaid, 60 percent said that they intended to quit, regardless of where they were -- underpaid, overpaid or right at the market rate.
If you were part of this survey, what would you say?
Are you underpaid?
Well, wait -- how do you even know, because you're not allowed to talk about it?
Next, information asymmetry, pay secrecy, makes it easier to ignore the discrimination that's already present in the market today.
In a 2011 report from the Institute for Women's Policy Research, the gender wage gap between men and women was 23 percent.
This is where that 77 cents on the dollar comes from.
But in the Federal Government, where salaries are pinned to certain levels and everybody knows what those levels are, the gender wage gap shrinks to 11 percent -- and this is before controlling for any of the factors that economists argue over whether or not to control for.
If we really want to close the gender wage gap, maybe we should start by opening up the payroll.
If this is what total market failure looks like, then openness remains the only way to ensure fairness.
Now, I realize that letting people know what you make might feel uncomfortable, but isn't it less uncomfortable than always wondering if you're being discriminated against, or if your wife or your daughter or your sister is being paid unfairly?
Openness remains the best way to ensure fairness, and pay transparency does that.
That's why entrepreneurial leaders and corporate leaders have been experimenting with sharing salaries for years.
Like Dane Atkinson.
Dane is a serial entrepreneur who started many companies in a pay secrecy condition and even used that condition to pay two equally qualified people dramatically different salaries, depending on how well they could negotiate.
And Dane saw the strife that happened as a result of this.
So when he started his newest company, SumAll, he committed to salary transparency from the beginning.
And the results have been amazing.
And in study after study, when people know how they're being paid and how that pay compares to their peers', they're more likely to work hard to improve their performance, more likely to be engaged, and they're less likely to quit.
That's why Dane's not alone.
From technology start-ups like Buffer, to the tens of thousands of employees at Whole Foods, where not only is your salary available for everyone to see, but the performance data for the store and for your department is available on the company intranet for all to see.
Now, pay transparency takes a lot of forms.
It's not one size fits all.
Some post their salaries for all to see.
Some only keep it inside the company.
Some post the formula for calculating pay, and others post the pay levels and affix everybody to that level.
So you don't have to make signs for all of your employees to wear around the office.
And you don't have to be the only one wearing a sign that you made at home.
But we can all take greater steps towards pay transparency.
For those of you that have the authority to move forward towards transparency: it's time to move forward.
And for those of you that don't have that authority: it's time to stand up for your right to.
So how much do you get paid?
And how does that compare to the people you work with?
You should know.
And so should they.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I opened Mott Hall Bridges Academy in 2010, my goal was simple: open a school to close a prison.
Now to some, this was an audacious goal, because our school is located in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn -- one of the most underserved and violent neighborhoods in all of New York City.
Like many urban schools with high poverty rates, we face numerous challenges, like finding teachers who can empathize with the complexities of a disadvantaged community, lack of funding for technology, low parental involvement and neighborhood gangs that recruit children as early as fourth grade.
So here I was, the founding principal of a middle school that was a district public school, and I only had 45 kids to start.
Thirty percent of them had special needs.
Eighty-six percent of them were below grade level in English and in math.
And 100 percent were living below the poverty level.
If our children are not in our classrooms, how will they learn?
And if they're not learning, where would they end up?
It was evident when I would ask my 13-year-old, "Young man, where do you see yourself in five years?"
And his response: "I don't know if I'm gonna live that long."
Or to have a young woman say to me that she had a lifelong goal of working in a fast-food restaurant.
To me, this was unacceptable.
It was also evident that they had no idea that there was a landscape of opportunity that existed beyond their neighborhood.
We call our students "scholars," because they're lifelong learners.
And the skills that they learn today will prepare them for college and career readiness.
I chose the royal colors of purple and black, because I want them to be reminded that they are descendants of greatness, and that through education, they are future engineers, scientists, entrepreneurs and even leaders who can and will take over this world.
To date, we have had three graduating classes, at a 98 -- (Applause) At a 98-percent graduation rate.
This is nearly 200 children, who are now going to some of the most competitive high schools in New York City.
(Applause) It was a cold day in January when my scholar, Vidal Chastanet, met Brandon Stanton, the founder of the popular blog "Humans of New York."
Brandon shared the story of a young man from Brownsville who had witnessed violence firsthand, by witnessing a man being thrown off of a roof.
Yet he can still be influenced by a principal who had opened up a school that believes in all children.
Vidal embodies the story of so many of our underprivileged children who are struggling to survive, which is why we must make education a priority.
Brandon's post created a global sensation that touched the lives of millions.
This resulted in 1.4 million dollars being raised for our scholars to attend field trips to colleges and universities, Summer STEAM programs, as well as college scholarships.
You need to understand that when 200 young people from Brownsville visited Harvard, they now understood that a college of their choice was a real possibility.
And the impossibilities that had been imposed upon them by a disadvantaged community were replaced by hope and purpose.
The revolution in education is happening in our schools, with adults who provide love, structure, support and knowledge.
These are the things that inspire children.
But it is not an easy task.
And there are high demands within an education system that is not perfect.
But I have a dynamic group of educators who collaborate as a team to determine what is the best curriculum.
They take time beyond their school day, and come in on weekends and even use their own money to often provide resources when we do not have it.
And as the principal, I have to inspect what I expect.
So I show up in classes and I conduct observations to give feedback, because I want my teachers to be just as successful as the name Mott Hall Bridges Academy.
And I give them access to me every single day, which is why they all have my personal cell number, including my scholars and those who graduated -- which is probably why I get phone calls and text messages at three o'clock in the morning.
(Laughter) But we are all connected to succeed, and good leaders do this.
Tomorrow's future is sitting in our classrooms.
And they are our responsibility.
That means everyone in here, and those who are watching the screen.
We must believe in their brilliance, and remind them by teaching them that there indeed is power in education.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why bother?
The game is rigged.
My vote won't count.
The choices are terrible.
Voting is for suckers.
Perhaps you've thought some of these things.
Perhaps you've even said them.
And if so, you wouldn't be alone, and you wouldn't be entirely wrong.
The game of public policy today is rigged in many ways.
How else would more than half of federal tax breaks flow up to the wealthiest five percent of Americans?
And our choices indeed are often terrible.
For many people across the political spectrum, Exhibit A is the 2016 presidential election.
But in any year, you can look up and down the ballot and find plenty to be uninspired about.
But in spite of all this, I still believe voting matters.
And crazy as it may sound, I believe we can revive the joy of voting.
Today, I want to talk about how we can do that, and why.
There used to be a time in American history when voting was fun, when it was much more than just a grim duty to show up at the polls.
That time is called "most of American history."
(Laughter) From the Revolution to the Civil Rights Era, the United States had a vibrant, robustly participatory and raucous culture of voting.
It was street theater, open-air debates, fasting and feasting and toasting, parades and bonfires.
During the 19th century, immigrants and urban political machines helped fuel this culture of voting.
That culture grew with each successive wave of new voters.
During Reconstruction, when new African-American voters, new African-American citizens, began to exercise their power, they celebrated in jubilee parades that connected emancipation with their newfound right to vote.
A few decades later, the suffragettes brought a spirit of theatricality to their fight, marching together in white dresses as they claimed the franchise.
And the Civil Rights Movement, which sought to redeem the promise of equal citizenship that had been betrayed by Jim Crow, put voting right at the center.
From Freedom Summer to the march in Selma, that generation of activists knew that voting matters, and they knew that spectacle and the performance of power is key to actually claiming power.
But it's been over a half century since Selma and the Voting Rights Act, and in the decades since, this face-to-face culture of voting has just about disappeared.
It's been killed by television and then the internet.
The couch has replaced the commons.
Screens have made citizens into spectators.
And while it's nice to share political memes on social media, that's a rather quiet kind of citizenship.
It's what the sociologist Sherry Turkle calls "being alone together."
What we need today is an electoral culture that is about being together together, in person, in loud and passionate ways, so that instead of being "eat your vegetables" or "do you duty," voting can feel more like "join the club" or, better yet, "join the party."
Imagine if we had, across the country right now, in local places but nationwide, a concerted effort to revive a face-to-face set of ways to engage and electioneer: outdoor shows in which candidates and their causes are mocked and praised in broad satirical style; soapbox speeches by citizens; public debates held inside pubs; streets filled with political art and handmade posters and murals; battle of the band concerts in which competing performers rep their candidates.
Now, all of this may sound a little bit 18th century to you, but in fact, it doesn't have to be any more 18th century than, say, Broadway's "Hamilton," which is to say vibrantly contemporary.
And the fact is that all around the world, today, millions of people are voting like this.
In India, elections are colorful, communal affairs.
In Brazil, election day is a festive, carnival-type atmosphere.
In Taiwan and Hong Kong, there is a spectacle, eye-popping, eye-grabbing spectacle to the street theater of elections.
You might ask, well, here in America, who has time for this?
And I would tell you that the average American watches five hours of television a day.
You might ask, who has the motivation?
And I'll tell you, any citizen who wants to be seen and heard not as a prop, not as a talking point, but as a participant, as a creator.
Well, how do we make this happen?
Simply by making it happen.
That's why a group of colleagues and I launched a new project called "The Joy of Voting."
In four cities across the United States -- Philadelphia, Miami, Akron, Ohio, and Wichita, Kansas -- we've gathered together artists and activists, educators, political folks, neighbors, everyday citizens to come together and create projects that can foster this culture of voting in a local way.
In Miami, that means all-night parties with hot DJs where the only way to get in is to show that you're registered to vote.
In Akron, it means political plays being performed in the bed of a flatbed truck that moves from neighborhood to neighborhood.
In Philadelphia, it's a voting-themed scavenger hunt all throughout colonial old town.
And in Wichita, it's making mixtapes and live graffiti art in the North End to get out the vote.
There are 20 of these projects, and they are remarkable in their beauty and their diversity, and they are changing people.
Let me tell you about a couple of them.
In Miami, we've commissioned and artist, a young artist named Atomico, to create some vivid and vibrant images for a new series of "I voted" stickers.
But the thing is, Atomico had never voted.
He wasn't even registered.
So as he got to work on creating this artwork for these stickers, he also began to get over his sense of intimidation about politics.
He got himself registered, and then he got educated about the upcoming primary election, and on election day he was out there not just passing out stickers, but chatting up voters and encouraging people to vote, and talking about the election with passersby.
In Akron, a theater company called the Wandering Aesthetics has been putting on these pickup truck plays.
And to do so, they put out an open call to the public asking for speeches, monologues, dialogues, poems, snippets of anything that could be read aloud and woven into a performance.
They got dozens of submissions.
One of them was a poem written by nine students in an ESL class, all of them Hispanic migrant workers from nearby Hartville, Ohio.
I want to read to you from this poem.
It's called "The Joy of Voting."
"I would like to vote for the first time because things are changing for Hispanics.
I used to be afraid of ghosts.
Now I am afraid of people.
There's more violence and racism.
Voting can change this.
The border wall is nothing.
It's just a wall.
The wall of shame is something.
It's very important to vote so we can break down this wall of shame.
I have passion in my heart.
Voting gives me a voice and power.
I can stand up and do something."
"The Joy of Voting" project isn't just about joy.
It's about this passion.
It's about feeling and belief, and it isn't just our organization's work.
All across this country right now, immigrants, young people, veterans, people of all different backgrounds are coming together to create this kind of passionate, joyful activity around elections, in red and blue states, in urban and rural communities, people of every political background.
What they have in common is simply this: their work is rooted in place.
Because remember, all citizenship is local.
When politics becomes just a presidential election, we yell and we scream at our screens, and then we collapse, exhausted.
But when politics is about us and our neighbors and other people in our community coming together to create experiences of collective voice and imagination, then we begin to remember that this stuff matters.
We begin to remember that this is the stuff of self-government.
Which brings me back to where I began.
Why bother?
There's one way to answer this question.
Voting matters because it is a self-fulfilling act of belief.
It feeds the spirit of mutual interest that makes any society thrive.
When we vote, even if it is in anger, we are part of a collective, creative leap of faith.
Voting helps us generate the very power that we wish we had.
It's no accident that democracy and theater emerged around the same time in ancient Athens.
Both of them yank the individual out of the enclosure of her private self.
Both of them create great public experiences of shared ritual.
Both of them bring the imagination to life in ways that remind us that all of our bonds in the end are imagined, and can be reimagined.
This moment right now, when we think about the meaning of imagination, is so fundamentally important, and our ability to take that spirit and to take that sense that there is something greater out there, is not just a matter of technical expertise.
It's not just a matter of making the time or having the know-how.
It is a matter of spirit.
But let me give you an answer to this question, "Why bother?"
that is maybe a little less spiritual and a bit more pointed.
Why bother voting?
Because there is no such thing as not voting.
Not voting is voting, for everything that you may detest and oppose.
Not voting can be dressed up as an act of principled, passive resistance, but in fact not voting is actively handing power over to those whose interests are counter to your own, and those who would be very glad to take advantage of your absence.
Not voting is for suckers.
Imagine where this country would be if all the folks who in 2010 created the Tea Party had decided that, you know, politics is too messy, voting is too complicated.
There is no possibility of our votes adding up to anything.
They didn't preemptively silence themselves.
They showed up, and in the course of showing up, they changed American politics.
Imagine if all of the followers of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders had decided not to upend the political status quo and blow apart the frame of the previously possible in American politics.
They did that by voting.
We live in a time right now, divided, often very dark, where across the left and the right, there's a lot of talk of revolution and the need for revolution to disrupt everyday democracy.
Well, here's the thing: everyday democracy already gives us a playbook for revolution.
In the 2012 presidential election, young voters, Latino voters, Asian-American voters, low-income voters, all showed up at less than 50 percent.
In the 2014 midterm elections, turnout was 36 percent, which was a 70-year low.
And in your average local election, turnout hovers somewhere around 20 percent.
I invite you to imagine 100 percent.
Picture 100 percent.
Mobilize 100 percent, and overnight, we get revolution.
Overnight, the policy priorities of this country change dramatically, and every level of government becomes radically more responsive to all the people.
What would it take to mobilize 100 percent?
Well, we do have to push back against efforts afoot all across the country right now to make voting harder.
But at the same time, we have to actively create a positive culture of voting that people want to belong to, be part of, and experience together.
We have to make purpose.
We have to make joy.
So yes, let's have that revolution, a revolution of spirit, of ideas, of policy and participation, a revolution against cynicism, a revolution against the self-fulfilling sense of powerlessness.
Let's vote this revolution into existence, and while we're at it, let's have some fun.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Alexios Komnenos, Byzantine emperor, led his army to meet the Scythian hordes in battle.
For good luck, he carried one of the holiest relics in Christendom: the veil that had belonged to the Virgin Mary.
Unfortunately, it didn’t help.
Not only was his army defeated, but as they fled, the Emperor was stabbed in the buttocks.
To make matters worse, a strong wind made the relic too heavy to carry, so he stashed it in some bushes as he escaped.
But even as he fled, he managed to slay some Scythians and rescue a few comrades.
At least, this is how Alexios' daughter Anna recounted the story, writing nearly 60 years later.
She spent the last decade of her long life creating a 500-page history of her father’s reign called The Alexiad.
Written in Greek, the book was modeled after ancient Greek epics and historical writings.
But Anna had a different, trickier task than the writers in these traditions: as a princess writing about her own family, she had to balance her loyalty to her kin with her obligation to portray events accurately, navigating issues like Alexios’s embarrassing stab to the buttocks.
A lifetime of study and participation in her father’s government prepared Anna for this undertaking.
Anna was born in 1083, shortly after her father seized control of the Roman Empire following a decade of brutal civil wars and revolts.
The empire was deep in decline when he came to power, and threatened from all sides: by the Seljuk Turks in the East, the Normans in the West, and Scythian raiders to the north.
Over the course of Anna’s childhood and adolescence, Alexios fought constant military campaigns to secure the frontiers of his empire, even striking up an uneasy alliance with the Crusaders.
Meanwhile in Constantinople, Anna fought her own battle.
She was expected to study subjects considered proper for a Byzantine princess, like courtly etiquette and the Bible, but preferred classical myth and philosophy.
To access this material, she had to learn to read and speak Ancient Greek, by studying secretly at night.
Eventually her parents realized how serious she was, and provided her with tutors.
Anna expanded her studies to classical literature, rhetoric, history, philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, and medicine.
One scholar even complained that her constant requests for more Aristotle commentaries were wearing out his eyes.
At age fifteen, Anna married Nikephoros Bryennios to quell old conflicts between their families and strengthen Alexios’s reign.
Fortunately, Anna and Nikephoros ended up sharing many intellectual interests, hosting and debating the leading scholars of the day.
Meanwhile, Alexios’s military excursions began to pay off, restoring many of the empire’s former territories.
As her father aged, Anna and her husband helped her parents with their imperial duties.
During this time, Anna reportedly advocated for just treatment of the people in their disputes with the government.
After Alexios’s death, Anna’s brother John ascended to the throne and Anna turned back to philosophy and scholarship.
Her husband had written a history arguing that his grandfather would have made a better emperor than Alexios, but Anna disagreed.
She began working on the Alexiad, which made the case for her father's merits as emperor.
Spanning the late 11th and early 12th centuries of Byzantine history, the Alexiad recounts the tumultuous events of Alexios’s reign, and Anna’s own reactions to those events, like bursting into tears at the thought of the deaths of her parents and husband.
She may have included these emotional passages in hopes that they would make her writing more palatable to a society that believed women shouldn't write about battles and empires.
While her loyalty to her father was evident in her favorable account of his reign, she also included criticism and her opinions of events.
In the centuries after her death, Anna’s Alexiad was copied over and over, and remains an invaluable eyewitness account of Alexios’s reign today.
And through her epic historical narrative, Anna Komnene secured her own place in history.
I remember the very first time I went to a nice restaurant, a really nice restaurant.
It was for a law firm recruitment dinner, and I remember beforehand the waitress walked around and asked whether we wanted some wine, so I said, "Sure, I'll take some white wine."
And she immediately said, "Would you like sauvignon blanc or chardonnay?"
And I remember thinking, "Come on, lady, stop with the fancy French words and just give me some white wine."
But I used my powers of deduction and recognized that chardonnay and sauvignon blanc were two separate types of white wine, and so I told her that I would take the chardonnay, because frankly that was the easiest one to pronounce for me.
So I had a lot of experiences like that during my first couple of years as a law student at Yale, because, despite all outward appearances, I'm a cultural outsider.
I didn't come from the elites.
I didn't come from the Northeast or from San Francisco.
I came from a southern Ohio steel town, and it's a town that's really struggling in a lot of ways, ways that are indicative of the broader struggles of America's working class.
Heroin has moved in, killing a lot of people, people I know.
Family violence, domestic violence, and divorce have torn apart families.
And there's a very unique sense of pessimism that's moved in.
Think about rising mortality rates in these communities and recognize that for a lot of these folks, the problems that they're seeing are actually causing rising death rates in their own communities, so there's a very real sense of struggle.
I had a very front-row seat to that struggle.
My family has been part of that struggle for a very long time.
I come from a family that doesn't have a whole lot of money.
The addiction that plagued my community also plagued my family, and even, sadly, my own mom.
There were a lot of problems that I saw in my own family, problems caused sometimes by a lack of money, problems caused sometimes by a lack of access to resources and social capital that really affected my life.
If you had looked at my life when I was 14 years old and said, "Well, what's going to happen to this kid?"
you would have concluded that I would have struggled with what academics call upward mobility.
So upward mobility is an abstract term, but it strikes at something that's very core at the heart of the American Dream.
It's the sense, and it measures whether kids like me who grow up in poor communities are going to live a better life, whether they're going to have a chance to live a materially better existence, or whether they're going to stay in the circumstances where they came from.
And one of the things we've learned, unfortunately, is that upward mobility isn't as high as we'd like it to be in this country, and interestingly, it's very geographically distributed.
So take Utah, for instance.
In Utah a poor kid is actually doing OK, very likely to live their share and their part in the American Dream.
But if you think of where I'm from, in the South, in Appalachia, in southern Ohio, it's very unlikely that kids like that will rise.
The American Dream in those parts of the country is in a very real sense just a dream.
So why is that happening?
So one reason is obviously economic or structural.
So you think of these areas.
They're beset by these terrible economic trends, built around industries like coal and steel that make it harder for folks to get ahead.
That's certainly one problem.
There's also the problem of brain drain, where the really talented people, because they can't find high-skilled work at home, end up moving elsewhere, so they don't build a business or non-profit where they're from, they end up going elsewhere and taking their talents with them.
There are failing schools in a lot of these communities, failing to give kids the educational leg up that really makes it possible for kids to have opportunities later in life.
These things are all important.
But when I look back at my life and my community, something else was going on, something else mattered.
It's difficult to quantify, but it was no less real.
So for starters, there was a very real sense of hopelessness in the community that I grew up in.
There was a sense that kids had that their choices didn't matter.
No matter what happened, no matter how hard they worked, no matter how hard they tried to get ahead, nothing good would happen.
So that's a tough feeling to grow up around.
That's a tough mindset to penetrate, and it leads sometimes to very conspiratorial places.
So let's just take one political issue that's pretty hot, affirmative action.
So depending on your politics, you might think that affirmative action is either a wise or an unwise way to promote diversity in the workplace or the classroom.
But if you grow up in an area like this, you see affirmative action as a tool to hold people like you back.
That's especially true if you're a member of the white working class.
You see it as something that isn't just about good or bad policy.
You see it as something that's actively conspiring, where people with political and financial power are working against you.
And there are a lot of ways that you see that conspiracy against you -- perceived, real, but it's there, and it warps expectations.
So if you think about what do you do when you grow up in that world, you can respond in a couple of ways.
One, you can say, "I'm not going to work hard, because no matter how hard I work, it's not going to matter."
Another thing you might do is say, "Well, I'm not going to go after the traditional markers of success, like a university education or a prestigious job, because the people who care about those things are unlike me.
They're never going to let me in."
When I got admitted to Yale, a family member asked me if I had pretended to be a liberal to get by the admissions committee.
Seriously.
And it's obviously not the case that there was a liberal box to check on the application, but it speaks to a very real insecurity in these places that you have to pretend to be somebody you're not to get past these various social barriers.
It's a very significant problem.
Even if you don't give in to that hopelessness, even if you think, let's say, that your choices matter and you want to make the good choices, you want to do better for yourself and for your family, it's sometimes hard to even know what those choices are when you grow up in a community like I did.
I didn't know, for example, that you had to go to law school to be a lawyer.
I didn't know that elite universities, as research consistently tells us, are cheaper for low-income kids because these universities have bigger endowments, can offer more generous financial aid.
I remember I learned this when I got the financial aid letter from Yale for myself, tens of thousands of dollars in need-based aid, which is a term I had never heard before.
But I turned to my aunt when I got that letter and said, "You know, I think this just means that for the first time in my life, being poor has paid really well."
So I didn't have access to that information because the social networks around me didn't have access to that information.
I learned from my community how to shoot a gun, how to shoot it well.
I learned how to make a damn good biscuit recipe.
The trick, by the way, is frozen butter, not warm butter.
But I didn't learn how to get ahead.
I didn't learn how to make the good decisions about education and opportunity that you need to make to actually have a chance in this 21st century knowledge economy.
Economists call the value that we gain from our informal networks, from our friends and colleagues and family "social capital."
The social capital that I had wasn't built for 21st century America, and it showed.
There's something else that's really important that's going on that our community doesn't like to talk about, but it's very real.
Working-class kids are much more likely to face what's called adverse childhood experiences, which is just a fancy word for childhood trauma: getting hit or yelled at, put down by a parent repeatedly, watching someone hit or beat your parent, watching someone do drugs or abuse alcohol.
These are all instances of childhood trauma, and they're pretty commonplace in my family.
Importantly, they're not just commonplace in my family right now.
They're also multigenerational.
So my grandparents, the very first time that they had kids, they expected that they were going to raise them in a way that was uniquely good.
They were middle class, they were able to earn a good wage in a steel mill.
But what ended up happening is that they exposed their kids to a lot of the childhood trauma that had gone back many generations.
My mom was 12 when she saw my grandma set my grandfather on fire.
His crime was that he came home drunk after she told him, "If you come home drunk, I'm gonna kill you."
And she tried to do it.
Think about the way that that affects a child's mind.
And we think of these things as especially rare, but a study by the Wisconsin Children's Trust Fund found that 40 percent of low-income kids face multiple instances of childhood trauma, compared to only 29 percent for upper-income kids.
And think about what that really means.
If you're a low-income kid, almost half of you face multiple instances of childhood trauma.
This is not an isolated problem.
This is a very significant issue.
We know what happens to the kids who experience that life.
They're more likely to do drugs, more likely to go to jail, more likely to drop out of high school, and most importantly, they're more likely to do to their children what their parents did to them.
This trauma, this chaos in the home, is our culture's very worst gift to our children, and it's a gift that keeps on giving.
So you combine all that, the hopelessness, the despair, the cynicism about the future, the childhood trauma, the low social capital, and you begin to understand why me, at the age of 14, was ready to become just another statistic, another kid who failed to beat the odds.
But something unexpected happened.
I did beat the odds.
Things turned up for me.
I graduated from high school, from college, I went to law school, and I have a pretty good job now.
So what happened?
Well, one thing that happened is that my grandparents, the same grandparents of setting someone on fire fame, they really shaped up by the time I came around.
They provided me a stable home, a stable family.
They made sure that when my parents weren't able to do the things that kids need, they stepped in and filled that role.
My grandma especially did two things that really matter.
One, she provided that peaceful home that allowed me to focus on homework and the things that kids should be focused on.
But she was also this incredibly perceptive woman, despite not even having a middle school education.
She recognized the message that my community had for me, that my choices didn't matter, that the deck was stacked against me.
She once told me, "JD, never be like those losers who think the deck is stacked against them.
You can do anything you want to."
And yet she recognized that life wasn't fair.
It's hard to strike that balance, to tell a kid that life isn't fair, but also recognize and enforce in them the reality that their choices matter.
But mamaw was able to strike that balance.
The other thing that really helped was the United States Marine Corps.
So we think of the Marine Corps as a military outfit, and of course it is, but for me, the US Marine Corps was a four-year crash course in character education.
It taught me how to make a bed, how to do laundry, how to wake up early, how to manage my finances.
These are things my community didn't teach me.
I remember when I went to go buy a car for the very first time, I was offered a dealer's low, low interest rate of 21.9 percent, and I was ready to sign on the dotted line.
But I didn't take that deal, because I went and took it to my officer who told me, "Stop being an idiot, go to the local credit union, and get a better deal."
And so that's what I did.
But without the Marine Corps, I would have never had access to that knowledge.
I would have had a financial calamity, frankly.
The last thing I want to say is that I had a lot of good fortune in the mentors and people who have played an important role in my life.
From the Marines, from Ohio State, from Yale, from other places, people have really stepped in and ensured that they filled that social capital gap that it was pretty obvious, apparently, that I had.
That comes from good fortune, but a lot of children aren't going to have that good fortune, and I think that raises really important questions for all of us about how we're going to change that.
We need to ask questions about how we're going to give low-income kids who come from a broken home access to a loving home.
We need to ask questions about how we're going to teach low-income parents how to better interact with their children, with their partners.
We need to ask questions about how we give social capital, mentorship to low-income kids who don't have it.
We need to think about how we teach working class children about not just hard skills, like reading, mathematics, but also soft skills, like conflict resolution and financial management.
Now, I don't have all of the answers.
I don't know all of the solutions to this problem, but I do know this: in southern Ohio right now, there's a kid who is anxiously awaiting their dad, wondering whether, when he comes through the door, he'll walk calmly or stumble drunkly.
There's a kid whose mom sticks a needle in her arm and passes out, and he doesn't know why she doesn't cook him dinner, and he goes to bed hungry that night.
There's a kid who has no hope for the future but desperately wants to live a better life.
They just want somebody to show it to them.
I don't have all the answers, but I know that unless our society starts asking better questions about why I was so lucky and about how to get that luck to more of our communities and our country's children, we're going to continue to have a very significant problem.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is the Bop.
The Bop is a type of social dance.
Dance is a language, and social dance is an expression that emerges from a community.
A social dance isn't choreographed by any one person.
It can't be traced to any one moment.
Each dance has steps that everyone can agree on, but it's about the individual and their creative identity.
Because of that, social dances bubble up, they change and they spread like wildfire.
They are as old as our remembered history.
In African-American social dances, we see over 200 years of how African and African-American traditions influenced our history.
The present always contains the past.
And the past shapes who we are and who we will be.
(Clapping) The Juba dance was born from enslaved Africans' experience on the plantation.
Brought to the Americas, stripped of a common spoken language, this dance was a way for enslaved Africans to remember where they're from.
It may have looked something like this.
Slapping thighs, shuffling feet and patting hands: this was how they got around the slave owners' ban on drumming, improvising complex rhythms just like ancestors did with drums in Haiti or in the Yoruba communities of West Africa.
It was about keeping cultural traditions alive and retaining a sense of inner freedom under captivity.
It was the same subversive spirit that created this dance: the Cakewalk, a dance that parodied the mannerisms of Southern high society -- a way for the enslaved to throw shade at the masters.
The crazy thing about this dance is that the Cakewalk was performed for the masters, who never suspected they were being made fun of.
Now you might recognize this one.
1920s -- the Charleston.
The Charleston was all about improvisation and musicality, making its way into Lindy Hop, swing dancing and even the Kid n Play, originally called the Funky Charleston.
Started by a tight-knit Black community near Charleston, South Carolina, the Charleston permeated dance halls where young women suddenly had the freedom to kick their heels and move their legs.
Now, social dance is about community and connection; if you knew the steps, it meant you belonged to a group.
But what if it becomes a worldwide craze?
Enter the Twist.
It's no surprise that the Twist can be traced back to the 19th century, brought to America from the Congo during slavery.
But in the late '50s, right before the Civil Rights Movement, the Twist is popularized by Chubby Checker and Dick Clark.
Suddenly, everybody's doing the Twist: white teenagers, kids in Latin America, making its way into songs and movies.
Through social dance, the boundaries between groups become blurred.
The story continues in the 1980s and '90s.
Along with the emergence of hip-hop, African-American social dance took on even more visibility, borrowing from its long past, shaping culture and being shaped by it.
Today, these dances continue to evolve, grow and spread.
Why do we dance?
To move, to let loose, to express.
Why do we dance together?
To heal, to remember, to say: "We speak a common language.
We exist and we are free."
What I'd like to do is just drag us all down into the gutter, and actually all the way down into the sewer because I want to talk about diarrhea.
And in particular, I want to talk about the design of diarrhea.
And when evolutionary biologists talk about design, they really mean design by natural selection.
And that brings me to the title of the talk, "Using Evolution to Design Disease Organisms Intelligently."
And I also have a little bit of a sort of smartass subtitle to this.
But I'm not just doing this to be cute.
I really think that this subtitle explains what somebody like me, who's sort of a Darwin wannabe, how they actually look at one's role in sort of coming into this field of health sciences and medicine.
It's really not a very friendly field for evolutionary biologists.
You actually see a great potential, but you see a lot of people who are sort of defending their turf, and may actually be very resistant, when one tries to introduce ideas.
So, all of the talk today is going to deal with two general questions.
One is that, why are some disease organisms more harmful?
And a very closely related question, which is, how can we take control of this situation once we understand the answer to the first question?
How can we make the harmful organisms more mild?
And I'm going to be talking, to begin with, as I said, about diarrheal disease organisms.
And the focus when I'm talking about the diarrheal organisms, as well as the focus when I'm talking about any organisms that cause acute infectious disease, is to think about the problem from a germ's point of view, germ's-eye view.
And in particular, to think about a fundamental idea which I think makes sense out of a tremendous amount of variation in the harmfulness of disease organisms.
And that idea is that from the germ's-eye point of view, disease organisms have to get from one host to another, and often they have to rely on the well-being of the host to move them to another host.
But not always.
Sometimes, you get disease organisms that don't rely on host mobility at all for transmission.
And when you have that, then evolutionary theory tells us that natural selection will favor the more exploitative, more predator-like organisms.
So, natural selection will favor organisms that are more likely to cause damage.
If instead transmission to another host requires host mobility, then we expect that the winners of the competition will be the milder organisms.
So, if the pathogen doesn't need the host to be healthy and active, and actual selection favors pathogens that take advantage of those hosts, the winners in the competition are those that exploit the hosts for their own reproductive success.
But if the host needs to be mobile in order to transmit the pathogen, then it's the benign ones that tend to be the winners.
So, I'm going to begin by applying this idea to diarrheal diseases.
Diarrheal disease organisms get transmitted in basically three ways.
They can be transmitted from person-to-person contact, person-to-food-then-to-person contact, when somebody eats contaminated food, or they can be transmitted through the water.
And when they're transmitted through the water, unlike the first two modes of transmission, these pathogens don't rely on a healthy host for transmission.
A person can be sick in bed and still infect tens, even hundreds of other individuals.
To sort of illustrate that, this diagram emphasizes that if you've got a sick person in bed, somebody's going to be taking out the contaminated materials.
They're going to wash those contaminated materials, and then the water may move into sources of drinking water.
People will come in to those places where you've got contaminated drinking water, bring things back to the family, may drink right at that point.
The whole point is that a person who can't move can still infect many other individuals.
And so, the theory tells us that when diarrheal disease organisms are transported by water, we expect them to be more predator-like, more harmful.
And you can test these ideas.
So, one way you can test is just look at all diarrheal bacteria, and see whether or not the ones that tend to be more transmitted by water, tend to be more harmful.
And the answer is -- yep, they are.
Now I put those names in there just for the bacteria buffs, but the main point here is that -- (Laughter) there's a lot of them here, I can tell -- the main point here is that those data points all show a very strong, positive association between the degree to which a disease organism is transmitted by water, and how harmful they are, how much death they cause per untreated infection.
So this suggests we're on the right track.
But this, to me, suggests that we really need to ask some additional questions.
Remember the second question that I raised at the outset was, how can we use this knowledge to make disease organisms evolve to be mild?
Now, this suggests that if you could just block waterborne transmission, you could cause disease organisms to shift from the right-hand side of that graph to the left-hand side of the graph.
But it doesn't tell you how long.
I mean, if this would require thousands of years, then it's worthless in terms of controlling of these pathogens.
But if it could occur in just a few years, then it might be a very important way to control some of the nasty problems that we haven't been able to control.
In other words, this suggests that we could domesticate these organisms.
We could make them evolve to be not so harmful to us.
And so, as I was thinking about this, I focused on this organism, which is the El Tor biotype of the organism called Vibrio cholerae.
And that is the species of organism that is responsible for causing cholera.
And the reason I thought this is a really great organism to look at is that we understand why it's so harmful.
It's harmful because it produces a toxin, and that toxin is released when the organism gets into our intestinal tract.
It causes fluid to flow from the cells that line our intestine into the lumen, the internal chamber of our intestine, and then that fluid goes the only way it can, which is out the other end.
And it flushes out thousands of different other competitors that would otherwise make life difficult for the Vibrios.
So what happens, if you've got an organism, it produces a lot of toxin.
After a few days of infection you end up having -- the fecal material really isn't so disgusting as we might imagine.
It's sort of cloudy water.
And if you took a drop of that water, you might find a million diarrheal organisms.
If the organism produced a lot of toxin, you might find 10 million, or 100 million.
If it didn't produce a lot of this toxin, then you might find a smaller number.
So the task is to try to figure out how to determine whether or not you could get an organism like this to evolve towards mildness by blocking waterborne transmission, thereby allowing the organism only to be transmitted by person-to-person contact, or person-food-person contact -- both of which would really require that people be mobile and fairly healthy for transmission.
Now, I can think of some possible experiments.
One would be to take a lot of different strains of this organism -- some that produce a lot of toxins, some that produce a little -- and take those strains and spew them out in different countries.
Some countries that might have clean water supplies, so that you can't get waterborne transmission: you expect the organism to evolve to mildness there.
Other countries, in which you've got a lot of waterborne transmission, there you expect these organisms to evolve towards a high level of harmfulness, right?
There's a little ethical problem in this experiment.
I was hoping to hear a few gasps at least.
That makes me worry a little bit.
(Laughter) But anyhow, the laughter makes me feel a little bit better.
And this ethical problem's a big problem.
Just to emphasize this, this is what we're really talking about.
Here's a girl who's almost dead.
She got rehydration therapy, she perked up, within a few days she was looking like a completely different person.
So, we don't want to run an experiment like that.
But interestingly, just that thing happened in 1991.
In 1991, this cholera organism got into Lima, Peru, and within two months it had spread to the neighboring areas.
Now, I don't know how that happened, and I didn't have anything to do with it, I promise you.
I don't think anybody knows, but I'm not averse to, once that's happened, to see whether or not the prediction that we would make, that I did make before, actually holds up.
Did the organism evolve to mildness in a place like Chile, which has some of the most well protected water supplies in Latin America?
And did it evolve to be more harmful in a place like Ecuador, which has some of the least well protected?
And Peru's got something sort of in between.
And so, with funding from the Bosack-Kruger Foundation, I got a lot of strains from these different countries and we measured their toxin production in the lab.
And we found that in Chile -- within two months of the invasion of Peru you had strains entering Chile -- and when you look at those strains, in the very far left-hand side of this graph, you see a lot of variation in the toxin production.
Each dot corresponds to an islet from a different person -- a lot of variation on which natural selection can act.
But the interesting point is, if you look over the 1990s, within a few years the organisms evolved to be more mild.
They evolved to produce less toxin.
And to just give you a sense of how important this might be, if we look in 1995, we find that there's only one case of cholera, on average, reported from Chile every two years.
So, it's controlled.
That's how much we have in America, cholera that's acquired endemically, and we don't think we've got a problem here.
They didn't -- they solved the problem in Chile.
But, before we get too confident, we'd better look at some of those other countries, and make sure that this organism doesn't just always evolve toward mildness.
Well, in Peru it didn't.
And in Ecuador -- remember, this is the place where it has the highest potential waterborne transmission -- it looked like it got more harmful.
In every case there's a lot of variation, but something about the environment the people are living in, and I think the only realistic explanation is that it's the degree of waterborne transmission, favored the harmful strains in one place, and mild strains in another.
So, this is very encouraging, it suggests that something that we might want to do anyhow, if we had enough money, could actually give us a much bigger bang for the buck.
It would make these organisms evolve to mildness, so that even though people might be getting infected, they'd be infected with mild strains.
It wouldn't be causing severe disease.
But there's another really interesting aspect of this, and this is that if you could control the evolution of virulence, evolution of harmfulness, then you should be able to control antibiotic resistance.
And the idea is very simple.
If you've got a harmful organism, a high proportion of the people are going to be symptomatic, a high proportion of the people are going to be going to get antibiotics.
You've got a lot of pressure favoring antibiotic resistance, so you get increased virulence leading to the evolution of increased antibiotic resistance.
And once you get increased antibiotic resistance, the antibiotics aren't knocking out the harmful strains anymore.
So, you've got a higher level of virulence.
So, you get this vicious cycle.
The goal is to turn this around.
If you could cause an evolutionary decrease in virulence by cleaning up the water supply, you should be able to get an evolutionary decrease in antibiotic resistance.
So, we can go to the same countries and look and see.
Did Chile avoid the problem of antibiotic resistance, whereas did Ecuador actually have the beginnings of the problem?
If we look in the beginning of the 1990s, we see, again, a lot of variation.
In this case, on the Y-axis, we've just got a measure of antibiotic sensitivity -- and I won't go into that.
But we've got a lot of variation in antibiotic sensitivity in Chile, Peru and Ecuador, and no trend across the years.
But if we look at the end of the 1990s, just half a decade later, we see that in Ecuador they started having a resistance problem.
Antibiotic sensitivity was going down.
And in Chile, you still had antibiotic sensitivity.
So, it looks like Chile dodged two bullets.
They got the organism to evolve to mildness, and they got no development of antibiotic resistance.
Now, these ideas should apply across the board, as long as you can figure out why some organisms evolved to virulence.
And I want to give you just one more example, because we've talked a little bit about malaria.
And the example I want to deal with is, or the idea I want to deal with, the question is, what can we do to try to get the malarial organism to evolve to mildness?
Now, malaria's transmitted by a mosquito, and normally if you're infected with malaria, and you're feeling sick, it makes it even easier for the mosquito to bite you.
And you can show, just by looking at data from literature, that vector-borne diseases are more harmful than non-vector-borne diseases.
But I think there's a really fascinating example of what one can do experimentally to try to actually demonstrate this.
In the case of waterborne transmission, we'd like to clean up the water supplies, see whether or not we can get those organisms to evolve towards mildness.
In the case of malaria, what we'd like to do is mosquito-proof houses.
And the logic's a little more subtle here.
If you mosquito-proof houses, when people get sick, they're sitting in bed -- or in mosquito-proof hospitals, they're sitting in a hospital bed -- and the mosquitoes can't get to them.
So, if you're a harmful variant in a place where you've got mosquito-proof housing, then you're a loser.
The only pathogens that get transmitted are the ones that are infecting people that feel healthy enough to walk outside and get mosquito bites.
So, if you were to mosquito proof houses, you should be able to get these organisms to evolve to mildness.
And there's a really wonderful experiment that was done that suggests that we really should go ahead and do this.
And that experiment was done in Northern Alabama.
Just to give you a little perspective on this, I've given you a star at the intellectual center of the United States, which is right there in Louisville, Kentucky.
And this really cool experiment was done about 200 miles south of there, in Northern Alabama, by the Tennessee Valley Authority.
They had dammed up the Tennessee River.
They'd caused the water to back up, they needed electric, hydroelectric power.
And when you get stagnant water, you get mosquitoes.
They found in the late '30s -- 10 years after they'd made these dams -- that the people in Northern Alabama were infected with malaria, about a third to half of them were infected with malaria.
This shows you the positions of some of these dams.
OK, so the Tennessee Valley Authority was in a little bit of a bind.
There wasn't DDT, there wasn't chloroquines: what do they do?
Well, they decided to mosquito proof every house in Northern Alabama.
So they did. They divided Northern Alabama into 11 zones, and within three years, about 100 dollars per house, they mosquito proofed every house.
And these are the data.
Every row across here represents one of those 11 zones.
And the asterisks represent the time at which the mosquito proofing was complete.
And so what you can see is that just the mosquito-proofed housing, and nothing else, caused the eradication of malaria.
And this was, incidentally, published in 1949, in the leading textbook of malaria, called "Boyd's Malariology."
But almost no malaria experts even know it exists.
This is important, because it tells us that if you have moderate biting densities, you can eradicate malaria by mosquito proofing houses.
Now, I would suggest that you could do this in a lot of places.
Like, you know, just as you get into the malaria zone, sub-Saharan Africa.
But as you move to really intense biting rate areas, like Nigeria, you're certainly not going to eradicate.
But that's when you should be favoring evolution towards mildness.
So to me, it's an experiment that's waiting to happen, and if it confirms the prediction, then we should have a very powerful tool.
In a way, much more powerful than the kind of tools we're looking at, because most of what's being done today is to rely on things like anti-malarial drugs.
And we know that, although it's great to make those anti-malarial drugs available at really low cost and high frequency, we know that when you make them highly available you're going to get resistance to those drugs.
And so it's a short-term solution.
This is a long-term solution.
What I'm suggesting here is that we could get evolution working in the direction we want it to go, rather than always having to battle evolution as a problem that stymies our efforts to control the pathogen, for example with anti-malarial drugs.
So, this table I've given just to emphasize that I've only talked about two examples.
But as I said earlier, this kind of logic applies across the board for infectious diseases, and it ought to.
Because when we're dealing with infectious diseases, we're dealing with living systems.
We're dealing with living systems; we're dealing with systems that evolve.
And so if you do something with those systems, they're going to evolve one way or another.
And all I'm saying is that we need to figure out how they'll evolve, so that -- we need to adjust our interventions to get the most bang for the intervention buck, so that we can get these organisms to evolve in the direction we want them to go.
So, I don't really have time to talk about those things, but I did want to put them up there, just to give you a sense that there really are solutions to controlling the evolution of harmfulness of some of the nasty pathogens that we're confronted with.
And this links up with a lot of the other ideas that have been talked about.
So, for example, earlier today there was discussion of, how do you really lower sexual transmission of HIV?
What this emphasizes is that we need to figure out how it will work.
Will it maybe get lowered if we alter the economy of the area?
It may get lowered if we intervene in ways that encourage people to stay more faithful to partners, and so on.
But the key thing is to figure out how to lower it, because if we lower it, we'll get an evolutionary change in the virus.
And the data really do support this: that you actually do get the virus evolving towards mildness.
And that will just add to the effectiveness of our control efforts.
So the other thing I really like about this, besides the fact that it brings a whole new dimension into the study of control of disease, is that often the kinds of interventions that you want, that it indicates should be done, are the kinds of interventions that people want anyhow.
But people just haven't been able to justify the cost.
So, this is the kind of thing I'm talking about.
If we know that we're going to get extra bang for the buck from providing clean water, then I think that we can say, let's push the effort into that aspect of the control, so that we can actually solve the problem, even though, if you just look at the frequency of infection, you would suggest that you can't solve the problem well enough just by cleaning up water supply.
Anyhow, I'll end that there, and thank you very much.
(Applause)
I was recently traveling in the Highlands of New Guinea, and I was talking with a man who had three wives.
I asked him, "How many wives would you like to have?"
And there was this long pause, and I thought to myself, "Is he going to say five?
Is he going to say 10?
Is he going to say 25?"
And he leaned towards me and he whispered, "None."
(Laughter) Eighty-six percent of human societies permit a man to have several wives: polygyny.
But in the vast majority of these cultures, only about five or ten percent of men actually do have several wives.
Having several partners can be a toothache.
In fact, co-wives can fight with each other, sometimes they can even poison each other's children.
And you've got to have a lot of cows, a lot of goats, a lot of money, a lot of land, in order to build a harem.
We are a pair-bonding species.
Ninety-seven percent of mammals do not pair up to rear their young; human beings do.
I'm not suggesting that we're not -- that we're necessarily sexually faithful to our partners.
I've looked at adultery in 42 cultures, I understand, actually, some of the genetics of it, and some of the brain circuitry of it.
It's very common around the world, but we are built to love.
How is technology changing love?
I'm going to say almost not at all.
I study the brain.
I and my colleagues have put over 100 people into a brain scanner -- people who had just fallen happily in love, people who had just been rejected in love and people who are in love long-term.
And it is possible to remain "in love" long-term.
And I've long ago maintained that we've evolved three distinctly different brain systems for mating and reproduction: sex drive, feelings of intense romantic love and feelings of deep cosmic attachment to a long-term partner.
And together, these three brain systems -- with many other parts of the brain -- orchestrate our sexual, our romantic and our family lives.
But they lie way below the cortex, way below the limbic system where we feel our emotions, generate our emotions.
They lie in the most primitive parts of the brain, linked with energy, focus, craving, motivation, wanting and drive.
In this case, the drive to win life's greatest prize: a mating partner.
They evolved over 4.4 million years ago among our first ancestors, and they're not going to change if you swipe left or right on Tinder.
(Laughter) (Applause) There's no question that technology is changing the way we court: emailing, texting, emojis to express your emotions, sexting, "liking" a photograph, selfies ...
We're seeing new rules and taboos for how to court.
But, you know -- is this actually dramatically changing love?
What about the late 1940s, when the automobile became very popular and we suddenly had rolling bedrooms?
(Laughter) How about the introduction of the birth control pill?
Unchained from the great threat of pregnancy and social ruin, women could finally express their primitive and primal sexuality.
Even dating sites are not changing love.
I'm Chief Scientific Advisor to Match.com, I've been it for 11 years.
I keep telling them and they agree with me, that these are not dating sites, they are introducing sites.
When you sit down in a bar, in a coffee house, on a park bench, your ancient brain snaps into action like a sleeping cat awakened, and you smile and laugh and listen and parade the way our ancestors did 100,000 years ago.
We can give you various people -- all the dating sites can -- but the only real algorithm is your own human brain.
Technology is not going to change that.
Technology is also not going to change who you choose to love.
I study the biology of personality, and I've come to believe that we've evolved four very broad styles of thinking and behaving, linked with the dopamine, serotonin, testosterone and estrogen systems.
So I created a questionnaire directly from brain science to measure the degree to which you express the traits -- the constellation of traits -- linked with each of these four brain systems.
I then put that questionnaire on various dating sites in 40 countries.
Fourteen million or more people have now taken the questionnaire, and I've been able to watch who's naturally drawn to whom.
And as it turns out, those who were very expressive of the dopamine system tend to be curious, creative, spontaneous, energetic -- I would imagine there's an awful lot of people like that in this room -- they're drawn to people like themselves.
Curious, creative people need people like themselves.
People who are very expressive of the serotonin system tend to be traditional, conventional, they follow the rules, they respect authority, they tend to be religious -- religiosity is in the serotonin system -- and traditional people go for traditional people.
In that way, similarity attracts.
In the other two cases, opposites attract.
People very expressive of the testosterone system tend to be analytical, logical, direct, decisive, and they go for their opposite: they go for somebody who's high estrogen, somebody who's got very good verbal skills and people skills, who's very intuitive and who's very nurturing and emotionally expressive.
We have natural patterns of mate choice.
Modern technology is not going to change who we choose to love.
But technology is producing one modern trend that I find particularly important.
It's associated with the concept of paradox of choice.
For millions of years, we lived in little hunting and gathering groups.
You didn't have the opportunity to choose between 1,000 people on a dating site.
In fact, I've been studying this recently, and I actually think there's some sort of sweet spot in the brain; I don't know what it is, but apparently, from reading a lot of the data, we can embrace about five to nine alternatives, and after that, you get into what academics call "cognitive overload," and you don't choose any.
So I've come to think that due to this cognitive overload, we're ushering in a new form of courtship that I call "slow love."
I arrived at this during my work with Match.com.
Every year for the last six years, we've done a study called "Singles in America."
We don't poll the Match population, we poll the American population.
We use 5,000-plus people, a representative sample of Americans based on the US census.
We've got data now on over 30,000 people, and every single year, I see some of the same patterns.
Every single year when I ask the question, over 50 percent of people have had a one-night stand -- not necessarily last year, but in their lives -- 50 percent have had a friends with benefits during the course of their lives, and over 50 percent have lived with a person long-term before marrying.
Americans think that this is reckless.
I have doubted that for a long time; the patterns are too strong.
There's got to be some Darwinian explanation -- Not that many people are crazy.
And I stumbled, then, on a statistic that really came home to me.
It was a very interesting academic article in which I found that 67 percent of singles in America today who are living long-term with somebody, have not yet married because they are terrified of divorce.
They're terrified of the social, legal, emotional, economic consequences of divorce.
So I came to realize that I don't think this is recklessness; I think it's caution.
Today's singles want to know every single thing about a partner before they wed.
You learn a lot between the sheets, not only about how somebody makes love, but whether they're kind, whether they can listen and at my age, whether they've got a sense of humor.
(Laughter) And in an age where we have too many choices, we have very little fear of pregnancy and disease and we've got no feeling of shame for sex before marriage, I think people are taking their time to love.
And actually, what's happening is, what we're seeing is a real expansion of the precommitment stage before you tie the knot.
Where marriage used to be the beginning of a relationship, now it's the finale.
But the human brain -- (Laughter) The human brain always triumphs, and indeed, in the United States today, 86 percent of Americans will marry by age 49.
And even in cultures around the world where they're not marrying as often, they are settling down eventually with a long-term partner.
So it began to occur to me: during this long extension of the precommitment stage, if you can get rid of bad relationships before you marry, maybe we're going to see more happy marriages.
So I did a study of 1,100 married people in America -- not on Match.com, of course -- and I asked them a lot of questions.
But one of the questions was, "Would you re-marry the person you're currently married to?"
And 81 percent said, "Yes."
In fact, the greatest change in modern romance and family life is not technology.
It's not even slow love.
It's actually women piling into the job market in cultures around the world.
For millions of years, our ancestors lived in little hunting and gathering groups.
Women commuted to work to gather their fruits and vegetables.
They came home with 60 to 80 percent of the evening meal.
The double-income family was the rule.
And women were regarded as just as economically, socially and sexually powerful as men.
Then the environment changed some 10,000 years ago, we began to settle down on the farm and both men and women became obliged, really, to marry the right person, from the right background, from the right religion and from the right kin and social and political connections.
Men's jobs became more important: they had to move the rocks, fell the trees, plow the land.
They brought the produce to local markets, and came home with the equivalent of money.
Along with this, we see a rise of a host of beliefs: the belief of virginity at marriage, arranged marriages -- strictly arranged marriages -- the belief that the man is the head of the household, that the wife's place is in the home and most important, honor thy husband, and 'til death do us part.
These are gone.
They are going, and in many places, they are gone.
We are right now in a marriage revolution.
We are shedding 10,000 years of our farming tradition and moving forward towards egalitarian relationships between the sexes -- something I regard as highly compatible with the ancient human spirit.
I'm not a Pollyanna; there's a great deal to cry about.
I've studied divorce in 80 cultures, I've studied, as I say, adultery in many -- there's a whole pile of problems.
As William Butler Yeats, the poet, once said, "Love is the crooked thing."
I would add, "Nobody gets out alive."
(Laughter) We all have problems.
But in fact, I think the poet Randall Jarrell really sums it up best.
He said, "The dark, uneasy world of family life -- where the greatest can fail, and the humblest succeed."
But I will leave you with this: love and attachment will prevail, technology cannot change it.
And I will conclude by saying any understanding of human relationships must take into account one the most powerful determinants of human behavior: the unquenchable, adaptable and primordial human drive to love.
Thank you.
(Applause) Kelly Stoetzel: Thank you so much for that, Helen.
As you know, there's another speaker here with us that works in your same field.
She comes at it from a different perspective.
Esther Perel is a psychotherapist who works with couples.
You study data, Esther studies the stories the couples tell her when they come to her for help.
Let's have her join us on the stage.
Esther?
(Applause) So Esther, when you were watching Helen's talk, was there any part of it that resonated with you through the lens of your own work that you'd like to comment on?
Esther Perel: It's interesting, because on the one hand, the need for love is ubiquitous and universal.
But the way we love -- the meaning we make out of it -- the rules that govern our relationships, I think, are changing fundamentally.
We come from a model that, until now, was primarily regulated around duty and obligation, the needs of the collective and loyalty.
And we have shifted it to a model of free choice and individual rights, and self-fulfillment and happiness.
And so, that was the first thing I thought, that the need doesn't change, but the context and the way we regulate these relationships changes a lot.
On the paradox of choice -- you know, on the one hand we relish the novelty and the playfulness, I think, to be able to have so many options.
And at the same time, as you talk about this cognitive overload, I see many, many people who ...
who dread the uncertainty and self-doubt that comes with this massa of choice, creating a case of "FOMO" and then leading us -- FOMO, fear of missed opportunity, or fear of missing out -- it's like, "How do I know I have found 'the one' -- the right one?"
So we've created what I call this thing of "stable ambiguity."
Stable ambiguity is when you are too afraid to be alone but also not really willing to engage in intimacy-building.
It's a set of tactics that kind of prolong the uncertainty of a relationship but also the uncertainty of the breakup.
So, here on the internet you have three major ones.
One is icing and simmering, which are great stalling tactics that offer a kind of holding pattern that emphasizes the undefined nature of a relationship but at the same time gives you enough of a comforting consistency and enough freedom of the undefined boundaries.
(Laughter) Yeah?
And then comes ghosting.
And ghosting is, basically, you disappear from this massa of texts on the spot, and you don't have to deal with the pain that you inflict on another, because you're making it invisible even to yourself.
(Laughter) Yeah?
So I was thinking -- these words came up for me as I was listening to you, like how a vocabulary also creates a reality, and at the same time, that's my question to you: Do you think when the context changes, it still means that the nature of love remains the same?
You study the brain and I study people's relationships and stories, so I think it's everything you say, plus.
But I don't always know the degree to which a changing context ...
Does it at some point begin to change -- If the meaning changes, does it change the need, or is the need clear of the entire context?
HF: Wow! Well -- (Laughter) (Applause) Well, I've got three points here, right?
First of all, to your first one: there's no question that we've changed, that we now want a person to love, and for thousands of years, we had to marry the right person from the right background and right kin connection.
And in fact, in my studies of 5,000 people every year, I ask them, "What are you looking for?"
And every single year, over 97 percent say -- EP: The list grows -- HF: Well, no.
The basic thing is over 97 percent of people want somebody that respects them, somebody they can trust and confide in, somebody who makes them laugh, somebody who makes enough time for them and somebody who they find physically attractive.
That never changes.
And there's certainly -- you know, there's two parts -- EP: But you know how I call that?
That's not what people used to say -- HF: That's exactly right.
EP: They said they wanted somebody with whom they have companionship, economic support, children.
We went from a production economy to a service economy.
(Laughter) We did it in the larger culture, and we're doing it in marriage.
HF: Right, no question about it.
But it's interesting, the millennials actually want to be very good parents, whereas the generation above them wants to have a very fine marriage but is not as focused on being a good parent.
You see all of these nuances.
There's two basic parts of personality: there's your culture -- everything you grew up to do and believe and say -- and there's your temperament.
Basically, what I've been talking about is your temperament.
And that temperament is certainly going to change with changing times and changing beliefs.
And in terms of the paradox of choice, there's no question about it that this is a pickle.
There were millions of years where you found that sweet boy at the other side of the water hole, and you went for it.
EP: Yes, but you -- HF: I do want to say one more thing.
The bottom line is, in hunting and gathering societies, they tended to have two or three partners during the course of their lives.
They weren't square!
And I'm not suggesting that we do, but the bottom line is, we've always had alternatives.
Mankind is always -- in fact, the brain is well-built to what we call "equilibrate," to try and decide: Do I come, do I stay? Do I go, do I stay?
What are the opportunities here?
How do I handle this there?
And so I think we're seeing another play-out of that now.
KS: Well, thank you both so much.
I think you're going to have a million dinner partners for tonight!
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
I'd like you to imagine the world anew.
I'd like to show you some maps, which have been drawn by Ben Hennig, of the planet in a way that most of you will never have seen the planet depicted before.
Here's an image that you're very familiar with.
I'm old enough that I was actually born before we saw this image.
Apparently some of my first words were "moona, moona," but I think that's my mom having a particular fantasy about what her baby boy could see on the flickering black and white TV screen.
It's only been a few centuries since we've actually, most of us, thought of our planet as spherical.
When we first saw these images in the 1960s, the world was changing at an incredible rate.
In my own little discipline of human geography, a cartographer called Waldo Tobler was drawing new maps of the planet, and these maps have now spread, and I'm going to show you one of them now.
This map is a map of the world, but it's a map which looks to you a little bit strange.
It's a map in which we stretched places, so that those areas which contain many people are drawn larger, and those areas, like the Sahara and the Himalayas, in which there are few people, have been shrunk away.
Everybody on the planet is given an equal amount of space.
The cities are shown shining bright.
The lines are showing you submarine cables and trade routes.
And there's one particular line that goes from the Chinese port of Dalian through past Singapore, through the Suez Canal, through the Mediterranean and round to Rotterdam.
And it's showing you the route of what was the world's largest ship just a year ago, a ship which was taking so many containers of goods that when they were unloaded, if the lorries had all gone in convoy, they would have been 100 kilometers long.
This is how our world is now connected.
This is the quantity of stuff we are now moving around the world, just on one ship, on one voyage, in five weeks.
We've lived in cities for a very long time, but most of us didn't live in cities.
This is Çatalhöyük, one of the world's first cities.
At its peak 9,000 years ago, people had to walk over the roofs of others' houses to get to their home.
If you look carefully at the map of the city, you'll see it has no streets, because streets are something we invented.
The world changes.
It changes by trial and error.
We work out slowly and gradually how to live in better ways.
And the world has changed incredibly quickly most recently.
It's only within the last six, seven, or eight generations that we have actually realized that we are a species.
It's only within the last few decades that a map like this could be drawn.
Again, the underlying map is the map of world population, but over it, you're seeing arrows showing how we spread out of Africa with dates showing you where we think we arrived at particular times.
I have to redraw this map every few months, because somebody makes a discovery that a particular date was wrong.
We are learning about ourselves at an incredible speed.
And we're changing.
A lot of change is gradual.
It's accretion.
We don't notice the change because we only have short lives, 70, 80, if you're lucky 90 years.
This graph is showing you the annual rate of population growth in the world.
It was very low until around about 1850, and then the rate of population growth began to rise so that around the time I was born, when we first saw those images from the moon of our planet, our global population was growing at two percent a year.
If it had carried on growing at two percent a year for just another couple of centuries, the entire planet would be covered with a seething mass of human bodies all touching each other.
And people were scared.
They were scared of population growth and what they called "the population bomb" in 1968.
But then, if you look at the end of the graph, the growth began to slow.
The decade -- the '70s, the '80s, the '90s, the noughties, and in this decade, even faster -- our population growth is slowing.
Our planet is stabilizing.
We are heading towards nine, 10, or 11 billion people by the end of the century.
Within that change, you can see tumult.
You can see the Second World War.
You can see the pandemic in 1918 from influenza.
You can see the great Chinese famine.
These are the events we tend to concentrate on.
We tend to concentrate on the terrible events in the news.
We don't tend to concentrate on the gradual change and the good news stories.
We worry about people.
We worry about how many people there are.
We worry about how you can get away from people.
But this is the map of the world changed again to make area large, the further away people are from each area.
So if you want to know where to go to get away from everybody, here's the best places to go.
And every year, these areas get bigger, because every year, we are coming off the land globally.
We are moving into the cities.
We are packing in more densely.
There are wolves again in Europe, and the wolves are moving west across the continent.
Our world is changing.
You have worries.
This is a map showing where the water falls on our planet.
We now know that.
And you can look at where Çatalhöyük was, where three continents meet, Africa, Asia, and Europe, and you can see there are a large number of people living there in areas with very little water.
And you can see areas in which there is a great deal of rainfall as well.
And we can get a bit more sophisticated.
Instead of making the map be shaped by people, we can shape the map by water, and then we can change it every month to show the amount of water falling on every small part of the globe.
And you see the monsoons moving around the planet, and the planet almost appears to have a heartbeat.
And all of this only became possible within my lifetime to see this is where we are living.
We have enough water.
This is a map of where we grow our food in the world.
This is the areas that we will rely on most for rice and maize and corn.
People worry that there won't be enough food, but we know, if we just ate less meat and fed less of the crops to animals, there is enough food for everybody as long as we think of ourselves as one group of people.
And we also know about what we do so terribly badly nowadays.
You will have seen this map of the world before.
This is the map produced by taking satellite images, if you remember those satellites around the planet in the very first slide I showed, and producing an image of what the Earth looks like at night.
When you normally see that map, on a normal map, the kind of map that most of you will be used to, you think you are seeing a map of where people live.
Where the lights are shining up is where people live.
But here, on this image of the world, remember we've stretched the map again.
Everywhere has the same density of people on this map.
If an area doesn't have people, we've shrunk it away to make it disappear.
So we're showing everybody with equal prominence.
Now, the lights no longer show you where people are, because people are everywhere.
Now the lights on the map, the lights in London, the lights in Cairo, the lights in Tokyo, the lights on the Eastern Seaboard of the United States, the lights show you where people live who are so profligate with energy that they can afford to spend money powering lights to shine up into the sky, so satellites can draw an image like this.
And the areas that are dark on the map are either areas where people do not have access to that much energy, or areas where people do, but they have learned to stop shining the light up into the sky.
And if I could show you this map animated over time, you would see that Tokyo has actually become darker, because ever since the tsunami in Japan, Japan has had to rely on a quarter less electricity because it turned the nuclear power stations off.
And the world didn't end.
You just shone less light up into the sky.
There are a huge number of good news stories in the world.
Infant mortality is falling and has been falling at an incredible rate.
A few years ago, the number of babies dying in their first year of life in the world fell by five percent in just one year.
More children are going to school and learning to read and write and getting connected to the Internet and going on to go to university than ever before at an incredible rate, and the highest number of young people going to university in the world are women, not men.
I can give you good news story after good news story about what is getting better in the planet, but we tend to concentrate on the bad news that is immediate.
Rebecca Solnit, I think, put it brilliantly, when she explained: "The accretion of incremental, imperceptible changes which can constitute progress and which render our era dramatically different from the past" -- the past was much more stable -- "a contrast obscured by the undramatic nature of gradual transformation, punctuated by occasional tumult."
Occasionally, terrible things happen.
You are shown those terrible things on the news every night of the week.
You are not told about the population slowing down.
You are not told about the world becoming more connected.
You are not told about the incredible improvements in understanding.
You are not told about how we are learning to begin to waste less and consume less.
This is my last map.
On this map, we have taken the seas and the oceans out.
Now you are just looking at about 7.4 billion people with the map drawn in proportion to those people.
You're looking at over a billion in China, and you can see the largest city in the world in China, but you do not know its name.
You can see that India is in the center of this world.
You can see that Europe is on the edge.
And we in Exeter today are on the far edge of the planet.
We are on a tiny scrap of rock off Europe which contains less than one percent of the world's adults, and less than half a percent of the world's children.
We are living in a stabilizing world, an urbanizing world, an aging world, a connecting world.
There are many, many things to be frightened about, but there is no need for us to fear each other as much as we do, and we need to see that we are now living in a new world.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk about a failure of intuition that many of us suffer from.
It's really a failure to detect a certain kind of danger.
I'm going to describe a scenario that I think is both terrifying and likely to occur, and that's not a good combination, as it turns out.
And yet rather than be scared, most of you will feel that what I'm talking about is kind of cool.
I'm going to describe how the gains we make in artificial intelligence could ultimately destroy us.
And in fact, I think it's very difficult to see how they won't destroy us or inspire us to destroy ourselves.
And yet if you're anything like me, you'll find that it's fun to think about these things.
And that response is part of the problem.
OK? That response should worry you.
And if I were to convince you in this talk that we were likely to suffer a global famine, either because of climate change or some other catastrophe, and that your grandchildren, or their grandchildren, are very likely to live like this, you wouldn't think, "Interesting.
I like this TED Talk."
Famine isn't fun.
Death by science fiction, on the other hand, is fun, and one of the things that worries me most about the development of AI at this point is that we seem unable to marshal an appropriate emotional response to the dangers that lie ahead.
I am unable to marshal this response, and I'm giving this talk.
It's as though we stand before two doors.
Behind door number one, we stop making progress in building intelligent machines.
Our computer hardware and software just stops getting better for some reason.
Now take a moment to consider why this might happen.
I mean, given how valuable intelligence and automation are, we will continue to improve our technology if we are at all able to.
What could stop us from doing this?
A full-scale nuclear war?
A global pandemic?
An asteroid impact?
Justin Bieber becoming president of the United States?
(Laughter) The point is, something would have to destroy civilization as we know it.
You have to imagine how bad it would have to be to prevent us from making improvements in our technology permanently, generation after generation.
Almost by definition, this is the worst thing that's ever happened in human history.
So the only alternative, and this is what lies behind door number two, is that we continue to improve our intelligent machines year after year after year.
At a certain point, we will build machines that are smarter than we are, and once we have machines that are smarter than we are, they will begin to improve themselves.
And then we risk what the mathematician IJ Good called an "intelligence explosion," that the process could get away from us.
Now, this is often caricatured, as I have here, as a fear that armies of malicious robots will attack us.
But that isn't the most likely scenario.
It's not that our machines will become spontaneously malevolent.
The concern is really that we will build machines that are so much more competent than we are that the slightest divergence between their goals and our own could destroy us.
Just think about how we relate to ants.
We don't hate them.
We don't go out of our way to harm them.
In fact, sometimes we take pains not to harm them.
We step over them on the sidewalk.
But whenever their presence seriously conflicts with one of our goals, let's say when constructing a building like this one, we annihilate them without a qualm.
The concern is that we will one day build machines that, whether they're conscious or not, could treat us with similar disregard.
Now, I suspect this seems far-fetched to many of you.
I bet there are those of you who doubt that superintelligent AI is possible, much less inevitable.
But then you must find something wrong with one of the following assumptions.
And there are only three of them.
Intelligence is a matter of information processing in physical systems.
Actually, this is a little bit more than an assumption.
We have already built narrow intelligence into our machines, and many of these machines perform at a level of superhuman intelligence already.
And we know that mere matter can give rise to what is called "general intelligence," an ability to think flexibly across multiple domains, because our brains have managed it. Right?
I mean, there's just atoms in here, and as long as we continue to build systems of atoms that display more and more intelligent behavior, we will eventually, unless we are interrupted, we will eventually build general intelligence into our machines.
It's crucial to realize that the rate of progress doesn't matter, because any progress is enough to get us into the end zone.
We don't need Moore's law to continue. We don't need exponential progress.
We just need to keep going.
The second assumption is that we will keep going.
We will continue to improve our intelligent machines.
And given the value of intelligence -- I mean, intelligence is either the source of everything we value or we need it to safeguard everything we value.
It is our most valuable resource.
So we want to do this.
We have problems that we desperately need to solve.
We want to cure diseases like Alzheimer's and cancer.
We want to understand economic systems. We want to improve our climate science.
So we will do this, if we can.
The train is already out of the station, and there's no brake to pull.
Finally, we don't stand on a peak of intelligence, or anywhere near it, likely.
And this really is the crucial insight.
This is what makes our situation so precarious, and this is what makes our intuitions about risk so unreliable.
Now, just consider the smartest person who has ever lived.
On almost everyone's shortlist here is John von Neumann.
I mean, the impression that von Neumann made on the people around him, and this included the greatest mathematicians and physicists of his time, is fairly well-documented.
If only half the stories about him are half true, there's no question he's one of the smartest people who has ever lived.
So consider the spectrum of intelligence.
Here we have John von Neumann.
And then we have you and me.
And then we have a chicken.
(Laughter) Sorry, a chicken.
(Laughter) There's no reason for me to make this talk more depressing than it needs to be.
(Laughter) It seems overwhelmingly likely, however, that the spectrum of intelligence extends much further than we currently conceive, and if we build machines that are more intelligent than we are, they will very likely explore this spectrum in ways that we can't imagine, and exceed us in ways that we can't imagine.
And it's important to recognize that this is true by virtue of speed alone.
Right? So imagine if we just built a superintelligent AI that was no smarter than your average team of researchers at Stanford or MIT.
Well, electronic circuits function about a million times faster than biochemical ones, so this machine should think about a million times faster than the minds that built it.
So you set it running for a week, and it will perform 20,000 years of human-level intellectual work, week after week after week.
How could we even understand, much less constrain, a mind making this sort of progress?
The other thing that's worrying, frankly, is that, imagine the best case scenario.
So imagine we hit upon a design of superintelligent AI that has no safety concerns.
We have the perfect design the first time around.
It's as though we've been handed an oracle that behaves exactly as intended.
Well, this machine would be the perfect labor-saving device.
It can design the machine that can build the machine that can do any physical work, powered by sunlight, more or less for the cost of raw materials.
So we're talking about the end of human drudgery.
We're also talking about the end of most intellectual work.
So what would apes like ourselves do in this circumstance?
Well, we'd be free to play Frisbee and give each other massages.
Add some LSD and some questionable wardrobe choices, and the whole world could be like Burning Man.
(Laughter) Now, that might sound pretty good, but ask yourself what would happen under our current economic and political order?
It seems likely that we would witness a level of wealth inequality and unemployment that we have never seen before.
Absent a willingness to immediately put this new wealth to the service of all humanity, a few trillionaires could grace the covers of our business magazines while the rest of the world would be free to starve.
And what would the Russians or the Chinese do if they heard that some company in Silicon Valley was about to deploy a superintelligent AI?
This machine would be capable of waging war, whether terrestrial or cyber, with unprecedented power.
This is a winner-take-all scenario.
To be six months ahead of the competition here is to be 500,000 years ahead, at a minimum.
So it seems that even mere rumors of this kind of breakthrough could cause our species to go berserk.
Now, one of the most frightening things, in my view, at this moment, are the kinds of things that AI researchers say when they want to be reassuring.
And the most common reason we're told not to worry is time.
This is all a long way off, don't you know.
This is probably 50 or 100 years away.
One researcher has said, "Worrying about AI safety is like worrying about overpopulation on Mars."
This is the Silicon Valley version of "don't worry your pretty little head about it."
(Laughter) No one seems to notice that referencing the time horizon is a total non sequitur.
If intelligence is just a matter of information processing, and we continue to improve our machines, we will produce some form of superintelligence.
And we have no idea how long it will take us to create the conditions to do that safely.
Let me say that again.
We have no idea how long it will take us to create the conditions to do that safely.
And if you haven't noticed, 50 years is not what it used to be.
This is 50 years in months.
This is how long we've had the iPhone.
This is how long "The Simpsons" has been on television.
Fifty years is not that much time to meet one of the greatest challenges our species will ever face.
Once again, we seem to be failing to have an appropriate emotional response to what we have every reason to believe is coming.
The computer scientist Stuart Russell has a nice analogy here.
He said, imagine that we received a message from an alien civilization, which read: "People of Earth, we will arrive on your planet in 50 years.
Get ready."
And now we're just counting down the months until the mothership lands?
We would feel a little more urgency than we do.
Another reason we're told not to worry is that these machines can't help but share our values because they will be literally extensions of ourselves.
They'll be grafted onto our brains, and we'll essentially become their limbic systems.
Now take a moment to consider that the safest and only prudent path forward, recommended, is to implant this technology directly into our brains.
Now, this may in fact be the safest and only prudent path forward, but usually one's safety concerns about a technology have to be pretty much worked out before you stick it inside your head.
(Laughter) The deeper problem is that building superintelligent AI on its own seems likely to be easier than building superintelligent AI and having the completed neuroscience that allows us to seamlessly integrate our minds with it.
And given that the companies and governments doing this work are likely to perceive themselves as being in a race against all others, given that to win this race is to win the world, provided you don't destroy it in the next moment, then it seems likely that whatever is easier to do will get done first.
Now, unfortunately, I don't have a solution to this problem, apart from recommending that more of us think about it.
I think we need something like a Manhattan Project on the topic of artificial intelligence.
Not to build it, because I think we'll inevitably do that, but to understand how to avoid an arms race and to build it in a way that is aligned with our interests.
When you're talking about superintelligent AI that can make changes to itself, it seems that we only have one chance to get the initial conditions right, and even then we will need to absorb the economic and political consequences of getting them right.
But the moment we admit that information processing is the source of intelligence, that some appropriate computational system is what the basis of intelligence is, and we admit that we will improve these systems continuously, and we admit that the horizon of cognition very likely far exceeds what we currently know, then we have to admit that we are in the process of building some sort of god.
Now would be a good time to make sure it's a god we can live with.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, has everybody heard of CRISPR?
I would be shocked if you hadn't.
This is a technology -- it's for genome editing -- and it's so versatile and so controversial that it's sparking all sorts of really interesting conversations.
Should we bring back the woolly mammoth?
Should we edit a human embryo?
And my personal favorite: How can we justify wiping out an entire species that we consider harmful to humans off the face of the Earth, using this technology?
This type of science is moving much faster than the regulatory mechanisms that govern it.
And so, for the past six years, I've made it my personal mission to make sure that as many people as possible understand these types of technologies and their implications.
Now, CRISPR has been the subject of a huge media hype, and the words that are used most often are "easy" and "cheap."
So what I want to do is drill down a little bit deeper and look into some of the myths and the realities around CRISPR.
If you're trying to CRISPR a genome, the first thing that you have to do is damage the DNA.
The damage comes in the form of a double-strand break through the double helix.
And then the cellular repair processes kick in, and then we convince those repair processes to make the edit that we want, and not a natural edit.
That's how it works.
It's a two-part system.
You've got a Cas9 protein and something called a guide RNA.
I like to think of it as a guided missile.
So the Cas9 -- I love to anthropomorphize -- so the Cas9 is kind of this Pac-Man thing that wants to chew DNA, and the guide RNA is the leash that's keeping it out of the genome until it finds the exact spot where it matches.
And the combination of those two is called CRISPR.
It's a system that we stole from an ancient, ancient bacterial immune system.
The part that's amazing about it is that the guide RNA, only 20 letters of it, are what target the system.
This is really easy to design, and it's really cheap to buy.
So that's the part that is modular in the system; everything else stays the same.
This makes it a remarkably easy and powerful system to use.
The guide RNA and the Cas9 protein complex together go bouncing along the genome, and when they find a spot where the guide RNA matches, then it inserts between the two strands of the double helix, it rips them apart, that triggers the Cas9 protein to cut, and all of a sudden, you've got a cell that's in total panic because now it's got a piece of DNA that's broken.
What does it do?
It calls its first responders.
There are two major repair pathways.
The first just takes the DNA and shoves the two pieces back together.
This isn't a very efficient system, because what happens is sometimes a base drops out or a base is added.
It's an OK way to maybe, like, knock out a gene, but it's not the way that we really want to do genome editing.
The second repair pathway is a lot more interesting.
In this repair pathway, it takes a homologous piece of DNA.
And now mind you, in a diploid organism like people, we've got one copy of our genome from our mom and one from our dad, so if one gets damaged, it can use the other chromosome to repair it.
So that's where this comes from.
The repair is made, and now the genome is safe again.
The way that we can hijack this is we can feed it a false piece of DNA, a piece that has homology on both ends but is different in the middle.
So now, you can put whatever you want in the center and the cell gets fooled.
So you can change a letter, you can take letters out, but most importantly, you can stuff new DNA in, kind of like a Trojan horse.
CRISPR is going to be amazing, in terms of the number of different scientific advances that it's going to catalyze.
The thing that's special about it is this modular targeting system.
I mean, we've been shoving DNA into organisms for years, right?
But because of the modular targeting system, we can actually put it exactly where we want it.
The thing is that there's a lot of talk about it being cheap and it being easy.
And I run a community lab.
I'm starting to get emails from people that say stuff like, "Hey, can I come to your open night and, like, maybe use CRISPR and engineer my genome?"
(Laugher) Like, seriously.
I'm, "No, you can't."
(Laughter) "But I've heard it's cheap. I've heard it's easy."
We're going to explore that a little bit.
So, how cheap is it?
Yeah, it is cheap in comparison.
It's going to take the cost of the average materials for an experiment from thousands of dollars to hundreds of dollars, and it cuts the time a lot, too.
It can cut it from weeks to days.
That's great.
You still need a professional lab to do the work in; you're not going to do anything meaningful outside of a professional lab.
I mean, don't listen to anyone who says you can do this sort of stuff on your kitchen table.
It's really not easy to do this kind of work.
Not to mention, there's a patent battle going on, so even if you do invent something, the Broad Institute and UC Berkeley are in this incredible patent battle.
It's really fascinating to watch it happen, because they're accusing each other of fraudulent claims and then they've got people saying, "Oh, well, I signed my notebook here or there."
This isn't going to be settled for years.
And when it is, you can bet you're going to pay someone a really hefty licensing fee in order to use this stuff.
So, is it really cheap?
Well, it's cheap if you're doing basic research and you've got a lab.
How about easy? Let's look at that claim.
The devil is always in the details.
We don't really know that much about cells.
They're still kind of black boxes.
For example, we don't know why some guide RNAs work really well and some guide RNAs don't.
We don't know why some cells want to do one repair pathway and some cells would rather do the other.
And besides that, there's the whole problem of getting the system into the cell in the first place.
In a petri dish, that's not that hard, but if you're trying to do it on a whole organism, it gets really tricky.
It's OK if you use something like blood or bone marrow -- those are the targets of a lot of research now.
There was a great story of some little girl who they saved from leukemia by taking the blood out, editing it, and putting it back with a precursor of CRISPR.
And this is a line of research that people are going to do.
But right now, if you want to get into the whole body, you're probably going to have to use a virus.
So you take the virus, you put the CRISPR into it, you let the virus infect the cell.
But now you've got this virus in there, and we don't know what the long-term effects of that are.
Plus, CRISPR has some off-target effects, a very small percentage, but they're still there.
What's going to happen over time with that?
These are not trivial questions, and there are scientists that are trying to solve them, and they will eventually, hopefully, be solved.
But it ain't plug-and-play, not by a long shot.
So: Is it really easy?
Well, if you spend a few years working it out in your particular system, yes, it is.
Now the other thing is, we don't really know that much about how to make a particular thing happen by changing particular spots in the genome.
We're a long way away from figuring out how to give a pig wings, for example.
Or even an extra leg -- I'd settle for an extra leg.
That would be kind of cool, right?
But what is happening is that CRISPR is being used by thousands and thousands of scientists to do really, really important work, like making better models of diseases in animals, for example, or for taking pathways that produce valuable chemicals and getting them into industrial production in fermentation vats, or even doing really basic research on what genes do.
This is the story of CRISPR we should be telling, and I don't like it that the flashier aspects of it are drowning all of this out.
Lots of scientists did a lot of work to make CRISPR happen, and what's interesting to me is that these scientists are being supported by our society.
Think about it.
We've got an infrastructure that allows a certain percentage of people to spend all their time doing research.
That makes us all the inventors of CRISPR, and I would say that makes us all the shepherds of CRISPR.
We all have a responsibility.
So I would urge you to really learn about these types of technologies, because, really, only in that way are we going to be able to guide the development of these technologies, the use of these technologies and make sure that, in the end, it's a positive outcome -- for both the planet and for us.
Thanks.
(Applause)
When Dorothy was a little girl, she was fascinated by her goldfish.
Her father explained to her that fish swim by quickly wagging their tails to propel themselves through the water.
Without hesitation, little Dorothy responded, "Yes, Daddy, and fish swim backwards by wagging their heads."
(Laughter) In her mind, it was a fact as true as any other.
Fish swim backwards by wagging their heads.
She believed it.
Our lives are full of fish swimming backwards.
We make assumptions and faulty leaps of logic.
We harbor bias.
We know that we are right, and they are wrong.
We fear the worst.
We strive for unattainable perfection.
We tell ourselves what we can and cannot do.
In our minds, fish swim by in reverse frantically wagging their heads and we don't even notice them.
I'm going to tell you five facts about myself.
One fact is not true.
One: I graduated from Harvard at 19 with an honors degree in mathematics.
Two: I currently run a construction company in Orlando.
Three: I starred on a television sitcom.
Four: I lost my sight to a rare genetic eye disease.
Five: I served as a law clerk to two US Supreme Court justices.
Which fact is not true?
Actually, they're all true.
Yeah. They're all true.
(Applause) At this point, most people really only care about the television show.
(Laughter) I know this from experience.
OK, so the show was NBC's "Saved by the Bell: The New Class."
And I played Weasel Wyzell, who was the sort of dorky, nerdy character on the show, which made it a very major acting challenge for me as a 13-year-old boy.
(Laughter) Now, did you struggle with number four, my blindness?
Why is that?
We make assumptions about so-called disabilities.
As a blind man, I confront others' incorrect assumptions about my abilities every day.
My point today is not about my blindness, however.
It's about my vision.
Going blind taught me to live my life eyes wide open.
It taught me to spot those backwards-swimming fish that our minds create.
Going blind cast them into focus.
What does it feel like to see?
It's immediate and passive.
You open your eyes and there's the world.
Seeing is believing. Sight is truth.
Right?
Well, that's what I thought.
Then, from age 12 to 25, my retinas progressively deteriorated.
My sight became an increasingly bizarre carnival funhouse hall of mirrors and illusions.
The salesperson I was relieved to spot in a store was really a mannequin.
Reaching down to wash my hands, I suddenly saw it was a urinal I was touching, not a sink, when my fingers felt its true shape.
A friend described the photograph in my hand, and only then I could see the image depicted.
Objects appeared, morphed and disappeared in my reality.
It was difficult and exhausting to see.
I pieced together fragmented, transitory images, consciously analyzed the clues, searched for some logic in my crumbling kaleidoscope, until I saw nothing at all.
I learned that what we see is not universal truth.
It is not objective reality.
What we see is a unique, personal, virtual reality that is masterfully constructed by our brain.
Let me explain with a bit of amateur neuroscience.
Your visual cortex takes up about 30 percent of your brain.
That's compared to approximately eight percent for touch and two to three percent for hearing.
Every second, your eyes can send your visual cortex as many as two billion pieces of information.
The rest of your body can send your brain only an additional billion.
So sight is one third of your brain by volume and can claim about two thirds of your brain's processing resources.
It's no surprise then that the illusion of sight is so compelling.
But make no mistake about it: sight is an illusion.
Here's where it gets interesting.
To create the experience of sight, your brain references your conceptual understanding of the world, other knowledge, your memories, opinions, emotions, mental attention.
All of these things and far more are linked in your brain to your sight.
These linkages work both ways, and usually occur subconsciously.
So for example, what you see impacts how you feel, and the way you feel can literally change what you see.
Numerous studies demonstrate this.
If you are asked to estimate the walking speed of a man in a video, for example, your answer will be different if you're told to think about cheetahs or turtles.
A hill appears steeper if you've just exercised, and a landmark appears farther away if you're wearing a heavy backpack.
We have arrived at a fundamental contradiction.
What you see is a complex mental construction of your own making, but you experience it passively as a direct representation of the world around you.
You create your own reality, and you believe it.
I believed mine until it broke apart.
The deterioration of my eyes shattered the illusion.
You see, sight is just one way we shape our reality.
We create our own realities in many other ways.
Let's take fear as just one example.
Your fears distort your reality.
Under the warped logic of fear, anything is better than the uncertain.
Fear fills the void at all costs, passing off what you dread for what you know, offering up the worst in place of the ambiguous, substituting assumption for reason.
Psychologists have a great term for it: awfulizing.
(Laughter) Right?
Fear replaces the unknown with the awful.
Now, fear is self-realizing.
When you face the greatest need to look outside yourself and think critically, fear beats a retreat deep inside your mind, shrinking and distorting your view, drowning your capacity for critical thought with a flood of disruptive emotions.
When you face a compelling opportunity to take action, fear lulls you into inaction, enticing you to passively watch its prophecies fulfill themselves.
When I was diagnosed with my blinding disease, I knew blindness would ruin my life.
Blindness was a death sentence for my independence.
It was the end of achievement for me.
Blindness meant I would live an unremarkable life, small and sad, and likely alone.
I knew it.
This was a fiction born of my fears, but I believed it.
It was a lie, but it was my reality, just like those backwards-swimming fish in little Dorothy's mind.
If I had not confronted the reality of my fear, I would have lived it.
I am certain of that.
So how do you live your life eyes wide open?
It is a learned discipline.
It can be taught. It can be practiced.
I will summarize very briefly.
Hold yourself accountable for every moment, every thought, every detail.
See beyond your fears.
Recognize your assumptions.
Harness your internal strength.
Silence your internal critic.
Correct your misconceptions about luck and about success.
Accept your strengths and your weaknesses, and understand the difference.
Open your hearts to your bountiful blessings.
Your fears, your critics, your heroes, your villains -- they are your excuses, rationalizations, shortcuts, justifications, your surrender.
They are fictions you perceive as reality.
Choose to see through them.
Choose to let them go.
You are the creator of your reality.
With that empowerment comes complete responsibility.
I chose to step out of fear's tunnel into terrain uncharted and undefined.
I chose to build there a blessed life.
Far from alone, I share my beautiful life with Dorothy, my beautiful wife, with our triplets, whom we call the Tripskys, and with the latest addition to the family, sweet baby Clementine.
What do you fear?
What lies do you tell yourself?
How do you embellish your truth and write your own fictions?
What reality are you creating for yourself?
In your career and personal life, in your relationships, and in your heart and soul, your backwards-swimming fish do you great harm.
They exact a toll in missed opportunities and unrealized potential, and they engender insecurity and distrust where you seek fulfillment and connection.
I urge you to search them out.
Helen Keller said that the only thing worse than being blind is having sight but no vision.
For me, going blind was a profound blessing, because blindness gave me vision.
I hope you can see what I see.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Isaac, before you leave the stage, just a question.
This is an audience of entrepreneurs, of doers, of innovators.
You are a CEO of a company down in Florida, and many are probably wondering, how is it to be a blind CEO?
What kind of specific challenges do you have, and how do you overcome them?
Isaac Lidsky: Well, the biggest challenge became a blessing.
I don't get visual feedback from people.
(Laughter) BG: What's that noise there? IL: Yeah.
So, for example, in my leadership team meetings, I don't see facial expressions or gestures.
I've learned to solicit a lot more verbal feedback.
I basically force people to tell me what they think.
And in this respect, it's become, like I said, a real blessing for me personally and for my company, because we communicate at a far deeper level, we avoid ambiguities, and most important, my team knows that what they think truly matters.
BG: Isaac, thank you for coming to TED. IL: Thank you, Bruno.
(Applause)
The language I'm speaking right now is on its way to becoming the world's universal language, for better or for worse.
Let's face it, it's the language of the internet, it's the language of finance, it's the language of air traffic control, of popular music, diplomacy -- English is everywhere.
Now, Mandarin Chinese is spoken by more people, but more Chinese people are learning English than English speakers are learning Chinese.
Last I heard, there are two dozen universities in China right now teaching all in English.
English is taking over.
And in addition to that, it's been predicted that at the end of the century almost all of the languages that exist now -- there are about 6,000 -- will no longer be spoken.
There will only be some hundreds left.
And on top of that, it's at the point where instant translation of live speech is not only possible, but it gets better every year.
The reason I'm reciting those things to you is because I can tell that we're getting to the point where a question is going to start being asked, which is: Why should we learn foreign languages -- other than if English happens to be foreign to one?
Why bother to learn another one when it's getting to the point where almost everybody in the world will be able to communicate in one?
I think there are a lot of reasons, but I first want to address the one that you're probably most likely to have heard of, because actually it's more dangerous than you might think.
And that is the idea that a language channels your thoughts, that the vocabulary and the grammar of different languages gives everybody a different kind of acid trip, so to speak.
That is a marvelously enticing idea, but it's kind of fraught.
So it's not that it's untrue completely.
So for example, in French and Spanish the word for table is, for some reason, marked as feminine.
So, "la table," "la mesa," you just have to deal with it.
It has been shown that if you are a speaker of one of those languages and you happen to be asked how you would imagine a table talking, then much more often than could possibly be an accident, a French or a Spanish speaker says that the table would talk with a high and feminine voice.
So if you're French or Spanish, to you, a table is kind of a girl, as opposed to if you are an English speaker.
It's hard not to love data like that, and many people will tell you that that means that there's a worldview that you have if you speak one of those languages.
But you have to watch out, because imagine if somebody put us under the microscope, the us being those of us who speak English natively.
What is the worldview from English?
So for example, let's take an English speaker.
Up on the screen, that is Bono.
He speaks English.
I presume he has a worldview.
Now, that is Donald Trump.
In his way, he speaks English as well.
(Laughter) And here is Ms. Kardashian, and she is an English speaker, too.
So here are three speakers of the English language.
What worldview do those three people have in common?
What worldview is shaped through the English language that unites them?
It's a highly fraught concept.
And so gradual consensus is becoming that language can shape thought, but it tends to be in rather darling, obscure psychological flutters.
It's not a matter of giving you a different pair of glasses on the world.
Now, if that's the case, then why learn languages?
If it isn't going to change the way you think, what would the other reasons be?
There are some.
One of them is that if you want to imbibe a culture, if you want to drink it in, if you want to become part of it, then whether or not the language channels the culture -- and that seems doubtful -- if you want to imbibe the culture, you have to control to some degree the language that the culture happens to be conducted in.
There's no other way.
There's an interesting illustration of this.
I have to go slightly obscure, but really you should seek it out.
There's a movie by the Canadian film director Denys Arcand -- read out in English on the page, "Dennis Ar-cand," if you want to look him up.
He did a film called "Jesus of Montreal."
And many of the characters are vibrant, funny, passionate, interesting French-Canadian, French-speaking women.
There's one scene closest to the end, where they have to take a friend to an Anglophone hospital.
In the hospital, they have to speak English.
Now, they speak English but it's not their native language, they'd rather not speak English.
And they speak it more slowly, they have accents, they're not idiomatic.
Suddenly these characters that you've fallen in love with become husks of themselves, they're shadows of themselves.
To go into a culture and to only ever process people through that kind of skrim curtain is to never truly get the culture.
And so to the extent that hundreds of languages will be left, one reason to learn them is because they are tickets to being able to participate in the culture of the people who speak them, just by virtue of the fact that it is their code.
So that's one reason.
Second reason: it's been shown that if you speak two languages, dementia is less likely to set in, and that you are probably a better multitasker.
And these are factors that set in early, and so that ought to give you some sense of when to give junior or juniorette lessons in another language.
Bilingualism is healthy.
And then, third -- languages are just an awful lot of fun.
Much more fun than we're often told.
So for example, Arabic: "kataba," he wrote, "yaktubu," he writes, she writes.
"Uktub," write, in the imperative.
What do those things have in common?
All those things have in common the consonants sitting in the middle like pillars.
They stay still, and the vowels dance around the consonants.
Who wouldn't want to roll that around in their mouths?
You can get that from Hebrew, you can get that from Ethiopia's main language, Amharic.
That's fun.
Or languages have different word orders.
Learning how to speak with different word order is like driving on the different side of a street if you go to certain country, or the feeling that you get when you put Witch Hazel around your eyes and you feel the tingle.
A language can do that to you.
So for example, "The Cat in the Hat Comes Back," a book that I'm sure we all often return to, like "Moby Dick."
One phrase in it is, "Do you know where I found him?
Do you know where he was? He was eating cake in the tub, Yes he was!"
Fine. Now, if you learn that in Mandarin Chinese, then you have to master, "You can know, I did where him find?
He was tub inside gorging cake, No mistake gorging chewing!"
That just feels good.
Imagine being able to do that for years and years at a time.
Or, have you ever learned any Cambodian?
Me either, but if I did, I would get to roll around in my mouth not some baker's dozen of vowels like English has, but a good 30 different vowels scooching and oozing around in the Cambodian mouth like bees in a hive.
That is what a language can get you.
And more to the point, we live in an era when it's never been easier to teach yourself another language.
It used to be that you had to go to a classroom, and there would be some diligent teacher -- some genius teacher in there -- but that person was only in there at certain times and you had to go then, and then was not most times.
You had to go to class.
If you didn't have that, you had something called a record.
I cut my teeth on those.
There was only so much data on a record, or a cassette, or even that antique object known as a CD.
Other than that you had books that didn't work, that's just the way it was.
Today you can lay down -- lie on your living room floor, sipping bourbon, and teach yourself any language that you want to with wonderful sets such as Rosetta Stone.
I highly recommend the lesser known Glossika as well.
You can do it any time, therefore you can do it more and better.
You can give yourself your morning pleasures in various languages.
I take some "Dilbert" in various languages every single morning; it can increase your skills.
Couldn't have done it 20 years ago when the idea of having any language you wanted in your pocket, coming from your phone, would have sounded like science fiction to very sophisticated people.
So I highly recommend that you teach yourself languages other than the one that I'm speaking, because there's never been a better time to do it.
It's an awful lot of fun.
It won't change your mind, but it will most certainly blow your mind.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Good evening.
My journey to this stage began when I came to America at the age of 17.
You see, I'm one of the 84 million Americans who are immigrants or children of immigrants.
Each of us has a dream when we come here, a dream that usually has to be rewritten and always has to be repurposed.
I was one of the lucky ones.
My revised dream led me to the work I do today: training immigrants to run for public office and leading a movement for inclusive democracy.
But I don't want you to think it was a cakewalk, that America opened its arms wide and welcomed me.
It's still not doing that.
And I've learned a few lessons along the way that I wanted to share with you, because I think that together we can make American democracy better and stronger.
I was born in India, the world's largest democracy, and when I was four, my family moved to Belize, the world's smallest democracy perhaps.
And at the age of 17, I moved to the United States, the world's greatest democracy.
I came because I wanted to study English literature.
You see, as a child, I buried my nose in books, and I thought, why not make a living doing that as an adult?
But after I graduated from college and got a graduate degree, I found myself moving from one less ideal job to another.
Maybe it was the optimism that I had about America that made me take a while to understand that things were not going to change.
The door that I thought was open was actually just slightly ajar -- this door of America that would open wide if you had the right name, the right skin color, the right networks, but could just slam in your face if you had the wrong religion, the wrong immigration status, the wrong skin color.
And I just couldn't accept that.
So I started a career as a social entrepreneur, starting an organization for young people like myself -- I was young at the time that I started it -- who traced their heritage to the Indian subcontinent.
In that work, I became and advocate for South Asians and other immigrants.
I lobbied members of Congress on policy issues.
I volunteered on election day to do exit polling.
But I couldn't vote, and I couldn't run for office.
So in 2000, when it was announced that the citizenship application fee was going to more than double from 95 dollars to 225 dollars, I decided it was time to apply before I could no longer afford it.
I filled out a long application, answering questions about my current and my past affiliations.
And once the application was submitted, there were fingerprints to be taken, a test to study for, endless hours of waiting in line.
You might call it extreme vetting.
And then in December of 2000, I joined hundreds of other immigrants in a hall in Brooklyn where we pledged our loyalty to a country that we had long considered home.
My journey from international student to American citizen took 16 years, a short timeline when you compare it to other immigrant stories.
And soon after I had taken that formal step to becoming an American, the attacks of September 11, 2001, changed the immigration landscape for decades to come.
My city, New York City, was reeling and healing, and in the midst of it, we were in an election cycle.
Two things happened as we coped with loss and recovery in New York City.
Voters elected Michael Bloomberg mayor of New York City.
We also adopted by ballot referendum the Office of Immigrant Affairs for the City of New York.
Five months after that election, the newly elected mayor appointed me the first Commissioner of Immigrant Affairs for this newly established office.
I want you to come back to that time.
I was a young immigrant woman from Belize.
I had basically floundered in various jobs in America before I started a community-based organization in a church basement in Queens.
The attacks of September 11 sent shock waves through my community.
People who were members of my family, young people I had worked with, were experiencing harassment at schools, at workplaces and in airports.
And now I was going to represent their concerns in government.
No job felt more perfect for me.
And here are two things I learned when I became Commissioner.
First, well-meaning New Yorkers who were in city government holding government positions had no idea how scared immigrants were of law enforcement.
Most of us don't really know the difference, do we, between a sheriff and local police and the FBI.
And most of us, when we see someone in uniform going through our neighborhoods feel curiosity, if not concern.
So if you're an undocumented parent, every day when you say goodbye to your child, send them off to school and go to work, you don't know what the chances are that you're going to see them at the end of the day.
Because a raid at your workplace, a chance encounter with local police could change the course of your life forever.
The second thing I learned is that when people like me, who understood that fear, who had learned a new language, who had navigated new systems, when people like us were sitting at the table, we advocated for our communities' needs in a way that no one else could or would.
I understood what that feeling of fear was like.
People in my family were experiencing it.
Young people I had worked with were being harassed, not just by classmates, but also by their teachers.
My husband, then boyfriend, thought twice before he put a backpack on or grew a beard because he traveled so much.
What I learned in 2001 was that my vote mattered but that my voice and vantage point also mattered.
And it's these three things -- immigrants' votes, voices and vantage points -- that I think can help make our democracy stronger.
We actually have the power to change the outcome of elections, to introduce new issues into the policy debate and to change the face of the pale, male, stale leadership that we have in our country today.
So how do we do that?
Well, let's talk first about votes.
It will come as no surprise to you that the majority of voters in America are white.
But it might surprise you to know that one in three voters are black, Latino or Asian.
But here's the thing: it doesn't just matter who can vote, it matters who does vote.
So in 2012, half of the Latino and Asian-American voters did not vote.
And these votes matter not just in presidential elections.
They matter in local and state elections.
In 2015, Lan Diep, the eldest son of political refugees from Vietnam, ran for a seat in the San Jose City Council.
He lost that election by 13 votes.
This year, he dusted off those campaign shoes and went back to run for that seat, and this time he won, by 12 votes.
Every one of our votes matters.
And when people like Lan are sitting at the policy table, they can make a difference.
We need those voices.
We need those voices in part because American leadership does not look like America's residents.
There are over 500,000 local and state offices in America.
Fewer than 2 percent of those offices are held by Asian-Americans or Latinos, the two largest immigrant groups in our country.
In the city of Yakima, Washington, where 49 percent of the population is Latino, there has never been a Latino on the city council until this year.
Three newly elected Latinas joined the Yakima City Council in 2016.
One of them is Carmen Méndez.
She is a first-generation college student.
She grew up partly in Colima, Mexico, and partly in Yakima, Washington.
She's a single mother, a community advocate.
Her voice on the Yakima City Council is advocating on behalf of the Latino community and of all Yakima residents.
And she's a role model for her daughter and other Latinas.
But the third most untapped resource in American democracy is the vantage point that immigrants bring.
We have fought to be here.
We have come for economic and educational opportunity.
We have come for political and religious freedom.
We have come in the pursuit of love.
That dedication, that commitment to America we also bring to public service.
People like Athena Salman, who just last week won the primary for a seat in the Arizona State House.
Athena's father grew up in the West Bank and moved to Chicago, where he met her mother.
Her mother is part Italian, part Mexican and part German.
Together they moved to Arizona and built a life.
Athena, when she gets to the statehouse, is going to fight for things like education funding that will help give families like hers a leg up so they can achieve the financial stability that we all are looking for.
Immigrants' votes, voices and vantage points are what we all need to work to include in American democracy.
It's not just my work. It's also yours.
And it's not going to be easy.
We never know what putting a new factor into an equation will do.
And it's a little scary.
You're scared that I'm going to take away your place at the table, and I'm scared that I'm never going to get a place at the table.
And we're all scared that we're going to lose this country that we know and love.
I'm scared you're going to take it away from me, and you're scared I'm going to take it away from you.
Look, it's been a rough election year, a reminder that people with my immigration history could be removed at the whim of a leader.
But I have fought to be in this country and I continue to do so every day.
So my optimism never wavers, because I know that there are millions of immigrants just like me, in front of me, behind me and all around me.
It's our country, too.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It was April, last year.
I was on an evening out with friends to celebrate one of their birthdays.
We hadn't been all together for a couple of weeks; it was a perfect evening, as we were all reunited.
At the end of the evening, I caught the last underground train back to the other side of London.
The journey was smooth.
I got back to my local station and I began the 10-minute walk home.
As I turned the corner onto my street, my house in sight up ahead, I heard footsteps behind me that seemed to have approached out of nowhere and were picking up pace.
Before I had time to process what was happening, a hand was clapped around my mouth so that I could not breathe, and the young man behind me dragged me to the ground, beat my head repeatedly against the pavement until my face began to bleed, kicking me in the back and neck while he began to assault me, ripping off my clothes and telling me to "shut up," as I struggled to cry for help.
With each smack of my head to the concrete ground, a question echoed through my mind that still haunts me today: "Is this going to be how it all ends?"
Little could I have realized, I'd been followed the whole way from the moment I left the station.
And hours later, I was standing topless and barelegged in front of the police, having the cuts and bruises on my naked body photographed for forensic evidence.
Now, there are few words to describe the all-consuming feelings of vulnerability, shame, upset and injustice that I was ridden with in that moment and for the weeks to come.
But wanting to find a way to condense these feelings into something ordered that I could work through, I decided to do what felt most natural to me: I wrote about it.
It started out as a cathartic exercise.
I wrote a letter to my assaulter, humanizing him as "you," to identify him as part of the very community that he had so violently abused that night.
Stressing the tidal-wave effect of his actions, I wrote: "Did you ever think of the people in your life?
I don't know who the people in your life are.
I don't know anything about you.
But I do know this: you did not just attack me that night.
I'm a daughter, I'm a friend, I'm a sister, I'm a pupil, I'm a cousin, I'm a niece, I'm a neighbor; I'm the employee who served everyone coffee in the café under the railway.
And all the people who form these relations to me make up my community.
And you assaulted every single one of them.
You violated the truth that I will never cease to fight for, and which all of these people represent: that there are infinitely more good people in the world than bad."
But, determined not to let this one incident make me lose faith in the solidarity in my community or humanity as a whole, I recalled the 7/7 terrorist bombings in July 2005 on London transport, and how the mayor of London at the time, and indeed my own parents, had insisted that we all get back on the tubes the next day, so we wouldn't be defined or changed by those that had made us feel unsafe.
I told my attacker, "You've carried out your attack, but now I'm getting back on my tube.
My community will not feel we are unsafe walking home after dark.
We will get on the last tubes home, and we will walk up our streets alone, because we will not ingrain or submit to the idea that we are putting ourselves in danger in doing so.
We will continue to come together, like an army, when any member of our community is threatened.
And this is a fight you will not win."
At the time of writing this letter -- (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) At the time of writing this letter, I was studying for my exams in Oxford, and I was working on the local student paper there.
Despite being lucky enough to have friends and family supporting me, it was an isolating time.
I didn't know anyone who'd been through this before; at least I didn't think I did.
I'd read news reports, statistics, and knew how common sexual assault was, yet I couldn't actually name a single person that I'd heard speak out about an experience of this kind before.
So in a somewhat spontaneous decision, I decided that I would publish my letter in the student paper, hoping to reach out to others in Oxford that might have had a similar experience and be feeling the same way.
At the end of the letter, I asked others to write in with their experiences under the hashtag, "#NotGuilty," to emphasize that survivors of assault could express themselves without feeling shame or guilt about what happened to them -- to show that we could all stand up to sexual assault.
What I never anticipated is that almost overnight, this published letter would go viral.
Soon, we were receiving hundreds of stories from men and women across the world, which we began to publish on a website I set up.
And the hashtag became a campaign.
There was an Australian mother in her 40s who described how on an evening out, she was followed to the bathroom by a man who went to repeatedly grab her crotch.
There was a man in the Netherlands who described how he was date-raped on a visit to London and wasn't taken seriously by anyone he reported his case to.
I had personal Facebook messages from people in India and South America, saying, how can we bring the message of the campaign there?
One of the first contributions we had was from a woman called Nikki, who described growing up, being molested my her own father.
And I had friends open up to me about experiences ranging from those that happened last week to those that happened years ago, that I'd had no idea about.
And the more we started to receive these messages, the more we also started to receive messages of hope -- people feeling empowered by this community of voices standing up to sexual assault and victim-blaming.
One woman called Olivia, after describing how she was attacked by someone she had trusted and cared about for a long time, said, "I've read many of the stories posted here, and I feel hopeful that if so many women can move forward, then I can, too.
I've been inspired by many, and I hope I can be as strong as them someday.
I'm sure I will."
People around the world began tweeting under this hashtag, and the letter was republished and covered by the national press, as well as being translated into several other languages worldwide.
But something struck me about the media attention that this letter was attracting.
For something to be front-page news, given the word "news" itself, we can assume it must be something new or something surprising.
And yet sexual assault is not something new.
Sexual assault, along with other kinds of injustices, is reported in the media all the time.
But through the campaign, these injustices were framed as not just news stories, they were firsthand experiences that had affected real people, who were creating, with the solidarity of others, what they needed and had previously lacked: a platform to speak out, the reassurance they weren't alone or to blame for what happened to them and open discussions that would help to reduce stigma around the issue.
The voices of those directly affected were at the forefront of the story -- not the voices of journalists or commentators on social media.
And that's why the story was news.
We live in an incredibly interconnected world with the proliferation of social media, which is of course a fantastic resource for igniting social change.
But it's also made us increasingly reactive, from the smallest annoyances of, "Oh, my train's been delayed," to the greatest injustices of war, genocides, terrorist attacks.
Our default response has become to leap to react to any kind of grievance by tweeting, Facebooking, hastagging -- anything to show others that we, too, have reacted.
The problem with reacting in this manner en masse is it can sometimes mean that we don't actually react at all, not in the sense of actually doing anything, anyway.
It might make ourselves feel better, like we've contributed to a group mourning or outrage, but it doesn't actually change anything.
And what's more, it can sometimes drown out the voices of those directly affected by the injustice, whose needs must be heard.
Worrying, too, is the tendency for some reactions to injustice to build even more walls, being quick to point fingers with the hope of providing easy solutions to complex problems.
One British tabloid, on the publication of my letter, branded a headline stating, "Oxford Student Launches Online Campaign to Shame Attacker."
But the campaign never meant to shame anyone.
It meant to let people speak and to make others listen.
Divisive Twitter trolls were quick to create even more injustice, commenting on my attacker's ethnicity or class to push their own prejudiced agendas.
And some even accused me of feigning the whole thing to push, and I quote, my "feminist agenda of man-hating."
(Laughter) I know, right?
As if I'm going to be like, "Hey guys! Sorry I can't make it, I'm busy trying to hate the entire male population by the time I'm 30."
(Laughter) Now, I'm almost sure that these people wouldn't say the things they say in person.
But it's as if because they might be behind a screen, in the comfort in their own home when on social media, people forget that what they're doing is a public act -- that other people will be reading it and be affected by it.
Returning to my analogy of getting back on our trains, another main concern I have about this noise that escalates from our online responses to injustice is that it can very easily slip into portraying us as the affected party, which can lead to a sense of defeatism, a kind of mental barrier to seeing any opportunity for positivity or change after a negative situation.
A couple of months before the campaign started or any of this happened to me, I went to a TEDx event in Oxford, and I saw Zelda la Grange speak, the former private secretary to Nelson Mandela.
One of the stories she told really struck me.
She spoke of when Mandela was taken to court by the South African Rugby Union after he commissioned an inquiry into sports affairs.
In the courtroom, he went up to the South African Rugby Union's lawyers, shook them by the hand and conversed with them, each in their own language.
And Zelda wanted to protest, saying they had no right to his respect after this injustice they had caused him.
He turned to her and said, "You must never allow the enemy to determine the grounds for battle."
At the time of hearing these words, I didn't really know why they were so important, but I felt they were, and I wrote them down in a notebook I had on me.
But I've thought about this line a lot ever since.
Revenge, or the expression of hatred towards those who have done us injustice may feel like a human instinct in the face of wrong, but we need to break out of these cycles if we are to hope to transform negative events of injustice into positive social change.
To do otherwise continues to let the enemy determine the grounds for battle, creates a binary, where we who have suffered become the affected, pitted against them, the perpetrators.
And just like we got back on our tubes, we can't let our platforms for interconnectivity and community be the places that we settle for defeat.
But I don't want to discourage a social media response, because I owe the development of the #NotGuilty campaign almost entirely to social media.
But I do want to encourage a more considered approach to the way we use it to respond to injustice.
The start, I think, is to ask ourselves two things.
Firstly: Why do I feel this injustice?
In my case, there were several answers to this.
Someone had hurt me and those who I loved, under the assumption they wouldn't have to be held to account or recognize the damage they had caused.
Not only that, but thousands of men and women suffer every day from sexual abuse, often in silence, yet it's still a problem we don't give the same airtime to as other issues.
It's still an issue many people blame victims for.
Next, ask yourself: How, in recognizing these reasons, could I go about reversing them?
With us, this was holding my attacker to account -- and many others.
It was calling them out on the effect they had caused.
It was giving airtime to the issue of sexual assault, opening up discussions amongst friends, amongst families, in the media that had been closed for too long, and stressing that victims shouldn't feel to blame for what happened to them.
We might still have a long way to go in solving this problem entirely.
But in this way, we can begin to use social media as an active tool for social justice, as a tool to educate, to stimulate dialogues, to make those in positions of authority aware of an issue by listening to those directly affected by it.
Because sometimes these questions don't have easy answers.
In fact, they rarely do.
But this doesn't mean we still can't give them a considered response.
In situations where you can't go about thinking how you'd reverse this feeling of injustice, you can still think, maybe not what you can do, but what you can not do.
You can not build further walls by fighting injustice with more prejudice, more hatred.
You can not speak over those directly affected by an injustice.
And you can not react to injustice, only to forget about it the next day, just because the rest of Twitter has moved on.
Sometimes not reacting instantly is, ironically, the best immediate course of action we can take.
Because we might be angry, upset and energized by injustice, but let's consider our responses.
Let us hold people to account, without descending into a culture that thrives off shaming and injustice ourselves.
Let us remember that distinction, so often forgotten by internet users, between criticism and insult.
Let us not forget to think before we speak, just because we might have a screen in front of us.
And when we create noise on social media, let it not drown out the needs of those affected, but instead let it amplify their voices, so the internet becomes a place where you're not the exception if you speak out about something that has actually happened to you.
All these considered approaches to injustice evoke the very keystones on which the internet was built: to network, to have signal, to connect -- all these terms that imply bringing people together, not pushing people apart.
Because if you look up the word "justice" in the dictionary, before punishment, before administration of law or judicial authority, you get: "The maintenance of what is right."
And I think there are few things more "right" in this world than bringing people together, than unions.
And if we allow social media to deliver that, then it can deliver a very powerful form of justice, indeed.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One hot October morning, I got off the all-night train in Mandalay, the old royal capital of Burma, now Myanmar.
And out on the street, I ran into a group of rough men standing beside their bicycle rickshaws.
And one of them came up and offered to show me around.
The price he quoted was outrageous.
It was less than I would pay for a bar of chocolate at home.
So I clambered into his trishaw, and he began pedaling us slowly between palaces and pagodas.
And as he did, he told me how he had come to the city from his village.
He'd earned a degree in mathematics.
His dream was to be a teacher.
But of course, life is hard under a military dictatorship, and so for now, this was the only way he could make a living.
Many nights, he told me, he actually slept in his trishaw so he could catch the first visitors off the all-night train.
And very soon, we found that in certain ways, we had so much in common -- we were both in our 20s, we were both fascinated by foreign cultures -- that he invited me home.
So we turned off the wide, crowded streets, and we began bumping down rough, wild alleyways.
There were broken shacks all around.
I really lost the sense of where I was, and I realized that anything could happen to me now.
I could get mugged or drugged or something worse.
Nobody would know.
Finally, he stopped and led me into a hut, which consisted of just one tiny room.
And then he leaned down, and reached under his bed.
And something in me froze.
I waited to see what he would pull out.
And finally he extracted a box.
Inside it was every single letter he had ever received from visitors from abroad, and on some of them he had pasted little black-and-white worn snapshots of his new foreign friends.
So when we said goodbye that night, I realized he had also shown me the secret point of travel, which is to take a plunge, to go inwardly as well as outwardly to places you would never go otherwise, to venture into uncertainty, ambiguity, even fear.
At home, it's dangerously easy to assume we're on top of things.
Out in the world, you are reminded every moment that you're not, and you can't get to the bottom of things, either.
Everywhere, "People wish to be settled," Ralph Waldo Emerson reminded us, "but only insofar as we are unsettled is there any hope for us."
At this conference, we've been lucky enough to hear some exhilarating new ideas and discoveries and, really, about all the ways in which knowledge is being pushed excitingly forwards.
But at some point, knowledge gives out.
And that is the moment when your life is truly decided: you fall in love; you lose a friend; the lights go out.
And it's then, when you're lost or uneasy or carried out of yourself, that you find out who you are.
I don't believe that ignorance is bliss.
Science has unquestionably made our lives brighter and longer and healthier.
And I am forever grateful to the teachers who showed me the laws of physics and pointed out that three times three makes nine.
I can count that out on my fingers any time of night or day.
But when a mathematician tells me that minus three times minus three makes nine, that's a kind of logic that almost feels like trust.
The opposite of knowledge, in other words, isn't always ignorance.
It can be wonder.
Or mystery.
Possibility.
And in my life, I've found it's the things I don't know that have lifted me up and pushed me forwards much more than the things I do know.
It's also the things I don't know that have often brought me closer to everybody around me.
For eight straight Novembers, recently, I traveled every year across Japan with the Dalai Lama.
And the one thing he said every day that most seemed to give people reassurance and confidence was, "I don't know."
"What's going to happen to Tibet?"
"When are we ever going to get world peace?"
"What's the best way to raise children?"
"Frankly," says this very wise man, "I don't know."
The Nobel Prize-winning economist Daniel Kahneman has spent more than 60 years now researching human behavior, and his conclusion is that we are always much more confident of what we think we know than we should be.
We have, as he memorably puts it, an "unlimited ability to ignore our ignorance."
We know -- quote, unquote -- our team is going to win this weekend, and we only remember that knowledge on the rare occasions when we're right.
Most of the time, we're in the dark.
And that's where real intimacy lies.
Do you know what your lover is going to do tomorrow?
Do you want to know?
The parents of us all, as some people call them, Adam and Eve, could never die, so long as they were eating from the tree of life.
But the minute they began nibbling from the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, they fell from their innocence.
They grew embarrassed and fretful, self-conscious.
And they learned, a little too late, perhaps, that there are certainly some things that we need to know, but there are many, many more that are better left unexplored.
Now, when I was a kid, I knew it all, of course.
I had been spending 20 years in classrooms collecting facts, and I was actually in the information business, writing articles for Time Magazine.
And I took my first real trip to Japan for two-and-a-half weeks, and I came back with a 40-page essay explaining every last detail about Japan's temples, its fashions, its baseball games, its soul.
But underneath all that, something that I couldn't understand so moved me for reasons I couldn't explain to you yet, that I decided to go and live in Japan.
And now that I've been there for 28 years, I really couldn't tell you very much at all about my adopted home.
Which is wonderful, because it means every day I'm making some new discovery, and in the process, looking around the corner and seeing the hundred thousand things I'll never know.
Knowledge is a priceless gift.
But the illusion of knowledge can be more dangerous than ignorance.
Thinking that you know your lover or your enemy can be more treacherous than acknowledging you'll never know them.
Every morning in Japan, as the sun is flooding into our little apartment, I take great pains not to consult the weather forecast, because if I do, my mind will be overclouded, distracted, even when the day is bright.
I've been a full-time writer now for 34 years.
And the one thing that I have learned is that transformation comes when I'm not in charge, when I don't know what's coming next, when I can't assume I am bigger than everything around me.
And the same is true in love or in moments of crisis.
Suddenly, we're back in that trishaw again and we're bumping off the broad, well-lit streets; and we're reminded, really, of the first law of travel and, therefore, of life: you're only as strong as your readiness to surrender.
In the end, perhaps, being human is much more important than being fully in the know.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"We're declaring war against cancer, and we will win this war by 2015."
This is what the US Congress and the National Cancer Institute declared just a few years ago, in 2003.
Now, I don't know about you, but I don't buy that.
I don't think we quite won this war yet, and I don't think anyone here will question that.
Now, I will argue that a primary reason why we're not winning this war against cancer is because we're fighting blindly.
I'm going to start by sharing with you a story about a good friend of mine.
His name is Ehud, and a few years ago, Ehud was diagnosed with brain cancer.
And not just any type of brain cancer: he was diagnosed with one of the most deadly forms of brain cancer.
In fact, it was so deadly that the doctors told him that they only have 12 months, and during those 12 months, they have to find a treatment.
They have to find a cure, and if they cannot find a cure, he will die.
Now, the good news, they said, is that there are tons of different treatments to choose from, but the bad news is that in order for them to tell if a treatment is even working or not, well, that takes them about three months or so.
So they cannot try that many things.
Well, Ehud is now going into his first treatment, and during that first treatment, just a few days into that treatment, I'm meeting with him, and he tells me, "Adam, I think this is working.
I think we really lucked out here. Something is happening."
And I ask him, "Really? How do you know that, Ehud?"
And he says, "Well, I feel so terrible inside.
Something's gotta be working up there.
It just has to."
Well, unfortunately, three months later, we got the news, it didn't work.
And so Ehud goes into his second treatment.
And again, the same story.
"It feels so bad, something's gotta be working there."
And then three months later, again we get bad news.
Ehud is going into his third treatment, and then his fourth treatment.
And then, as predicted, Ehud dies.
Now, when someone really close to you is going through such a huge struggle, you get really swamped with emotions.
A lot of things are going through your head.
For me, it was mostly outrage.
I was just outraged that, how come this is the best that we can offer?
And I started looking more and more into this.
As it turns out, this is not just the best that doctors could offer Ehud.
It's not just the best doctors could offer patients with brain cancer generally.
We're actually not doing that well all across the board with cancer.
I picked up one of those statistics, and I'm sure some of you have seen those statistics before.
This is going to show you here how many patients actually died of cancer, in this case females in the United States, ever since the 1930s.
You'll notice that there aren't that many things that have changed.
It's still a huge issue.
You'll see a few changes, though.
You'll see lung cancer, for example, on the rise.
Thank you, cigarettes.
And you'll also see that, for example, stomach cancer once used to be one of the biggest killers of all cancers, is essentially eliminated.
Now, why is that? Anyone knows, by the way?
Why is it that humanity is no longer struck by stomach cancer?
What was the huge, huge medical technology breakthrough that came to our world that saved humanity from stomach cancer?
Was it maybe a new drug, or a better diagnostic?
You guys are right, yeah.
It's the invention of the refrigerator, and the fact that we're no longer eating spoiled meats.
So the best thing that happened to us so far in the medical arena in cancer research is the fact that the refrigerator was invented.
(Laughter) And so -- yeah, I know.
We're not doing so well here.
I don't want to miniaturize the progress and everything that's been done in cancer research.
Look, there is like 50-plus years of good cancer research that discovered major, major things that taught us about cancer.
But all that said, we have a lot of heavy lifting to still do ahead of us.
Again, I will argue that the primary reason why this is the case, why we have not done that remarkably well, is really we're fighting blindly here.
And this is where medical imaging comes in.
This is where my own work comes in.
And so to give you a sense of the best medical imaging that's offered today to brain cancer patients, or actually generally to all cancer patients, take a look at this PET scan right here.
Let's see. There we go.
So this is a PET/CT scan, and what you'll see in this PET/CT scan is the CT scan will show you where the bones are, and the PET scan will show you where tumors are.
Now, what you can see here is essentially a sugar molecule that was added a small little tag that is signaling to us outside of the body, "Hey, I'm here."
And those sugar molecules are injected into these patients by the billions, and they're going all over the body looking for cells that are hungry for sugar.
You'll see that the heart, for example, lights up there.
That's because the heart needs a lot of sugar.
You'll also see that the bladder lights up there.
That's because the bladder is the thing that's clearing the sugar away from our body.
And then you'll see a few other hot spots, and these are in fact the tumors.
Now, this is a really a wonderful technology.
For the first time it allowed us to look into someone's body without picking up each and every one of the cells and putting them under the microscope, but in a noninvasive way allowing us to look into someone's body and ask, "Hey, has the cancer metastasized?
Where is it?"
And the PET scans here are showing you very clearly where are these hot spots, where is the tumor.
So as miraculous as this might seem, unfortunately, well, it's not that great.
You see, those small little hot spots there.
Can anyone guess how many cancer cells are in any one of these tumors?
So it's about 100 million cancer cells, and let me make sure that this number sunk in.
In each and every one of these small little blips that you're seeing on the image, there needs to be at least 100 million cancer cells in order for it to be detected.
Now, if that seemed to you like a very large number, it is a very large number.
This is in fact an incredibly large number, because what we really need in order to pick up something early enough to do something about it, to do something meaningful about it, well, we need to pick up tumors that are a thousand cells in size, and ideally just a handful of cells in size.
So we're clearly pretty far away from this.
So we're going to play a little experiment here.
I'm going to ask each of you to now play and imagine that you are brain surgeons.
And you guys are now at an operating room, and there's a patient in front of you, and your task is to make sure that the tumor is out.
So you're looking down at the patient, the skin and the skull have already been removed, so you're looking at the brain.
And all you know about this patient is that there's a tumor about the size of a golf ball or so in the right frontal lobe of this person's brain.
And that's more or less it.
So you're looking down, and unfortunately everything looks the same, because brain cancer tissue and healthy brain tissue really just look the same.
And so you're going in with your thumb, and you start to press a little bit on the brain, because tumors tend to be a little harder, stiffer, and so you go in and go a little bit like this and say, "It seems like the tumor is right there."
Then you take out your knife and start cutting the tumor piece by piece by piece.
And as you're taking the tumor out, then you're getting to a stage where you think, "Alright, I'm done. I took out everything."
And at this stage, if that's -- so far everything sounded, like, pretty crazy -- you're now about to face the most challenging decision of your life here.
Because now you need to decide, should I stop here and let this patient go, risking that there might be some leftover cancer cells behind that I just couldn't see, or should I take away some extra margins, typically about an inch or so around the tumor just to be sure that I removed everything?
So this is not a simple decision to make, and unfortunately this is the decision that brain cancer surgeons have to take every single day as they're seeing their patients.
And so I remember talking to a few friends of mine in the lab, and we say, "Boy, there's got to be a better way."
But not just like you tell a friend that there's got to be a better way.
There's just got to be a better way here.
This is just incredible.
And so we looked back.
Remember those PET scans I told you about, the sugar and so on.
We said, hey, how about instead of using sugar molecules, let's maybe take tiny, tiny little particles made of gold, and let's program them with some interesting chemistry around them.
Let's program them to look for cancer cells.
And then we will inject these gold particles into these patients by the billions again, and we'll have them go all over the body, and just like secret agents, if you will, go and walk by every single cell in our body and knock on the door of that cell, and ask, "Are you a cancer cell or are you a healthy cell?
If you're a healthy cell, we're moving on.
If you're a cancer cell, we're sticking in and shining out and telling us, "Hey, look at me, I'm here."
And they'll do it through some interesting cameras that we developed in the lab.
And once we see that, maybe we can guide brain cancer surgeons towards taking only the tumor and leaving the healthy brain alone.
And so we've tested that, and boy, this works well.
So I'm going to show you an example now.
What you're looking at here is an image of a mouse's brain, and we've implanted into this mouse's brain a small little tumor.
And so this tumor is now growing in this mouse's brain, and then we've taken a doctor and asked the doctor to please operate on the mouse as if that was a patient, and take out piece by piece out of the tumor.
And while he's doing that, we're going to take images to see where the gold particles are.
And so we're going to first start by injecting these gold particles into this mouse, and we're going to see right here at the very left there that image at the bottom is the image that shows where the gold particles are.
The nice thing is that these gold particles actually made it all the way to the tumor, and then they shine out and tell us, "Hey, we're here. Here's the tumor."
So now we can see the tumor, but we're not showing this to the doctor yet.
We're asking the doctor, now please start cutting away the tumor, and you'll see here the doctor just took the first quadrant of the tumor and you see that first quadrant is now missing.
The doctor then took the second quadrant, the third, and now it appears to be everything.
And so at this stage, the doctor came back to us and said, "Alright, I'm done. What do you want me to do?
Should I keep things as they are or do you want me to take some extra margins around?"
And then we said, "Well, hang on."
We told the doctor, "You've missed those two spots, so rather than taking huge margins around, only take out those tiny little areas.
Take them out, and then let's take a look."
And so the doctor took them away, and lo and behold, the cancer is now completely gone.
Now, the important thing is that it's not just that the cancer is completely gone from this person's brain, or from this mouse's brain.
The most important thing is that we did not have to take huge amounts of healthy brain in the process.
And so now we can actually imagine a world where doctors and surgeons, as they take away a tumor, they actually know what to take out, and they no longer have to guess with their thumb.
Now, here's why it's extremely important to take those tiny little leftover tumors.
Those leftover tumors, even if it's just a handful of cells, they will grow to recur the tumor, for the tumor to come back.
In fact, the reason why 80 to 90 percent of those brain cancer surgeries ultimately fail is because of those small little extra margins that were left positive, those small little leftover tumors that were left there.
So this is clearly very nice, but what I really want to share with you is where I think we're heading from here.
And so in my lab at Stanford, my students and I are asking, what should we be working on now?
And I think where medical imaging is heading to is the ability to look into the human body and actually see each and every one of these cells separately.
The ability like this would allow us to actually pick up tumors way, way earlier in the process, way before it's 100 million cells inside, so we can actually do something about it.
An ability to see each and every one of the cells might also allow us to ask insightful questions.
So in the lab, we are now getting to a point where we can actually start asking these cancer cells real questions, like, for example, are you responding to the treatment we are giving you or not?
So if you're not responding, we'll know to stop the treatment right away, days into the treatment, not three months.
And so also for patients like Ehud that are going through these nasty, nasty chemotherapy drugs, for them not to suffer through those horrendous side effects of the drugs when the drugs are in fact not even helping them.
So to be frank here, we're pretty far away from winning the war against cancer, just to be realistic.
But at least I am hopeful that we should be able to fight this war with better medical imaging techniques in the way that is not blind.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I wrote this poem after hearing a pretty well known actress tell a very well known interviewer on television, "I'm really getting into the Internet lately.
I just wish it were more organized."
So ...
(Laughter) If I controlled the Internet, you could auction your broken heart on eBay.
Take the money; go to Amazon; buy a phonebook for a country you've never been to -- call folks at random until you find someone who flirts really well in a foreign language.
(Laughter) If I were in charge of the Internet, you could Mapquest your lover's mood swings.
Hang left at cranky, right at preoccupied, U-turn on silent treatment, all the way back to tongue kissing and good lovin'.
You could navigate and understand every emotional intersection.
Some days, I'm as shallow as a baking pan, but I still stretch miles in all directions.
If I owned the Internet, Napster, Monster and Friendster.com would be one big website.
That way you could listen to cool music while you pretend to look for a job and you're really just chattin' with your pals.
(Laughter) Heck, if I ran the Web, you could email dead people.
(Laughter) They would not email you back (Laughter) -- but you'd get an automated reply.
(Laughter) Their name in your inbox (Laughter) -- it's all you wanted anyway.
And a message saying, "Hey, it's me. I miss you.
(Laughter) Listen, you'll see being dead is dandy.
Now you go back to raising kids and waging peace and craving candy."
If I designed the Internet, childhood.com would be a loop of a boy in an orchard, with a ski pole for a sword, trashcan lid for a shield, shouting, "I am the emperor of oranges.
I am the emperor of oranges. I am the emperor of oranges."
Now follow me, OK?
(Laughter) Grandma.com would be a recipe for biscuits and spit-bath instructions.
One, two, three.
That links with hotdiggitydog.com.
That is my grandfather.
They take you to gruff-ex-cop-on-his-fourth-marriage.dad.
He forms an attachment to kind-of-ditzy-but-still-sends-ginger-snaps-for-Christmas.mom, who downloads the boy in the orchard, the emperor of oranges, who grows up to be me -- the guy who usually goes too far.
So if I were emperor of the Internet, I guess I'd still be mortal, huh?
But at that point, I would probably already have the lowest possible mortgage and the most enlarged possible penis (Laughter) -- so I would outlaw spam on my first day in office.
I wouldn't need it.
I'd be like some kind of Internet genius, and me, I'd like to upgrade to deity and maybe just like that -- pop! -- I'd go wireless.
(Laughter) Huh? Maybe Google would hire this.
I could zip through your servers and firewalls like a virus until the World Wide Web is as wise, as wild and as organized as I think a modern-day miracle/oracle can get, but, ooh-eee, you want to bet just how whack and un-PC your Mac or PC is going to be when I'm rocking hot-shit-hot-shot-god.net?
I guess it's just like life.
It is not a question of if you can -- it's: do ya?
We can interfere with the interface.
We can make "You've got Hallelujah" the national anthem of cyberspace every lucky time we log on.
You don't say a prayer.
You don't write a psalm.
You don't chant an "om."
You send one blessed email to whomever you're thinking of at dah-da-la-dat-da-dah-da-la-dat.com.
Thank you, TED.
(Applause)
I'm a painter.
I make large-scale figurative paintings, which means I paint people like this.
But I'm here tonight to tell you about something personal that changed my work and my perspective.
It's something we all go through, and my hope is that my experience may be helpful to somebody.
To give you some background on me, I grew up the youngest of eight.
Yes, eight kids in my family.
I have six older brothers and a sister.
To give you a sense of what that's like, when my family went on vacation, we had a bus.
(Laughter) My supermom would drive us all over town to our various after-school activities -- not in the bus.
We had a regular car, too.
She would take me to art classes, and not just one or two.
She took me to every available art class from when I was eight to 16, because that's all I wanted to do.
She even took a class with me in New York City.
Now, being the youngest of eight, I learned a few survival skills.
Rule number one: don't let your big brother see you do anything stupid.
So I learned to be quiet and neat and careful to follow the rules and stay in line.
But painting was where I made the rules.
That was my private world.
By 14, I knew I really wanted to be an artist.
My big plan was to be a waitress to support my painting.
So I continued honing my skills.
I went to graduate school and I got an MFA, and at my first solo show, my brother asked me, "What do all these red dots mean next to the paintings?"
Nobody was more surprised than me.
The red dots meant that the paintings were sold and that I'd be able to pay my rent with painting.
Now, my apartment had four electrical outlets, and I couldn't use a microwave and a toaster at the same time, but still, I could pay my rent.
So I was very happy.
Here's a painting from back around that time.
I needed it to be as realistic as possible.
It had to be specific and believable.
This was the place where I was isolated and in total control.
Since then, I've made a career of painting people in water.
Bathtubs and showers were the perfect enclosed environment.
It was intimate and private, and water was this complicated challenge that kept me busy for a decade.
I made about 200 of these paintings, some of them six to eight feet, like this one.
For this painting, I mixed flour in with the bathwater to make it cloudy and I floated cooking oil on the surface and stuck a girl in it, and when I lit it up, it was so beautiful I couldn't wait to paint it.
I was driven by this kind of impulsive curiosity, always looking for something new to add: vinyl, steam, glass.
I once put all this Vaseline in my head and hair just to see what that would look like.
Don't do that.
(Laughter) So it was going well.
I was finding my way.
I was eager and motivated and surrounded by artists, always going to openings and events.
I was having some success and recognition and I moved into an apartment with more than four outlets.
My mom and I would stay up very late talking about our latest ideas and inspiring each other.
She made beautiful pottery.
I have a friend named Bo who made this painting of his wife and I dancing by the ocean, and he called it "The Light Years."
I asked him what that meant, and he said, "Well, that's when you've stepped into adulthood, you're no longer a child, but you're not yet weighed down by the responsibilities of life."
That was it. It was the light years.
On October 8, 2011, the light years came to an end.
My mom was diagnosed with lung cancer.
It had spread to her bones, and it was in her brain.
When she told me this, I fell to my knees.
I totally lost it.
And when I got myself together and I looked at her, I realized, this isn't about me.
This is about figuring out how to help her.
My father is a doctor, and so we had a great advantage having him in charge, and he did a beautiful job taking care of her.
But I, too, wanted to do everything I could to help, so I wanted to try everything.
We all did.
I researched alternative medicines, diets, juicing, acupuncture.
Finally, I asked her, "Is this what you want me to do?"
And she said, "No."
She said, "Pace yourself. I'm going to need you later."
She knew what was happening, and she knew what the doctors and the experts and the internet didn't know: how she wanted to go through this.
I just needed to ask her.
I realized that if I tried to fix it, I would miss it.
So I just started to be with her, whatever that meant and whatever situation came up, just really listen to her.
If before I was resisting, then now I was surrendering, giving up trying to control the uncontrollable and just being there in it with her.
Time slowed down, and the date was irrelevant.
We developed a routine.
Early each morning I would crawl into bed with her and sleep with her.
My brother would come for breakfast and we'd be so glad to hear his car coming up the driveway.
So I'd help her up and take both her hands and help her walk to the kitchen.
She had this huge mug she made she loved to drink her coffee out of, and she loved Irish soda bread for breakfast.
Afterwards was the shower, and she loved this part.
She loved the warm water, so I made this as indulgent as I could, like a spa.
My sister would help sometimes.
We had warm towels and slippers ready immediately so she never got cold for a second.
I'd blow-dry her hair.
My brothers would come in the evenings and bring their kids, and that was the highlight of her day.
Over time, we started to use a wheelchair, and she didn't want to eat so much, and she used the tiniest little teacup we could find to drink her coffee.
I couldn't support her myself anymore, so we hired an aide to help me with the showers.
These simple daily activities became our sacred ritual, and we repeated them day after day as the cancer grew.
It was humbling and painful and exactly where I wanted to be.
We called this time "the beautiful awful."
She died on October 26, 2012.
It was a year and three weeks after her diagnosis.
She was gone.
My brothers, sister, and father and I all came together in this supportive and attentive way.
It was as though our whole family dynamic and all our established roles vanished and we were just all together in this unknown, feeling the same thing and taking care of each other.
I'm so grateful for them.
As someone who spends most of my time alone in a studio working, I had no idea that this kind of connection could be so important, so healing.
This was the most important thing.
It was what I always wanted.
So after the funeral, it was time for me to go back to my studio.
So I packed up my car and I drove back to Brooklyn, and painting is what I've always done, so that's what I did.
And here's what happened.
It's like a release of everything that was unraveling in me.
That safe, very, very carefully rendered safe place that I created in all my other paintings, it was a myth.
It didn't work.
And I was afraid, because I didn't want to paint anymore.
So I went into the woods.
I thought, I'll try that, going outside.
I got my paints, and I wasn't a landscape painter, but I wasn't really much of any kind of painter at all, so I had no attachment, no expectation, which allowed me to be reckless and free.
I actually left one of these wet paintings outside overnight next to a light in the woods.
By the morning it was lacquered with bugs.
But I didn't care. It didn't matter. It didn't matter.
I took all these paintings back to my studio, and scraped them, and carved into them, and poured paint thinner on them, put more paint on top, drew on them.
I had no plan, but I was watching what was happening.
This is the one with all the bugs in it.
I wasn't trying to represent a real space.
It was the chaos and the imperfections that were fascinating me, and something started to happen.
I got curious again.
This is another one from the woods.
There was a caveat now, though.
I couldn't be controlling the paint like I used to.
It had to be about implying and suggesting, not explaining or describing.
And that imperfect, chaotic, turbulent surface is what told the story.
I started to be as curious as I was when I was a student.
So the next thing was I wanted to put figures in these paintings, people, and I loved this new environment, so I wanted to have both people and this atmosphere.
When the idea hit me of how to do this, I got kind of nauseous and dizzy, which is really just adrenaline, probably, but for me it's a really good sign.
And so now I want to show you what I've been working on.
It's something I haven't shown yet, and it's like a preview, I guess, of my upcoming show, what I have so far.
Expansive space instead of the isolated bathtub.
I'm going outside instead of inside.
Loosening control, savoring the imperfections, allowing the -- allowing the imperfections.
And in that imperfection, you can find a vulnerability.
I could feel my deepest intention, what matters most to me, that human connection that can happen in a space where there's no resisting or controlling.
I want to make paintings about that.
So here's what I learned.
We're all going to have big losses in our lives, maybe a job or a career, relationships, love, our youth.
We're going to lose our health, people we love.
These kinds of losses are out of our control.
They're unpredictable, and they bring us to our knees.
And so I say, let them.
Fall to your knees. Be humbled.
Let go of trying to change it or even wanting it to be different.
It just is.
And then there's space, and in that space feel your vulnerability, what matters most to you, your deepest intention.
And be curious to connect to what and who is really here, awake and alive.
It's what we all want.
Let's take the opportunity to find something beautiful in the unknown, in the unpredictable, and even in the awful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you ever noticed when you ask someone to talk about a change they're making for the better in their personal lives, they're often really energetic?
Whether it's training for a marathon, picking up an old hobby, or learning a new skill, for most people, self-transformation projects occupy a very positive emotional space.
Self-transformation is empowering, energizing, even exhilarating.
I mean just take a look at some of the titles of self-help books: "Awaken the Giant Within," "Practicing the Power of Now," or here's a great one we can all relate to, "You are a Badass: How to Stop Doubting Your Greatness and Start Living an Awesome Life."
(Laughter) When it comes to self-transformation, you can't help but get a sense of the excitement.
But there's another type of transformation that occupies a very different emotional space.
The transformation of organizations.
If you're like most people, when you hear the words "Our organization is going to start a transformation," you're thinking, "Uh-oh."
(Laughter) "Layoffs."
The blood drains from your face, your mind goes into overdrive, frantically searching for some place to run and hide.
Well, you can run, but you really can't hide.
Most of us spend the majority of our waking hours involved in organizations.
And due to changes in globalization, changes due to advances in technology and other factors, the reality is our organizations are constantly having to adapt.
In fact, I call this the era of "always-on" transformation.
When I shared this idea with my wife Nicola, she said, "Always-on transformation?
That sounds exhausting."
And that may be exactly what you're thinking -- and you would be right.
Particularly if we continue to approach the transformation of organizations the way we always have been.
But because we can't hide, we need to sort out two things.
First, why is transformation so exhausting?
And second, how do we fix it?
First of all, let's acknowledge that change is hard.
People naturally resist change, especially when it's imposed on them.
But there are things that organizations do that make change even harder and more exhausting for people than it needs to be.
First of all, leaders often wait too long to act.
As a result, everything is happening in crisis mode.
Which, of course, tends to be exhausting.
Or, given the urgency, what they'll do is they'll just focus on the short-term results, but that doesn't give any hope for the future.
Or they'll just take a superficial, one-off approach, hoping that they can return back to business as usual as soon as the crisis is over.
This kind of approach is kind of the way some students approach preparing for standardized tests.
In order to get test scores to go up, teachers will end up teaching to the test.
Now, that approach can work; test results often do go up.
But it fails the fundamental goal of education: to prepare students to succeed over the long term.
So given these obstacles, what can we do to transform the way we transform organizations so rather than being exhausting, it's actually empowering and energizing?
To do that, we need to focus on five strategic imperatives, all of which have one thing in common: putting people first.
The first imperative for putting people first is to inspire through purpose.
Most transformations have financial and operational goals.
These are important and they can be energizing to leaders, but they tend not to be very motivating to most people in the organization.
To motivate more broadly, the transformation needs to connect with a deeper sense of purpose.
Take LEGO.
The LEGO Group has become an extraordinary global company.
Under their very capable leadership, they've actually undergone a series of transformations.
While each of these has had a very specific focus, the North Star, linking and guiding all of them, has been Lego's powerful purpose: inspire and develop the builders of tomorrow.
Expanding globally?
It's not about increasing sales, but about giving millions of additional children access to LEGO building bricks.
Investment and innovation?
It's not about developing new products, but about enabling more children to experience the joy of learning through play.
Not surprisingly, that deep sense of purpose tends to be highly motivating to LEGO's people.
The second imperative for putting people first is to go all in.
Too many transformations are nothing more than head-count cutting exercises; layoffs under the guise of transformation.
In the face of relentless competition, it may well be that you will have to take the painful decision to downsize the organization, just as you may have to lose some weight in order to run a marathon.
But losing weight alone will not get you across the finish line with a winning time.
To win you need to go all in.
You need to go all in.
Rather than just cutting costs, you need to think about initiatives that will enable you to win in the medium term, initiatives to drive growth, actions that will fundamentally change the way the company operates, and very importantly, investments to develop the leadership and the talent.
The third imperative for putting people first is to enable people with the capabilities that they need to succeed during the transformation and beyond.
Over the years I've competed in a number of triathlons.
You know, frankly, I'm not that good, but I do have one distinct capability; I am remarkably fast at finding my bike.
(Laughter) By the time I finish the swim, almost all the bikes are already gone.
(Laughter) Real triathletes know that each leg -- the swim, the bike, the run -- really requires different capabilities, different tools, different skills, different techniques.
Likewise when we transform organizations, we need to be sure that we're giving our people the skills and the tools they need along the way.
Chronos, a global software company, recognized the need to transfer from building products -- software products -- to building software as a service.
To enable its people to take that transformation, first of all they invested in new tools that would enable their employees to monitor the usage of the features as well as customer satisfaction with the new service.
They also invested in skill development, so that their employees would be able to resolve customer service problems on the spot.
And very importantly, they also reinforced the collaborative behaviors that would be required to deliver an end-to-end seamless customer experience.
Because of these investments, rather than feeling overwhelmed by the transformation, Chronos employees actually felt energized and empowered in their new roles.
In the era of "always-on" transformation, change is a constant.
My fourth imperative therefore is to instill a culture of continuous learning.
When Satya Nadella became the CEO of Microsoft in February 2014, he embarked on an ambitious transformation journey to prepare the company to compete in a mobile-first, cloud-first world.
This included changes to strategy, the organization and very importantly, the culture.
Microsoft's culture at the time was one of silos and internal competition -- not exactly conducive to learning.
Nadella took this head-on.
He rallied his leadership around his vision for a living, learning culture, shifting from a fixed mindset, where your role was to show up as the smartest person in the room, to a growth mindset, where your role was to listen, to learn and to bring out the best in people.
Well, early days, Microsoft employees already noticed this shift in the culture -- clear evidence of Microsoft putting people first.
My fifth and final imperative is specifically for leaders.
In a transformation, a leader needs to have a vision, a clear road map with milestones, and then you need to hold people accountable for results.
In other words, you need to be directive.
But in order to capture the hearts and minds of people, you also need to be inclusive.
Inclusive leadership is critical to putting people first.
I live in the San Francisco Bay area.
And right now, our basketball team is the best in the league.
We won the 2015 championship, and we're favored to win again this year.
There are many explanations for this.
They have some fabulous players, but one of the key reasons is their head coach, Steve Kerr, is an inclusive leader.
When Kerr came to the Warriors in 2014, the Warriors were looking for a major transformation.
They hadn't won a national championship since 1975.
Kerr came in, and he had a clear vision, and he immediately got to work.
From the outset, he reached out and engaged the players and the staff.
He created an environment of open debate and solicited suggestions.
During games he would often ask, "What are you seeing that I'm missing?"
One the best examples of this came in game four of the 2015 finals.
The Warriors were down two games to one when Kerr made the decision to change the starting lineup; a bold move by any measure.
The Warriors won the game and went on to win the championship.
And it is widely viewed that that move was the pivotal move in their victory.
Interestingly, it wasn't actually Kerr's idea.
It was the idea of his 28-year-old assistant, Nick U'Ren.
Because of Kerr's leadership style, U'Ren felt comfortable bringing the idea forward.
And Kerr not only listened, but he implemented the idea and then afterwards, gave U'Ren all the credit -- actions all consistent with Kerr's highly inclusive approach to leadership.
In the era of "always-on" transformation, organizations are always going to be transforming.
But doing so does not have to be exhausting.
We owe it to ourselves, to our organizations and to society more broadly to boldly transform our approach to transformation.
To do that, we need to start putting people first.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Applause) Trevor Copp: When "Dancing With the Stars" first hit the airwaves, that is not what it looked like.
(Laughter) Jeff and I were full-time ballroom dance instructors when the big TV ballroom revival hit, and this was incredible.
I mean, one day we would say "foxtrot," and people were like "Foxes trotting."
(Laughter) And the next day they were telling us the finer points of a good feather step.
And this blew our minds.
I mean, all of the ballroom dance geeking out that we had always done on why salsa worked differently than the competitive rumba and why tango traveled unlike the waltz, all of that just hit the public consciousness, and it changed everything.
But running parallel to this excitement, the excitement that suddenly, somehow, we were cool -- (Laughter) there was also this reservation.
Why this and why now?
Jeff Fox: When Trevor and I would get together for training seminars or just for fun, we'd toss each other around, mix it up, take a break from having to lead all the time.
We even came up with a system for switching lead and follow while we were dancing, as a way of taking turns and playing fair.
It wasn't until we used that system as part of a performance in a small festival that we got an important tap on the shoulder.
Lisa O'Connell, a dramaturge and director of a playwright center, pulled us aside after the show and said, "Do you have any idea how political that was?"
(Laughter) So that began an eight-year collaboration to create a play which not only further developed our system for switching but also explored the impact of being locked into a single role, and what's worse, being defined by that single role.
TC: Because, of course, classic Latin and ballroom dancing isn't just a system of dancing; it's a way of thinking, of being, of relating to each other that captured a whole period's values.
There's one thing that stayed consistent, though: the man leads and the woman follows.
So street salsa, championship tango, it's all the same -- he leads, she follows.
So this was gender training.
You weren't just learning to dance -- you were learning to "man" and to "woman."
It's a relic.
And in the way of relics, you don't throw it out, but you need to know that this is the past.
This isn't the present.
It's like Shakespeare: respect it, revive it -- great!
But know that this is history.
This doesn't represent how we think today.
So we asked ourselves: If you strip it all down, what is at the core of partner dancing?
JF: Well, the core principle of partner dancing is that one person leads, the other one follows.
The machine works the same, regardless of who's playing which role.
The physics of movement doesn't really give a crap about your gender.
(Laughter) So if we were to update the existing form, we would need to make it more representative of how we interact here, now, in 2015.
When you watch ballroom, don't just watch what's there.
Watch what's not.
The couple is always only a man and a woman.
Together.
Only.
Ever.
So, same-sex and gender nonconformist couples just disappear.
In most mainstream international ballroom competitions, same-sex couples are rarely recognized on the floor, and in many cases, the rules prohibit them completely.
TC: Try this: Google-image, "professional Latin dancer," and then look for an actual Latino person.
(Laughter) You'll be there for days.
What you will get is page after page of white, straight Russian couples spray-tanned to the point of mahogany.
(Laughter) There are no black people, there are no Asians, no mixed-race couples, so basically, non-white people just disappeared.
Even within the white-straight- couple-only paradigm -- she can't be taller, he can't be shorter.
She can't be bolder, he can't be gentler.
If you were to take a ballroom dance and translate that into a conversation and drop that into a movie, we, as a culture, would never stand for this.
He dictates, she reacts.
No relationship -- gay, straight or anything -- that we would regard as remotely healthy or functional looks like that, and yet somehow, you put it on prime time, you slap some makeup on it, throw the glitter on, put it out there as movement, not as text, and we, as a culture, tune in and clap.
We are applauding our own absence.
Too many people have disappeared from partner dancing.
(Music) (Applause) JF: Now, you just saw two men dancing together.
(Laughter) And you thought it looked ...
a little strange.
Interesting -- appealing, even -- but a little bit odd.
Even avid followers of the same-sex ballroom circuit can attest that while same-sex partner dancing can be dynamic and strong and exciting, it just doesn't quite seem to fit.
Aesthetically speaking, if Alida and I take the classic closed ballroom hold ...
this is considered beautiful.
(Laughter) But why not this?
(Laughter) See, the standard image that the leader must be larger and masculine and the follower smaller and feminine -- this is a stumbling point.
TC: So we wanted to look at this from a totally different angle.
So, what if we could keep the idea of lead and follow but toss the idea that this was connected to gender?
Further, what if a couple could lead and follow each other and then switch?
And then switch back?
What if it could be like a conversation, taking turns listening and speaking, just like we do in life?
What if we could dance like that?
We call it "Liquid Lead Dancing."
JF: Let's try this with a Latin dance, salsa.
In salsa, there's a key transitional step, called the cross-body lead.
We use it as punctuation to break up the improvisation.
It can be a little tricky to spot if you're not used to looking for it, so here it is.
One more time for the cheap seats.
(Laughter) And here's the action one more time, nice and slow.
Now, if we apply liquid-lead thinking to this transitional step, the cross-body lead becomes a point where the lead and the follow can switch.
The person following can elect to take over the lead, or the person leading can choose to surrender it, essentially making it a counter-cross-body lead.
Here's how that looks in slow motion.
And here's how it looked when we danced it in the opening dance.
With this simple tweak, the dance moves from being a dictation to a negotiation.
Anyone can lead. Anyone can follow.
And more importantly, you can change your mind.
Now, this is only one example of how this applies, but once the blinkers come off, anything can happen.
TC: Let's look at how Liquid Lead thinking could apply to a classic waltz.
Because, of course, it isn't just a system of switching leads; it's a way of thinking that can actually make the dance itself more efficient.
So: the waltz.
The waltz is a turning dance.
This means that for the lead, you spend half of the dance traveling backwards, completely blind.
And because of the follower's position, basically, no one can see where they're going.
(Laughter) So you're out here on the floor, and then imagine that coming right at you.
JF: Raaaaaah!
(Laughter) TC: There are actually a lot of accidents out there that happen as a result of this blind spot.
But what if the partners were to just allow for a switch of posture for a moment?
A lot of accidents could be avoided.
Even if one person led the whole dance but allowed this switch to happen, it would be a lot safer, while at the same time, offering new aesthetics into the waltz.
Because physics doesn't give a damn about your gender.
(Laughter) JF: Now, we've danced Liquid Lead in clubs, convention centers and as part of "First Dance," the play we created with Lisa, on stages in North America and in Europe.
And it never fails to engage.
I mean, beyond the unusual sight of seeing two men dancing together, it always evokes and engages.
But why?
The secret lies in what made Lisa see our initial demonstration as "political."
It wasn't just that we were switching lead and follow; it's that we stayed consistent in our presence, our personality and our power, regardless of which role we were playing.
We were still us.
And that's where the true freedom lies -- not just the freedom to switch roles, but the freedom from being defined by whichever role you're playing, the freedom to always remain true to yourself.
Forget what a lead is supposed to look like, or a follow.
Be a masculine follow or a feminine lead.
Just be yourself.
Obviously, this applies off the dance floor as well, but on the floor, it gives us the perfect opportunity to update an old paradigm, reinvigorate an old relic, and make it more representative of our era and our current way of being.
TC: Jeff and I dance partner dancing all the time with women and men and we love it.
But we dance with a consciousness that this is a historic form that can produce silence and produce invisibility across the spectrum of identity that we enjoy today.
We invented Liquid Lead as a way of stripping out all the ideas that don't belong to us and taking partner dancing back to what it really always was: the fine art of taking care of each other.
(Music) (Applause)
You are a high-ranking military service member deployed to Afghanistan.
You are responsible for the lives of hundreds of men and women, and your base is under attack.
Incoming mortar rounds are exploding all around you.
Struggling to see through the dust and the smoke, you do your best to assist the wounded and then crawl to a nearby bunker.
Conscious but dazed by the blasts, you lay on your side and attempt to process what has just happened.
As you regain your vision, you see a bloody face staring back at you.
The image is terrifying, but you quickly come to understand it's not real.
This vision continues to visit you multiple times a day and in your sleep.
You choose not to tell anyone for fear of losing your job or being seen as weak.
You give the vision a name, Bloody Face in Bunker, and call it BFIB for short.
You keep BFIB locked away in your mind, secretly haunting you, for the next seven years.
Now close your eyes.
Can you see BFIB?
If you can, you're beginning to see the face of the invisible wounds of war, commonly known as post-traumatic stress disorder and traumatic brain injury.
While I can't say I have post-traumatic stress disorder, I've never been a stranger to it.
When I was a little girl, I would visit my grandparents every summer.
It was my grandfather who introduced me to the effects of combat on the psyche.
While my grandfather was serving as a Marine in the Korean War, a bullet pierced his neck and rendered him unable to cry out.
He watched as a corpsman passed him over, declaring him a goner, and then leaving him to die.
Years later, after his physical wounds had healed and he'd returned home, he rarely spoke of his experiences in waking life.
But at night I would hear him shouting obscenities from his room down the hall.
And during the day I would announce myself as I entered the room, careful not to startle or agitate him.
He lived out the remainder of his days isolated and tight-lipped, never finding a way to express himself, and I didn't yet have the tools to guide him.
I wouldn't have a name for my grandfather's condition until I was in my 20s.
Seeking a graduate degree in art therapy, I naturally gravitated towards the study of trauma.
And while sitting in class learning about post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD for short, my mission to help service members who suffered like my grandfather began to take form.
We've had various names for post-traumatic stress throughout the history of war: homesickness, soldier's heart, shell shock, thousand-yard stare, for instance.
And while I was pursuing my degree, a new war was raging, and thanks to modern body armor and military vehicles, service members were surviving blast injuries they wouldn't have before.
But the invisible wounds were reaching new levels, and this pushed military doctors and researchers to try and truly understand the effects that traumatic brain injury, or TBI, and PTSD have on the brain.
Due to advances in technology and neuroimaging, we now know there's an actual shutdown in the Broca's, or the speech-language area of the brain, after an individual experiences trauma.
This physiological change, or speechless terror as it's often called, coupled with mental health stigma, the fear of being judged or misunderstood, possibly even removed from their current duties, has led to the invisible struggles of our servicemen and women.
Generation after generation of veterans have chosen not to talk about their experiences, and suffer in solitude.
I had my work cut out for me when I got my first job as an art therapist at the nation's largest military medical center, Walter Reed.
After working for a few years on a locked-in patient psychiatric unit, I eventually transferred to the National Intrepid Center of Excellence, NICoE, which leads TBI care for active duty service members.
Now, I believed in art therapy, but I was going to have to convince service members, big, tough, strong, manly military men, and some women too, to give art-making as a psychotherapeutic intervention a try.
The results have been nothing short of spectacular.
Vivid, symbolic artwork is being created by our servicemen and women, and every work of art tells a story.
We've observed that the process of art therapy bypasses the speech-language issue with the brain.
Art-making accesses the same sensory areas of the brain that encode trauma.
Service members can use the art-making to work through their experiences in a nonthreatening way.
They can then apply words to their physical creations, reintegrating the left and the right hemispheres of the brain.
Now, we've seen this can work with all forms of art -- drawing, painting, collage -- but what seems to have the most impact is mask-making.
Finally, these invisible wounds don't just have a name, they have a face.
And when service members create these masks, it allows them to come to grips, literally, with their trauma.
And it's amazing how often that enables them to break through the trauma and start to heal.
Remember BFIB?
That was a real experience for one of my patients, and when he created his mask, he was able to let go of that haunting image.
Initially, it was a daunting process for the service member, but eventually he began to think of BFIB as the mask, not his internal wound, and he would go to leave each session, he would hand me the mask, and say, "Melissa, take care of him."
Eventually, we placed BFIB in a box to further contain him, and when the service member went to leave the NICoE, he chose to leave BFIB behind.
A year later, he had only seen BFIB twice, and both times BFIB was smiling and the service member didn't feel anxious.
Now, whenever that service member is haunted by some traumatic memory, he continues to paint.
Every time he paints these disturbing images, he sees them less or not at all.
Philosophers have told us for thousands of years that the power to create is very closely linked to the power to destroy.
Now science is showing us that the part of the brain that registers a traumatic wound can be the part of the brain where healing happens too.
And art therapy is showing us how to make that connection.
We asked one of our service members to describe how mask-making impacted his treatment, and this is what he had to say.
(Video) Service Member: You sort of just zone out into the mask.
You zone out into the drawing, and for me, it just released the block, so I was able to do it.
And then when I looked at it after two days, I was like, "Holy crap, here's the picture, here's the key, here's the puzzle," and then from there it just soared.
I mean, from there my treatment just when out of sight, because they were like, Kurt, explain this, explain this.
And for the first time in 23 years, I could actually talk about stuff openly to, like, anybody.
I could talk to you about it right now if I wanted to, because it unlocked it.
It's just amazing.
And it allowed me to put 23 years of PTSD and TBI stuff together in one place that has never happened before.
Sorry.
Melissa Walker: Over the past five years, we've had over 1,000 masks made.
It's pretty amazing, isn't it?
Thank you.
(Applause) I wish I could have shared this process with my grandfather, but I know that he would be thrilled that we are finding ways to help today's and tomorrow's service members heal, and finding the resources within them that they can call upon to heal themselves.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Let's talk about trust.
