As my high school algebra teacher used to say, show your math, because if I don't know what steps you took, I don't know what steps you didn't take, and if I don't know what questions you asked, I don't know what questions you didn't ask.
And it means asking ourselves, really, the hardest question of all: Did the data really show us this, or does the result make us feel more successful and more comfortable?
So the Health Media Collaboratory, at the end of their project, they were able to find that 87 percent of tweets about those very graphic and disturbing anti-smoking ads expressed fear, but did they conclude that they actually made people stop smoking?
No. It's science, not magic.
So if we are to unlock the power of data, we don't have to go blindly into Orwell's vision of a totalitarian future, or Huxley's vision of a trivial one, or some horrible cocktail of both.
What we have to do is treat critical thinking with respect and be inspired by examples like the Health Media Collaboratory, and as they say in the superhero movies, let's use our powers for good.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I experienced my first coup d'état at the age of four.
Because of the coup d'état, my family had to leave my native home of Ghana and move to the Gambia.
As luck would have it, six months after we arrived, they too had a military coup.
I vividly remember being woken up in the middle of the night and gathering the few belongings we could and walking for about two hours to a safe house.
For a week, we slept under our beds because we were worried that bullets might fly through the window.
Then, at the age of eight, we moved to Botswana.
This time, it was different.
There were no coups.
Everything worked. Great education.
They had such good infrastructure that even at the time they had a fiber-optic telephone system, long before it had reached Western countries.
The only thing they didn't have is that they didn't have their own national television station, and so I remember watching TV from neighboring South Africa, and watching Nelson Mandela in jail being offered a chance to come out if he would give up the apartheid struggle.
But he didn't. He refused to do that until he actually achieved his objective of freeing South Africa from apartheid.
And I remember feeling how just one good leader could make such a big difference in Africa.
Then at the age of 12, my family sent me to high school in Zimbabwe.
Initially, this too was amazing: growing economy, excellent infrastructure, and it seemed like it was a model for economic development in Africa.
I graduated from high school in Zimbabwe and I went off to college.
Six years later, I returned to the country.
Everything was different.
It had shattered into pieces.
Millions of people had emigrated, the economy was in a shambles, and it seemed all of a sudden that 30 years of development had been wiped out.
How could a country go so bad so fast?
Most people would agree that it's all because of leadership.
One man, President Robert Mugabe, is almost single-handedly responsible for having destroyed this country.
Now, all these experiences of living in different parts of Africa growing up did two things to me.
The first is it made me fall in love with Africa.
Everywhere I went, I experienced the wonderful beauty of our continent and saw the resilience and the spirit of our people, and at the time, I realized that I wanted to dedicate the rest of my life to making this continent great.
But I also realized that making Africa great would require addressing this issue of leadership.
You see, all these countries I lived in, the coups d'état and the corruption I'd seen in Ghana and Gambia and in Zimbabwe, contrasted with the wonderful examples I had seen in Botswana and in South Africa of good leadership.
It made me realize that Africa would rise or fall because of the quality of our leaders.
Now, one might think, of course, leadership matters everywhere.
But if there's one thing you take away from my talk today, it is this: In Africa, more than anywhere else in the world, the difference that just one good leader can make is much greater than anywhere else, and here's why.
It's because in Africa, we have weak institutions, like the judiciary, the constitution, civil society and so forth.
So here's a general rule of thumb that I believe in: When societies have strong institutions, the difference that one good leader can make is limited, but when you have weak institutions, then just one good leader can make or break that country.
Let me make it a bit more concrete.
You become the president of the United States.
You think, "Wow, I've arrived.
I'm the most powerful man in the world."
So you decide, perhaps let me pass a law.
All of a sudden, Congress taps you on the shoulder and says, "No, no, no, no, no, you can't do that."
You say, "Let me try this way."
The Senate comes and says, "Uh-uh, we don't think you can do that."
You say, perhaps, "Let me print some money.
I think the economy needs a stimulus."
The central bank governor will think you're crazy.
You might get impeached for that.
But if you become the president of Zimbabwe, and you say, "You know, I really like this job.
I think I'd like to stay in it forever." (Laughter) Well, you just can.
You decide you want to print money.
You call the central bank governor and you say, "Please double the money supply."
He'll say, "Okay, yes, sir, is there anything else I can do for you?"
This is the power that African leaders have, and this is why they make the most difference on the continent.
The good news is that the quality of leadership in Africa has been improving.
We've had three generations of leaders, in my mind.
Generation one are those who appeared in the '50s and '60s.
These are people like Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana and Julius Nyerere of Tanzania.
The legacy they left is that they brought independence to Africa.
They freed us from colonialism, and let's give them credit for that.
They were followed by generation two.
These are people that brought nothing but havoc to Africa.
Think warfare, corruption, human rights abuses.
This is the stereotype of the typical African leader that we typically think of: Mobutu Sese Seko from Zaire, Sani Abacha from Nigeria.
The good news is that most of these leaders have moved on, and they were replaced by generation three.
These are people like the late Nelson Mandela and most of the leaders that we see in Africa today, like Paul Kagame and so forth.
Now these leaders are by no means perfect, but the one thing they have done is that they have cleaned up much of the mess of generation two.
They've stopped the fighting, and I call them the stabilizer generation.
They're much more accountable to their people, they've improved macroeconomic policies, and we are seeing for the first time Africa's growing, and in fact it's the second fastest growing economic region in the world.
So these leaders are by no means perfect, but they are by and large the best leaders we've seen in the last 50 years.
So where to from here?
I believe that the next generation to come after this, generation four, has a unique opportunity to transform the continent.
Specifically, they can do two things that previous generations have not done.
The first thing they need to do is they need to create prosperity for the continent.
Why is prosperity so important?
Because none of the previous generations have been able to tackle this issue of poverty.
Africa today has the fastest growing population in the world, but also is the poorest.
By 2030, Africa will have a larger workforce than China, and by 2050, it will have the largest workforce in the world.
One billion people will need jobs in Africa, so if we don't grow our economies fast enough, we're sitting on a ticking time bomb, not just for Africa but for the entire world.
Let me show you an example of one person who is living up to this legacy of creating prosperity: Laetitia.
Laetitia's a young woman from Kenya who at the age of 13 had to drop out of school because her family couldn't afford to pay fees for her.
So she started her own business rearing rabbits, which happen to be a delicacy in this part of Kenya that she's from.
This business did so well that within a year, she was employing 15 women and was able to generate enough income that she was able to send herself to school, and through these women fund another 65 children to go to school.
The profits that she generated, she used that to build a school, and today she educates 400 children in her community.
And she's just turned 18.
(Applause) Another example is Erick Rajaonary.
Erick comes from the island of Madagascar.
Now, Erick realized that agriculture would be the key to creating jobs in the rural areas of Madagascar, but he also realized that fertilizer was a very expensive input for most farmers in Madagascar.
Madagascar has these very special bats that produce these droppings that are very high in nutrients.
In 2006, Erick quit his job as a chartered accountant and started a company to manufacture fertilizer from the bat droppings.
Today, Erick has built a business that generates several million dollars of revenue, and he employs 70 people full time and another 800 people during the season when the bats drop their droppings the most.
Now, what I like about this story is that it shows that opportunities to create prosperity can be found almost anywhere.
Erick is known as the Batman.
(Laughter) And who would have thought that you would have been able to build a multimillion-dollar business employing so many people just from bat poo?
The second thing that this generation needs to do is to create our institutions.
They need to build these institutions such that we are never held to ransom again by a few individuals like Robert Mugabe.
Now, all of this sounds great, but where are we going to get this generation four from?
Do we just sit and hope that they emerge by chance, or that God gives them to us?
No, I don't think so.
It's too important an issue for us to leave it to chance.
I believe that we need to create African institutions, home-grown, that will identify and develop these leaders in a systematic, practical way.
We've been doing this for the last 10 years through the African Leadership Academy.
Laetitia is one of our young leaders.
Today, we have 700 of them that are being groomed for the African continent, and over the next 50 years, we expect to create 6,000 of them.
But one thing has been troubling me.
We would get about 4,000 applications a year for 100 young leaders that we could take into this academy, and so I saw the tremendous hunger that existed for this leadership training that we're offering.
But we couldn't satisfy it.
So today, I'm announcing for the first time in public an extension to this vision for the African Leadership Academy.
We're building 25 brand new universities in Africa that are going to cultivate this next generation of African leaders.
Each campus will have 10,000 leaders at a time so we'll be educating and developing 250,000 leaders at any given time.
(Applause) Over the next 50 years, this institution will create three million transformative leaders for the continent.
My hope is that half of them will become the entrepreneurs that we need, who will create these jobs that we need, and the other half will go into government and the nonprofit sector, and they will build the institutions that we need.
But they won't just learn academics.
They will also learn how to become leaders, and they will develop their skills as entrepreneurs.
So think of this as Africa's Ivy League, but instead of getting admitted because of your SAT scores or because of how much money you have or which family you come from, the main criteria for getting into this university will be what is the potential that you have for transforming Africa?
But what we're doing is just one group of institutions.
We cannot transform Africa by ourselves.
My hope is that many, many other home-grown African institutions will blossom, and these institutions will all come together with a common vision of developing this next generation of African leaders, generation four, and they will teach them this common message: create jobs, build our institutions.
Nelson Mandela once said, "Every now and then, a generation is called upon to be great.
You can be that great generation."
I believe that if we carefully identify and cultivate the next generation of African leaders, then this generation four that is coming up will be the greatest generation that Africa and indeed the entire world has ever seen.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I suspect that every aid worker in Africa comes to a time in her career when she wants to take all the money for her project — maybe it's a school or a training program — pack it in a suitcase, get on a plane flying over the poorest villages in the country, and start throwing that money out the window.
Because to a veteran aid worker, the idea of putting cold, hard cash into the hands of the poorest people on Earth doesn't sound crazy, it sounds really satisfying.
I had that moment right about the 10-year mark, and luckily, that's also when I learned that this idea actually exists, and it might be just what the aid system needs.
Economists call it an unconditional cash transfer, and it's exactly that: It's cash given with no strings attached.
Governments in developing countries have been doing this for decades, and it's only now, with more evidence and new technology that it's possible to make this a model for delivering aid.
It's a pretty simple idea, right?
Well, why did I spend a decade doing other stuff for the poor?
Honestly, I believed that I could do more good with money for the poor than the poor could do for themselves.
I held two assumptions: One, that poor people are poor in part because they're uneducated and don't make good choices; two is that we then need people like me to figure out what they need and get it to them.
It turns out, the evidence says otherwise.
In recent years, researchers have been studying what happens when we give poor people cash.
Dozens of studies show across the board that people use cash transfers to improve their own lives.
Pregnant women in Uruguay buy better food and give birth to healthier babies.
Sri Lankan men invest in their businesses.
Researchers who studied our work in Kenya found that people invested in a range of assets, from livestock to equipment to home improvements, and they saw increases in income from business and farming one year after the cash was sent.
None of these studies found that people spend more on drinking or smoking or that people work less.
In fact, they work more.
Now, these are all material needs.
In Vietnam, elderly recipients used their cash transfers to pay for coffins.
As someone who wonders if Maslow got it wrong, I find this choice to prioritize spiritual needs deeply humbling.
I don't know if I would have chosen to give food or equipment or coffins, which begs the question: How good are we at allocating resources on behalf of the poor?
Are we worth the cost?
Again, we can look at empirical evidence on what happens when we give people stuff of our choosing.
One very telling study looked at a program in India that gives livestock to the so-called ultra-poor, and they found that 30 percent of recipients had turned around and sold the livestock they had been given for cash.
The real irony is, for every 100 dollars worth of assets this program gave someone, they spent another 99 dollars to do it.
What if, instead, we use technology to put cash, whether from aid agencies or from any one of us directly into a poor person's hands.
Today, three in four Kenyans use mobile money, which is basically a bank account that can run on any cell phone.
A sender can pay a 1.6 percent fee and with the click of a button send money directly to a recipient's account with no intermediaries.
Like the technologies that are disrupting industries in our own lives, payments technology in poor countries could disrupt aid.
It's spreading so quickly that it's possible to imagine reaching billions of the world's poor this way.
That's what we've started to do at GiveDirectly.
We're the first organization dedicated to providing cash transfers to the poor.
We've sent cash to 35,000 people across rural Kenya and Uganda in one-time payments of 1,000 dollars per family.
So far, we've looked for the poorest people in the poorest villages, and in this part of the world, they're the ones living in homes made of mud and thatch, not cement and iron.
So let's say that's your family.
We show up at your door with an Android phone.
We'll get your name, take your photo and a photo of your hut and grab the GPS coordinates.
That night, we send all the data to the cloud, and each piece gets checked by an independent team using, for one example, satellite images.
Then, we'll come back, we'll sell you a basic cell phone if you don't have one already, and a few weeks later, we send money to it.
Something that five years ago would have seemed impossible we can now do efficiently and free of corruption.
The more cash we give to the poor, and the more evidence we have that it works, the more we have to reconsider everything else we give.
Today, the logic behind aid is too often, well, we do at least some good.
When we're complacent with that as our bar, when we tell ourselves that giving aid is better than no aid at all, we tend to invest inefficiently, in our own ideas that strike us as innovative, on writing reports, on plane tickets and SUVs.
What if the logic was, will we do better than cash given directly?
Organizations would have to prove that they're doing more good for the poor than the poor can do for themselves.
Of course, giving cash won't create public goods like eradicating disease or building strong institutions, but it could set a higher bar for how we help individual families improve their lives.
I believe in aid.
I believe most aid is better than just throwing money out of a plane.
I am also absolutely certain that a lot of aid today isn't better than giving directly to the poor.
I hope that one day, it will be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
George and Charlotte Blonsky, who were a married couple living in the Bronx in New York City, invented something.
They got a patent in 1965 for what they call, "a device to assist women in giving birth."
This device consists of a large, round table and some machinery.
When the woman is ready to deliver her child, she lies on her back, she is strapped down to the table, and the table is rotated at high speed.
The child comes flying out through centrifugal force.
If you look at their patent carefully, especially if you have any engineering background or talent, you may decide that you see one or two points where the design is not perfectly adequate. (Laughter) Doctor Ivan Schwab in California is one of the people, one of the main people, who helped answer the question, "Why don't woodpeckers get headaches?"
And it turns out the answer to that is because their brains are packaged inside their skulls in a way different from the way our brains, we being human beings, true, have our brains packaged.
They, the woodpeckers, typically will peck, they will bang their head on a piece of wood thousands of times every day. Every day!
And as far as anyone knows, that doesn't bother them in the slightest.
How does this happen?
Their brain does not slosh around like ours does.
Their brain is packed in very tightly, at least for blows coming right from the front.
Not too many people paid attention to this research until the last few years when, in this country especially, people are becoming curious about what happens to the brains of football players who bang their heads repeatedly.
And the woodpecker maybe relates to that.
There was a paper published in the medical journal The Lancet in England a few years ago called " A man who pricked his finger and smelled putrid for 5 years."
Dr. Caroline Mills and her team received this patient and didn't really know what to do about it.
The man had cut his finger, he worked processing chickens, and then he started to smell really, really bad.
So bad that when he got in a room with the doctors and the nurses, they couldn't stand being in the room with him.
It was intolerable.
They tried every drug, every other treatment they could think of.
After a year, he still smelled putrid.
After two years, still smelled putrid.
Three years, four years, still smelled putrid.
After five years, it went away on its own.
It's a mystery.
In New Zealand, Dr. Lianne Parkin and her team tested an old tradition in her city.
They live in a city that has huge hills, San Francisco-grade hills.
And in the winter there, it gets very cold and very icy.
There are lots of injuries.
The tradition that they tested, they tested by asking people who were on their way to work in the morning, to stop and try something out.
Try one of two conditions.
The tradition is that in the winter, in that city, you wear your socks on the outside of your boots.
And what they discovered by experiment, and it was quite graphic when they saw it, was that it's true.
That if you wear your socks on the outside rather than the inside, you're much more likely to survive and not slip and fall.
Now, I hope you will agree with me that these things I've just described to you, each of them, deserves some kind of prize. (Laughter) And that's what they got, each of them got an Ig Nobel prize.
In 1991, I, together with bunch of other people, started the Ig Nobel prize ceremony.
Every year we give out 10 prizes.
The prizes are based on just one criteria. It's very simple.
It's that you've done something that makes people laugh and then think.
What you've done makes people laugh and then think.
Whatever it is, there's something about it that when people encounter it at first, their only possible reaction is to laugh.
And then a week later, it's still rattling around in their heads and all they want to do is tell their friends about it.
That's the quality we look for.
Every year, we get in the neighborhood of 9,000 new nominations for the Ig Nobel prize.
Of those, consistently between 10 percent and 20 percent of those nominations are people who nominate themselves.
Those self-nominees almost never win.
It's very difficult, numerically, to win a prize if you want to.
Even if you don't want to, it's very difficult numerically.
You should know that when we choose somebody to win an Ig Nobel prize, We get in touch with that person, very quietly.
We offer them the chance to decline this great honor if they want to.
Happily for us, almost everyone who's offered a prize decides to accept.
What do you get if you win an Ig Nobel prize?
Well, you get several things.
You get an Ig Nobel prize.
The design is different every year.
These are always handmade from extremely cheap materials.
You're looking at a picture of the prize we gave last year, 2013.
Most prizes in the world also give their winners some cash, some money.
We don't have any money, so we can't give them.
In fact, the winners have to pay their own way to come to the Ig Nobel ceremony, which most of them do.
Last year, though, we did manage to scrape up some money.
Last year, each of the 10 Ig Nobel prize winners received from us 10 trillion dollars.
A $10 trillion bill from Zimbabwe. (Laughter) You may remember that Zimbabwe had a little adventure for a few years there of inflation.
They ended up printing bills that were in denominations as large as 100 trillion dollars.
The man responsible, who runs the national bank there, by the way, won an Ig Nobel prize in mathematics.
The other thing you win is an invitation to come to the ceremony, which happens at Harvard University.
And when you get there, you come to Harvard's biggest meeting place and classroom.
It fits 1,100 people, it's jammed to the gills, and up on the stage, waiting to shake your hand, waiting to hand you your Ig Nobel prize, are a bunch of Nobel prize winners.
That's the heart of the ceremony.
The winners are kept secret until that moment, even the Nobel laureates who will shake their hand don't know who they are until they're announced.
I am going to tell you about just a very few of the other medical-related prizes we've given.
Keep in mind, we've given 230 prizes.
There are lots of these people who walk among you.
Maybe you have one.
A paper was published about 30 years ago called "Injuries due to Falling Coconuts."
It was written by Dr. Peter Barss, who is Canadian.
Dr. Barss came to the ceremony and explained that as a young doctor, he wanted to see the world.
So he went to Papua New Guinea.
When he got there, he went to work in a hospital, and he was curious what kinds of things happen to people that bring them to the hospital.
He looked through the records, and he discovered that a surprisingly large number of people in that hospital were there because of injuries due to falling coconuts.
One typical thing that happens is people will come from the highlands, where there are not many coconut trees, down to visit their relatives on the coast, where there are lots.
And they'll think that a coconut tree is a fine place to stand and maybe lie down.
A coconut tree that is 90 feet tall, and has coconuts that weigh two pounds that can drop off at any time.
A team of doctors in Europe published a series of papers about colonoscopies.
You're all familiar with colonoscopies, one way or another.
Or in some cases, one way and another.
They, in these papers, explained to their fellow doctors who perform colonoscopies, how to minimize the chance that when you perform a colonoscopy, your patient will explode. (Laughter) Dr. Emmanuel Ben-Soussan one of the authors, flew in from Paris to the ceremony, where he explained the history of this, that in the 1950s, when colonoscopies were becoming a common technique for the first time, people were figuring out how to do it well.
And there were some difficulties at first.
The basic problem, I'm sure you're familiar with, that you're looking inside a long, narrow, dark place.
And so, you want to have a larger space.
You add some gas to inflate it so you have room to look around.
Now, that's added to the gas, the methane gas, that's already inside.
The gas that they used at first, in many cases, was oxygen.
So they added oxygen to methane gas.
And then they wanted to be able to see, they needed light, so they'd put in a light source, which in the 1950s was very hot.
So you had methane gas, which is flammable, oxygen and heat.
They stopped using oxygen pretty quickly. (Laughter) Now it's rare that patients will explode, but it does still happen.
The final thing that I want to tell you about is a prize we gave to Dr. Elena Bodnar.
Dr. Elena Bodnar invented a brassiere that in an emergency can be quickly separated into a pair of protective face masks.
One to save your life, one to save the life of some lucky bystander. (Laughter) Why would someone do this, you might wonder.
Dr. Bodnar came to the ceremony and she explained that she grew up in Ukraine.
She was one of the doctors who treated victims of the Chernobyl power plant meltdown.
And they later discovered that a lot of the worst medical problems came from the particles people breathed in.
So she was always thinking after that about could there be some simple mask that was available everywhere when the unexpected happens.
Years later, she moved to America.
She had a baby, One day she looked, and on the floor, her infant son had picked up her bra, and had her bra on his face.
And that's where the idea came from.
She came to the Ig Nobel ceremony with the first prototype of the bra and she demonstrated: (Laughter) (Applause) ["Paul Krugman, Nobel laureate (2008) in economics"] ["Wolfgang Ketterle, Nobel laureate (2001) in physics"] I myself own an emergency bra. (Laughter) It's my favorite bra, but I would be happy to share it with any of you, should the need arise.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a confession to make.
I am addicted to adventure, and as a young boy, I would rather look outside the window at the birds in the trees and the sky than looking at that two-dimensional chalky blackboard where time stands still and even sometimes dies.
My teachers thought there was something wrong with me because I wasn't paying attention in class.
They didn't find anything specifically wrong with me, other than being slightly dyslexic because I'm a lefty.
But they didn't test for curiosity.
Curiosity, to me, is about our connection with the world, with the universe.
It's about seeing what's around that next coral head or what's around that next tree, and learning more not only about our environment but about ourselves.
Now, my dream of dreams, I want to go explore the oceans of Mars, but until we can go there, I think the oceans still hold quite a few secrets.
As a matter of fact, if you take our planet as the oasis in space that it is and dissect it into a living space, the ocean represents over 3.4 billion cubic kilometers of volume, within which we've explored less than five percent.
And I look at this, and I go, well, there are tools to go deeper, longer and further: submarines, ROVs, even Scuba diving.
But if we're going to explore the final frontier on this planet, we need to live there.
We need to build a log cabin, if you will, at the bottom of the sea.
And so there was a great curiosity in my soul when I went to go visit a TED [Prize winner] by the name of Dr. Sylvia Earle.
Maybe you've heard of her.
Two years ago, she was staked out at the last undersea marine laboratory to try and save it, to try and petition for us not to scrap it and bring it back on land.
We've only had about a dozen or so scientific labs at the bottom of the sea.
There's only one left in the world: it's nine miles offshore and 65 feet down.
It's called Aquarius.
Aquarius, in some fashion, is a dinosaur, an ancient robot chained to the bottom, this Leviathan.
In other ways, it's a legacy.
And so with that visit, I realized that my time is short if I wanted to experience what it was like to become an aquanaut.
When we swam towards this after many moons of torture and two years of preparation, this habitat waiting to invite us was like a new home.
And the point of going down to and living at this habitat was not to stay inside.
It wasn't about living at something the size of a school bus.
It was about giving us the luxury of time outside to wander, to explore, to understand more about this oceanic final frontier.
We had megafauna come and visit us.
This spotted eagle ray is a fairly common sight in the oceans.
But why this is so important, why this picture is up, is because this particular animal brought his friends around, and instead of being the pelagic animals that they were, they started getting curious about us, these new strangers that were moving into the neighborhood, doing things with plankton.
We were studying all sorts of animals and critters, and they got closer and closer to us, and because of the luxury of time, these animals, these residents of the coral reef, were starting to get used to us, and these pelagics that normal travel through stopped.
This particular animal actually circled for 31 full days during our mission.
So mission 31 wasn't so much about breaking records.
It was about that human-ocean connection.
Because of the luxury of time, we were able to study animals such as sharks and grouper in aggregations that we've never seen before.
It's like seeing dogs and cats behaving well together.
Even being able to commune with animals that are much larger than us, such as this endangered goliath grouper who only still resides in the Florida Keys.
Of course, just like any neighbor, after a while, if they get tired, the goliath grouper barks at us, and this bark is so powerful that it actually stuns its prey before it aspirates it all within a split second.
For us, it's just telling us to go back into the habitat and leave them alone.
Now, this wasn't just about adventure.
There was actually a serious note to it.
We did a lot of science, and again, because of the luxury of time, we were able to do over three years of science in 31 days.
In this particular case, we were using a PAM, or, let me just see if I can get this straight, a Pulse Amplitude Modulated Fluorometer.
And our scientists from FIU, MIT, and from Northeastern were able to get a gauge for what coral reefs do when we're not around.
The Pulse Amplitude Modulated Fluorometer, or PAM, gauges the fluorescence of corals as it pertains to pollutants in the water as well as climate change-related issues.
We used all sorts of other cutting-edge tools, such as this sonde, or what I like to call the sponge proctologist, whereby the sonde itself tests for metabolism rates in what in this particular case is a barrel sponge, or the redwoods of the [ocean].
And this gives us a much better gauge of what's happening underwater with regard to climate change-related issues, and how the dynamics of that affect us here on land.
And finally, we looked at predator-prey behavior.
And predator-prey behavior is an interesting thing, because as we take away some of the predators on these coral reefs around the world, the prey, or the forage fish, act very differently.
What we realized is not only do they stop taking care of the reef, darting in, grabbing a little bit of algae and going back into their homes, they start spreading out and disappearing from those particular coral reefs.
Well, within that 31 days, we were able to generate over 10 scientific papers on each one of these topics.
But the point of adventure is not only to learn, it's to be able to share that knowledge with the world, and with that, thanks to a couple of engineers at MIT, we were able to use a prototype camera called the Edgertronic to capture slow-motion video, up to 20,000 frames per second in a little box that's worth 3,000 dollars.
It's available to every one of us.
And that particular camera gives us an insight into what fairly common animals do but we can't even see it in the blink of an eye.
Let me show you a quick video of what this camera does.
You can see the silky bubble come out of our hard hats.
It gives us an insight into some of the animals that we were sitting right next to for 31 days and never normally would have paid attention to, such as hermit crabs.
Now, using a cutting-edge piece of technology that's not really meant for the oceans is not always easy.
We sometimes had to put the camera upside down, cordon it back to the lab, and actually man the trigger from the lab itself.
But what this gives us is the foresight to look at and analyze in scientific and engineering terms some of the most amazing behavior that the human eye just can't pick up, such as this manta shrimp trying to catch its prey, within about .3 seconds.
That punch is as strong as a .22 caliber bullet, and if you ever try to catch a bullet in mid-flight with your eye, impossible.
But now we can see things such as these Christmas tree worms pulling in and fanning out in a way that the eye just can't capture, or in this case, a fish throwing up grains of sand.
This is an actual sailfin goby, and if you look at it in real time, it actually doesn't even show its fanning motion because it's so quick.
One of the most precious gifts that we had underwater is that we had WiFi, and for 31 days straight we were able to connect with the world in real time from the bottom of the sea and share all of these experiences.
Quite literally right there I am Skyping in the classroom with one of the six continents and some of the 70,000 students that we connected every single day to some of these experiences.
As a matter of fact, I'm showing a picture that I took with my smartphone from underwater of a goliath grouper laying on the bottom.
We had never seen that before.
And I dream of the day that we have underwater cities, and maybe, just maybe, if we push the boundaries of adventure and knowledge, and we share that knowledge with others out there, we can solve all sorts of problems.
My grandfather used to say, "People protect what they love."
My father, "How can people protect what they don't understand?"
And I've thought about this my whole life.
Nothing is impossible.
We need to dream, we need to be creative, and we all need to have an adventure in order to create miracles in the darkest of times.
And whether it's about climate change or eradicating poverty or giving back to future generations what we've taken for granted, it's about adventure.
And who knows, maybe there will be underwater cities, and maybe some of you will become the future aquanauts.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Humanity takes center stage at TED, but I would like to add a voice for the animals, whose bodies and minds and spirits shaped us.
Some years ago, it was my good fortune to meet a tribal elder on an island not far from Vancouver.
His name is Jimmy Smith, and he shared a story with me that is told among his people, who call themselves the Kwikwasut'inuxw.
Once upon a time, he told me, all animals on Earth were one.
Even though they look different on the outside, inside, they're all the same, and from time to time they would gather at a sacred cave deep inside the forest to celebrate their unity.
When they arrived, they would all take off their skins.
Raven shed his feathers, bear his fur, and salmon her scales, and then, they would dance.
But one day, a human made it to the cave and laughed at what he saw because he did not understand.
Embarrassed, the animals fled, and that was the last time they revealed themselves this way.
The ancient understanding that underneath their separate identities, all animals are one, has been a powerful inspiration to me.
I like to get past the fur, the feathers and the scales.
I want to get under the skin.
No matter whether I'm facing a giant elephant or a tiny tree frog, my goal is to connect us with them, eye to eye.
You may wonder, do I ever photograph people?
Sure. People are always present in my photos, no matter whether they appear to portray tortoises or cougars or lions.
You just have to learn how to look past their disguise.
As a photographer, I try to reach beyond the differences in our genetic makeup to appreciate all we have in common with every other living thing.
When I use my camera, I drop my skin like the animals at that cave so I can show who they really are.
As animals blessed with the power of rational thought, we can marvel at the intricacies of life.
As citizens of a planet in trouble, it is our moral responsibility to deal with the dramatic loss in diversity of life.
But as humans with hearts, we can all rejoice in the unity of life, and perhaps we can change what once happened in that sacred cave.
Let's find a way to join the dance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Three people are at a dinner party.
Paul, who’s married, is looking at Linda.
Meanwhile, Linda is looking at John, who’s not married.
Is someone who’s married looking at someone who’s not married?
Take a moment to think about it.
Most people answer that there’s not enough information to tell.
And most people are wrong.
Linda must be either married or not married—there are no other options.
So in either scenario, someone married is looking at someone who’s not married.
When presented with the explanation, most people change their minds and accept the correct answer, despite being very confident in their first responses.
Now let’s look at another case.
A 2005 study by Brendan Nyhan and Jason Reifler examined American attitudes regarding the justifications for the Iraq War.
Researchers presented participants with a news article that showed no weapons of mass destruction had been found.
Yet many participants not only continued to believe that WMDs had been found, but they even became more convinced of their original views.
So why do arguments change people’s minds in some cases and backfire in others?
Arguments are more convincing when they rest on a good knowledge of the audience, taking into account what the audience believes, who they trust, and what they value.
Mathematical and logical arguments like the dinner party brainteaser work because even when people reach different conclusions, they’re starting from the same set of shared beliefs.
In 1931, a young, unknown mathematician named Kurt Gödel presented a proof that a logically complete system of mathematics was impossible.
Despite upending decades of work by brilliant mathematicians like Bertrand Russell and David Hilbert, the proof was accepted because it relied on axioms that everyone in the field already agreed on.
Of course, many disagreements involve different beliefs that can’t simply be reconciled through logic.
When these beliefs involve outside information, the issue often comes down to what sources and authorities people trust.
One study asked people to estimate several statistics related to the scope of climate change.
Participants were asked questions, such as “how many of the years between 1995 and 2006 were one of the hottest 12 years since 1850?” After providing their answers, they were presented with data from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, in this case showing that the answer was 11 of the 12 years.
Being provided with these reliable statistics from a trusted official source made people more likely to accept the reality that the earth is warming.
Finally, for disagreements that can’t be definitively settled with statistics or evidence, making a convincing argument may depend on engaging the audience’s values.
For example, researchers have conducted a number of studies where they’ve asked people of different political backgrounds to rank their values.
Liberals in these studies, on average, rank fairness— here meaning whether everyone is treated in the same way—above loyalty.
In later studies, researchers attempted to convince liberals to support military spending with a variety of arguments.
Arguments based on fairness— like that the military provides employment and education to people from disadvantaged backgrounds— were more convincing than arguments based on loyalty— such as that the military unifies a nation.
These three elements— beliefs, trusted sources, and values— may seem like a simple formula for finding agreement and consensus.
The problem is that our initial inclination is to think of arguments that rely on our own beliefs, trusted sources, and values.
And even when we don’t, it can be challenging to correctly identify what’s held dear by people who don’t already agree with us.
The best way to find out is simply to talk to them.
In the course of discussion, you’ll be exposed to counter-arguments and rebuttals.
These can help you make your own arguments and reasoning more convincing and sometimes, you may even end up being the one changing your mind.
Let me tell you a story about a little girl named Naghma.
Naghma lived in a refugee camp with her parents and her eight brothers and sisters.
Every morning, her father would wake up in the hopes he'd be picked for construction work, and on a good month he would earn 50 dollars.
The winter was very harsh, and unfortunately, Naghma's brother died and her mother became very ill.
In desperation, her father went to a neighbor to borrow 2,500 dollars.
After several months of waiting, the neighbor became very impatient, and he demanded that he be paid back.
Unfortunately, Naghma's father didn't have the money, and so the two men agreed to a jirga.
So simply put, a jirga is a form of mediation that's used in Afghanistan's informal justice system.
It's usually presided over by religious leaders and village elders, and jirgas are often used in rural countries like Afghanistan, where there's deep-seated resentment against the formal system.
At the jirga, the men sat together and they decided that the best way to satisfy the debt would be if Naghma married the neighbor's 21-year-old son.
She was six.
Now, stories like Naghma's unfortunately are all too common, and from the comforts of our home, we may look at these stories as another crushing blow to women's rights.
And if you watched Afghanistan on the news, you may have this view that it's a failed state.
However, Afghanistan does have a legal system, and while jirgas are built on long-standing tribal customs, even in jirgas, laws are supposed to be followed, and it goes without saying that giving a child to satisfy a debt is not only grossly immoral, it's illegal.
In 2008, I went to Afghanistan for a justice funded program, and I went there originally on this nine-month program to train Afghan lawyers.
In that nine months, I went around the country and I talked to hundreds of people that were locked up, and I talked to many businesses that were also operating in Afghanistan.
And within these conversations, I started hearing the connections between the businesses and the people, and how laws that were meant to protect them were being underused, while gross and illegal punitive measures were overused.
And so this put me on a quest for justness, and what justness means to me is using laws for their intended purpose, which is to protect.
The role of laws is to protect.
So as a result, I decided to open up a private practice, and I became the first foreigner to litigate in Afghan courts.
Throughout this time, I also studied many laws, I talked to many people, I read up on many cases, and I found that the lack of justness is not just a problem in Afghanistan, but it's a global problem.
And while I originally shied away from representing human rights cases because I was really concerned about how it would affect me both professionally and personally, I decided that the need for justness was so great that I couldn't continue to ignore it.
And so I started representing people like Naghma pro bono also.
Now, since I've been in Afghanistan and since I've been an attorney for over 10 years, I've represented from CEOs of Fortune 500 companies to ambassadors to little girls like Naghma, and with much success.
And the reason for my success is very simple: I work the system from the inside out and use the laws in the ways that they're intended to be used.
I find that achieving justness in places like Afghanistan is difficult, and there's three reasons.
The first reason is that simply put, people are very uneducated as to what their legal rights were, and I find that this is a global problem.
The second issue is that even with laws on the books, it's often superseded or ignored by tribal customs, like in the first jirga that sold Naghma off.
And the third problem with achieving justness is that even with good, existing laws on the books, there aren't people or lawyers that are willing to fight for those laws.
And that's what I do: I use existing laws, often unused laws, and I work those to the benefits of my clients.
We all need to create a global culture of human rights and be investors in a global human rights economy, and by working in this mindset, we can significantly improve justice globally.
Now let's get back to Naghma.
Several people heard about this story, and so they contacted me because they wanted to pay the $2,500 debt.
And it's not just that simple; you can't just throw money at this problem and think that it's going to disappear.
That's not how it works in Afghanistan.
So I told them I'd get involved, but in order to get involved, what needed to happen is a second jirga needed to be called, a jirga of appeals.
And so in order for that to happen, we needed to get the village elders together, we needed to get the tribal leaders together, the religious leaders.
Naghma's father needed to agree, the neighbor needed to agree, and also his son needed to agree.
And I thought, if I'm going to get involved in this thing, then they also need to agree that I preside over it.
So, after hours of talking and tracking them down, and about 30 cups of tea, they finally agreed that we could sit down for a second jirga, and we did.
And what was different about the second jirga is this time, we put the law at the center of it, and it was very important for me that they all understood that Naghma had a right to be protected.
And at the end of this jirga, it was ordered by the judge that the first decision was erased, and that the $2,500 debt was satisfied, and we all signed a written order where all the men acknowledged that what they did was illegal, and if they did it again, that they would go to prison.
Most — (Applause) Thanks.
And most importantly, the engagement was terminated and Naghma was free.
Protecting Naghma and her right to be free protects us.
Now, with my job, there's above-average amount of risks that are involved.
I've been temporarily detained.
I've been accused of running a brothel, accused of being a spy.
I've had a grenade thrown at my office.
It didn't go off, though.
But I find that with my job, that the rewards far outweigh the risks, and as many risks as I take, my clients take far greater risks, because they have a lot more to lose if their cases go unheard, or worse, if they're penalized for having me as their lawyer.
With every case that I take, I realize that as much as I'm standing behind my clients, that they're also standing behind me, and that's what keeps me going.
Law as a point of leverage is crucial in protecting all of us.
Journalists are very vital in making sure that that information is given to the public.
Too often, we receive information from journalists but we forget how that information was given.
This picture is a picture of the British press corps in Afghanistan.
It was taken a couple of years ago by my friend David Gill.
According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, since 2010, there have been thousands of journalists who have been threatened, injured, killed, detained.
Too often, when we get this information, we forget who it affects or how that information is given to us.
What many journalists do, both foreign and domestic, is very remarkable, especially in places like Afghanistan, and it's important that we never forget that, because what they're protecting is not only our right to receive that information but also the freedom of the press, which is vital to a democratic society.
Matt Rosenberg is a journalist in Afghanistan.
He works for The New York Times, and unfortunately, a few months ago he wrote an article that displeased people in the government.
As a result, he was temporarily detained and he was illegally exiled out of the country.
I represent Matt, and after dealing with the government, I was able to get legal acknowledgment that in fact he was illegally exiled, and that freedom of the press does exist in Afghanistan, and there's consequences if that's not followed.
And I'm happy to say that as of a few days ago, the Afghan government formally invited him back into the country and they reversed their exile order of him.
(Applause) If you censor one journalist, then it intimidates others, and soon nations are silenced.
It's important that we protect our journalists and freedom of the press, because that makes governments more accountable to us and more transparent.
Protecting journalists and our right to receive information protects us.
Our world is changing. We live in a different world now, and what were once individual problems are really now global problems for all of us.
Two weeks ago, Afghanistan had its first democratic transfer of power and elected president Ashraf Ghani, which is huge, and I'm very optimistic about him, and I'm hopeful that he'll give Afghanistan the changes that it needs, especially within the legal sector.
We live in a different world.
We live in a world where my eight-year-old daughter only knows a black president.
There's a great possibility that our next president will be a woman, and as she gets older, she may question, can a white guy be president?
(Laughter) (Applause) Our world is changing, and we need to change with it, and what were once individual problems are problems for all of us.
According to UNICEF, there are currently over 280 million boys and girls who are married under the age of 15.
Two hundred and eighty million.
Child marriages prolong the vicious cycle of poverty, poor health, lack of education.
At the age of 12, Sahar was married.
She was forced into this marriage and sold by her brother.
When she went to her in-laws' house, they forced her into prostitution.
Because she refused, she was tortured.
She was severely beaten with metal rods.
They burned her body.
They tied her up in a basement and starved her.
They used pliers to take out her fingernails.
At one point, she managed to escape from this torture chamber to a neighbor's house, and when she went there, instead of protecting her, they dragged her back to her husband's house, and she was tortured even worse.
When I met first Sahar, thankfully, Women for Afghan Women gave her a safe haven to go to.
As a lawyer, I try to be very strong for all my clients, because that's very important to me, but seeing her, how broken and very weak as she was, was very difficult.
It took weeks for us to really get to what happened to her when she was in that house, but finally she started opening up to me, and when she opened up, what I heard was she didn't know what her rights were, but she did know she had a certain level of protection by her government that failed her, and so we were able to talk about what her legal options were.
And so we decided to take this case to the Supreme Court.
Now, this is extremely significant, because this is the first time that a victim of domestic violence in Afghanistan was being represented by a lawyer, a law that's been on the books for years and years, but until Sahar, had never been used.
In addition to this, we also decided to sue for civil damages, again using a law that's never been used, but we used it for her case.
So there we were at the Supreme Court arguing in front of 12 Afghan justices, me as an American female lawyer, and Sahar, a young woman who when I met her couldn't speak above a whisper.
She stood up, she found her voice, and my girl told them that she wanted justice, and she got it.
At the end of it all, the court unanimously agreed that her in-laws should be arrested for what they did to her, her fucking brother should also be arrested for selling her — (Applause) — and they agreed that she did have a right to civil compensation.
What Sahar has shown us is that we can attack existing bad practices by using the laws in the ways that they're intended to be used, and by protecting Sahar, we are protecting ourselves.
After having worked in Afghanistan for over six years now, a lot of my family and friends think that what I do looks like this.
(Laughter) But in all actuality, what I do looks like this.
Now, we can all do something.
I'm not saying we should all buy a plane ticket and go to Afghanistan, but we can all be contributors to a global human rights economy.
We can create a culture of transparency and accountability to the laws, and make governments more accountable to us, as we are to them.
A few months ago, a South African lawyer visited me in my office and he said, "I wanted to meet you.
I wanted to see what a crazy person looked like."
The laws are ours, and no matter what your ethnicity, nationality, gender, race, they belong to us, and fighting for justice is not an act of insanity.
Businesses also need to get with the program.
A corporate investment in human rights is a capital gain on your businesses, and whether you're a business, an NGO, or a private citizen, rule of law benefits all of us.
And by working together with a concerted mindset, through the people, public and private sector, we can create a global human rights economy and all become global investors in human rights.
And by doing this, we can achieve justness together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I came here to show you the Fotokite.
It's a tethered, flying camera.
But before I do that, I want to tell you a bit about where it came from, what motivated it.
So I was born in Russia, and three years ago, in 2011, there were the Russian federal elections.
There were massive irregularities reported, and people came out to protest, which was very unlikely for Russia.
And no one really knew how significant these protests were, because, for whatever reason, the world media largely ignored it.
Now, there was a group of photographers who kind of flew flying cameras as a hobby — usually photographing things like the Sphinx, the Pyramids — who happened to be right around the corner, and they flew a camera and they took some snapshots, some panoramas of this demonstration.
Just completely independent entity, completely random occurrence, and the image, when I saw it, it really struck me.
Here's one of the panoramas.
So in a single image, you can really see the scale of this event — just the number of people, the colors, the banners.
You just can't consider this insignificant.
All in a single image, which was really cool to me.
And I think, in the future, journalism and many other professions, there are flying cameras already quite commonly out there, but I think, you wait a few months, a few years, and for many professions, it's really going to be a requirement.
And it make sense. It's such a unique perspective.
Nothing really communicates this scale, for example, in context, in a way that this does.
But there are a few hurdles, and they are quite basic and quite fundamental.
One is piloting.
So for this image, they flew a camera, a five kilogram device with an SLR under it.
It's quite heavy, lots of spinning, sharp things.
It's a bit uncomfortable to fly, probably also for the operator.
In fact, you can see that on the back of the pilot's shirt, it says, "No questions until landing" in Russian and in English, because people are curious, and they'll go tap you, and then you lose your focus and things happen.
And these guys are great. They're professionals; they're really careful in what they do.
So in the protests, maybe you noticed, they flew over the river so it was quite safe.
But this doesn't necessarily apply to all people and all conditions, so we really have to make piloting easier.
The other problem is regulations, or rather, the lack of good regulation.
For many good reasons, it's just difficult to come up with common sense laws to regulate flying cameras.
So we already have cameras.
Everyone here, I'm sure, has a smartphone with a camera, right?
There are more and more of them.
You hear about people with Google Glass being attacked.
You hear about, actually, a drone pilot, a hobbyist, was attacked two weeks ago because he was flying near a beach.
Here's some personal input I didn't expect.
Just yesterday, I was attacked by a guy who claimed that I was filming him.
I was checking my email right here — easy way to get input for your talk.
But I think there are better solutions.
I think we have to defuse the situation.
We have to come up with responsible solutions that address the privacy issues and the safety, accountability issues but still give us that perspective.
And this is one potential solution.
So this is the Fotokite.
Well, let me see, it's a quadrocopter, but what's kind of special about it is there's a leash.
It's literally a dog leash. It's very convenient.
And the neat thing about it is, to fly it, there's no joysticks, nothing like this.
You just turn it on and you point in the direction that you want to fly.
You give it a little twist.
That's kind of the way you communicate.
And there it goes.
(Applause) So the interaction is super simple.
It's like a personal flying pet.
It just always maintains a certain angle to you, and if I move around with it, it'll actually follow me naturally.
And of course, we can build on top of this.
So this leash has some additional electronics.
You can turn it on.
And now, it's like telling your dog to fly lower, if you have such a dog. So, I can press a button and manipulate it rather easily.
So I just shifted its position.
And it's really safe.
I don't know about you guys in the front row — (Laughter) — but at least in principle, you have to agree that you feel safer because there is a physical connection.
Live demos are hard, right?
Things go wrong all the time.
But no matter what, this thing will actually prevent this thing from going into you.
What's more, it tells you immediately that I am the one responsible for this device.
You don't have to look for someone controlling it.
Now, I can tell you that it's easy a lot, but I think a really good way to prove that is to grab a second one and launch it.
And if I can do this on stage live, then I can show each and every one of you in five minutes how to operate one of these devices.
So now we have two eyes in the sky. (Applause) And now the trick is getting them back.
(Laughter) So my question now to you is, well, it's a nice solution, it's very accessible, it's safe.
What would you use it for?
What would you use such a camera for in your life?
Thank you.
(Applause)
When Homer’s Iliad was first written down in the 8th century BCE, the story of the Trojan war was already an old one.
From existing oral tradition, audiences knew the tales of the long siege, the epic duels outside the city walls, and the cunning trick that finally won the war.
In the end, the magnificent city was burned to the ground, never to rise again.
But had it ever existed?
By the time the field of archaeology began to take shape in the 19th century, many were skeptical, considering the epic to be pure fiction, a founding myth imagining a bygone heroic era.
But some scholars believed that behind the superhuman feats and divine miracles there must have been a grain of historical truth - a war that was really fought, and a place where it happened.
Frank Calvert was one such believer.
He had spent his youth traveling and learning about ancient civilizations before accompanying his brother Frederick on a diplomatic mission to the northwest Anatolian region of Çanakkale.
It was here that Homer described the Greek encampment at the mouth of the Scamander river.
And it was here that fate brought Frank into contact with a journalist and geologist named Charles Maclaren.
Locals and travelers had long speculated that Troy might’ve stood on one of the surrounding hilltops.
But Maclaren had been one of the first to publish a detailed topographical study of the area.
He believed he had found the site – a 32-meter mound known by the name Hisarlık, derived from the Turkish word for “fortress.” Soon after meeting with him in 1847, the Calverts bought 2,000 acres of farmland that included part of the hill.
Before they could explore any further, the Crimean War broke out and forestalled their archaeological ambitions for several years.
After the war’s end, Frank Calvert began to survey the site, but lacked the funds for a full excavation.
This was where the wealthy German businessman and amateur archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann came in.
At Calvert’s invitation, Schliemann visited the grounds in 1868, and decided to excavate.
Eager to find the ancient city, Schliemann tore massive trenches all the way to the base of the hill.
There, he uncovered a hoard of precious artifacts, jewelry, and metalwork, including two diadems and a copper shield.
Schliemann took full credit for the discovery, announcing that he had found Troy and the treasure of its king Priam.
But the real treasure was elsewhere.
When later archaeologists studied the site, they realized that the mound consisted of no less than nine cities, each built atop the ruins of the last.
The layer Schliemann had uncovered dated back to the Mycenaean Age, more than 1,000 years too early for Homer.
But inside the mound was indeed evidence for a city that had thrived during the Bronze Age, with charred stone, broken arrowheads, and damaged human skeletons suggesting a violent end.
It was Troy VII, contained in the middle layers and now ravaged for a second time by Schliemann’s careless excavation.
The settlement, spanning some 200,000 square meters and home to as many as 10,000 people, thrived until around 1180 BCE.
Its position at the southern entrance of the Dardanelles strait would’ve made a formidable strategic location for both defense and trade.
Most importantly, there are the remains of a massive fortification wall – perhaps the very same one from which Priam and Hector once watched the Greeks approach.
Of course, it’s difficult to be certain that these ruins are the true remains of ancient Troy, and scholars still dispute whether the Trojan War as described by Homer ever happened.
Yet the evidence is strong enough that UNESCO has labelled Hisarlık the archeological site of Troy.
Regardless of its identity, thanks to persistence, a bit of faith, and a lot of research, archaeologists are bringing the long-buried secrets of an ancient, lost city to light.
I'm going to talk about two stories today.
One is how we need to use market-based pricing to affect demand and use wireless technologies to dramatically reduce our emissions in the transportation sector.
And the other is that there is an incredible opportunity if we choose the right wireless technologies; how we can generate a new engine for economic growth and dramatically reduce C02 in the other sectors.
I'm really scared.
We need to reduce C02 emissions in ten to fifteen years by 80 percent in order to avert catastrophic effects.
And I am astounded that I'm standing here to tell you that.
What are catastrophic effects? A three degree centigrade climate change rise that will result in 50 percent species extinction.
It's not a movie. This is real life.
And I'm really worried, because when people talk about cars -- which I know something about -- the press and politicians and people in this room are all thinking, "Let's use fuel-efficient cars."
If we started today, 10 years from now, at the end of this window of opportunity, those fuel-efficient cars will reduce our fossil fuel needs by four percent.
That is not enough.
But now I'll talk about some more pleasant things.
Here are some ways that we can make some dramatic changes.
So, Zipcar is a company that I founded seven years ago, but it's an example of something called car sharing.
What Zipcar does is we park cars throughout dense urban areas for members to reserve, by the hour and by the day, instead of using their own car.
How does it feel to be a person using a Zipcar?
It means that I pay only for what I need.
All those hours when a car is sitting idle, I'm not paying for it.
It means that I can choose a car exactly for that particular trip.
So, here's a woman that reserved MiniMia, and she had her day.
I can take a BMW when I'm seeing clients.
I can drive my Toyota Element when I'm going to go on that surfing trip.
And the other remarkable thing is it's, I think, the highest status of car ownership.
Not only do I have a fleet of cars available to me in seven cities around the world that I can have at my beck and call, but heaven forbid I would ever maintain or deal with the repair or have anything to do with it.
It's like the car that you always wanted that your mom said that you couldn't have.
I get all the good stuff and none of the bad.
So, what is the social result of this?
The social result is that today's Zipcar has 100,000 members driving 3,000 cars parked in 3,000 parking spaces.
Instead of driving 12,000 miles a year, which is what the average city dweller does, they drive 500 miles a year. Are they happy?
The company has been doubling in size ever since I founded it, or greater.
People adore the company. And it's better, you know? They like it.
So, how is it that people went from the 12,000 miles a year to 500 miles?
It's because they said, "It's eight to 10 dollars an hour and 65 dollars a day.
If I'm going to go buy some ice cream, do I really want to spend eight dollars to go buy the ice cream? Or maybe I'll do without.
Maybe I would have bought the ice cream when I did some other errand."
So, people really respond very quickly to it, to prices.
And the last point I want to make is Zipcar would never be possible without technology.
It required that it was completely trivial: that it takes 30 seconds to reserve a car, go get it, drive it.
And for me, as a service provider, I would never be able to provide you a car for an hour if the transaction cost was anything.
So, without these wireless technologies, this, as a concept, could never happen.
So, here's another example. This company is GoLoco -- I'm launching it in about three weeks -- and I hope to do for ridesharing what I did for car sharing.
This will apply to people across all of America.
Today, 75 percent of the trips are single-occupancy vehicles, yet 12 percent of trips to work are currently carpool.
And I think that we can apply social networks and online payment systems to completely change how people feel about ridesharing and make that trip much more efficient.
And so when I think about the future, people will be thinking that sharing the ride with someone is this incredibly great social event out of their day.
You know, how did you get to TED? You went with other TEDsters.
How fabulous. Why would you ever want to go by yourself in your own car?
How did you go food shopping? You went with your neighbor, what a great social time.
You know it's going to really transform how we feel about travel, and it will also, I think, enhance our freedom of mobility.
Where can I go today and who can I do it with?
Those are the types of things that you will look at and feel.
And the social benefits: the rate of single-occupancy vehicles is, I told you, 75 percent; I think we can get that down to 50 percent.
The demand for parking, of course, is down, congestion and the CO2 emissions.
One last piece about this, of course, is that it's enabled by wireless technologies.
And it's the cost of driving that's making people want to be able to do this.
The average American spends 19 percent of their income on their car, and there's a pressure for them to reduce that cost, yet they have no outlet today.
So, the last example of this is congestion pricing, very famously done in London.
It's when you charge a premium for people to drive on congested roads.
In London, the day they turned the congestion pricing on, there was a 25 percent decrease in congestion overnight, and that's persisted for the four years in which they've been doing congestion pricing.
And again, do people like the outcome?
Ken Livingstone was reelected.
So again, we can see that price plays an enormous role in people's willingness to reduce their driving behavior.
We've tripled the miles that we drive since 1970 and doubled them since 1982.
There's a huge slack in that system; with the right pricing we can undo that.
Congestion pricing is being discussed in every major city around the world and is, again, wirelessly enabled.
You weren't going to put tollbooths around the city of London and open and shut those gates.
And what congestion pricing is is that it's a technology trial and a psychological trial for something called road pricing.
And road pricing is where we're all going to have to go, because today we pay for our maintenance and wear and tear on our cars with gas taxes.
And as we get our cars more fuel-efficient, that's going to be reducing the amount of revenue that you get off of those gas taxes, so we need to charge people by the mile that they drive.
Whatever happens with congestion pricing and those technologies will be happening with road pricing.
Why do we travel too much?
Car travel is underpriced and therefore we over-consumed.
We need to put this better market feedback.
And if we have it, you'll decide how many miles to drive, what mode of travel, where to live and work.
And wireless technologies make this real-time loop possible.
So, I want to move now to the second part of my story, which is: when are we going to start doing this congestion pricing? Road pricing is coming.
When are we going to do it? Are we going to wait 10 to 15 years for this to happen or are we going to finally have this political will to make it happen in the next two years?
Because I'm going to say, that is going to be the tool that's going to turn our usage overnight.
And what kind of wireless technology are we going to use?
This is my big vision.
There is a tool that can help us bridge the digital divide, respond to emergencies, get traffic moving, provide a new engine for economic growth and dramatically reduce CO2 emissions in every sector.
And this is a moment from "The Graduate." Do you remember this moment?
You guys are going to be the handsome young guy and I'm going to be the wise businessman.
"I want to say one word to you, just one word."
"Yes, sir?" "Are you listening?" "Yes I am."
"Ad-hoc peer-to-peer self-configuring wireless networks."
(Laughter) These are also called mesh networks.
And in a mesh, every device contributes to and expands the network, and I think you might have heard a little bit about it before.
I'm going to give you some examples.
You'll be hearing later today from Alan Kay.
These laptops, when a child opens them up, they communicate with every single child in the classroom, within that school, within that village.
And what is the cost of that communication system?
Zero dollars a month.
Here's another example: in New Orleans, video cameras were mesh-enabled so that they could monitor crime in the downtown French Quarter.
When the hurricane happened, the only communication system standing was the mesh network.
Volunteers flew in, added a whole bunch of devices, and for the next 12 months, mesh networks were the only wireless that was happening in New Orleans.
Another example is in Portsmouth, U.K.
They mesh-enabled 300 buses and they speak to these smart terminals.
You can look at the terminal and be able to see precisely where your bus is on the street and when it's coming, and you can buy your tickets in real time.
Again, all mesh-enabled. Monthly communication cost: zero.
So, the beauty of mesh networks: you can have these very low-cost devices.
Zero ongoing communication costs. Highly scalable; you can just keep adding them, and as in Katrina, you can keep subtracting them -- as long as there's some, we can still communicate.
They're resilient; their redundancy is built into this fabulous decentralized design.
What are the incredible weaknesses?
There isn't anybody in Washington lobbying to make it happen -- or in those municipalities, to build out their cities with these wireless networks -- because there's zero ongoing communications cost.
So, the examples that I gave you are these islands of mesh networks, and networks are interesting only as they are big.
How do we create a big network?
Are you guys ready again -- "The Graduate"?
This time you will still play the handsome young thing, but I'll be the sexy woman.
These are the next two lines in the movie.
"Where did you do it?" "In his car."
So you know, when you stick this idea ... (Laughter) where would we expect me, Robin Chase, to be thinking is imagine if we put a mesh-network device in every single car across America.
We could have a coast-to-coast, free wireless communication system.
I guess I just want you to think about that.
And why is this going to happen? Because we're going to do congestion pricing, we are going to do road tolls, gas taxes are going to become road pricing.
These things are going to happen.
What's the wireless technology we're going to use?
Maybe we should use a good one. When are we going to do it?
Maybe we shouldn't wait for the 10 or 15 years for this to happen.
We should pull it forward.
So, I'd like us to launch the wireless Internet interstate wireless mesh system, and require that this network be accessible to everyone, with open standards.
Right now in the transportation sector, we're creating these wireless devices -- I guess you guys might have Fast Pass here or Easy Lane -- that are single-purpose devices in these closed networks.
What is the point?
We're transferring just a few little data bits when we're doing road controlling, road pricing.
We have this incredible excess capacity.
So, we can provide the lowest-cost means of going wireless coast-to-coast, we can have resilient nationwide communication systems, we have a new tool for creating efficiencies in all sectors.
Imagine what happens when the cost of getting information from anywhere to anywhere is close to zero.
What you can do with that tool: we can create an economic engine.
Information should be free, and access to information should be free, and we should be charging people for carbon.
I think this is a more powerful tool than the Interstate Highway Act, and I think this is as important and world changing to our economy as electrification.
And if I had my druthers, we would have an open-source version in addition to open standards.
And this open-source version means that it could be -- if we did a brilliant job of it -- it could be used around the world very quickly.
So, going back to one of my earlier thoughts.
Imagine if every one of these buses in Lagos was part of the mesh network.
When I went this morning to Larry Brilliant's TEDTalk prize -- his fabulous networks -- imagine if there was an open-source mesh communications device that can be put into those networks, to make all that happen.
And we can be doing it if we could just get over the fact that this little slice of things is going to be for free.
We could make billions of dollars on top of it, but this one particular slice of communications needs to be open source.
So, let's take control of this nightmare: implement a gas tax immediately; transition across the nation to road-tolling with this wireless mesh; require that the mesh be open to all, with open standards; and, of course, use mesh networks.
Thank you. (Applause)
I just met you on a bus, and we would really like to get to know each other, but I've got to get off at the next stop, so you're going to tell me three things about yourself that just define you as a person, three things about yourself that will help me understand who you are, three things that just get to your very essence.
And what I'm wondering is, of those three things, is any one of them surviving some kind of trauma?
Cancer survivor, rape survivor, Holocaust survivor, incest survivor.
Ever notice how we tend to identify ourselves by our wounds?
And where I have seen this survivor identity have the most consequences is in the cancer community.
And I've been around this community for a long time, because I've been a hospice and a hospital chaplain for almost 30 years.
And in 2005, I was working at a big cancer center when I received the news that my mother had breast cancer.
And then five days later, I received the news that I had breast cancer.
My mother and I can be competitive — (Laughter) — but I was really not trying to compete with her on this one.
And in fact, I thought, well, if you have to have cancer, it's pretty convenient to be working at a place that treats it.
But this is what I heard from a lot of outraged people.
What?
You're the chaplain.
You should be immune.
Like, maybe I should have just gotten off with a warning instead of an actual ticket, because I'm on the force.
So I did get my treatment at the cancer center where I worked, which was amazingly convenient, and I had chemotherapy and a mastectomy, and a saline implant put in, and so before I say another word, let me just say right now, this is the fake one. (Laughter) I have found that I need to get that out of the way, because I'll see somebody go "Oh, I know it's this one."
And then I'll move or I'll gesture and they'll go, "No, it's that one."
So now you know.
I learned a lot being a patient, and one of the surprising things was that only a small part of the cancer experience is about medicine.
Most of it is about feelings and faith and losing and finding your identity and discovering strength and flexibility you never even knew you had.
It's about realizing that the most important things in life are not things at all, but relationships, and it's about laughing in the face of uncertainty and learning that the way to get out of almost anything is to say, "I have cancer."
So the other thing I learned was that I don't have to take on "cancer survivor" as my identity, but, boy, are there powerful forces pushing me to do just that.
Now, don't, please, misunderstand me.
Cancer organizations and the drive for early screening and cancer awareness and cancer research have normalized cancer, and this is a wonderful thing.
We can now talk about cancer without whispering.
We can talk about cancer and we can support one another.
But sometimes, it feels like people go a little overboard and they start telling us how we're going to feel.
So about a week after my surgery, we had a houseguest.
That was probably our first mistake.
And keep in mind that at this point in my life I had been a chaplain for over 20 years, and issues like dying and death and the meaning of life, these are all things I'd been yakking about forever.
So at dinner that night, our houseguest proceeds to stretch his arms up over his head, and say, "You know, Deb, now you're really going to learn what's important.
Yes, you are going to make some big changes in your life, and now you're going to start thinking about your death.
Yep, this cancer is your wakeup call."
Now, these are golden words coming from someone who is speaking about their own experience, but when someone is telling you how you are going to feel, it's instant crap.
The only reason I did not kill him with my bare hands was because I could not lift my right arm.
But I did say a really bad word to him, followed by a regular word, that — (Laughter) — made my husband say, "She's on narcotics."
(Laughter) And then after my treatment, it just felt like everyone was telling me what my experience was going to mean.
"Oh, this means you're going to be doing the walk."
"Oh, this means you're coming to the luncheon."
"This means you're going to be wearing the pink ribbon and the pink t-shirt and the headband and the earrings and the bracelet and the panties."
Panties. No, seriously, google it.
(Laughter) How is that raising awareness?
Only my husband should be seeing my panties.
(Laughter) He's pretty aware of cancer already.
It was at that point where I felt like, oh my God, this is just taking over my life.
And that's when I told myself, claim your experience.
Don't let it claim you.
We all know that the way to cope with trauma, with loss, with any life-changing experience, is to find meaning.
But here's the thing: No one can tell us what our experience means.
We have to decide what it means.
And it doesn't have to be some gigantic, extroverted meaning.
We don't all have to start a foundation or an organization or write a book or make a documentary.
Meaning can be quiet and introverted.
Maybe we make one small decision about our lives that can bring about big change.
Many years ago, I had a patient, just a wonderful young man who was loved by the staff, and so it was something of a shock to us to realize that he had no friends.
He lived by himself, he would come in for chemotherapy by himself, he would receive his treatment, and then he'd walk home alone.
And I even asked him. I said, "Hey, how come you never bring a friend with you?"
And he said, "I don't really have any friends."
But he had tons of friends on the infusion floor.
We all loved him, and people were going in and out of his room all the time.
So at his last chemo, we sang him the song and we put the crown on his head and we blew the bubbles, and then I asked him, I said, "So what are you going to do now?"
And he answered, "Make friends."
And he did.
He started volunteering and he made friends there, and he began going to a church and he made friends there, and at Christmas he invited my husband and me to a party in his apartment, and the place was filled with his friends.
Claim your experience.
Don't let it claim you.
He decided that the meaning of his experience was to know the joy of friendship, and then learn to make friends.
So what about you?
How are you going to find meaning in your crappy experience?
It could be a recent one, or it could be one that you've been carrying around for a really long time.
It's never too late to change what it means, because meaning is dynamic.
What it means today may not be what it means a year from now, or 10 years from now.
It's never too late to become someone other than simply a survivor.
Hear how static that word sounds?
Survivor.
No movement, no growth.
Claim your experience.
Don't let it claim you, because if you do, I believe you will become trapped, you will not grow, you will not evolve.
But of course, sometimes it's not outside pressures that cause us to take on that identity of survivor.
Sometimes we just like the perks.
Sometimes there's a payoff.
But then we get stuck.
Now, one of the first things I learned as a chaplain intern was the three C's of the chaplain's job: Comfort, clarify and, when necessary, confront or challenge.
Now, we all pretty much love the comforting and the clarifying.
The confronting, not so much.
One of the other things that I loved about being a chaplain was seeing patients a year, or even several years after their treatment, because it was just really cool to see how they had changed and how their lives had evolved and what had happened to them.
So I was thrilled one day to get a page down into the lobby of the clinic from a patient who I had seen the year before, and she was there with her two adult daughters, who I also knew, for her one year follow-up exam.
So I got down to the lobby, and they were ecstatic because she had just gotten all of her test results back and she was NED: No Evidence of Disease.
Which I used to think meant Not Entirely Dead.
So they were ecstatic, we sat down to visit, and it was so weird, because within two minutes, she started retelling me the story of her diagnosis and her surgery and her chemo, even though, as her chaplain, I saw her every week, and so I knew this story.
And she was using words like suffering, agony, struggle.
And she ended her story with, "I felt crucified."
And at that point, her two daughters got up and said, "We're going to go get coffee."
And they left.
Tell me three things about yourself before the next stop.
People were leaving the bus before she even got to number two or number three.
So I handed her a tissue, and I gave her a hug, and then, because I really cared for this woman, I said, "Get down off your cross."
And she said, "What?"
And I repeated, "Get down off your cross."
And to her credit, she could talk about her reasons for embracing and then clinging to this identity.
It got her a lot of attention.
People were taking care of her for a change.
But now, it was having the opposite effect.
It was pushing people away.
People kept leaving to get coffee.
She felt crucified by her experience, but she didn't want to let that crucified self die.
Now, perhaps you are thinking I was a little harsh with her, so I must tell you that I was speaking out of my own experience.
Many, many years before, I had been fired from a job that I loved, and I would not stop talking about my innocence and the injustice and the betrayal and the deceipt, until finally, just like this woman, people were walking away from me, until I finally realized I wasn't just processing my feelings, I was feeding them.
I didn't want to let that crucified self die.
But we all know that with any resurrection story, you have to die first.
The Christian story, Jesus was dead a whole day in the tomb before he was resurrected.
And I believe that for us, being in the tomb means doing our own deep inner work around our wounds and allowing ourselves to be healed.
We have to let that crucified self die so that a new self, a truer self, is born.
We have to let that old story go so that a new story, a truer story, can be told.
Claim your experience. Don't let it claim you.
What if there were no survivors, meaning, what if people decided to just claim their trauma as an experience instead of taking it on as an identity?
Maybe it would be the end of being trapped in our wounds and the beginning of amazing self-exploration and discovery and growth.
Maybe it would be the start of defining ourselves by who we have become and who we are becoming.
So perhaps survivor was not one of the three things that you would tell me.
No matter.
I just want you all to know that I am really glad that we are on this bus together, and this is my stop.
(Applause)
So this is Anna Hazare, and Anna Hazare may well be the most cutting-edge digital activist in the world today.
And you wouldn't know it by looking at him.
Hazare is a 77-year-old Indian anticorruption and social justice activist.
And in 2011, he was running a big campaign to address everyday corruption in India, a topic that Indian elites love to ignore.
So as part of this campaign, he was using all of the traditional tactics that a good Gandhian organizer would use.
So he was on a hunger strike, and Hazare realized through his hunger that actually maybe this time, in the 21st century, a hunger strike wouldn't be enough.
So he started playing around with mobile activism.
So the first thing he did is he said to people, "Okay, why don't you send me a text message if you support my campaign against corruption?"
So he does this, he gives people a short code, and about 80,000 people do it.
Okay, that's pretty respectable.
But then he decides, "Let me tweak my tactics a little bit."
He says, "Why don't you leave me a missed call?"
Now, for those of you who have lived in the global South, you'll know that missed calls are a really critical part of global mobile culture.
I see people nodding.
People leave missed calls all the time: If you're running late for a meeting and you just want to let them know that you're on the way, you leave them a missed call.
If you're dating someone and you just want to say "I miss you" you leave them a missed call.
So a note for a dating tip here, in some cultures, if you want to please your lover, you call them and hang up. (Laughter) So why do people leave missed calls?
Well, the reason of course is that they're trying to avoid charges associated with making calls and sending texts.
So when Hazare asked people to leave him a missed call, let's have a little guess how many people actually did this?
Thirty-five million.
So this is one of the largest coordinated actions in human history.
It's remarkable.
And this reflects the extraordinary strength of the emerging Indian middle class and the power that their mobile phones bring.
But he used that, Hazare ended up with this massive CSV file of mobile phone numbers, and he used that to deploy real people power on the ground to get hundreds of thousands of people out on the streets in Delhi to make a national point of everyday corruption in India.
It's a really striking story.
So this is me when I was 12 years old.
I hope you see the resemblance.
And I was also an activist, and I have been an activist all my life.
I had this really funny childhood where I traipsed around the world meeting world leaders and Noble prize winners, talking about Third World debt, as it was then called, and demilitarization.
I was a very, very serious child. (Laughter) And back then, in the early '90s, I had a very cutting-edge tech tool of my own: the fax.
And the fax was the tool of my activism.
And at that time, it was the best way to get a message to a lot of people all at once.
I'll give you one example of a fax campaign that I ran.
It was the eve of the Gulf War and I organized a global campaign to flood the hotel, the Intercontinental in Geneva, where James Baker and Tariq Aziz were meeting on the eve of the war, and I thought if I could flood them with faxes, we'll stop the war.
Well, unsurprisingly, that campaign was wholly unsuccessful.
There are lots of reasons for that, but there's no doubt that one sputtering fax machine in Geneva was a little bit of a bandwidth constraint in terms of the ability to get a message to lots of people.
And so, I went on to discover some better tools.
I cofounded Avaaz, which uses the Internet to mobilize people and now has almost 40 million members, and I now run Purpose, which is a home for these kinds of technology-powered movements.
So what's the moral of this story?
Is the moral of this story, you know what, the fax is kind of eclipsed by the mobile phone?
This is another story of tech-determinism?
Well, I would argue that there's actually more to it than that.
I'd argue that in the last 20 years, something more fundamental has changed than just new tech.
I would argue that there has been a fundamental shift in the balance of power in the world.
You ask any activist how to understand the world, and they'll say, "Look at where the power is, who has it, how it's shifting."
And I think we all sense that something big is happening.
So Henry Timms and I — Henry's a fellow movement builder — got talking one day and we started to think, how can we make sense of this new world?
How can we describe it and give it a framework that makes it more useful?
Because we realized that many of the lessons that we were discovering in movements actually applied all over the world in many sectors of our society.
So I want to introduce you to this framework: Old power, meet new power.
And I want to talk to you about what new power is today.
New power is the deployment of mass participation and peer coordination — these are the two key elements — to create change and shift outcomes.
And we see new power all around us.
This is Beppe Grillo he was a populist Italian blogger who, with a minimal political apparatus and only some online tools, won more than 25 percent of the vote in recent Italian elections.
This is Airbnb, which in just a few years has radically disrupted the hotel industry without owning a single square foot of real estate.
This is Kickstarter, which we know has raised over a billion dollars from more than five million people.
Now, we're familiar with all of these models.
But what's striking is the commonalities, the structural features of these new models and how they differ from old power.
Let's look a little bit at this.
Old power is held like a currency.
New power works like a current.
Old power is held by a few.
New power isn't held by a few, it's made by many.
Old power is all about download, and new power uploads.
And you see a whole set of characteristics that you can trace, whether it's in media or politics or education.
So we've talked a little bit about what new power is.
Let's, for a second, talk about what new power isn't.
New power is not your Facebook page.
I assure you that having a social media strategy can enable you to do just as much download as you used to do when you had the radio.
Just ask Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad, I assure you that his Facebook page has not embraced the power of participation.
New power is not inherently positive.
In fact, this isn't an normative argument that we're making, there are many good things about new power, but it can produce bad outcomes.
More participation, more peer coordination, sometimes distorts outcomes and there are some things, like things, for example, in the medical profession that we want new power to get nowhere near.
And thirdly, new power is not the inevitable victor.
In fact, unsurprisingly, as many of these new power models get to scale, what you see is this massive pushback from the forces of old power.
Just look at this really interesting epic struggle going on right now between Edward Snowden and the NSA.
You'll note that only one of the two people on this slide is currently in exile.
And so, it's not at all clear that new power will be the inevitable victor.
That said, keep one thing in mind: We're at the beginning of a very steep curve.
So you think about some of these new power models, right?
These were just like someone's garage idea a few years ago, and now they're disrupting entire industries.
And so, what's interesting about new power, is the way it feeds on itself.
Once you have an experience of new power, you tend to expect and want more of it.
So let's say you've used a peer-to-peer lending platform like Lending Tree or Prosper, then you've figured out that you don't need the bank, and who wants the bank, right?
And so, that experience tends to embolden you it tends to make you want more participation across more aspects of your life.
And what this gives rise to is a set of values.
We talked about the models that new power has engendered — the Airbnbs, the Kickstarters.
What about the values?
And this is an early sketch at what new power values look like.
New power values prize transparency above all else.
It's almost a religious belief in transparency, a belief that if you shine a light on something, it will be better.
And remember that in the 20th century, this was not at all true.
People thought that gentlemen should sit behind closed doors and make comfortable agreements.
New power values of informal, networked governance.
New power folks would never have invented the U.N. today, for better or worse.
New power values participation, and new power is all about do-it-yourself.
In fact, what's interesting about new power is that it eschews some of the professionalization and specialization that was all the rage in the 20th century.
So what's interesting about these new power values and these new power models is what they mean for organizations.
So we've spent a bit of time thinking, how can we plot organizations on a two-by-two where, essentially, we look at new power values and new power models and see where different people sit?
We started with a U.S. analysis, and let me show you some interesting findings.
So the first is Apple.
In this framework, we actually described Apple as an old power company.
That's because the ideology, the governing ideology of Apple is the ideology of the perfectionist product designer in Cupertino.
It's absolutely about that beautiful, perfect thing descending upon us in perfection.
And it does not value, as a company, transparency.
In fact, it's very secretive.
Now, Apple is one of the most succesful companies in the world.
So this shows that you can still pursue a successful old power strategy.
But one can argue that there's real vulnerabilites in that model.
I think another interesting comparison is that of the Obama campaign versus the Obama presidency.
(Applause) Now, I like President Obama, but he ran with new power at his back, right?
And he said to people, we are the ones we've been waiting for.
And he used crowdfunding to power a campaign.
But when he got into office, he governed like more or less all the other presidents did.
And this is a really interesting trend, is when new power gets powerful, what happens?
So this is a framework you should look at and think about where your own organization sits on it.
And think about where it should be in five or 10 years.
So what do you do if you're old power?
Well, if you're there thinking, in old power, this won't happen to us.
Then just look at the Wikipedia entry for Encyclopædia Britannica.
Let me tell you, it's a very sad read.
But if you are old power, the most important thing you can do is to occupy yourself before others occupy you, before you are occupied.
Imagine that a group of your biggest skeptics are camped in the heart of your organization asking the toughest questions and they can see everything inside of your organization.
And ask them, would they like what they see and should our model change?
What about if you're new power?
Is new power kind of just riding the wave to glory?
I would argue no.
I would argue that there are some very real challenges to new power in this nascent phase.
Let's stick with the Occupy Wall Street example for a moment.
Occupy was this incredible example of new power, the purest example of new power.
And yet, it failed to consolidate.
So the energy that it created was great for the meme phase, but they were so committed to participation, that they never got anything done.
And in fact that model means that the challenge for new power is: how do you use institutional power without being institutionalized?
One the other end of the spectra is Uber.
Uber is an amazing, highly scalable new power model.
That network is getting denser and denser by the day.
But what's really interesting about Uber is it hasn't really adopted new power values.
This is a real quote from the Uber CEO recently: He says, "Once we get rid of the dude in the car" — he means drivers — "Uber will be cheaper."
Now, new power models live and die by the strength of their networks.
By whether the drivers and the consumers who use the service actually believe in it.
Because they're not an exercise of top-down perfectionism, they are about the network.
And so, the challenge, and this is why it's in no way surprising, is that Uber's drivers are now unionizing.
It's extraordinary.
Uber's drivers are turning on Uber.
And the challenge for Uber — this isn't an easy situation for them — is that they are locked into a broader superstrcuture that is really old power.
They've raised more than a billion dollars in the capital markets.
Those markets expect a financial return, and they way you get a financial return is by squeezing and squeezing your users and your drivers for more and more value and giving that value to your investors.
So the big question about the future of new power, in my view, is: Will that old power just emerge?
So will new power elites just become old power and squeeze?
Or will that new power base bite back?
Will the next big Uber be co-owned by Uber drivers?
And I think this going to be a very interesting structural question.
Finally, think about new power being more than just an entity that scales things that make us have slightly better consumer experiences.
My call to action for new power is to not be an island.
We have major structural problems in the world today that could benefit enormously from the kinds of mass participation and peer coordination that these new power players know so well how to generate.
And we badly need them to turn their energies and their power to big, what economists might call public goods problems, that are often beyond markets where investors can easily be found.
And I think if we can do that, we might be able to fundamentally change not only human beings' sense of their own agency and power — because I think that's the most wonderful thing about new power, is that people feel more powerful — but we might also be able to change the way we relate to each other and the way we relate to authority and institutions.
And to me, that's absolutely worth trying for.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I grew up diagnosed as phobically shy, and, like at least 20 other people in a room of this size, I was a stutterer.
Do you dare raise your hand?
And it sticks with us. It really does stick with us, because when we are treated that way, we feel invisible sometimes, or talked around and at.
And as I started to look at people, which is mostly all I did, I noticed that some people really wanted attention and recognition.
Remember, I was young then.
So what did they do?
What we still do perhaps too often.
We talk about ourselves.
And yet there are other people I observed who had what I called a mutuality mindset.
In each situation, they found a way to talk about us and create that "us" idea.
So my idea to reimagine the world is to see it one where we all become greater opportunity-makers with and for others.
There's no greater opportunity or call for action for us now than to become opportunity-makers who use best talents together more often for the greater good and accomplish things we couldn't have done on our own.
And I want to talk to you about that, because even more than giving, even more than giving, is the capacity for us to do something smarter together for the greater good that lifts us both up and that can scale.
That's why I'm sitting here.
But I also want to point something else out: Each one of you is better than anybody else at something.
That disproves that popular notion that if you're the smartest person in the room, you're in the wrong room.
(Laughter) So let me tell you about a Hollywood party I went to a couple years back, and I met this up-and-coming actress, and we were soon talking about something that we both felt passionately about: public art.
And she had the fervent belief that every new building in Los Angeles should have public art in it.
She wanted a regulation for it, and she fervently started — who is here from Chicago? — she fervently started talking about these bean-shaped reflective sculptures in Millennium Park, and people would walk up to it and they'd smile in the reflection of it, and they'd pose and they'd vamp and they'd take selfies together, and they'd laugh.
And as she was talking, a thought came to my mind.
I said, "I know someone you ought to meet.
He's getting out of San Quentin in a couple of weeks" — (Laughter) — "and he shares your fervent desire that art should engage and enable people to connect."
He spent five years in solitary, and I met him because I gave a speech at San Quentin, and he's articulate and he's rather easy on the eyes because he's buff.
He had workout regime he did every day.
(Laughter) I think she was following me at that point.
I said, "He'd be an unexpected ally."
And not just that. There's James. He's an architect and he's a professor, and he loves place-making, and place-making is when you have those mini-plazas and those urban walkways and where they're dotted with art, where people draw and come up and talk sometimes.
I think they'd make good allies.
And indeed they were.
They met together. They prepared.
They spoke in front of the Los Angeles City Council.
And the council members not only passed the regulation, half of them came down and asked to pose with them afterwards.
They were startling, compelling and credible.
You can't buy that.
What I'm asking you to consider is what kind of opportunity- makers we might become, because more than wealth or fancy titles or a lot of contacts, it's our capacity to connect around each other's better side and bring it out.
And I'm not saying this is easy, and I'm sure many of you have made the wrong moves too about who you wanted to connect with, but what I want to suggest is, this is an opportunity.
I started thinking about it way back when I was a Wall Street Journal reporter and I was in Europe and I was supposed to cover trends and trends that transcended business or politics or lifestyle.
So I had to have contacts in different worlds very different than mine, because otherwise you couldn't spot the trends.
And third, I had to write the story in a way stepping into the reader's shoes, so they could see how these trends could affect their lives.
That's what opportunity-makers do.
And here's a strange thing: Unlike an increasing number of Americans who are working and living and playing with people who think exactly like them because we then become more rigid and extreme, opportunity-makers are actively seeking situations with people unlike them, and they're building relationships, and because they do that, they have trusted relationships where they can bring the right team in and recruit them to solve a problem better and faster and seize more opportunities.
They're not affronted by differences, they're fascinated by them, and that is a huge shift in mindset, and once you feel it, you want it to happen a lot more.
This world is calling out for us to have a collective mindset, and I believe in doing that.
It's especially important now.
Why is it important now?
Because things can be devised like drones and drugs and data collection, and they can be devised by more people and cheaper ways for beneficial purposes and then, as we know from the news every day, they can be used for dangerous ones.
It calls on us, each of us, to a higher calling.
But here's the icing on the cake: It's not just the first opportunity that you do with somebody else that's probably your greatest, as an institution or an individual.
It's after you've had that experience and you trust each other.
It's the unexpected things that you devise later on you never could have predicted.
For example, Marty is the husband of that actress I mentioned, and he watched them when they were practicing, and he was soon talking to Wally, my friend the ex-con, about that exercise regime.
And he thought, I have a set of racquetball courts.
That guy could teach it.
A lot of people who work there are members at my courts.
They're frequent travelers.
They could practice in their hotel room, no equipment provided.
That's how Wally got hired.
Not only that, years later he was also teaching racquetball.
Years after that, he was teaching the racquetball teachers.
What I'm suggesting is, when you connect with people around a shared interest and action, you're accustomed to serendipitous things happening into the future, and I think that's what we're looking at.
We open ourselves up to those opportunities, and in this room are key players in technology, key players who are uniquely positioned to do this, to scale systems and projects together.
So here's what I'm calling for you to do.
Remember the three traits of opportunity-makers.
Opportunity-makers keep honing their top strength and they become pattern seekers.
They get involved in different worlds than their worlds so they're trusted and they can see those patterns, and they communicate to connect around sweet spots of shared interest.
So what I'm asking you is, the world is hungry.
I truly believe, in my firsthand experience, the world is hungry for us to unite together as opportunity-makers and to emulate those behaviors as so many of you already do — I know that firsthand — and to reimagine a world where we use our best talents together more often to accomplish greater things together than we could on our own.
Just remember, as Dave Liniger once said, "You can't succeed coming to the potluck with only a fork."
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
Thank you. (Applause)
About 12 years ago, I gave up my career in banking to try to make the world a safer place.
This involved a journey into national and global advocacy and meeting some of the most extraordinary people in the world.
In the process, I became a civil society diplomat.
Civil society diplomats do three things: They voice the concerns of the people, are not pinned down by national interests, and influence change through citizen networks, not only state ones.
And if you want to change the world, we need more of them.
But many people still ask, "Can civil society really make a big difference?
Can citizens influence and shape national and global policy?"
I never thought I would ask myself these questions, but here I am to share some lessons about two powerful civil society movements that I've been involved in.
They are in issues that I'm passionate about: gun control and drug policy.
And these are issues that matter here.
Latin America is ground zero for both of them.
For example, Brazil -- this beautiful country hosting TEDGlobal has the world's ugliest record.
We are the number one champion in homicidal violence.
One in every 10 people killed around the world is a Brazilian.
This translates into over 56,000 people dying violently each year.
Most of them are young, black boys dying by guns.
Brazil is also one of the world's largest consumers of drugs, and the War on Drugs has been especially painful here.
Around 50 percent of the homicides in the streets in Brazil are related to the War on Drugs.
The same is true for about 25 percent of people in jail.
And it's not just Brazil that is affected by the twin problems of guns and drugs.
Virtually every country and city across Central and South America is in trouble.
Latin America has nine percent of the world's population, but 25 percent of its global violent deaths.
These are not problems we can run away from.
I certainly could not.
So the first campaign I got involved with started here in 2003 to change Brazil's gun law and to create a program to buy back weapons.
In just a few years, we not only changed national legislation that made it much more difficult for civilians to buy a gun, but we collected and destroyed almost half a million weapons.
This was one of the biggest buyback programs in history -- (Applause) -- but we also suffered some setbacks.
We lost a referendum to ban gun sales to civilians in 2005.
The second initiative was also home-grown, but is today a global movement to reform the international drug control regime.
I am the executive coordinator of something called the Global Commission on Drug Policy.
The commission is a high-level group of global leaders brought together to identify more humane and effective approaches to the issue of drugs.
Since we started in 2008, the taboo on drugs is broken.
Across the Americas, from the US and Mexico to Colombia and Uruguay, change is in the air.
But rather than tell you the whole story about these two movements, I just want to share with you four key insights.
I call them lessons to change the world.
There are certainly many more, but these are the ones that stand out to me.
So the first lesson is: Change and control the narrative.
It may seem obvious, but a key ingredient to civil society diplomacy is first changing and then controlling the narrative.
This is something that veteran politicians understand, but that civil society groups generally do not do very well.
In the case of drug policy, our biggest success has been to change the discussion away from prosecuting a War on Drugs to putting people's health and safety first.
In a cutting-edge report we just launched in New York, we also showed that the groups benefiting most from this $320 billion market are criminal gangs and cartels.
So in order to undermine the power and profit of these groups, we need to change the conversation.
We need to make illegal drugs legal.
But before I get you too excited, I don't mean drugs should be a free-for-all.
What I'm talking about, and what the Global Commission advocates for is creating a highly regulated market, where different drugs would have different degrees of regulation.
As for gun control, we were successful in changing, but not so much in controlling, the narrative.
And this brings me to my next lesson: Never underestimate your opponents.
If you want to succeed in changing the world, you need to know who you're up against.
You need to learn their motivations and points of view.
In the case of gun control, we really underestimated our opponents.
After a very successful gun-collection program, we were elated.
We had support from 80 percent of Brazilians, and thought that this could help us win the referendum to ban gun sales to civilians.
But we were dead wrong.
During a televised 20-day public debate, our opponent used our own arguments against us.
We ended up losing the popular vote.
It was really terrible.
The National Rifle Association -- yes, the American NRA -- came to Brazil.
They inundated our campaign with their propaganda, that as you know, links the right to own guns to ideas of freedom and democracy.
They simply threw everything at us.
They used our national flag, our independence anthem.
They invoked women's rights and misused images of Mandela, Tiananmen Square, and even Hitler.
They won by playing with people's fears.
In fact, guns were almost completely ignored in their campaign.
Their focus was on individual rights.
But I ask you, which right is more important, the right to life or the right to have a gun that takes life away?
(Applause) We thought people would vote in defense of life, but in a country with a recent past of military dictatorship, the anti-government message of our opponents resonated, and we were not prepared to respond.
Lesson learned.
We've been more successful in the case of drug policy.
If you asked most people 10 years ago if an end to the War on Drugs was possible, they would have laughed.
After all, there are huge military police prisons and financial establishments benefiting from this war.
But today, the international drug control regime is starting to crumble.
Governments and civil societies are experimenting with new approaches.
The Global Commission on Drug Policy really knew its opposition, and rather than fighting them, our chair -- former Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso -- reached out to leaders from across the political spectrum, from liberals to conservatives.
This high level group agreed to honestly discuss the merits and flaws of drug policies.
It was this reasoned, informed and strategic discussion that revealed the sad truth about the War on Drugs.
The War on Drugs has simply failed across every metric.
Drugs are cheaper and more available than ever, and consumption has risen globally.
But even worse, it also generated massive negative unintended consequences.
It is true that some people have made these arguments before, but we've made a difference by anticipating the arguments of our opponents and by leveraging powerful voices that a few years ago would probably have resisted change.
Third lesson: Use data to drive your argument.
Guns and drugs are emotive issues, and as we've painfully learned in the gun referendum campaign in Brazil, sometimes it's impossible to cut through the emotions and get to the facts.
But this doesn't mean that we shouldn't try.
Until quite recently, we simply didn't know how many Brazilians were killed by guns.
Amazingly, it was a local soap opera called "Mulheres Apaixonadas" -- or "Women in Love" -- that kicked off Brazil's national gun control campaign.
In one highly viewed episode, a soap opera lead actress was killed by a stray bullet.
Brazilian grannies and housewives were outraged, and in a case of art imitating life, this episode also included footage of a real gun control march that we had organized right here, outside in Copacabana Beach.
The televised death and march had a huge impact on public opinion.
Within weeks, our national congress approved the disarmament bill that had been languishing for years.
We were then able to mobilize data to show the successful outcomes of the change in the law and gun collection program.
Here is what I mean: We could prove that in just one year, we saved more than 5,000 lives.
(Applause) And in the case of drugs, in order to undermine this fear and prejudice that surrounds the issue, we managed to gather and present data that shows that today's drug policies cause much more harm than drug use per se, and people are starting to get it.
My fourth insight is: Don't be afraid to bring together odd bedfellows.
What we've learned in Brazil -- and this doesn't only apply to my country -- is the importance of bringing diverse and eclectic folks together.
If you want to change the world, it helps to have a good cross-section of society on your side.
In both the case of guns and drugs, we brought together a wonderful mix of people.
We mobilized the elite and got huge support from the media.
We gathered the victims, human rights champions, cultural icons.
We also assembled the professional classes -- doctors, lawyers, academia and more.
What I've learned over the last years is that you need coalitions of the willing and of the unwilling to make change.
In the case of drugs, we needed libertarians, anti-prohibitionists, legalizers, and liberal politicians.
They may not agree on everything; in fact, they disagree on almost everything.
But the legitimacy of the campaign is based on their diverse points of view.
Over a decade ago, I had a comfortable future working for an investment bank.
I was as far removed from the world of civil society diplomacy as you can imagine.
But I took a chance.
I changed course, and on the way, I helped to create social movements that I believe have made some parts of the world safer.
Each and every one of us has the power to change the world.
No matter what the issue, and no matter how hard the fight, civil society is central to the blueprint for change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I thought a lot about the first word I'd say today, and I decided to say "Colombia."
And the reason, I don't know how many of you have visited Colombia, but Colombia is just north of the border with Brazil.
It's a beautiful country with extraordinary people, like me and others -- (Laughter) -- and it's populated with incredible fauna, flora.
It's got water; it's got everything to be the perfect place.
But we have a few problems.
You may have heard of some of them.
We have the oldest standing guerrilla in the world.
It's been around for over 50 years, which means that in my lifetime, I have never lived one day of peace in my country.
This guerrilla -- and the main group is the FARC guerrillas, Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia -- they have financed their war by kidnapping, by extortion, by getting into the drug trade, by illegal mining.
There has been terrorism. There have been random bombs.
So it's not good. It's not really good.
And if you look at the human cost of this war over 50 years, we have had more than 5.7 million displaced population.
It's one of the biggest displaced populations in the world, and this conflict has cost over 220,000 lives.
So it's a little bit like the Bolívar wars again.
It's a lot of people who have died unnecessarily.
We are now in the middle of peace talks, and we've been trying to help resolve this problem peacefully, and as part of that, we decided to try something completely lateral and different: Christmas lights.
So Christmas lights, and you're saying, what the hell is this guy going to talk about?
I am going to talk about gigantic trees that we put in nine strategic pathways in the jungle covered with Christmas lights.
These trees helped us demobilize 331 guerrillas, roughly five percent of the guerrilla force at the time.
These trees were lit up at night, and they had a sign beside them that said, "If Christmas can come to the jungle, you can come home.
Demobilize.
At Christmas, everything is possible."
So how do we know these trees worked?
Well, we got 331, which is okay, but we also know that not a lot of guerrillas saw them, but we know that a lot of guerrillas heard about them, and we know this because we are constantly talking to demobilized guerrillas.
So let me take you back four years before the trees.
Four years before the trees, we were approached by the government to help them come up with a communications strategy to get as many guerrillas as we could out of the jungle.
The government had a military strategy, it had a legal strategy, it had a political strategy, but it said, "We don't really have a communications strategy, and it probably would be a good thing to have," so we decided to immediately jump into this, because it is an opportunity to affect the outcome of the conflict with the things that we do, with the tools that we have.
But we didn't know very much about it.
We didn't understand in Colombia, if you live in the cities, you're very far away from where the war is actually happening, so you don't really understand it, and we asked the government to give us access to as many demobilized guerrillas as possible.
And we talked to about 60 of them before we felt we fully understood the problem.
We talked about -- they told us why they had joined the guerrillas, why the left the guerrillas, what their dreams were, what their frustrations were, and from those conversations came the underlying insight that has guided this whole campaign, which is that guerrillas are as much prisoners of their organizations as the people they hold hostage.
And at the beginning, we were so touched by these stories, we were so amazed by these stories, that we thought that maybe the best way to talk to the guerrillas was to have them talk to themselves, so we recorded about a hundred different stories during the first year, and we put them on the radio and television so that the guerrillas in the jungle could hear stories, their stories, or stories similar to theirs, and when they heard them, they decided to go out.
I want to tell you one of these stories.
This person you see here is Giovanni Andres.
Giovanni Andres is 25 when we took that picture.
He had been seven years in the guerrilla, and he had demobilized very recently.
His story is the following: He was recruited when he was 17, and sometime later, in his squadron, if you will, this beautiful girl was recruited, and they fell in love.
Their conversations were about what their family was going to be like, what their kids' names would be, how their life would be when they left the guerrilla.
But it turns out that love is very strictly forbidden in the lower ranks of the guerrilla, so their romance was discovered and they were separated.
He was sent very far away, and she was left behind.
She was very familiar with the territory, so one night, when she was on guard, she just left, and she went to the army, she demobilized, and she was one of the persons that we had the fortune to talk to, and we were really touched by this story, so we made a radio spot, and it turns out, by chance, that far away, many, many kilometers north, he heard her on the radio, and when he heard her on the radio, he said, "What am I doing here?
She had the balls to get out. I need to do the same thing."
And he did.
He walked for two days and two nights, and he risked his life and he got out, and the only thing he wanted was to see her.
The only thing that was in his mind was to see her.
The story was, they did meet.
I know you're wondering if they did meet.
They did meet.
She had been recruited when she was 15, and she left when she was 17, so there were a lot of other complications, but they did eventually meet.
I don't know if they're together now, but I can find out. (Laughter) But what I can tell you is that our radio strategy was working.
The problem is that it was working in the lower ranks of the guerrilla.
It was not working with the commanders, the people that are more difficult to replace, because you can easily recruit but you can't get the older commanders.
So we thought, well, we'll use the same strategy.
We'll have commanders talking to commanders.
And we even went as far as asking ex-commanders of the guerrilla to fly on helicopters with microphones telling the people that used to fight with them, "There is a better life out there," "I'm doing good," "This is not worth it," etc.
But, as you can all imagine, it was very easy to counteract, because what was the guerrilla going to say?
"Yeah, right, if he doesn't do that, he's going to get killed."
So it was easy, so we were suddenly left with nothing, because the guerrilla were spreading the word that all of those things are done because if they don't do it, they're in danger.
And somebody, some brilliant person in our team, came back and said, "You know what I noticed?
I noticed that around Christmastime, there have been peaks of demobilization since this war has started."
And that was incredible, because that led us to think that we needed to talk to the human being and not to the soldier.
We needed to step away from talking from government to army, from army to army, and we needed to talk about the universal values, and we needed to talk about humanity.
And that was when the Christmas tree happened.
This picture that I have here, you see this is the planning of the Christmas trees, and that man you see there with the three stars, he's Captain Juan Manuel Valdez.
Captain Valdez was the first high-ranking official to give us the helicopters and the support we needed to put these Christmas trees up, and he said in that meeting something that I will never forget.
He said, "I want to do this because being generous makes me stronger, makes my men feel stronger."
And I get very emotional when I remember him because he was killed later in combat and we really miss him, but I wanted you all to see him, because he was really, really important.
He gave us all the support to put up the first Christmas trees.
What happened later is that the guerrillas who came out during the Christmas tree operation and all of that said, "That's really good, Christmas trees are really cool, but you know what? We really don't walk anymore.
We use rivers."
So rivers are the highways of the jungle, and this is something we learned, and most of the recruiting was being done in and around the river villages.
So we went to these river villages, and we asked the people, and probably some of them were direct acquaintances of the guerrillas.
We asked them, "Can you send guerrillas a message?"
We collected over 6,000 messages.
Some of them were notes saying, get out.
Some of them were toys. Some of them were candy.
Even people took off their jewelry, their little crosses and religious things, and put them in these floating balls that we sent down the rivers so that they could be picked up at night.
And we sent thousands of these down the rivers, and then picked them up later if they weren't.
But lots of them were picked up.
This generated, on average, a demobilization every six hours, so this was incredible and it was about: Come home at Christmas.
Then came the peace process, and when the peace process started, the whole mindset of the guerrilla changed.
And it changed because it makes you think, "Well, if there's a peace process, this is probably going to be over.
At some point I'm going to get out."
And their fears completely changed, and their fears were not about, "Am I going to get killed?"
Their fears were, "Am I going to be rejected?
When I get out of this, am I going to be rejected?"
So the past Christmas, what we did was we asked -- we found 27 mothers of guerrillas, and we asked them to give us pictures of their children, when they only could recognize themselves, so as not to put their lives in danger, and we asked them to give the most motherly message you can get, which is, "Before you were a guerrilla, you were my child, so come home, I'm waiting for you."
You can see the pictures here. I'll show you a couple.
(Applause) Thank you.
And these pictures were placed in many different places, and a lot of them came back, and it was really, really beautiful.
And then we decided to work with society.
So we did mothers around Christmastime.
Now let's talk about the rest of the people.
And you may be aware of this or not, but there was a World Cup this year, and Colombia played really well, and it was a unifying moment for Colombia.
And what we did was tell the guerrillas, "Come, get out of the jungle. We're saving a place for you."
So this was television, this was all different types of media saying, "We are saving a place for you."
The soldier here in the commercial says, "I'm saving a place for you right here in this helicopter so that you can get out of this jungle and go enjoy the World Cup."
Ex-football players, radio announcers, everybody was saving a place for the guerrilla.
So since we started this work a little over eight years ago, 17,000 guerrillas have demobilized.
I do not -- (Applause) Thank you.
I don't want to say in any way that it only has to do with what we do, but what I do know is that our work and the work that we do may have helped a lot of them start thinking about demobilization, and it may have helped a lot of them take the final decision.
If that is true, advertising is still one of the most powerful tools of change that we have available.
And I speak not only my behalf, but on behalf of all the colleagues I see here who work in advertising, and of all the team that has worked with me to do this, that if you want to change the world, or if you want to achieve peace, please call us.
We'd love to help.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You know, it's a big privilege for me to be working in one of the biodiversity hotspots in the world: the Mascarene Islands in the Indian Ocean.
These islands — Mauritius, Rodrigues, and Réunion — along with the island of Madagascar, they are blessed with unique plants found nowhere else in the world.
And today I will tell you about five of them and their particular features and why these plants are so unique.
Take a look at this plant.
I call it benjoin in the local vernacular, and the botanical name is Terminalia bentzoe, subspecies bentzoe.
This subspecies is endemic to Mauritius, and its particular feature is its heterophylly.
What do I mean by heterophylly?
It's that the same plant has got leaves that are different shapes and sizes.
Now, these plants have evolved very far away from the mainland, and within specific ecosystems.
Often, these particular features have evolved as a response to the threat presented by the local fauna, in this case, grazing tortoises.
Tortoises are known to have poor eyesight, and as such, they tend to avoid the plants they don't recognize.
So this evolutionary foil safeguards the plant against these rather cute animals, and protects it and of course ensures its survival.
Now the question you're probably asking yourself is, why is she telling us all these stories?
The reason for that is that we tend to overlook the diversity and the variety of the natural world.
These particular habitats are unique and they are host to a whole lot of plants.
We don't realize how valuable and how precious these resources are, and yet, through our insouciance, we keep on destroying them.
We're all familiar with the macro impact of urbanization, climate change, resource exploitation, but when that one last plant — or animal for that matter — when that very last specimen has disappeared from the face of this Earth, we would have lost an entire subset of the Earth's biology, and with it, important plants with medicinal potential or which could have ingredients that would speak to the cosmetic, nutrition, pharma, and even the ethno-veterinary sectors, be gone forever.
And here we have a very prime example of the iconic dodo, which comes from Mauritius, and, of course, we know is now a symbol of extinction.
We know plants have a fundamental role to play.
Well, first of all, they feed us and they also give us the oxygen we breathe, but plants are also the source of important, biologically active ingredients that we should be studying very carefully, because human societies over the millennia, they have developed important knowledge, cultural traditions, and important plant-based medicinal resources.
Here's a data point: 1.4 percent of the entire land surface is home to 40 percent of the species of higher plants, 35 percent of the species of vertebrates, and this 1.4 percent represents the 25 biodiversity hotspots in the world, and this 1.4 percent of the entire land surface already provides for 35 percent of the ecosystem services that vulnerable people depend on.
And as you can see, the island of Mauritius where I work and where I live, belongs to one such biodiversity hotspot, and I study the unique plants on the island for their biomedical applications.
Now, let's go back again to that first plant I showed you, the one, of course, with different-shaped leaves and different sizes, Terminalia bentzoe, subspecies bentzoe, a plant only found in Mauritius.
Now, the local people, they used a decoction of the leaves against infectious diseases.
Now our work, that is, the scientific validation of this traditional information, has shown that precisely that leaf extract shows activity, potent activity, against a wide range of bacteria that could be pathogenic to humans.
Now, could this plant be the answer to antibiotic resistance?
You know, antibiotic resistance is proving to be a big challenge globally.
While we may not be sure, one thing is certain: we will not want this plant to disappear.
But the harsh reality is that this particular plant is in fact considered to be vulnerable in its natural habitat.
This brings me to another example.
This bush here is known as baume de l'ile plate in the local vernacular.
The botanical name is Psiadia arguta.
It's a plant which is rare, which is endemic to Mauritius.
It used to grow on the mainland, but through the sheer pressures of urbanization has been pushed out of the mainland, and we've managed to bring it back from the brink of extinction by developing in vitro plants which are now growing in the wild.
Now, one thing I must point out straightaway is that not all plants can be developed in vitro.
While we humans, we are happy in our comfort zone, these plants also need their ecosystem to be preserved, and they don't react — endemic plants don't react to very harsh changes in their ecosystem, and yet we know what are the challenges that climate change, for example, is posing to these plants.
Now, the local people again use the leaves in traditional medicine against respiratory problems.
Now, our preliminary labwork on the leaf extract has shown that precisely these leaves contain ingredients that are very close, in terms of structures, chemical structures, to those medicines which are sold in the chemist's shop against asthma.
So who knows what humanity will benefit from should this plant decide to reveal all its secrets.
Now, I come from the developing world where we are forever being challenged with this issue of population explosion.
Africa is the continent which is getting younger, and whenever one talks about population explosion, one talks about the issue of food security as being the other side of the same coin.
Now this plant here, the baobab, could be part of the answer.
It's an underutilized, neglected food plant.
It defines the landscape of West Africa, where it is known as the tree of life, and later on I will tell you why the Africans consider it to be the tree of life.
Now interestingly, there are many legends which are associated with this plant.
Because of its sheer size, it was meant to be lording over lesser plants, so God didn't like this arrogance, uprooted it, and planted it upside down, hence its particular shape.
And if you look at this tree again within the African context, in West Africa, it's known as the palaver tree, because it performs great social functions.
Now if you have a problem in the community, meeting under the palaver tree with the chiefs or the tribesmen would be synonymous to trying to find a solution to that particular problem, and also to reinforce trust and respect among members of the community.
From the scientific point of view, there are eight species of baobab in the world.
There's one from Africa, one from Australia, and six are endemic to the island of Madagascar.
The one I have showed you is the one from Africa, Adansonia digitata.
Now, the flower, this beautiful white flower, it opens at night, is pollinated by bats, and it gives rise to the fruit which is curiously known as the monkey apple.
The monkeys are not stupid animals.
They know what's good for them.
Now, if you open the fruit of the baobab, you'll see a white, floury pulp, which is very rich in nutrients and has got protein, more protein than in human milk.
Yes, you heard right: more protein than in human milk.
And this is one of the reasons why the nutrition companies of this world, they are looking for this fruit to provide what we know as reinforced food.
The seeds give an oil, a very stable oil which is sought after by the cosmetic industry to give to produce body lotions, for example.
And if you look at the trunk, the trunk, of course, safeguards water, which is often harvested by a thirsty traveler, and the leaves are used in traditional medicine against infectious disease.
Now, you can see now why the Africans consider it to be the tree of life.
It's a complete plant, and in fact, the sheer size of these trees is hiding a massive potential, not only for the pharma, nutrition, and the cosmetic industry.
What I have showed you here is only the species from Africa, Adansonia digitata.
We have six species yet in Madagascar, and we don't know what is the potential of this plant, but one thing we know is that the flora is considered to be threatened with extinction.
Let me take you to Africa again, and introduce you to one of my very favorite, the resurrection plant.
Now here you'll find that even Jesus has competition.
(Laughter) Now, this plant here has developed remarkable tolerance to drought, which enables it to withstand up to 98 percent dehydration over the period of a year without damage, and yet it can regenerate itself almost completely overnight, over 24 hours, and flower.
Now, us human beings, we're always on the lookout for the elixir of youth.
We don't want to get old, and rightly so.
Why should we, especially if you can afford it?
And this gives you an indication of what the plant looks like before.
Now, if you are an inexperienced gardener, the first thing you'll do when you visit the garden is to uproot this plant because it's dead.
But if you water it, this is what you get.
Absolutely amazing.
Now, if you look at our aging process, the aging process is in fact the loss of water from the upper epidermis, resulting in wrinkling as we know it, especially women, we are so conscious of this.
And this plant, in fact, is giving the cosmetic chemists very important ingredients that are actually finding ways to slow down the aging process and at the same time reinforce the cells against the onslaught of environmental toxins.
Now, these four examples I have just given you are just a very tiny reminder as to how our health and our survival are closely linked to the health and the resilience of our ecosystem, and why we should be very careful about preserving biodiversity.
Every time a forest is cut down, every time a marsh is filled in, it is a potential lab that goes with it, and which we will never, ever recover.
And I know what I'm talking about, coming from Mauritius and missing the dodo.
Let me finish with just one last example.
Conservation issues are normally guided towards rare, endemic plants, but what we call exotic plants, that is, the ones which grow in many different habitats across the world, they also need to be considered.
You know why? Because the environment plays a very important role in modifying the composition of that plant.
So let's take a look at this plant here, Centella asiatica. It's a weed.
We call it a weed.
Now, Centella asiatica grows across the world in many different habitats — in Africa, in Asia — and this plant has been instrumental in providing a solution to that dreadful disease called leprosy in Madagascar in the 1940s.
Now, while Centella grows across the world — in Africa, in Asia — the best quality Centella comes from Madagascar, because that Centella contains the three vital ingredients which are sought after by the pharma and the cosmetic companies.
And the cosmetic companies are already using it to make regenerating cream.
Now, there is an ancient saying that for every disease known to mankind, there is a plant to cure it.
Now, you may not believe in ancient sayings.
You may think they're obsolete now that our science and technology are so powerful.
So you may look on Centella as being an insignificant, humble weed, which, if destroyed, won't be missed.
But you know, there is no such thing as a weed.
It's a plant.
It's a living biological lab that may well have answers to the question that we may have, but we have to ensure that it has the right to live.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If there's any power in design, that's the power of synthesis.
The more complex the problem, the more the need for simplicity.
So allow me to share three cases where we tried to apply design's power of synthesis.
Let's start with the global challenge of urbanization.
It's a fact that people are moving towards cities.
and even if counterintuitive, it's good news.
Evidence shows that people are better off in cities.
But there's a problem that I would call the "3S" menace: The scale, speed, and scarcity of means with which we will have to respond to this phenomenon has no precedence in history.
For you to have an idea, out of the three billion people living in cities today, one billion are under the line of poverty.
By 2030, out of the five billion people that will be living in cities, two billion are going to be under the line of poverty.
That means that we will have to build a one million-person city per week with 10,000 dollars per family during the next 15 years.
A one million-person city per week with 10,000 dollars per family.
If we don't solve this equation, it is not that people will stop coming to cities.
They will come anyhow, but they will live in slums, favelas and informal settlements.
So what to do? Well, an answer may come from favelas and slums themselves.
A clue could be in this question we were asked 10 years ago.
We were asked to accommodate 100 families that had been occupying illegally half a hectare in the center of the city of Iquique in the north of Chile using a $10,000 subsidy with which we had to buy the land, provide the infrastructure, and build the houses that, in the best of the cases, would be of around 40 square meters.
And by the way, they said, the cost of the land, because it's in the center of the city, is three times more than what social housing can normally afford.
Due to the difficulty of the question, we decided to include the families in the process of understanding the constraints, and we started a participatory design process, and testing what was available there in the market.
Detached houses, 30 families could be accommodated.
Row houses, 60 families.
["100 families"] The only way to accommodate all of them was by building in height, and they threatened us to go on a hunger strike if we even dared to offer this as a solution, because they could not make the tiny apartments expand.
So the conclusion with the families — and this is important, not our conclusion — with the families, was that we had a problem.
We had to innovate.
So what did we do?
Well, a middle-class family lives reasonably well in around 80 square meters, but when there's no money, what the market does is to reduce the size of the house to 40 square meters.
What we said was, what if, instead of thinking of 40 square meters as a small house, why don't we consider it half of a good one?
When you rephrase the problem as half of a good house instead of a small one, the key question is, which half do we do?
And we thought we had to do with public money the half that families won't be able to do individually.
We identified five design conditions that belonged to the hard half of a house, and we went back to the families to do two things: join forces and split tasks.
Our design was something in between a building and a house.
As a building, it could pay for expensive, well-located land, and as a house, it could expand.
If, in the process of not being expelled to the periphery while getting a house, families kept their network and their jobs, we knew that the expansion would begin right away.
So we went from this initial social housing to a middle-class unit achieved by families themselves within a couple of weeks.
This was our first project in Iquique 10 years ago.
This is our last project in Chile.
Different designs, same principle: You provide the frame, and from then on, families take over.
So the purpose of design, trying to understand and trying to give an answer to the "3S" menace, scale, speed, and scarcity, is to channel people's own building capacity.
We won't solve the one million people per week equation unless we use people's own power for building.
So, with the right design, slums and favelas may not be the problem but actually the only possible solution.
The second case is how design can contribute to sustainability.
In 2012, we entered the competition for the Angelini Innovation Center, and the aim was to build the right environment for knowledge creation.
It is accepted that for such an aim, knowledge creation, interaction among people, face-to-face contact, it's important, and we agreed on that.
But for us, the question of the right environment was a very literal question.
We wanted to have a working space with the right light, with the right temperature, with the right air.
So we asked ourselves: Does the typical office building help us in that sense?
Well, how does that building look, typically?
It's a collection of floors, one on top of each other, with a core in the center with elevators, stairs, pipes, wires, everything, and then a glass skin on the outside that, due to direct sun radiation, creates a huge greenhouse effect inside.
In addition to that, let's say a guy working on the seventh floor goes every single day through the third floor, but has no idea what the guy on that floor is working on.
So we thought, well, maybe we have to turn this scheme inside out.
And what we did was, let's have an open atrium, a hollowed core, the same collection of floors, but have the walls and the mass in the perimeter, so that when the sun hits, it's not impacting directly glass, but a wall.
When you have an open atrium inside, you are able to see what others are doing from within the building, and you have a better way to control light, and when you place the mass and the walls in the perimeter, then you are preventing direct sun radiation.
You may also open those windows and get cross-ventilation.
We just made those openings of such a scale that they could work as elevated squares, outdoor spaces throughout the entire height of the building.
None of this is rocket science.
You don't require sophisticated programming.
It's not about technology.
This is just archaic, primitive common sense, and by using common sense, we went from 120 kilowatts per square meter per year, which is the typical energy consumption for cooling a glass tower, to 40 kilowatts per square meter per year.
So with the right design, sustainability is nothing but the rigorous use of common sense.
Last case I would like to share is how design can provide more comprehensive answers against natural disasters.
You may know that Chile, in 2010, was hit by an 8.8 Richter scale earthquake and tsunami, and we were called to work in the reconstruction of the Constitución, in the southern part of the country.
We were given 100 days, three months, to design almost everything, from public buildings to public space, street grid, transportation, housing, and mainly how to protect the city against future tsunamis.
This was new in Chilean urban design, and there were in the air a couple of alternatives.
First one: Forbid installation on ground zero.
Thirty million dollars spent mainly in land expropriation.
This is exactly what's being discussed in Japan nowadays, and if you have a disciplined population like the Japanese, this may work, but we know that in Chile, this land is going to be occupied illegally anyhow, so this alternative was unrealistic and undesirable.
Second alternative: build a big wall, heavy infrastructure to resist the energy of the waves.
This alternative was conveniently lobbied by big building companies, because it meant 42 million dollars in contracts, and was also politically preferred, because it required no land expropriation.
But Japan proved that trying to resist the force of nature is useless.
So this alternative was irresponsible.
As in the housing process, we had to include the community in the way of finding a solution for this, and we started a participatory design process.
(Video) [In Spanish] Loudspeaker: What kind of city do you want?
Vote for Constitución.
Go to the Open House and express your options.
Participate!
Fisherman: I am a fisherman.
Twenty-five fishermen work for me.
Where should I take them? To the forest?
Man: So why can't we have a concrete defense?
Done well, of course.
Man 2: I am the history of Constitución.
And you come here to tell me that I cannot keep on living here?
My whole family has lived here, I raised my children here, and my children will also raise their children here.
and my grandchildren and everyone else will.
But why are you imposing this on me?
You! You are imposing this on me!
In danger zone I am not authorized to build.
He himself is saying that.
Man 3: No, no, no, Nieves...
Alejandro Aravena: I don't know if you were able to read the subtitles, but you can tell from the body language that participatory design is not a hippie, romantic, let's-all-dream-together-about- the-future-of-the-city kind of thing.
It is actually — (Applause) It is actually not even with the families trying to find the right answer.
It is mainly trying to identify with precision what is the right question.
There is nothing worse than answering well the wrong question.
So it was pretty obvious after this process that, well, we chicken out here and go away because it's too tense, or we go even further in asking, what else is bothering you?
What other problems do you have and you want us to take care of now that the city will have to be rethought from scratch?
And what they said was, look, fine to protect the city against future tsunamis, we really appreciate, but the next one is going to come in, what, 20 years?
But every single year, we have problems of flooding due to rain.
In addition, we are in the middle of the forest region of the country, and our public space sucks.
It's poor and it's scarce.
And the origin of the city, our identity, is not really connected to the buildings that fell, it is connected to the river, but the river cannot be accessed publicly, because its shores are privately owned.
So we thought that we had to produce a third alternative, and our approach was against geographical threats, have geographical answers.
What if, in between the city and the sea we have a forest, a forest that doesn't try to resist the energy of nature, but dissipates it by introducing friction?
A forest that may be able to laminate the water and prevent the flooding?
That may pay the historical debt of public space, and that may provide, finally, democratic access to the river.
So as a conclusion of the participatory design, the alternative was validated politically and socially, but there was still the problem of the cost: 48 million dollars.
So what we did was a survey in the public investment system, and found out that there were three ministries with three projects in the exact same place, not knowing of the existence of the other projects.
The sum of them: 52 million dollars.
So design's power of synthesis is trying to make a more efficient use of the scarcest resource in cities, which is not money but coordination.
By doing so, we were able to save four million dollars, and that is why the forest is today under construction.
(Applause) So be it the force of self construction, the force of common sense, or the force of nature, all these forces need to be translated into form, and what that form is modeling and shaping is not cement, bricks, or wood.
It is life itself.
Design's power of synthesis is just an attempt to put at the innermost core of architecture the force of life.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Dre Urhahn: This theater is built on Copacabana, which is the most famous beach in the world, but 25 kilometers away from here in the North Zone of Rio lies a community called Vila Cruzeiro, and roughly 60,000 people live there.
Now, the people here in Rio mostly know Vila Cruzeiro from the news, and unfortunately, news from Vila Cruzeiro often is not good news.
But Vila Cruzeiro is also the place where our story begins.
Jeroen Koolhaas: Ten years ago, we first came to Rio to shoot a documentary about life in the favelas.
Now, we learned that favelas are informal communities.
They emerged over the years when immigrants from the countryside came to the cities looking for work, like cities within the cities, known for problems like crime, poverty, and the violent drug war between police and the drug gangs.
So what struck us was that these were communities that the people who lived there had built with their own hands, without a master plan and like a giant work in progress.
Where we're from, in Holland, everything is planned.
We even have rules for how to follow the rules.
(Laughter) DU: So the last day of filming, we ended up in Vila Cruzeiro, and we were sitting down and we had a drink, and we were overlooking this hill with all these houses, and most of these houses looked unfinished, and they had walls of bare brick, but we saw some of these houses which were plastered and painted, and suddenly we had this idea: what would it look like if all these houses would be plastered and painted?
And then we imagined one big design, one big work of art.
Who would expect something like that in a place like this?
So we thought, would that even be possible?
So first we started to count the houses, but we soon lost count.
But somehow the idea stuck.
JK: We had a friend.
He ran an NGO in Vila Cruzeiro.
His name was Nanko, and he also liked the idea.
He said, "You know, everybody here would pretty much love to have their houses plastered and painted.
It's when a house is finished."
So he introduced us to the right people, and Vitor and Maurinho became our crew.
We picked three houses in the center of the community and we start here. We made a few designs, and everybody liked this design of a boy flying a kite the best.
So we started painting, and the first thing we did was to paint everything blue, and we thought that looked already pretty good.
But they hated it. The people who lived there really hated it.
They said, "What did you do?
You painted our house in exactly the same color as the police station."
(Laughter) In a favela, that is not a good thing.
Also the same color as the prison cell.
So we quickly went ahead and we painted the boy, and then we thought we were finished, we were really happy, but still, it wasn't good because the little kids started coming up to us, and they said, "You know, there's a boy flying the kite, but where is his kite?"
We said, "Uh, it's art.
You know, you have to imagine the kite."
(Laughter) And they said, "No, no, no, we want to see the kite."
So we quickly installed a kite way up high on the hill, so that you could see the boy flying the kite and you could actually see a kite.
So the local news started writing about it, which was great, and then even The Guardian wrote about it: "Notorious slum becomes open-air gallery."
JK: So, encouraged by this success, we went back to Rio for a second project, and we stumbled upon this street.
It was covered in concrete to prevent mudslides, and somehow we saw a sort of river in it, and we imagined this river to be a river in Japanese style with koi carp swimming upstream.
So we decided to paint that river, and we invited Rob Admiraal, who is a tattoo artist, and he specialized in the Japanese style.
So little did we know that we would spend almost an entire year painting that river, together with Geovani and Robinho and Vitor, who lived nearby.
And we even moved into the neighborhood when one of the guys that lived on the street, Elias, told us that we could come and live in his house, together with his family, which was fantastic.
Unfortunately, during that time, another war broke out between the police and the drug gangs.
(Video) (Gunfire) We learned that during those times, people in communities really stick together during these times of hardship, but we also learned a very important element, the importance of barbecues. (Laughter) Because, when you throw a barbecue, it turns you from a guest into a host, so we decided to throw one almost every other week, and we got to know everybody in the neighborhood.
JK: We still had this idea of the hill, though.
DU: Yeah, yeah, we were talking about the scale of this, because this painting was incredibly big, and it was insanely detailed, and this process almost drove us completely insane ourselves.
But we figured that maybe, during this process, all the time that we had spent in the neighborhood was maybe actually even more important than the painting itself.
JK: So after all that time, this hill, this idea was still there, and we started to make sketches, models, and we figured something out.
We figured that our ideas, our designs had to be a little bit more simple than that last project so that we could paint with more people and cover more houses at the same time.
And we had an opportunity to try that out in a community in the central part of Rio, which is called Santa Marta, and we made a design for this place which looked like this, and then we got people to go along with it because turns out that if your idea is ridiculously big, it's easier to get people to go along with this. (Laughter) And the people of Santa Marta got together and in a little over a month they turned that square into this.
(Applause) And this image somehow went all over the world.
DU: So then we received an unexpected phone call from the Philadelphia Mural Arts Program, and they had this question if this idea, our approach, if this would actually work in North Philly, which is one of the poorest neighborhoods in the United States.
So we immediately said yes.
We had no idea how, but it seemed like a very interesting challenge, so we did exactly the same as we did in Rio, and we moved into the neighborhood and started barbecuing.
(Laughter) So the project took almost two years to complete, and we made individual designs for every single house on the avenue that we painted, and we made these designs together with the local store owners, the building owners, and a team of about a dozen young men and women.
They were hired, and then they were trained as painters, and together they transformed their own neighborhood, the whole street, into a giant patchwork of color.
(Applause) And at the end, the city of Philadelphia thanked every single one of them and gave them a merit for their accomplishment.
JK: So now we had painted a whole street.
How about we do this whole hill now?
We started looking for funding, but instead, we just ran into questions, like, how many houses are you going to paint?
How many square meters is that?
How much paint are you going to use, and how many people are you going to employ?
And we did try for years to write plans for the funding and answer all those questions, but then we thought, in order to answer all those questions, you have to know exactly what you're going to do before you actually get there and start.
And maybe it's a mistake to think like that.
It would lose some of the magic that we had learned about that if you go somewhere and you spend time there, you can let the project grow organically and have a life of its own.
DU: So what we did is we decided to take this plan and strip it away from all the numbers and all the ideas and presumptions and just go back to the base idea, which was to transform this hill into a giant work of art.
And instead of looking for funding, we started a crowdfunding campaign, and in a little over a month, more than 1,500 people put together and donated over 100,000 dollars.
So for us, this was an amazing moment, because now — (Applause) — because now we finally had the freedom to use all the lessons that we had learned and create a project that was built the same way that the favela was built, from the ground on up, bottom up, with no master plan.
JK: So we went back, and we employed Angelo, and he's a local artist from Vila Cruzeiro, very talented guy, and he knows almost everybody there, and then we employed Elias, our former landlord who invited us into his house, and he's a master of construction.
Together with them, we decided where to start.
We picked this spot in Vila Cruzeiro, and houses are being plastered as we speak.
And the good thing about them is that they are deciding which houses go next.
They're even printing t-shirts, they're putting up banners explaining everything to everybody, and talking to the press.
This article about Angelo appeared.
DU: So while this is happening, we are bringing this idea all over the world.
So, like the project we did in Philadelphia, we are also invited to do workshops, for instance in Curaçao, and right now we're planning a huge project in Haiti.
JK: So the favela was not only the place where this idea started: it was also the place that made it possible to work without a master plan, because these communities are informal — this was the inspiration — and in a communal effort, together with the people, you can almost work like in an orchestra, where you can have a hundred instruments playing together to create a symphony.
DU: So we want to thank everybody who wanted to become part of this dream and supported us along the way, and we are looking at continuing.
JK: Yeah. And so one day pretty soon, when the colors start going up on these walls, we hope more people will join us, and join this big dream, and maybe one day, the whole of Vila Cruzeiro will be painted.
DU: Thank you.
(Applause)
I hope you'll understand my English.
In the mornings it is terrible, and the afternoon is worst.
(Laughter) During many years, I made some speeches starting with this saying: "City is not a problem, it's a solution."
And more and more, I'm convinced that it's not only a solution for a country, but it's a solution for the problem of climate change.
But we have a very pessimistic approach about the cities.
I'm working in cities for almost 40 years, and where every mayor is trying to tell me his city is so big, or the other mayors say, "We don't have financial resources," I would like to say from the experience I had: every city in the world can be improved in less than three years.
There's no matter of scale. It's not a question of scale, it's not a question of financial resources.
Every problem in a city has to have its own equation of co-responsibility and also a design.
So to start, I want to introduce some characters from a book I made for teenagers.
The best example of quality of life is the turtle because the turtle is an example of living and working together.
And when you realize that the casque of the turtle looks like an urban tessitura, and can we imagine, if we cut the casque of the turtle, how sad she's going to be?
And that's what we're doing in our cities: living here, working here, having leisure here.
And most of the people are leaving the city and living outside of the city.
So, the other character is Otto, the automobile.
He is invited for a party -- he never wants to leave.
The chairs are on the tables and still drinking, and he drinks a lot. (Laughter) And he coughs a lot. Very egotistical: he carries only one or two people and he asks always for more infrastructure.
Freeways.
He's a very demanding person.
And on the other hand, Accordion, the friendly bus, he carries 300 people -- 275 in Sweden; 300 Brazilians. (Laughter) Speaking about the design: every city has its own design.
Curitiba, my city: three million in the metropolitan area, 1,800,000 people in the city itself.
Curitiba, Rio: it's like two birds kissing themselves.
Oaxaca, San Francisco -- it's very easy: Market Street, Van Ness and the waterfront.
And every city has its own design.
But to make it happen, sometimes you have to propose a scenario and to propose a design -- an idea that everyone, or the large majority, will help you to make it happen.
And that's the structure of the city of Curitiba.
And it's an example of living and working together.
And this is where we have more density; it's where we have more public transport.
So, this system started in '74. We started with 25,000 passengers a day, now it's 2,200,000 passengers a day.
And it took 25 years until another city ...
which is Bogota, and they did a very good job.
And now there's 83 cities all over the world that they are doing what they call the BRT of Curitiba.
And one thing: it's important not for only your own city; every city, besides its normal problems, they have a very important role in being with the whole humanity.
That means mostly two main issues -- mobility and sustainability -- are becoming very important for the cities.
And this is an articulated bus, double-articulated.
And we are very close to my house.
You can come when you are in Curitiba and have a coffee there.
And that's the evolution of the system.
What in the design that made the difference is the boarding tubes: the boarding tube gives to the bus the same performance as a subway.
That's why, I'm trying to say, it's like metro-nizing the bus.
This is the design of the bus, and you can pay before entering the bus you're boarding.
And for handicapped, they can use this as a normal system.
What I'm trying to say is the major contribution on carbon emissions are from the cars -- more than 50 percent -- so when we depend only on cars, it's ...
-- that's why when we're talking about sustainability, it's not enough, green buildings.
It's not enough, a new materials.
It's not enough, new sources of energy.
It's the concept of the city, the design of the city, that's also important, too. And also, how to teach the children.
I'll speak on this later on.
Our idea of mobility is trying to make the connections between all the systems.
We started in '83, proposing for the city of Rio how to connect the subway with the bus.
The subway was against, of course.
And 23 years after, they called us to develop -- we're developing this idea.
And you can understand how different it's going to be, the image of Rio with the system -- one-minute frequency.
And it's not Shanghai, it's not being colored during the day, only at night it will look this way.
And before you say it's a Norman Foster design, we designed this in '83.
And this is the model, how it's going to work. So, it's the same system; the vehicle is different. And that's the model.
What I'm trying to say is, I'm not trying to prove which system of transport is better.
I'm trying to say we have to combine all the systems, and with one condition: never -- if you have a subway, if you have surface systems, if you have any kind of system -- never compete in the same space.
And coming back to the car, I always used to say that the car is like your mother-in-law: you have to have good relationship with her, but she cannot command your life.
So, when the only woman in your life is your mother-in-law, you have a problem. (Laughter) So, all the ideas about how to transform through design -- old quarries and open universities and botanic garden -- all of it's related to how we teach the children.
And the children, we teach during six months how to separate their garbage.
And after, the children teach their parents.
And now we have 70 percent -- since 20 years, it's the highest rate of separation of garbage in the world.
Seven zero.
(Applause) So teach the children.
I would like to say, if we want to have a sustainable world we have to work with everything what's said, but don't forget the cities and the children.
I'm working in a museum and also a multi-use city, because you cannot have empty places during 18 hours a day.
You should have always a structure of living and working together.
Try to understand the sectors in the city that could play different roles during the 24 hours.
Another issue is, a city's like our family portrait.
We don't rip our family portrait, even if we don't like the nose of our uncle, because this portrait is you.
And these are the references that we have in any city.
This is the main pedestrian mall; we did it in 72 hours. Yes, you have to be fast.
And these are the references from our ethnic contribution.
This is the Italian portal, the Ukrainian park, the Polish park, the Japanese square, the German park.
All of a sudden, the Soviet Union, they split.
And since we have people from Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, [unclear], we have to stop the program.
(Laughter) Don't forget: creativity starts when you cut a zero from your budget.
If you cut two zeros, it's much better.
And this is the Wire Opera theater. We did it in two months.
Parks -- old quarries that they were transformed into parks.
Quarries once made the nature, and sometimes we took this and we transformed.
And every part can be transformed; every frog can be transformed in a prince.
So, in a city, you have to work fast.
Planning takes time. And I'm proposing urban acupuncture.
That means me, with some focal ideas to help the normal process of planning.
And this is an acupuncture note -- or I.M. Pei's. Some small ones can make the city better.
The smallest park in New York, the most beautiful: 32 meters.
So, I want just to end saying that you can always propose new materials -- new sustainable materials -- but keep in mind that we have to work fast to the end, because we don't have the whole time to plan.
And I think creativity, innovation is starting.
And we cannot have all the answers.
So when you start -- and we cannot be so prepotent on having all the answers -- it's important starting and having the contribution from people, and they could teach you if you're not in the right track.
At the end, I would like if you can help me to sing the sustainable song.
OK?
Please, allow me just two minutes.
You're going to make the music and the rhythm.
♫ Toonchi-too! Toonchi-too! Toonchi-too! ♫ ♫ Toonchi-too! Toonchi-too! Toonchi-too! ♫ ♫ It's possible! It's possible! You can do it! You can do it! ♫ ♫ Use less your car! Make this decision! ♫ ♫ Avoid carbon emission! It's possible! It's possible! ♫ ♫ You can do it! You can do it! ♫ ♫ Live closer to work! ♫ ♫ Work closer to home! Save energy in your home! ♫ ♫ It's possible! It's possible! You can do it! ♫ ♫ You can do it! Separate your garbage! ♫ ♫ Organic, schmorganic! Save more! Waste less! It's possible! ♫ ♫ You can do it! Please, do it now! ♫ Thank you.
(Applause)
What has the War on Drugs done to the world?
Look at the murder and mayhem in Mexico, Central America, so many other parts of the planet, the global black market estimated at 300 billion dollars a year, prisons packed in the United States and elsewhere, police and military drawn into an unwinnable war that violates basic rights, and ordinary citizens just hope they don't get caught in the crossfire, and meanwhile, more people using more drugs than ever.
It's my country's history with alcohol prohibition and Al Capone, times 50.
Which is why it's particularly galling to me as an American that we've been the driving force behind this global drug war.
Ask why so many countries criminalize drugs they'd never heard of, why the U.N. drug treaties emphasize criminalization over health, even why most of the money worldwide for dealing with drug abuse goes not to helping agencies but those that punish, and you'll find the good old U.S. of A.
Why did we do this?
Some people, especially in Latin America, think it's not really about drugs.
It's just a subterfuge for advancing the realpolitik interests of the U.S.
But by and large, that's not it.
We don't want gangsters and guerrillas funded with illegal drug money terrorizing and taking over other nations.
No, the fact is, America really is crazy when it comes to drugs.
I mean, don't forget, we're the ones who thought that we could prohibit alcohol.
So think about our global drug war not as any sort of rational policy, but as the international projection of a domestic psychosis.
(Applause) But here's the good news.
Now it's the Russians leading the Drug War and not us.
Most politicians in my country want to roll back the Drug War now, put fewer people behind bars, not more, and I'm proud to say as an American that we now lead the world in reforming marijuana policies.
It's now legal for medical purposes in almost half our 50 states, millions of people can purchase their marijuana, their medicine, in government- licensed dispensaries, and over half my fellow citizens now say it's time to legally regulate and tax marijuana more or less like alcohol.
That's what Colorado and Washington are doing, and Uruguay, and others are sure to follow.
So that's what I do: work to end the Drug War.
I think it all started growing up in a fairly religious, moral family, eldest son of a rabbi, going off to university where I smoked some marijuana and I liked it. (Laughter) And I liked drinking too, but it was obvious that alcohol was really the more dangerous of the two, but my friends and I could get busted for smoking a joint.
Now, that hypocrisy kept bugging me, so I wrote my Ph.D dissertation on international drug control.
I talked my way into the State Department.
I got a security clearance.
I interviewed hundreds of DEA and other law enforcement agents all around Europe and the Americas, and I'd ask them, "What do you think the answer is?"
Well, in Latin America, they'd say to me, "You can't really cut off the supply.
The answer lies back in the U.S., in cutting off the demand."
So then I go back home and I talk to people involved in anti-drug efforts there, and they'd say, "You know, Ethan, you can't really cut off the demand.
The answer lies over there. You've got to cut off the supply."
Then I'd go and talk to the guys in customs trying to stop drugs at the borders, and they'd say, "You're not going to stop it here.
The answer lies over there, in cutting off supply and demand."
And it hit me: Everybody involved in this thought the answer lay in that area about which they knew the least.
So that's when I started reading everything I could about psychoactive drugs: the history, the science, the politics, all of it, and the more one read, the more it hit you how a thoughtful, enlightened, intelligent approach took you over here, whereas the politics and laws of my country were taking you over here.
And that disparity struck me as this incredible intellectual and moral puzzle.
There's probably never been a drug-free society.
Virtually every society has ingested psychoactive substances to deal with pain, increase our energy, socialize, even commune with God.
Our desire to alter our consciousness may be as fundamental as our desires for food, companionship and sex.
So our true challenge is to learn how to live with drugs so they cause the least possible harm and in some cases the greatest possible benefit.
I'll tell you something else I learned, that the reason some drugs are legal and others not has almost nothing to do with science or health or the relative risk of drugs, and almost everything to do with who uses and who is perceived to use particular drugs.
In the late 19th century, when most of the drugs that are now illegal were legal, the principal consumers of opiates in my country and others were middle-aged white women, using them to alleviate aches and pains when few other analgesics were available.
And nobody thought about criminalizing it back then because nobody wanted to put Grandma behind bars.
But when hundreds of thousands of Chinese started showing up in my country, working hard on the railroads and the mines and then kicking back in the evening just like they had in the old country with a few puffs on that opium pipe, that's when you saw the first drug prohibition laws in California and Nevada, driven by racist fears of Chinese transforming white women into opium-addicted sex slaves.
The first cocaine prohibition laws, similarly prompted by racist fears of black men sniffing that white powder and forgetting their proper place in Southern society.
And the first marijuana prohibition laws, all about fears of Mexican migrants in the West and the Southwest.
And what was true in my country, is true in so many others as well, with both the origins of these laws and their implementation.
Put it this way, and I exaggerate only slightly: If the principal smokers of cocaine were affluent older white men and the principal consumers of Viagra were poor young black men, then smokable cocaine would be easy to get with a prescription from your doctor and selling Viagra would get you five to 10 years behind bars.
(Applause) I used to be a professor teaching about this.
Now I'm an activist, a human rights activist, and what drives me is my shame at living in an otherwise great nation that has less than five percent of the world's population but almost 25 percent of the world's incarcerated population.
It's the people I meet who have lost someone they love to drug-related violence or prison or overdose or AIDS because our drug policies emphasize criminalization over health.
It's good people who have lost their jobs, their homes, their freedom, even their children to the state, not because they hurt anyone but solely because they chose to use one drug instead of another.
So is legalization the answer?
On that, I'm torn: three days a week I think yes, three days a week I think no, and on Sundays I'm agnostic.
But since today is Tuesday, let me just say that legally regulating and taxing most of the drugs that are now criminalized would radically reduce the crime, violence, corruption and black markets, and the problems of adulterated and unregulated drugs, and improve public safety, and allow taxpayer resources to be developed to more useful purposes.
I mean, look, the markets in marijuana, cocaine, heroin and methamphetamine are global commodities markets just like the global markets in alcohol, tobacco, coffee, sugar, and so many other things.
Where there is a demand, there will be a supply.
Knock out one source and another inevitably emerges.
People tend to think of prohibition as the ultimate form of regulation when in fact it represents the abdication of regulation with criminals filling the void.
Which is why putting criminal laws and police front and center in trying to control a dynamic global commodities market is a recipe for disaster.
And what we really need to do is to bring the underground drug markets as much as possible aboveground and regulate them as intelligently as we can to minimize both the harms of drugs and the harms of prohibitionist policies.
Now, with marijuana, that obviously means legally regulating and taxing it like alcohol.
The benefits of doing so are enormous, the risks minimal.
Will more people use marijuana?
Maybe, but it's not going to be young people, because it's not going to be legalized for them, and quite frankly, they already have the best access to marijuana.
I think it's going to be older people.
It's going to be people in their 40s and 60s and 80s who find they prefer a little marijuana to that drink in the evening or the sleeping pill or that it helps with their arthritis or diabetes or maybe helps spice up a long-term marriage. (Laughter) And that just might be a net public health benefit.
As for the other drugs, look at Portugal, where nobody goes to jail for possessing drugs, and the government's made a serious commitment to treating addiction as a health issue.
Look at Switzerland, Germany, the Netherlands, Denmark, England, where people who have been addicted to heroin for many years and repeatedly tried to quit and failed can get pharmaceutical heroin and helping services in medical clinics, and the results are in: Illegal drug abuse and disease and overdoses and crime and arrests all go down, health and well-being improve, taxpayers benefit, and many drug users even put their addictions behind them.
Look at New Zealand, which recently enacted a law allowing certain recreational drugs to be sold legally provided their safety had been established.
Look here in Brazil, and some other countries, where a remarkable psychoactive substance, ayahuasca, can be legally bought and consumed provided it's done so within a religious context.
Look in Bolivia and Peru, where all sorts of products made from the coca leaf, the source of cocaine, are sold legally over the counter with no apparent harm to people's public health.
I mean, don't forget, Coca-Cola had cocaine in it until 1900, and so far as we know was no more addictive than Coca-Cola is today.
Conversely, think about cigarettes: Nothing can both hook you and kill you like cigarettes.
When researchers ask heroin addicts what's the toughest drug to quit, most say cigarettes.
Yet in my country and many others, half of all the people who were ever addicted to cigarettes have quit without anyone being arrested or put in jail or sent to a "treatment program" by a prosecutor or a judge.
What did it were higher taxes and time and place restrictions on sale and use and effective anti-smoking campaigns.
Now, could we reduce smoking even more by making it totally illegal? Probably.
But just imagine the drug war nightmare that would result.
So the challenges we face today are twofold.
The first is the policy challenge of designing and implementing alternatives to ineffective prohibitionist policies, even as we need to get better at regulating and living with the drugs that are now legal.
But the second challenge is tougher, because it's about us.
The obstacles to reform lie not just out there in the power of the prison industrial complex or other vested interests that want to keep things the way they are, but within each and every one of us.
It's our fears and our lack of knowledge and imagination that stands in the way of real reform.
And ultimately, I think that boils down to the kids, and to every parent's desire to put our baby in a bubble, and the fear that somehow drugs will pierce that bubble and put our young ones at risk.
In fact, sometimes it seems like the entire War on Drugs gets justified as one great big child protection act, which any young person can tell you it's not.
So here's what I say to teenagers.
First, don't do drugs.
Second, don't do drugs.
Third, if you do do drugs, there's some things I want you to know, because my bottom line as your parent is, come home safely at the end of the night and grow up and lead a healthy and good adulthood.
That's my drug education mantra: Safety first.
So this is what I've dedicated my life to, to building an organization and a movement of people who believe we need to turn our backs on the failed prohibitions of the past and embrace new drug policies grounded in science, compassion, health and human rights, where people who come from across the political spectrum and every other spectrum as well, where people who love our drugs, people who hate drugs, and people who don't give a damn about drugs, but every one of us believes that this War on Drugs, this backward, heartless, disastrous War on Drugs, has got to end.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Ethan, congrats — quite the reaction.
That was a powerful talk.
Not quite a complete standing O, though, and I'm guessing that some people here and maybe a few watching online, maybe someone knows a teenager or a friend or whatever who got sick, maybe died from some drug overdose.
I'm sure you've had these people approach you before.
What do you say to them?
Ethan Nadelmann: Chris, the most amazing thing that's happened of late is that I've met a growing number of people who have actually lost a sibling or a child to a drug overdose, and 10 years ago, those people just wanted to say, let's line up all the drug dealers and shoot them and that will solve it.
And what they've come to understand is that the Drug War did nothing to protect their kids.
If anything, it made it more likely that those kids were put at risk.
And so they're now becoming part of this drug policy reform movement.
There's other people who have kids, one's addicted to alcohol, the other one's addicted to cocaine or heroin, and they ask themselves the question: Why does this kid get to take one step at a time and try to get better and that one's got to deal with jail and police and criminals all the time?
So everybody's understanding, the Drug War's not protecting anybody.
CA: Certainly in the U.S., you've got political gridlock on most issues.
Is there any realistic chance of anything actually shifting on this issue in the next five years?
EN: I'd say it's quite remarkable. I'm getting all these calls from journalists now who are saying to me, "Ethan, it seems like the only two issues advancing politically in America right now are marijuana law reform and gay marriage.
What are you doing right?"
And then you're looking at bipartisanship breaking out with, actually, Republicans in the Congress and state legislatures allowing bills to be enacted with majority Democratic support, so we've gone from being sort of the third rail, the most fearful issue of American politics, to becoming one of the most successful.
CA: Ethan, thank you so much for coming to TEDGlobal. EN: Chris, thanks so much.
CA: Thank you. EN: Thank you. (Applause)
[This talk contains mature language Viewer discretion is advised] If we traveled back to the year 800 BC, in Greece, we would see that merchants whose businesses failed were forced to sit in the marketplace with a basket over their heads.
In premodern Italy, failed business owners, who had outstanding debts, were taken totally naked to the public square where they had to bang their butts against a special stone while a crowd jeered at them.
In the 17th century in France, failed business owners were taken to the center of the market, where the beginning of their bankruptcy was publicly announced.
And in order to avoid immediate imprisonment, they had to wear a green bonnet so that everyone knew they were a failure.
Of course, these are extreme examples.
But it is important to remember that when we excessively punish those who fail, we stifle innovation and business creation, the engines of economic growth in any country.
Time has passed, and today we don't publicly humiliate failed entrepreneurs.
And they don't broadcast their failures on social media.
In fact, I think that all of us can relate with the pain of failure.
But we don't share the details of those experiences.
And I totally get it, my friends, I have also been there.
I had a business that failed and sharing that story was incredibly hard.
In fact, it required seven years, a good dose of vulnerability and the company of my friends.
This is my failure story.
When I was in college, studying business, I met a group of indigenous women.
They lived in a poor rural community in the state of Puebla, in central Mexico.
They made beautiful handmade products.
And when I met them and I saw their work, I decided I wanted to help.
With some friends, I cofounded a social enterprise with the mission to help the women create an income stream and improve their quality of life.
We did everything by the book, as we had learned in business school.
We got investors, we spent a lot of time building the business and training the women.
But soon we realized we were novices.
The handmade products were not selling, and the financial plan we had made was totally unrealistic.
In fact, we worked for years without a salary, hoping that a miracle would happen, that magically a great buyer would arrive and she would make the business profitable.
But that miracle never happened.
In the end, we had to close the business, and that broke my heart.
I started everything to create a positive impact on the life of the artisans.
And I felt that I have done the opposite.
I felt so guilty that I decided to hide this failure from my conversations and my resume for years.
I didn't know other failed entrepreneurs, and I thought I was the only loser in the world.
One night, seven years later, I was out with some friends and we were talking about the life of the entrepreneur.
And of course, the issue of failure came out.
I decided to confess to my friends the story of my failed business.
And they shared similar stories.
In that moment, a thought became really clear in my mind: all of my friends were failures.
(Laughter) Being more serious, that night I realized that A: I wasn't the only loser in the world, and B: we all have hidden failures.
Please tell me if that is not true.
That night was like an exorcism for me.
I realized that sharing your failures makes you stronger, not weaker.
And being open to my vulnerability helped me connect with others in a deeper and more meaningful way and embrace life lessons I wouldn't have learned previously.
As a consequence of this experience of sharing stories of businesses that didn't work, we decided to create a platform of events to help others share their failure stories.
And we called it Fuckup Nights.
Years later, we also created a research center devoted to the story of failure and its implications on business, people and society and as we love cool names, we called it the Failure Institute.
It has been surprising to see that when an entrepreneur stands on a stage and shares a story of failure, she can actually enjoy that experience.
It doesn't have to be a moment of shame and embarrassment, as it used to be in the past.
It is an opportunity to share lessons learned and build empathy.
We have also discovered that when the members of a team share their failures, magic happens.
Bonds grow stronger and collaboration becomes easier.
Through our events and research projects, we have found some interesting facts.
For instance, that men and women react in a different way after the failure of a business.
The most common reaction among men is to start a new business within one year of failure, but in a different sector, while women decide to look for a job and postpone the creation of a new business.
Our hypothesis is that this happens because women tend to suffer more from the impostor syndrome.
We feel that we need something else to be a good entrepreneur.
But I have seen that in many, many cases women have everything that's needed.
We just need to take the step.
And in the case of men, it is more common to see that they feel they have enough knowledge and just need to put it in practice in another place with better luck.
Another interesting finding has been that there are regional differences on how entrepreneurs cope with failure.
For instance, the most common reaction after the failure of a business in the American continent is to go back to school.
While in Europe, the most common reaction is to look for a therapist.
(Laughter) We're not sure which is a better reaction after the failure of a business, but this is something we will study in the future.
Another interesting finding has been the profound impact that public policy has on failed entrepreneurs.
For instance, in my country, in Mexico, the regulatory environment is so hard, that closing a business can take you a lot of time and a lot of money.
Let's begin with the money.
In the best possible scenario, meaning you don't have problems with partners, providers, clients, employees, in the best possible scenario, officially closing a business will cost you 2,000 dollars.
Which is a lot of money in Mexico.
Someone who earns the minimum wage would have to work for 15 months to save this amount.
Now, let's talk about the time.
As you may know, in most of the developing world, the average life expectancy of a business is two years.
In Mexico, the process of officially closing a business takes two years.
What happens when the average life expectancy of a business is so similar to the time it will take you to close it if it doesn't work?
Of course, this discourages business creation and promotes informal economy.
In fact, econometric research has proved that if the process of declaring bankruptcy takes less time and less money, more new firms will enter the market.
For this reason, in 2017, we proposed a series of public policy recommendations for the procedure of officially closing businesses in Mexico.
For a whole year, we worked with entrepreneurs from all over the country and with Congress.
And the good news is that we managed to help change the law.
Yay!
(Applause) The idea is that when the new regulation comes into force, entrepreneurs will be able to close their businesses in an online procedure that is faster and inexpensive.
(Sighs) On the night we invented Fuckup Nights, we never imagined that the movement would grow this big.
We are in 80 countries now.
In that moment, our only intention was to put the topic of failure on the table.
To help our friends see that failure is something we must talk about.
It is not a cause of humiliation, as it used to be in the past, or a cause of celebration, as some people say.
In fact, I want to confess something.
Every time I listen to Silicon Valley types or students bragging about failing fast and often like it's no big deal, I cringe.
Because I think that there is a dark side on the mantra "fail fast."
Of course, failing fast is a great way to accelerate learning and avoid wasting time.
But I fear that when we present rapid failure to entrepreneurs as their one and only option, we might be promoting laziness.
We might be promoting that entrepreneurs give up too easily.
I also fear that the culture of rapid failure could be minimizing the devastating consequences of the failure of a business.
For instance, when my social enterprise died, the worst part was that I had to go back to the indigenous community and tell the women that the business had failed and it was my fault.
For some people this could be seen like a great learning opportunity for me, but the truth is that the closure of this business represented much more than that.
It meant that the women would stop receiving an income that they really needed.
For this reason, I want to propose something.
I want to propose that just as we put aside the idea of publicly humiliating failed entrepreneurs, we must put aside the idea that failing fast is always the best.
And I want to propose a new mantra: fail mindfully.
We must remember that businesses are made of people, businesses are not entities that appear and disappear magically without consequences.
When a firm dies, some people will lose their jobs.
And others will lose their money.
And in the case of social and green enterprises, the death of this business can have a negative impact on the ecosystems or communities they were trying to serve.
But what does it mean to fail mindfully?
It means being aware of the impact, of the consequences of the failure of that business.
Being aware of the lessons learned.
And being aware of the responsibility to share those learnings with the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Vincent Moon: How can we use computers, cameras, microphones to represent the world in an alternative way, as much as possible?
How, maybe, is it possible to use the Internet to create a new form of cinema?
And actually, why do we record?
Well, it is with such simple questions in mind that I started to make films 10 years ago, first with a friend, Christophe Abric.
He had a website, La Blogothèque, dedicated to independent music.
We were crazy about music.
We wanted to represent music in a different way, to film the music we love, the musicians we admired, as much as possible, far from the music industry and far from the cliches attached to it.
We started to publish every week sessions on the Internet.
We are going to see a few extracts now.
From Grizzly Bear in the shower to Sigur Ros playing in a Parisian cafe.
From Phoenix playing by the Eiffel Tower to Tom Jones in his hotel room in New York.
From Arcade Fire in an elevator in the Olympia to Beirut going down a staircase in Brooklyn.
From R.E.M. in a car to The National around a table at night in the south of France.
From Bon Iver playing with some friends in an apartment in Montmartre to Yeasayer having a long night, and many, many, many more unknown or very famous bands.
We published all those films for free on the Internet, and we wanted to share all those films and represent music in a different way.
We wanted to create another type of intimacy using all those new technologies.
At the time, 10 years ago actually, there was no such project on the Internet, and I guess that's why the project we were making, the Take Away Shows, got quite successful, reaching millions of viewers.
After a while, I got a bit — I wanted to go somewhere else.
I felt the need to travel and to discover some other music, to explore the world, going to other corners, and actually it was also this idea of nomadic cinema, sort of, that I had in mind.
How could the use of new technologies and the road fit together?
How could I edit my films in a bus crossing the Andes?
So I went on five-year travels around the globe.
I started at the time in the digital film and music label collection Petites Planètes, which was also an homage to French filmmaker Chris Marker.
We're going to see now a few more extracts of those new films.
From the tecno brega diva of northern Brazil, Gaby Amarantos to a female ensemble in Chechnya.
From experimental electronic music in Singapore with One Man Nation to Brazilian icon Tom Zé singing on his rooftop in São Paolo.
From The Bambir, the great rock band from Armenia to some traditional songs in a restaurant in Tbilisi, Georgia.
From White Shoes, a great retro pop band from Jakarta, Indonesia to DakhaBrakha, the revolutionary band from Kiev, Ukraine.
From Tomi Lebrero and his bandoneon and his friends in Buenos Aires, Argentina, to many other places and musicians around the world.
My desire was to make it as a trek.
To do all those films, it would have been impossible with a big company behind me, with a structure or anything.
I was traveling alone with a backpack — computer, camera, microphones in it.
Alone, actually, but just with local people, meeting my team, which was absolutely not professional people, on the spot there, going from one place to another and to make cinema as a trek.
I really believed that cinema could be this very simple thing: I want to make a film and you're going to give me a place to stay for the night.
I give you a moment of cinema and you offer me a capirinha.
Well, or other drinks, depending on where you are.
In Peru, they drink pisco sour.
Well, when I arrived in Peru, actually, I had no idea about what I would do there.
And I just had one phone number, actually, of one person.
Three months later, after traveling all around the country, I had recorded 33 films, only with the help of local people, only with the help of people that I was asking all the time the same question: What is important to record here today?
By living in such a way, by working without any structure, I was able to react to the moment and to decide, oh, this is important to make now.
This is important to record that whole person.
This is important to create this exchange.
When I went to Chechnya, the first person I met looked at me and was like, "What are you doing here?
Are you a journalist? NGO? Politics?
What kind of problems are you going to study?"
Well, I was there to research on Sufi rituals in Chechnya, actually — incredible culture of Sufism in Chechnya, which is absolutely unknown outside of the region.
As soon as people understood that I would give them those films — I would publish them online for free under a Creative Commons license, but I would also really give them to the people and I would let them do what they want with it.
I just want to represent them in a beautiful light.
I just want to portray them in a way that their grandchildren are going to look at their grandfather, and they're going to be like, "Whoa, my grandfather is as cool as Beyoncé." (Laughter) It's a really important thing.
(Applause) It's really important, because that's the way people are going to look differently at their own culture, at their own land.
They're going to think about it differently.
It may be a way to maintain a certain diversity.
Why you will record?
Hmm. There's a really good quote by American thinker Hakim Bey which says, "Every recording is a tombstone of a live performance."
It's a really good sentence to keep in mind nowadays in an era saturated by images.
What's the point of that?
Where do we go with it?
I was researching. I was still keeping this idea in mind: What's the point?
I was researching on music, trying to pull, trying to get closer to a certain origin of it.
Where is this all coming from?
I am French. I had no idea about what I would discover, which is a very simple thing: Everything was sacred, at first, and music was spiritual healing.
How could I use my camera, my little tool, to get closer and maybe not only capture the trance but find an equivalent, a cine-trance, maybe, something in complete harmony with the people?
That is now my new research I'm doing on spirituality, on new spirits around the world.
Maybe a few more extracts now.
From the Tana Toraja funeral ritual in Indonesia to an Easter ceremony in the north of Ethiopia.
From jathilan, a popular trance ritual on the island of Java, to Umbanda in the north of Brazil.
The Sufi rituals of Chechnya to a mass in the holiest church of Armenia.
Some Sufi songs in Harar, the holy city of Ethiopia, to an ayahuasca ceremony deep in the Amazon of Peru with the Shipibo.
Then to my new project, the one I'm doing now here in Brazil, named "Híbridos."
I'm doing it with Priscilla Telmon.
It's research on the new spiritualities all around the country.
This is my quest, my own little quest of what I call experimental ethnography, trying to hybrid all those different genres, trying to regain a certain complexity.
Why do we record?
I was still there.
I really believe cinema teaches us to see.
The way we show the world is going to change the way we see this world, and we live in a moment where the mass media are doing a terrible, terrible job at representing the world: violence, extremists, only spectacular events, only simplifications of everyday life.
I think we are recording to regain a certain complexity.
To reinvent life today, we have to make new forms of images.
And it's very simple.
Muito obrigado.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Vincent, Vincent, Vincent.
Merci. We have to prepare for the following performance, and I have a question for you, and the question is this: You show up in places like the ones you just have shown us, and you are carrying a camera and I assume that you are welcome but you are not always absolutely welcome.
You walk into sacred rituals, private moments in a village, a town, a group of people.
How do you break the barrier when you show up with a lens?
VM: I think you break it with your body, more than with your knowledge.
That's what it taught me to travel, to trust the memory of the body more than the memory of the brain.
The respect is stepping forward, not stepping backward, and I really think that by engaging your body in the moment, in the ceremony, in the places, people welcome you and understand your energy.
BG: You told me that most of the videos you have made are actually one single shot.
You don't do much editing.
I mean, you edited the ones for us at the beginning of the sessions because of the length, etc.
Otherwise, you just go in and capture whatever happens in front of your eyes without much planning, and so is that the case?
It's correct?
VM: My idea is that I think that as long as we don't cut, in a way, as long as we let the viewer watch, more and more viewers are going to feel closer, are going to get closer to the moment, to that moment and to that place.
I really think of that as a matter of respecting the viewer, to not cut all the time from one place to another, to just let the time go.
BG: Tell me in a few words about your new project, "Híbridos," here in Brazil.
Just before coming to TEDGlobal, you have actually been traveling around the country for that.
Tell us a couple of things.
VM: "Híbridos" is — I really believe Brazil, far from the cliches, is the greatest religious country in the world, the greatest country in terms of spirituality and in experimentations in spiritualities.
And it's a big project I'm doing over this year, which is researching in very different regions of Brazil, in very different forms of cults, and trying to understand how people live together with spirituality nowadays.
BG: The man who is going to appear onstage momentarily, and Vincent's going to introduce him, is one of the subjects of one of his past videos.
When did you do a video with him?
VM: I guess four years ago, four years in my first travel.
BG: So it was one of your first ones in Brazil.
VM: It was amongst the first ones in Brazil, yeah.
I shot the film in Recife, in the place where he is from.
BG: So let's introduce him. Who are we waiting for?
VM: I'll just make it very short.
It's a very great honor for me to welcome onstage one of the greatest Brazilian musicians of all time.
Please welcome Naná Vasconcelos.
BG: Naná Vasconcelos!
(Applause) (Music) Naná Vasconcelos: Let's go to the jungle.
(Applause)
The first patient to ever be treated with an antibiotic was a policeman in Oxford.
On his day off from work, he was scratched by a rose thorn while working in the garden.
That small scratch became infected.
Over the next few days, his head was swollen with abscesses, and in fact his eye was so infected that they had to take it out, and by February of 1941, this poor man was on the verge of dying.
He was at Radcliffe Infirmary in Oxford, and fortunately for him, a small team of doctors led by a Dr. Howard Florey had managed to synthesize a very small amount of penicillin, a drug that had been discovered 12 years before by Alexander Fleming but had never actually been used to treat a human, and indeed no one even knew if the drug would work, if it was full of impurities that would kill the patient, but Florey and his team figured if they had to use it, they might as well use it on someone who was going to die anyway.
So they gave Albert Alexander, this Oxford policeman, the drug, and within 24 hours, he started getting better.
His fever went down, his appetite came back.
Second day, he was doing much better.
They were starting to run out of penicillin, so what they would do was run with his urine across the road to re-synthesize the penicillin from his urine and give it back to him, and that worked.
Day four, well on the way to recovery.
This was a miracle.
Day five, they ran out of penicillin, and the poor man died.
So that story didn't end that well, but fortunately for millions of other people, like this child who was treated again in the early 1940s, who was again dying of a sepsis, and within just six days, you can see, recovered thanks to this wonder drug, penicillin.
Millions have lived, and global health has been transformed.
Now, antibiotics have been used for patients like this, but they've also been used rather frivolously in some instances, for treating someone with just a cold or the flu, which they might not have responded to an antibiotic, and they've also been used in large quantities sub-therapeutically, which means in small concentrations, to make chicken and hogs grow faster.
Just to save a few pennies on the price of meat, we've spent a lot of antibiotics on animals, not for treatment, not for sick animals, but primarily for growth promotion.
Now, what did that lead us to?
Basically, the massive use of antibiotics around the world has imposed such large selection pressure on bacteria that resistance is now a problem, because we've now selected for just the resistant bacteria.
And I'm sure you've all read about this in the newspapers, you've seen this in every magazine that you come across, but I really want you to appreciate the significance of this problem.
This is serious.
The next slide I'm about to show you is of carbapenem resistance in acinetobacter.
Acinetobacter is a nasty hospital bug, and carbapenem is pretty much the strongest class of antibiotics that we can throw at this bug.
And you can see in 1999 this is the pattern of resistance, mostly under about 10 percent across the United States.
Now watch what happens when we play the video.
So I don't know where you live, but wherever it is, it certainly is a lot worse now than it was in 1999, and that is the problem of antibiotic resistance.
It's a global issue affecting both rich and poor countries, and at the heart of it, you might say, well, isn't this really just a medical issue?
If we taught doctors how not to use antibiotics as much, if we taught patients how not to demand antibiotics, perhaps this really wouldn't be an issue, and maybe the pharmaceutical companies should be working harder to develop more antibiotics.
Now, it turns out that there's something fundamental about antibiotics which makes it different from other drugs, which is that if I misuse antibiotics or I use antibiotics, not only am I affected but others are affected as well, in the same way as if I choose to drive to work or take a plane to go somewhere, that the costs I impose on others through global climate change go everywhere, and I don't necessarily take these costs into consideration.
This is what economists might call a problem of the commons, and the problem of the commons is exactly what we face in the case of antibiotics as well: that we don't consider — and we, including individuals, patients, hospitals, entire health systems — do not consider the costs that they impose on others by the way antibiotics are actually used.
Now, that's a problem that's similar to another area that we all know about, which is of fuel use and energy, and of course energy use both depletes energy as well as leads to local pollution and climate change.
And typically, in the case of energy, there are two ways in which you can deal with the problem.
One is, we can make better use of the oil that we have, and that's analogous to making better use of existing antibiotics, and we can do this in a number of ways that we'll talk about in a second, but the other option is the "drill, baby, drill" option, which in the case of antibiotics is to go find new antibiotics.
Now, these are not separate.
They're related, because if we invest heavily in new oil wells, we reduce the incentives for conservation of oil in the same way that's going to happen for antibiotics.
The reverse is also going to happen, which is that if we use our antibiotics appropriately, we don't necessarily have to make the investments in new drug development.
And if you thought that these two were entirely, fully balanced between these two options, you might consider the fact that this is really a game that we're playing.
The game is really one of coevolution, and coevolution is, in this particular picture, between cheetahs and gazelles.
Cheetahs have evolved to run faster, because if they didn't run faster, they wouldn't get any lunch.
Gazelles have evolved to run faster because if they don't run faster, they would be lunch.
Now, this is the game we're playing against the bacteria, except we're not the cheetahs, we're the gazelles, and the bacteria would, just in the course of this little talk, would have had kids and grandkids and figured out how to be resistant just by selection and trial and error, trying it over and over again.
Whereas how do we stay ahead of the bacteria?
We have drug discovery processes, screening molecules, we have clinical trials, and then, when we think we have a drug, then we have the FDA regulatory process.
And once we go through all of that, then we try to stay one step ahead of the bacteria.
Now, this is clearly not a game that can be sustained, or one that we can win by simply innovating to stay ahead.
We've got to slow the pace of coevolution down, and there are ideas that we can borrow from energy that are helpful in thinking about how we might want to do this in the case of antibiotics as well.
Now, if you think about how we deal with energy pricing, for instance, we consider emissions taxes, which means we're imposing the costs of pollution on people who actually use that energy.
We might consider doing that for antibiotics as well, and perhaps that would make sure that antibiotics actually get used appropriately.
There are clean energy subsidies, which are to switch to fuels which don't pollute as much or perhaps don't need fossil fuels.
Now, the analogy here is, perhaps we need to move away from using antibiotics, and if you think about it, what are good substitutes for antibiotics?
Well, turns out that anything that reduces the need for the antibiotic would really work, so that could include improving hospital infection control or vaccinating people, particularly against the seasonal influenza.
And the seasonal flu is probably the biggest driver of antibiotic use, both in this country as well as in many other countries, and that could really help.
A third option might include something like tradeable permits.
And these seem like faraway scenarios, but if you consider the fact that we might not have antibiotics for many people who have infections, we might consider the fact that we might want to allocate who actually gets to use some of these antibiotics over others, and some of these might have to be on the basis of clinical need, but also on the basis of pricing.
And certainly consumer education works.
Very often, people overuse antibiotics or prescribe too much without necessarily knowing that they do so, and feedback mechanisms have been found to be useful, both on energy — When you tell someone that they're using a lot of energy during peak hour, they tend to cut back, and the same sort of example has been performed even in the case of antibiotics.
A hospital in St. Louis basically would put up on a chart the names of surgeons in the ordering of how much antibiotics they'd used in the previous month, and this was purely an informational feedback, there was no shaming, but essentially that provided some information back to surgeons that maybe they could rethink how they were using antibiotics.
Now, there's a lot that can be done on the supply side as well.
If you look at the price of penicillin, the cost per day is about 10 cents.
It's a fairly cheap drug.
If you take drugs that have been introduced since then — linezolid or daptomycin — those are significantly more expensive, so to a world that has been used to paying 10 cents a day for antibiotics, the idea of paying 180 dollars per day seems like a lot.
But what is that really telling us?
That price is telling us that we should no longer take cheap, effective antibiotics as a given into the foreseeable future, and that price is a signal to us that perhaps we need to be paying much more attention to conservation.
That price is also a signal that maybe we need to start looking at other technologies, in the same way that gasoline prices are a signal and an impetus, to, say, the development of electric cars.
Prices are important signals and we need to pay attention, but we also need to consider the fact that although these high prices seem unusual for antibiotics, they're nothing compared to the price per day of some cancer drugs, which might save a patient's life only for a few months or perhaps a year, whereas antibiotics would potentially save a patient's life forever.
So this is going to involve a whole new paradigm shift, and it's also a scary shift because in many parts of this country, in many parts of the world, the idea of paying 200 dollars for a day of antibiotic treatment is simply unimaginable.
So we need to think about that.
Now, there are backstop options, which is other alternative technologies that people are working on.
It includes bacteriophages, probiotics, quorum sensing, synbiotics.
Now, all of these are useful avenues to pursue, and they will become even more lucrative when the price of new antibiotics starts going higher, and we've seen that the market does actually respond, and the government is now considering ways of subsidizing new antibiotics and development.
But there are challenges here.
We don't want to just throw money at a problem.
What we want to be able to do is invest in new antibiotics in ways that actually encourage appropriate use and sales of those antibiotics, and that really is the challenge here.
Now, going back to these technologies, you all remember the line from that famous dinosaur film, "Nature will find a way."
So it's not as if these are permanent solutions.
We really have to remember that, whatever the technology might be, that nature will find some way to work around it.
You might think, well, this is just a problem just with antibiotics and with bacteria, but it turns out that we have the exact same identical problem in many other fields as well, with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, which is a serious problem in India and South Africa.
Thousands of patients are dying because the second-line drugs are so expensive, and in some instances, even those don't work and you have XDR TB.
Viruses are becoming resistant.
Agricultural pests. Malaria parasites.
Right now, much of the world depends on one drug, artemisinin drugs, essentially to treat malaria.
Resistance to artemisinin has already emerged, and if this were to become widespread, that puts at risk the single drug that we have to treat malaria around the world in a way that's currently safe and efficacious.
Mosquitos develop resistance.
If you have kids, you probably know about head lice, and if you're from New York City, I understand that the specialty there is bedbugs.
So those are also resistant.
And we have to bring an example from across the pond.
Turns out that rats are also resistant to poisons.
Now, what's common to all of these things is the idea that we've had these technologies to control nature only for the last 70, 80 or 100 years and essentially in a blink, we have squandered our ability to control, because we have not recognized that natural selection and evolution was going to find a way to get back, and we need to completely rethink how we're going to use measures to control biological organisms, and rethink how we incentivize the development, introduction, in the case of antibiotics prescription, and use of these valuable resources.
And we really now need to start thinking about them as natural resources.
And so we stand at a crossroads.
An option is to go through that rethinking and carefully consider incentives to change how we do business.
The alternative is a world in which even a blade of grass is a potentially lethal weapon.
Thank you.
(Applause)
They told me that I'm a traitor to my own profession, that I should be fired, have my medical license taken away, that I should go back to my own country.
My email got hacked.
In a discussion forum for other doctors, someone took credit for "Twitter-bombing" my account.
Now, I didn't know if this was a good or bad thing, but then came the response: "Too bad it wasn't a real bomb."
I never thought that I would do something that would provoke this level of anger among other doctors.
Becoming a doctor was my dream.
I grew up in China, and my earliest memories are of being rushed to the hospital because I had such bad asthma that I was there nearly every week.
I had this one doctor, Dr. Sam, who always took care of me.
She was about the same age as my mother.
She had this wild, curly hair, and she always wore these bright yellow flowery dresses.
She was one of those doctors who, if you fell and you broke your arm, she would ask you why you weren't laughing because it's your humerus. Get it?
See, you'd groan, but she'd always make you feel better after having seen her.
Well, we all have that childhood hero that we want to grow up to be just like, right?
Well, I wanted to be just like Dr. Sam.
When I was eight, my parents and I moved to the U.S., and ours became the typical immigrant narrative.
My parents cleaned hotel rooms and washed dishes and pumped gas so that I could pursue my dream.
Well, eventually I learned enough English, and my parents were so happy the day that I got into medical school and took my oath of healing and service.
But then one day, everything changed.
My mother called me to tell me that she wasn't feeling well, she had a cough that wouldn't go away, she was short of breath and tired.
Well, I knew that my mother was someone who never complained about anything.
For her to tell me that something was the matter, I knew something had to be really wrong.
And it was: We found out that she had stage IV breast cancer, cancer that by then had spread to her lungs, her bones, and her brain.
My mother was brave, though, and she had hope.
She went through surgery and radiation, and was on her third round of chemotherapy when she lost her address book.
She tried to look up her oncologist's phone number on the Internet and she found it, but she found something else too.
On several websites, he was listed as a highly paid speaker to a drug company, and in fact often spoke on behalf of the same chemo regimen that he had prescribed her.
She called me in a panic, and I didn't know what to believe.
Maybe this was the right chemo regimen for her, but maybe it wasn't.
It made her scared and it made her doubt.
When it comes to medicine, having that trust is a must, and when that trust is gone, then all that's left is fear.
There's another side to this fear.
As a medical student, I was taking care of this 19-year-old who was biking back to his dorm when he got struck and hit, run over by an SUV.
He had seven broken ribs, shattered hip bones, and he was bleeding inside his belly and inside his brain.
Now, imagine being his parents who flew in from Seattle, 2,000 miles away, to find their son in a coma.
I mean, you'd want to find out what's going on with him, right?
They asked to attend our bedside rounds where we discussed his condition and his plan, which I thought was a reasonable request, and also would give us a chance to show them how much we were trying and how much we cared.
The head doctor, though, said no.
He gave all kinds of reasons.
Maybe they'll get in the nurse's way.
Maybe they'll stop students from asking questions.
He even said, "What if they see mistakes and sue us?"
What I saw behind every excuse was deep fear, and what I learned was that to become a doctor, we have to put on our white coats, put up a wall, and hide behind it.
There's a hidden epidemic in medicine.
Of course, patients are scared when they come to the doctor.
Imagine you wake up with this terrible bellyache, you go to the hospital, you're lying in this strange place, you're on this hospital gurney, you're wearing this flimsy gown, strangers are coming to poke and prod at you.
You don't know what's going to happen.
You don't even know if you're going to get the blanket you asked for 30 minutes ago.
But it's not just patients who are scared; doctors are scared too.
We're scared of patients finding out who we are and what medicine is all about.
And so what do we do?
We put on our white coats and we hide behind them.
Of course, the more we hide, the more people want to know what it is that we're hiding.
The more fear then spirals into mistrust and poor medical care.
We don't just have a fear of sickness, we have a sickness of fear.
Can we bridge this disconnect between what patients need and what doctors do?
Can we overcome the sickness of fear?
Let me ask you differently: If hiding isn't the answer, what if we did the opposite?
What if doctors were to become totally transparent with their patients?
Last fall, I conducted a research study to find out what it is that people want to know about their healthcare.
I didn't just want to study patients in a hospital, but everyday people.
So my two medical students, Suhavi Tucker and Laura Johns, literally took their research to the streets.
They went to banks, coffee shops, senior centers, Chinese restaurants and train stations.
What did they find?
Well, when we asked people, "What do you want to know about your healthcare?"
people responded with what they want to know about their doctors, because people understand health care to be the individual interaction between them and their doctors.
When we asked, "What do you want to know about your doctors?"
people gave three different answers.
Some want to know that their doctor is competent and certified to practice medicine.
Some want to be sure that their doctor is unbiased and is making decisions based on evidence and science, not on who pays them.
Surprisingly to us, many people want to know something else about their doctors.
Jonathan, a 28-year-old law student, says he wants to find someone who is comfortable with LGBTQ patients and specializes in LGBT health.
Serena, a 32-year-old accountant, says that it's important to her for her doctor to share her values when it comes to reproductive choice and women's rights.
Frank, a 59-year-old hardware store owner, doesn't even like going to the doctor and wants to find someone who believes in prevention first, but who is comfortable with alternative treatments.
One after another, our respondents told us that that doctor-patient relationship is a deeply intimate one — that to show their doctors their bodies and tell them their deepest secrets, they want to first understand their doctor's values.
Just because doctors have to see every patient doesn't mean that patients have to see every doctor.
People want to know about their doctors first so that they can make an informed choice.
As a result of this, I formed a campaign, Who's My Doctor?
that calls for total transparency in medicine.
Participating doctors voluntarily disclose on a public website not just information about where we went to medical school and what specialty we're in, but also our conflicts of interest.
We go beyond the Government in the Sunshine Act about drug company affiliations, and we talk about how we're paid.
Incentives matter.
If you go to your doctor because of back pain, you might want to know he's getting paid 5,000 dollars to perform spine surgery versus 25 dollars to refer you to see a physical therapist, or if he's getting paid the same thing no matter what he recommends.
Then, we go one step further.
We add our values when it comes to women's health, LGBT health, alternative medicine, preventive health, and end-of-life decisions.
We pledge to our patients that we are here to serve you, so you have a right to know who we are.
We believe that transparency can be the cure for fear.
I thought some doctors would sign on and others wouldn't, but I had no idea of the huge backlash that would ensue.
Within one week of starting Who's My Doctor?
Medscape's public forum and several online doctors' communities had thousands of posts about this topic.
Here are a few.
From a gastroenterologist in Portland: "I devoted 12 years of my life to being a slave.
I have loans and mortgages.
I depend on lunches from drug companies to serve patients."
Well, times may be hard for everyone, but try telling your patient making 35,000 dollars a year to serve a family of four that you need the free lunch.
From an orthopedic surgeon in Charlotte: "I find it an invasion of my privacy to disclose where my income comes from.
My patients don't disclose their incomes to me."
But your patients' sources of income don't affect your health.
From a psychiatrist in New York City: "Pretty soon we will have to disclose whether we prefer cats to dogs, what model of car we drive, and what toilet paper we use."
Well, how you feel about Toyotas or Cottonelle won't affect your patients' health, but your views on a woman's right to choose and preventive medicine and end-of-life decisions just might.
And my favorite, from a Kansas City cardiologist: "More government-mandated stuff?
Dr. Wen needs to move back to her own country."
Well, two pieces of good news.
First of all, this is meant to be voluntary and not mandatory, and second of all, I'm American and I'm already here.
(Laughter) (Applause) Within a month, my employers were getting calls asking for me to be fired.
I received mail at my undisclosed home address with threats to contact the medical board to sanction me.
My friends and family urged me to quit this campaign.
After the bomb threat, I was done.
But then I heard from patients.
Over social media, a TweetChat, which I'd learned what that was by then, generated 4.3 million impressions, and thousands of people wrote to encourage me to continue.
They wrote with things like, "If doctors are doing something they're that ashamed of, they shouldn't be doing it."
"Elected officials have to disclose campaign contributions.
Lawyers have to disclose conflicts of interests.
Why shouldn't doctors?"
And finally, many people wrote and said, "Let us patients decide what's important when we're choosing a doctor."
In our initial trial, over 300 doctors have taken the total transparency pledge.
What a crazy new idea, right?
But actually, this is not that new of a concept at all.
Remember Dr. Sam, my doctor in China, with the goofy jokes and the wild hair?
Well, she was my doctor, but she was also our neighbor who lived in the building across the street.
I went to the same school as her daughter.
My parents and I trusted her because we knew who she was and what she stood for, and she had no need to hide from us.
Just one generation ago, this was the norm in the U.S. as well.
You knew that your family doctor was the father of two teenage boys, that he quit smoking a few years ago, that he says he's a regular churchgoer, but you see him twice a year: once at Easter and once when his mother-in-law comes to town.
You knew what he was about, and he had no need to hide from you.
But the sickness of fear has taken over, and patients suffer the consequences.
I know this firsthand.
My mother fought her cancer for eight years.
She was a planner, and she thought a lot about how she wanted to live and how she wanted to die.
Not only did she sign advance directives, she wrote a 12-page document about how she had suffered enough, how it was time for her to go.
One day, when I was a resident physician, I got a call to say that she was in the intensive care unit.
By the time I got there, she was about to be intubated and put on a breathing machine.
"But this is not what she wants," I said, "and we have documents."
The ICU doctor looked at me in the eye, pointed at my then 16-year-old sister, and said, "Do you remember when you were that age?
How would you have liked to grow up without your mother?"
Her oncologist was there too, and said, "This is your mother.
Can you really face yourself for the rest of your life if you don't do everything for her?"
I knew my mother so well.
I understood what her directives meant so well, but I was a physician.
That was the single hardest decision I ever made, to let her die in peace, and I carry those words of those doctors with me every single day.
We can bridge the disconnect between what doctors do and what patients need.
We can get there, because we've been there before, and we know that transparency gets us to that trust.
Research has shown us that openness also helps doctors, that having open medical records, being willing to talk about medical errors, will increase patient trust, improve health outcomes, and reduce malpractice.
That openness, that trust, is only going to be more important as we move from the infectious to the behavioral model of disease.
Bacteria may not care so much about trust and intimacy, but for people to tackle the hard lifestyle choices, to address issues like smoking cessation, blood-pressure management and diabetes control, well, that requires us to establish trust.
Here's what other transparent doctors have said.
Brandon Combs, an internist in Denver: "This has brought me closer to my patients.
The type of relationship I've developed — that's why I entered medicine."
Aaron Stupple, an internist in Denver: "I tell my patients that I am totally open with them.
I don't hide anything from them.
This is me. Now tell me about you.
We're in this together."
May Nguyen, a family physician in Houston: "My colleagues are astounded by what I'm doing.
They ask me how I could be so brave.
I said, I'm not being brave, it's my job."
I leave you today with a final thought.
Being totally transparent is scary.
You feel naked, exposed and vulnerable, but that vulnerability, that humility, it can be an extraordinary benefit to the practice of medicine.
When doctors are willing to step off our pedestals, take off our white coats, and show our patients who we are and what medicine is all about, that's when we begin to overcome the sickness of fear.
That's when we establish trust.
That's when we change the paradigm of medicine from one of secrecy and hiding to one that is fully open and engaged for our patients.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On January 4, 1934, a young man delivered a report to the United States Congress that 80 years on, still shapes the lives of everyone in this room today, still shapes the lives of everyone on this planet.
That young man wasn't a politician, he wasn't a businessman, a civil rights activist or a faith leader.
He was that most unlikely of heroes, an economist.
His name was Simon Kuznets and the report that he delivered was called "National Income, 1929-1932."
Now, you might think this is a rather dry and dull report.
And you're absolutely right.
It's dry as a bone.
But this report is the foundation of how, today, we judge the success of countries: what we know best as Gross Domestic Product, GDP.
GDP has defined and shaped our lives for the last 80 years.
And today I want to talk about a different way to measure the success of countries, a different way to define and shape our lives for the next 80 years.
But first, we have to understand how GDP came to dominate our lives.
Kuznets' report was delivered at a moment of crisis.
The U.S. economy was plummeting into the Great Depression and policy makers were struggling to respond.
Struggling because they didn't know what was going on.
They didn't have data and statistics.
So what Kuznet's report gave them was reliable data on what the U.S. economy was producing, updated year by year.
And armed with this information, policy makers were, eventually, able to find a way out of the slump.
And because Kuznets' invention was found to be so useful, it spread around the world.
And now today, every country produces GDP statistics.
But, in that first report, Kuznets himself delivered a warning.
It's in the introductory chapter.
On page seven he says, "The welfare of a nation can, therefore, scarcely be inferred from a measurement of national income as defined above."
It's not the greatest sound bite in the world, and it's dressed up in the cautious language of the economist.
But his message was clear: GDP is a tool to help us measure economic performance.
It's not a measure of our well-being.
And it shouldn't be a guide to all decision making.
But we have ignored Kuznets' warning.
We live in a world where GDP is the benchmark of success in a global economy.
Our politicians boast when GDP goes up.
Markets move and trillions of dollars of capital move around the world based on which countries are going up and which countries are going down, all measured in GDP.
Our societies have become engines to create more GDP.
But we know that GDP is flawed.
It ignores the environment.
It counts bombs and prisons as progress.
It can't count happiness or community.
And it has nothing to say about fairness or justice.
Is it any surprise that our world, marching to the drumbeat of GDP, is teetering on the brink of environmental disaster and filled with anger and conflict?
We need a better way to measure our societies, a measure based on the real things that matter to real people.
Do I have enough to eat?
Can I read and write?
Am I safe?
Do I have rights?
Do I live in a society where I'm not discriminated against?
Is my future and the future of my children prevented from environmental destruction?
These are questions that GDP does not and cannot answer.
There have, of course, been efforts in the past to move beyond GDP.
But I believe that we're living in a moment when we are ready for a measurement revolution.
We're ready because we've seen, in the financial crisis of 2008, how our fetish for economic growth led us so far astray.
We've seen, in the Arab Spring, how countries like Tunisia were supposedly economic superstars, but they were societies that were seething with discontentment.
We're ready, because today we have the technology to gather and analyze data in ways that would have been unimaginable to Kuznets.
Today, I'd like to introduce you to the Social Progress Index.
It's a measure of the well-being of society, completely separate from GDP.
It's a whole new way of looking at the world.
The Social Progress Index begins by defining what it means to be a good society based around three dimensions.
The first is, does everyone have the basic needs for survival: food, water, shelter, safety?
Secondly, does everyone have access to the building blocks to improve their lives: education, information, health and sustainable environment?
And then third, does every individual have access to a chance to pursue their goals and dreams and ambitions free from obstacles?
Do they have rights, freedom of choice, freedom from discrimination and access to the the world's most advanced knowledge?
Together, these 12 components form the Social Progress framework.
And for each of these 12 components, we have indicators to measure how countries are performing.
Not indicators of effort or intention, but real achievement.
We don't measure how much a country spends on healthcare, we measure the length and quality of people's lives.
We don't measure whether governments pass laws against discrimination, we measure whether people experience discrimination.
But what you want to know is who's top, don't you? (Laughter) I knew that, I knew that, I knew that.
Okay, I'm going to show you.
I'm going to show you on this chart.
So here we are, what I've done here is put on the vertical axis social progress.
Higher is better.
And then, just for comparison, just for fun, on the horizontal axis is GDP per capita.
Further to the right is more.
So the country in the world with the highest social progress, the number one country on social progress is New Zealand.
(Applause) Well done! Never been; must go.
(Laughter) The country with the least social progress, I'm sorry to say, is Chad.
I've never been; maybe next year.
(Laughter) Or maybe the year after.
Now, I know what you're thinking.
You're thinking, "Aha, but New Zealand has a higher GDP than Chad!"
It's a good point, well made.
But let me show you two other countries.
Here's the United States — considerably richer than New Zealand, but with a lower level of social progress.
And then here's Senegal — it's got a higher level of social progress than Chad, but the same level of GDP.
So what's going on? Well, look.
Let me bring in the rest of the countries of the world, the 132 we've been able to measure, each one represented by a dot.
There we go. Lots of dots.
Now, obviously I can't do all of them, so a few highlights for you: The highest ranked G7 country is Canada.
My country, the United Kingdom, is sort of middling, sort of dull, but who cares — at least we beat the French.
(Laughter) And then looking at the emerging economies, top of the BRICS, pleased to say, is Brazil.
(Applause) Come on, cheer!
Go, Brazil!
Beating South Africa, then Russia, then China and then India.
Tucked away on the right-hand side, you will see a dot of a country with a lot of GDP but not a huge amount of social progress — that's Kuwait.
Just above Brazil is a social progress superpower — that's Costa Rica.
It's got a level of social progress the same as some Western European countries, with a much lower GDP.
Now, my slide is getting a little cluttered and I'd like to step back a bit.
So let me take away these countries, and then pop in the regression line.
So this shows the average relationship between GDP and social progress.
The first thing to notice, is that there's lots of noise around the trend line.
And what this shows, what this empirically demonstrates, is that GDP is not destiny.
At every level of GDP per capita, there are opportunities for more social progress, risks of less.
The second thing to notice is that for poor countries, the curve is really steep.
So what this tells us is that if poor countries can get a little bit of extra GDP, and if they reinvest that in doctors, nurses, water supplies, sanitation, etc., there's a lot of social progress bang for your GDP buck.
And that's good news, and that's what we've seen over the last 20, 30 years, with a lot of people lifted out of poverty by economic growth and good policies in poorer countries.
But go on a bit further up the curve, and then we see it flattening out.
Each extra dollar of GDP is buying less and less social progress.
And with more and more of the world's population living on this part of the curve, it means GDP is becoming less and less useful as a guide to our development.
I'll show you an example of Brazil.
Here's Brazil: social progress of about 70 out of 100, GDP per capita about 14,000 dollars a year.
And look, Brazil's above the line.
Brazil is doing a reasonably good job of turning GDP into social progress.
But where does Brazil go next?
Let's say that Brazil adopts a bold economic plan to double GDP in the next decade.
But that is only half a plan.
It's less than half a plan, because where does Brazil want to go on social progress?
Brazil, it's possible to increase your growth, increase your GDP, while stagnating or going backwards on social progress.
We don't want Brazil to become like Russia.
What you really want is for Brazil to get ever more efficient at creating social progress from its GDP, so it becomes more like New Zealand.
And what that means is that Brazil needs to prioritize social progress in its development plan and see that it's not just growth alone, it's growth with social progress.
And that's what the Social Progress Index does: It reframes the debate about development, not just about GDP alone, but inclusive, sustainable growth that brings real improvements in people's lives.
And it's not just about countries.
Earlier this year, with our friends from the Imazon nonprofit here in Brazil, we launched the first subnational Social Progress Index.
We did it for the Amazon region.
It's an area the size of Europe, 24 million people, one of the most deprived parts of the country.
And here are the results, and this is broken down into nearly 800 different municipalities.
And with this detailed information about the real quality of life in this part of the country, Imazon and other partners from government, business and civil society can work together to construct a development plan that will help really improve people's lives, while protecting that precious global asset that is the Amazon Rainforest.
And this is just the beginning, You can create a Social Progress Index for any state, region, city or municipality.
We all know and love TEDx; this is Social Pogress-x.
This is a tool for anyone to come and use.
Contrary to the way we sometimes talk about it, GDP was not handed down from God on tablets of stone. (Laughter) It's a measurement tool invented in the 20th century to address the challenges of the 20th century.
In the 21st century, we face new challenges: aging, obesity, climate change, and so on.
To face those challenges, we need new tools of measurement, new ways of valuing progress.
Imagine if we could measure what nonprofits, charities, volunteers, civil society organizations really contribute to our society.
Imagine if businesses competed not just on the basis of their economic contribution, but on their contribution to social progress.
Imagine if we could hold politicians to account for really improving people's lives.
Imagine if we could work together — government, business, civil society, me, you — and make this century the century of social progress.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Picture this: It's Monday morning, you're at the office, you're settling in for the day at work, and this guy that you sort of recognize from down the hall, walks right into your cubicle and he steals your chair.
Doesn't say a word — just rolls away with it.
Doesn't give you any information about why he took your chair out of all the other chairs that are out there.
Doesn't acknowledge the fact that you might need your chair to get some work done today.
You wouldn't stand for it. You'd make a stink.
You'd follow that guy back to his cubicle and you'd say, "Why my chair?"
Okay, so now it's Tuesday morning and you're at the office, and a meeting invitation pops up in your calendar.
(Laughter) And it's from this woman who you kind of know from down the hall, and the subject line references some project that you heard a little bit about.
But there's no agenda.
There's no information about why you were invited to the meeting.
And yet you accept the meeting invitation, and you go.
And when this highly unproductive session is over, you go back to your desk, and you stand at your desk and you say, "Boy, I wish I had those two hours back, like I wish I had my chair back."
(Laughter) Every day, we allow our coworkers, who are otherwise very, very nice people, to steal from us.
And I'm talking about something far more valuable than office furniture.
I'm talking about time. Your time.
In fact, I believe that we are in the middle of a global epidemic of a terrible new illness known as MAS: Mindless Accept Syndrome.
(Laughter) The primary symptom of Mindless Accept Syndrome is just accepting a meeting invitation the minute it pops up in your calendar.
(Laughter) It's an involuntary reflex — ding, click, bing — it's in your calendar, "Gotta go, I'm already late for a meeting." (Laughter) Meetings are important, right?
And collaboration is key to the success of any enterprise.
And a well-run meeting can yield really positive, actionable results.
But between globalization and pervasive information technology, the way that we work has really changed dramatically over the last few years.
And we're miserable. (Laughter) And we're miserable not because the other guy can't run a good meeting, it's because of MAS, our Mindless Accept Syndrome, which is a self-inflicted wound.
Actually, I have evidence to prove that MAS is a global epidemic.
Let me tell you why.
A couple of years ago, I put a video on Youtube, and in the video, I acted out every terrible conference call you've ever been on.
It goes on for about five minutes, and it has all the things that we hate about really bad meetings.
There's the moderator who has no idea how to run the meeting.
There are the participants who have no idea why they're there.
The whole thing kind of collapses into this collaborative train wreck.
And everybody leaves very angry.
It's kind of funny.
(Laughter) Let's take a quick look.
(Video) Our goal today is to come to an agreement on a very important proposal.
As a group, we need to decide if — bloop bloop — Hi, who just joined?
Hi, it's Joe. I'm working from home today.
(Laughter) Hi, Joe. Thanks for joining us today, great.
I was just saying, we have a lot of people on the call we'd like to get through, so let's skip the roll call and I'm gonna dive right in.
Our goal today is to come to an agreement on a very important proposal.
As a group, we need to decide if — bloop bloop — (Laughter) Hi, who just joined?
No? I thought I heard a beep. (Laughter) Sound familiar?
Yeah, it sounds familiar to me, too.
A couple of weeks after I put that online, 500,000 people in dozens of countries, I mean dozens of countries, watched this video.
And three years later, it's still getting thousands of views every month.
It's close to about a million right now.
And in fact, some of the biggest companies in the world, companies that you've heard of but I won't name, have asked for my permission to use this video in their new-hire training to teach their new employees how not to run a meeting at their company.
And if the numbers — there are a million views and it's being used by all these companies — aren't enough proof that we have a global problem with meetings, there are the many, many thousands of comments posted online after the video went up.
Thousands of people wrote things like, "OMG, that was my day today!"
"That was my day every day!"
"This is my life."
One guy wrote, "It's funny because it's true.
Eerily, sadly, depressingly true.
It made me laugh until I cried.
And cried. And I cried some more."
(Laughter) This poor guy said, "My daily life until retirement or death, sigh."
These are real quotes and it's real sad.
A common theme running through all of these comments online is this fundamental belief that we are powerless to do anything other than go to meetings and suffer through these poorly run meetings and live to meet another day.
But the truth is, we're not powerless at all.
In fact, the cure for MAS is right here in our hands.
It's right at our fingertips, literally.
It's something that I call ¡No MAS!
(Laughter) Which, if I remember my high school Spanish, means something like, "Enough already, make it stop!"
Here's how No MAS works. It's very simple.
First of all, the next time you get a meeting invitation that doesn't have a lot of information in it at all, click the tentative button!
It's okay, you're allowed, that's why it's there.
It's right next to the accept button.
Or the maybe button, or whatever button is there for you not to accept immediately.
Then, get in touch with the person who asked you to the meeting.
Tell them you're very excited to support their work, ask them what the goal of the meeting is, and tell them you're interested in learning how you can help them achieve their goal.
And if we do this often enough, and we do it respectfully, people might start to be a little bit more thoughtful about the way they put together meeting invitations.
And you can make more thoughtful decisions about accepting it.
People might actually start sending out agendas. Imagine!
Or they might not have a conference call with 12 people to talk about a status when they could just do a quick email and get it done with.
People just might start to change their behavior because you changed yours.
And they just might bring your chair back, too. (Laughter) No MAS!
Thank you.
(Applause).
I haven't told many people this, but in my head, I've got thousands of secret worlds all going on all at the same time.
I am also autistic.
People tend to diagnose autism with really specific check-box descriptions, but in reality, it's a whole variation as to what we're like.
For instance, my little brother, he's very severely autistic.
He's nonverbal. He can't talk at all.
But I love to talk.
People often associate autism with liking maths and science and nothing else, but I know so many autistic people who love being creative.
But that is a stereotype, and the stereotypes of things are often, if not always, wrong.
For instance, a lot of people think autism and think "Rain Man" immediately.
That's the common belief, that every single autistic person is Dustin Hoffman, and that's not true.
But that's not just with autistic people, either.
I've seen it with LGBTQ people, with women, with POC people.
People are so afraid of variety that they try to fit everything into a tiny little box with really specific labels.
This is something that actually happened to me in real life: I googled "autistic people are ..."
and it comes up with suggestions as to what you're going to type.
I googled "autistic people are ..."
and the top result was "demons."
That is the first thing that people think when they think autism.
They know.
(Laughter) One of the things I can do because I'm autistic — it's an ability rather than a disability — is I've got a very, very vivid imagination.
Let me explain it to you a bit.
It's like I'm walking in two worlds most of the time.
There's the real world, the world that we all share, and there's the world in my mind, and the world in my mind is often so much more real than the real world.
Like, it's very easy for me to let my mind loose because I don't try and fit myself into a tiny little box.
That's one of the best things about being autistic.
You don't have the urge to do that.
You find what you want to do, you find a way to do it, and you get on with it.
If I was trying to fit myself into a box, I wouldn't be here, I wouldn't have achieved half the things that I have now.
There are problems, though.
There are problems with being autistic, and there are problems with having too much imagination.
School can be a problem in general, but having also to explain to a teacher on a daily basis that their lesson is inexplicably dull and you are secretly taking refuge in a world inside your head in which you are not in that lesson, that adds to your list of problems.
(Laughter) Also, when my imagination takes hold, my body takes on a life of its own.
When something very exciting happens in my inner world, I've just got to run.
I've got to rock backwards and forwards, or sometimes scream.
This gives me so much energy, and I've got to have an outlet for all that energy.
But I've done that ever since I was a child, ever since I was a tiny little girl.
And my parents thought it was cute, so they didn't bring it up, but when I got into school, they didn't really agree that it was cute.
It can be that people don't want to be friends with the girl that starts screaming in an algebra lesson.
And this doesn't normally happen in this day and age, but it can be that people don't want to be friends with the autistic girl.
It can be that people don't want to associate with anyone who won't or can't fit themselves into a box that's labeled normal.
But that's fine with me, because it sorts the wheat from the chaff, and I can find which people are genuine and true and I can pick these people as my friends.
But if you think about it, what is normal?
What does it mean?
Imagine if that was the best compliment you ever received.
"Wow, you are really normal."
(Laughter) But compliments are, "you are extraordinary" or "you step outside the box."
It's "you're amazing."
So if people want to be these things, why are so many people striving to be normal?
Why are people pouring their brilliant individual light into a mold?
People are so afraid of variety that they try and force everyone, even people who don't want to or can't, to become normal.
There are camps for LGBTQ people or autistic people to try and make them this "normal," and that's terrifying that people would do that in this day and age.
All in all, I wouldn't trade my autism and my imagination for the world.
Because I am autistic, I've presented documentaries to the BBC, I'm in the midst of writing a book, I'm doing this — this is fantastic — and one of the best things that I've achieved, that I consider to have achieved, is I've found ways of communicating with my little brother and sister, who as I've said are nonverbal. They can't speak.
And people would often write off someone who's nonverbal, but that's silly, because my little brother and sister are the best siblings that you could ever hope for.
They're just the best, and I love them so much and I care about them more than anything else.
I'm going to leave you with one question: If we can't get inside the person's minds, no matter if they're autistic or not, instead of punishing anything that strays from normal, why not celebrate uniqueness and cheer every time someone unleashes their imagination?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Well, good afternoon.
How many of you took the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge?
(Applause) Woo hoo!
Well, I have to tell you, from the bottom of our hearts, thank you so very, very much.
Do you know to date the ALS Association has raised 125 million dollars?
Woo hoo! (Applause) It takes me back to the summer of 2011.
My family, my kids had all grown up.
We were officially empty nesters, and we decided, let's go on a family vacation.
Jenn, my daughter, and my son-in-law came down from New York.
My youngest, Andrew, he came down from his home in Charlestown where he was working in Boston, and my son Pete, who had played at Boston College, baseball, had played baseball professionally in Europe, and had now come home and was selling group insurance, he also joined us.
And one night, I found myself having a beer with Pete, and Pete was looking at me and he just said, "You know, Mom, I don't know, selling group insurance is just not my passion."
He said, "I just don't feel I'm living up to my potential.
I don't feel this is my mission in life."
And he said, "You know, oh by the way, Mom, I have to leave early from vacation because my inter-city league team that I play for made the playoffs, and I have to get back to Boston because I can't let my team down.
I'm just not as passionate about my job as I am about baseball."
So off Pete went, and left the family vacation — break a mother's heart — and he went, and we followed four days later to see the next playoff game.
We're at the playoff game, Pete's at the plate, and a fastball's coming in, and it hits him on the wrist.
Oh, Pete.
His wrist went completely limp, like this.
So for the next six months, Pete went back to his home in Southie, kept working that unpassionate job, and was going to doctors to see what was wrong with this wrist that never came back.
Six months later, in March, he called my husband and me, and he said, "Oh, Mom and Dad, we have a doctor that found a diagnosis for that wrist.
Do you want to come with the doctor's appointment with me?"
I said, "Sure, we'll come in."
That morning, Pete, John and I all got up, got dressed, got in our cars — three separate cars because we were going to go to work after the doctor's appointment to find out what happened to the wrist.
We walked into the neurologist's office, sat down, four doctors walk in, and the head neurologist sits down.
And he says, "Well, Pete, we've been looking at all the tests, and I have to tell you, it's not a sprained wrist, it's not a broken wrist, it's not nerve damage in the wrist, it's not an infection, it's not Lyme disease."
And there was this deliberate elimination going up, and I was thinking to myself, where is he going with this?
Then he put his hands on his knees, he looked right at my 27-year-old kid, and said, "I don't know how to tell a 27-year-old this: Pete, you have ALS."
ALS?
I had had a friend whose 80-year-old father had ALS.
I looked at my husband, he looked at me, and then we looked at the doctor, and we said, "ALS?
Okay, what treatment? Let's go.
What do we do? Let's go."
And he looked at us, and he said, "Mr. and Mrs. Frates, I'm sorry to tell you this, but there's no treatment and there's no cure."
We were the worst culprits.
We didn't even understand that it had been 75 years since Lou Gehrig and nothing had been done in the progress against ALS.
So we all went home, and Jenn and Dan flew home from Wall Street, Andrew came home from Charlestown, and Pete went to B.C. to pick up his then-girlfriend Julie and brought her home, and six hours later after diagnosis, we're sitting around having a family dinner, and we're having small chat.
I don't even remember cooking dinner that night.
But then our leader, Pete, set the vision, and talked to us just like we were his new team.
He said, "There will be no wallowing, people."
He goes, "We're not looking back, we're looking forward.
What an amazing opportunity we have to change the world.
I'm going to change the face of this unacceptable situation of ALS.
We're going to move the needle, and I'm going to get it in front of philanthropists like Bill Gates."
And that was it. We were given our directive.
So in the days and months that followed, within a week, we had our brothers and sisters and our family come to us, that they were already creating Team Frate Train.
Uncle Dave, he was the webmaster; Uncle Artie, he was the accountant; Auntie Dana, she was the graphic artist; and my youngest son, Andrew, quit his job, left his apartment in Charlestown and says, "I'm going to take care of Pete and be his caregiver."
Then all those people, classmates, teammates, coworkers that Pete had inspired throughout his whole life, the circles of Pete all started intersecting with one another, and made Team Frate Train.
Six months after diagnosis, Pete was given an award at a research summit for advocacy.
He got up and gave a very eloquent speech, and at the end of the speech, there was a panel, and on the panel were these pharmaceutical executives and biochemists and clinicians and I'm sitting there and I'm listening to them and most of the content went straight over my head.
I avoided every science class I ever could.
But I was watching these people, and I was listening to them, and they were saying, "I, I do this, I do that," and there was a real unfamiliarity between them.
So at the end of their talk, the panel, they had questions and answers, and boom, my hand went right up, and I get the microphone, and I look at them and I say, "Thank you.
Thank you so much for working in ALS.
It means so very much to us."
I said, "But I do have to tell you that I'm watching your body language and I'm listening to what you're saying.
It just doesn't seem like there's a whole lot of collaboration going on here.
And not only that, where's the flip chart with the action items and the follow-up and the accountability?
What are you going to do after you leave this room?"
And then I turned around and there was about 200 pairs of eyes just staring at me.
And it was that point that I realized that I had talked about the elephant in the room.
Thus my mission had begun.
So over the next couple of years, Pete — we've had our highs and our lows.
Pete was put on a compassionate use drug.
It was hope in a bottle for the whole ALS community.
It was in a phase III trial.
Then six months later, the data comes back: no efficacy.
We were supposed to have therapies overseas, and the rug was pulled out from under us.
So for the next two years, we just watched my son be taken away from me, little by little every day.
Two and a half years ago, Pete was hitting home runs at baseball fields.
Today, Pete's completely paralyzed.
He can't hold his head up any longer.
He's confined to a motorized wheelchair.
He can no longer swallow or eat.
He has a feeding tube.
He can't speak.
He talks with eye gaze technology and a speech generating device, and we're watching his lungs, because his diaphragm eventually is going to give out and then the decision will be made to put him on a ventilator or not.
ALS robs the human of all their physical parts, but the brain stays intact.
So July 4th, 2014, 75th year of Lou Gehrig's inspirational speech comes, and Pete is asked by MLB.com to write an article in the Bleacher Report.
And it was very significant, because he wrote it using his eye gaze technology.
Twenty days later, the ice started to fall.
On July 27th, Pete's roommate in New York City, wearing a Quinn For The Win shirt, signifying Pat Quinn, another ALS patient known in New York, and B.C. shorts said, "I'm taking the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge," picked up the ice, put it over his head.
"And I'm nominating ..." And he sent it up to Boston.
And that was on July 27th.
Over the next couple of days, our news feed was full of family and friends.
If you haven't gone back, the nice thing about Facebook is that you have the dates, you can go back.
You've got to see Uncle Artie's human Bloody Mary.
I'm telling you, it's one of the best ones, and that was probably in day two.
By about day four, Uncle Dave, the webmaster, he isn't on Facebook, and I get a text from him, and it says, "Nancy, what the hell is going on?"
Uncle Dave gets a hit every time Pete's website is gone onto, and his phone was blowing up.
So we all sat down and we realized, money is coming in — how amazing.
So we knew awareness would lead to funding, we just didn't know it would only take a couple of days.
So we got together, put our best 501(c)(3)s on Pete's website, and off we went.
So week one, Boston media.
Week two, national media.
It was during week two that our neighbor next door opened up our door and threw a pizza across the kitchen floor, saying, "I think you people might need food in there."
(Laughter) Week three, celebrities — Entertainment Tonight, Access Hollywood.
Week four, global — BBC, Irish Radio.
Did anyone see "Lost In Translation"?
My husband did Japanese television.
It was interesting.
(Laughter) And those videos, the popular ones.
Paul Bissonnette's glacier video, incredible.
How about the redemption nuns of Dublin?
Who's seen that one?
It's absolutely fantastic.
J.T., Justin Timberlake.
That's when we knew, that was a real A-list celebrity.
I go back on my texts, and I can see "JT! JT!" My sister texting me.
Angela Merkel, the chancellor of Germany.
Incredible.
And the ALS patients, you know what their favorite ones are, and their families'?
All of them.
Because this misunderstood and underfunded "rare" disease, they just sat and watched people saying it over and over: "ALS, ALS."
It was unbelievable.
And those naysayers, let's just talk a couple of stats, shall we?
Okay, so the ALS Association, they think by year end, it'll be 160 million dollars.
ALS TDI in Cambridge, they raised three million dollars.
Well, guess what?
They had a clinical trial for a drug that they've been developing.
It was on a three-year track for funding.
Two months.
It's coming out starting in two months.
(Applause) And YouTube has reported that over 150 countries have posted Ice Bucket Challenges for ALS.
And Facebook, 2.5 million videos, and I had the awesome adventure visiting the Facebook campus last week, and I said to them, "I know what it was like in my house.
I can't imagine what it was like around here."
All she said was, "Jaw-dropping."
And my family's favorite video?
Bill Gates.
Because the night Pete was diagnosed, he told us that he was going to get ALS in front of philanthropists like Bill Gates, and he did it.
Goal number one, check.
Now on to the treatment and cure.
(Applause) So okay, after all of this ice, we know that it was much more than just pouring buckets of ice water over your head, and I really would like to leave you with a couple of things that I'd like you to remember.
The first thing is, every morning when you wake up, you can choose to live your day in positivity.
Would any of you blame me if I just was in the fetal position and pulled the covers over my head every day?
No, I don't think anybody would blame me, but Pete has inspired us to wake up every morning and be positive and proactive.
I actually had to ditch support groups because everybody was in there saying that spraying their lawns with chemicals, that's why they got ALS, and I was like, "I don't think so," but I had to get away from the negativity.
The second thing I want to leave you with is the person at the middle of the challenge has to be willing to have the mental toughness to put themselves out there.
Pete still goes to baseball games and he still sits with his teammates in the dugout, and he hangs his gravity feed bag right on the cages.
You'll see the kids, they're up there hanging it up.
"Pete, is that okay?" "Yup."
And then they put it right into his stomach.
Because he wants them to see what the reality of this is, and how he's never, ever going to give up.
And the third thing I want to leave you with: If you ever come across a situation that you see as so unacceptable, I want you to dig down as deep as you can and find your best mother bear and go after it.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) I know that I'm running over, but I've got to leave you with this: the gifts that my son has given me.
I have had 29 years of having the honor of being the mother of Pete Frates.
Pete Frates has been inspiring and leading his whole life.
He's thrown out kindness, and all that kindness has come back to him.
He walks the face of the Earth right now and knows why he's here.
What a gift.
The second thing that my son has given me is he's given me my mission in life.
Now I know why I'm here.
I'm going to save my son, and if it doesn't happen in time for him, I'm going to work so that no other mother has to go through what I'm going through.
And the third thing, and last but not least gift that my son has given me, as an exclamation point to the miraculous month of August 2014: That girlfriend that he went to get on the night of diagnosis is now his wife, and Pete and Julie have given me my granddaughter, Lucy Fitzgerald Frates.
Lucy Fitzgerald Frates came two weeks early as the exclamation point on August 31st, 2014.
And so — (Applause) — And so let me leave you with Pete's words of inspiration that he would use to classmates, coworkers and teammates.
Be passionate.
Be genuine.
Be hardworking.
And don't forget to be great.
Thank you. (Applause)
I want you guys to imagine that you're a soldier running through the battlefield.
Now, you're shot in the leg with a bullet, which severs your femoral artery.
Now, this bleed is extremely traumatic and can kill you in less than three minutes.
Unfortunately, by the time that a medic actually gets to you, what the medic has on his or her belt can take five minutes or more, with the application of pressure, to stop that type of bleed.
Now, this problem is not only a huge problem for the military, but it's also a huge problem that's epidemic throughout the entire medical field, which is how do we actually look at wounds and how do we stop them quickly in a way that can work with the body?
So now, what I've been working on for the last four years is to develop smart biomaterials, which are actually materials that will work with the body, helping it to heal and helping it to allow the wounds to heal normally.
So now, before we do this, we have to take a much closer look at actually how does the body work.
So now, everybody here knows that the body is made up of cells.
So the cell is the most basic unit of life.
But not many people know what else.
But it actually turns out that your cells sit in this mesh of complicated fibers, proteins and sugars known as the extracellular matrix.
So now, the ECM is actually this mesh that holds the cells in place, provides structure for your tissues, but it also gives the cells a home.
It allows them to feel what they're doing, where they are, and tells them how to act and how to behave.
And it actually turns out that the extracellular matrix is different from every single part of the body.
So the ECM in my skin is different than the ECM in my liver, and the ECM in different parts of the same organ actually vary, so it's very difficult to be able to have a product that will react to the local extracellular matrix, which is exactly what we're trying to do.
So now, for example, think of the rainforest.
You have the canopy, you have the understory, and you have the forest floor.
Now, all of these parts of the forest are made up of different plants, and different animals call them home.
So just like that, the extracellular matrix is incredibly diverse in three dimensions.
On top of that, the extracellular matrix is responsible for all wound healing, so if you imagine cutting the body, you actually have to rebuild this very complex ECM in order to get it to form again, and a scar, in fact, is actually poorly formed extracellular matrix.
So now, behind me is an animation of the extracellular matrix.
So as you see, your cells sit in this complicated mesh and as you move throughout the tissue, the extracellular matrix changes.
So now every other piece of technology on the market can only manage a two- dimensional approximation of the extracellular matrix, which means that it doesn't fit in with the tissue itself.
So when I was a freshman at NYU, what I discovered was you could actually take small pieces of plant-derived polymers and reassemble them onto the wound.
So if you have a bleeding wound like the one behind me, you can actually put our material onto this, and just like Lego blocks, it'll reassemble into the local tissue.
So that means if you put it onto liver, it turns into something that looks like liver, and if you put it onto skin, it turns into something that looks just like skin.
So when you put the gel on, it actually reassembles into this local tissue.
So now, this has a whole bunch of applications, but basically the idea is, wherever you put this product, you're able to reassemble into it immediately.
Now, this is a simulated arterial bleed — blood warning — at twice human artery pressure.
So now, this type of bleed is incredibly traumatic, and like I said before, would actually take five minutes or more with pressure to be able to stop.
Now, in the time that it takes me to introduce the bleed itself, our material is able to stop that bleed, and it's because it actually goes on and works with the body to heal, so it reassembles into this piece of meat, and then the blood actually recognizes that that's happening, and produces fibrin, producing a very fast clot in less than 10 seconds.
So now this technology — Thank you.
(Applause) So now this technology, by January, will be in the hands of veterinarians, and we're working very diligently to try to get it into the hands of doctors, hopefully within the next year.
But really, once again, I want you guys to imagine that you are a soldier running through a battlefield.
Now, you get hit in the leg with a bullet, and instead of bleeding out in three minutes, you pull a small pack of gel out of your belt, and with the press of a button, you're able to stop your own bleed and you're on your way to recovery.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We can cut violent deaths around the world by 50 percent in the next three decades.
All we have to do is drop killing by 2.3 percent a year, and we'll hit that target.
You don't believe me?
Well, the leading epidemiologists and criminologists around the world seem to think we can, and so do I, but only if we focus on our cities, especially the most fragile ones.
You see, I've been thinking about this a lot.
For the last 20 years, I've been working in countries and cities ripped apart by conflict, violence, terrorism, or some insidious combination of all.
I've tracked gun smugglers from Russia to Somalia, I've worked with warlords in Afghanistan and the Congo, I've counted cadavers in Colombia, in Haiti, in Sri Lanka, in Papua New Guinea.
You don't need to be on the front line, though, to get a sense that our planet is spinning out of control, right?
There's this feeling that international instability is the new normal.
But I want you to take a closer look, and I think you'll see that the geography of violence is changing, because it's not so much our nation states that are gripped by conflict and crime as our cities: Aleppo, Bamako, Caracas, Erbil, Mosul, Tripoli, Salvador.
Violence is migrating to the metropole.
And maybe this is to be expected, right?
After all, most people today, they live in cities, not the countryside.
Just 600 cities, including 30 megacities, account for two thirds of global GDP.
But when it comes to cities, the conversation is dominated by the North, that is, North America, Western Europe, Australia and Japan, where violence is actually at historic lows.
As a result, city enthusiasts, they talk about the triumph of the city, of the creative classes, and the mayors that will rule the world.
Now, I hope that mayors do one day rule the world, but, you know, the fact is, we don't hear any conversation, really, about what is happening in the South.
And by South, I mean Latin America, Africa, Asia, where violence in some cases is accelerating, where infrastructure is overstretched, and where governance is sometimes an aspiration and not a reality.
Now, some diplomats and development experts and specialists, they talk about 40 to 50 fragile states that will shape security in the 21st century.
I think it's fragile cities which will define the future of order and disorder.
That's because warfare and humanitarian action are going to be concentrated in our cities, and the fight for development, whether you define that as eradicating poverty, universal healthcare, beating back climate change, will be won or lost in the shantytowns, slums and favelas of our cities.
I want to talk to you about four megarisks that I think will define fragility in our time, and if we can get to grips with these, I think we can do something with that lethal violence problem.
So let me start with some good news.
Fact is, we're living in the most peaceful moment in human history.
Steven Pinker and others have shown how the intensity and frequency of conflict is actually at an all-time low.
Now, Gaza, Syria, Sudan, Ukraine, as ghastly as these conflicts are, and they are horrific, they represent a relatively small blip upwards in a 50-year-long secular decline.
What's more, we're seeing a dramatic reduction in homicide.
Manuel Eisner and others have shown that for centuries, we've seen this incredible drop in murder, especially in the West.
Most Northern cities today are 100 times safer than they were just 100 years ago.
These two facts -- the decline in armed conflict and the decline in murder -- are amongst the most extraordinary, if unheralded, accomplishments of human history, and we should be really excited, right?
Well, yeah, we should.
There's just one problem: These two scourges are still with us.
You see, 525,000 people -- men, women, boys and girls -- die violently every single year.
Research I've been doing with Keith Krause and others has shown that between 50,000 and 60,000 people are dying in war zones violently.
The rest, almost 500,000 people, are dying outside of conflict zones.
In other words, 10 times more people are dying outside of war than inside war.
What's more, violence is moving south, to Latin America and the Caribbean, to parts of Central and Southern Africa, and to bits of the Middle East and Central Asia.
Forty of the 50 most dangerous cities in the world are right here in Latin America, 13 in Brazil, and the most dangerous of all, it's San Pedro Sula, Honduras' second city, with a staggering homicide rate of 187 murders per 100,000 people.
That's 23 times the global average.
Now, if violence is re-concentrating geographically, it's also being reconfigured to the world's new topography, because when it comes to cities, the world ain't flat, like Thomas Friedman likes to say.
It's spiky.
The dominance of the city as the primary mode of urban living is one of the most extraordinary demographic reversals in history, and it all happened so fast.
You all know the figures, right?
There's 7.3 billion people in the world today; there will be 9.6 billion by 2050.
But consider this one fact: In the 1800s, one in 30 people lived in cities, today it's one in two, and tomorrow virtually everyone is going to be there.
And this expansion in urbanization is going to be neither even nor equitable.
The vast majority, 90 percent, will be happening in the South, in cities of the South.
So urban geographers and demographers, they tell us that it's not necessarily the size or even the density of cities that predicts violence, no.
Tokyo, with 35 million people, is one of the largest, and some might say safest, urban metropolises in the world.
No, it's the speed of urbanization that matters.
I call this turbo-urbanization, and it's one of the key drivers of fragility.
When you think about the incredible expansion of these cities, and you think about turbo-urbanization, think about Karachi.
Karachi was about 500,000 people in 1947, a hustling, bustling city.
Today, it's 21 million people, and apart from accounting for three quarters of Pakistan's GDP, it's also one of the most violent cities in South Asia.
Dhaka, Lagos, Kinshasa, these cities are now 40 times larger than they were in the 1950s.
Now take a look at New York.
The Big Apple, it took 150 years to get to eight million people.
São Paulo, Mexico City, took 15 to reach that same interval.
Now, what do these medium, large, mega-, and hypercities look like?
What is their profile?
Well, for one thing, they're young.
What we're seeing in many of them is the rise of the youth bulge.
Now, this is actually a good news story.
It's a function of reductions in child mortality rates.
But the youth bulge is something we've got to watch.
What it basically means is the proportion of young people living in our fragile cities is much larger than those living in our healthier and wealthier ones.
In some fragile cities, 75 percent of the population is under the age of 30.
Think about that: Three in four people are under 30.
It's like Palo Alto on steroids.
Now, if you look at Mogadishu for example, in Mogadishu the mean age is 16 years old.
Ditto for Dhaka, Dili and Kabul.
And Tokyo? It's 46.
Same for most Western European cities.
Now, it's not just youth that necessarily predicts violence.
That's one factor among many, but youthfulness combined with unemployment, lack of education, and -- this is the kicker -- being male, is a deadly proposition.
They're statistically correlated, all those risk factors, with youth, and they tend to relate to increases in violence.
Now, for those of you who are parents of teenage sons, you know what I'm talking about, right?
Just imagine your boy without any structure with those unruly friends of his, out there cavorting about.
Now, take away the parents, take away the education, limit the education possibilities, sprinkle in a little bit of drugs, alcohol and guns, and sit back and watch the fireworks.
The implications are disconcerting.
Right here in Brazil, the life expectancy is 73.6 years.
If you live in Rio, I'm sorry, shave off two right there.
But if you're young, you're uneducated, you lack employment, you're black, and you're male, your life expectancy drops to less than 60 years old.
There's a reason why youthfulness and violence are the number one killers in this country.
Okay, so it's not all doom and gloom in our cities.
After all, cities are hubs of innovation, dynamism, prosperity, excitement, connectivity.
They're where the smart people gather.
And those young people I just mentioned, they're more digitally savvy and tech-aware than ever before.
And this explosion, the Internet, and mobile technology, means that the digital divide separating the North and the South between countries and within them, is shrinking.
But as we've heard so many times, these new technologies are dual-edged, right?
Take the case of law enforcement.
Police around the world are starting to use remote sensing and big data to anticipate crime.
Some cops are able to predict criminal violence before it even happens.
The future crime scenario, it's here today, and we've got to be careful.
We have to manage the issues of the public safety against rights to individual privacy.
But it's not just the cops who are innovating.
We've heard extraordinary activities of civil society groups who are engaging in local and global collective action, and this is leading to digital protest and real revolution.
But most worrying of all are criminal gangs who are going online and starting to colonize cyberspace.
In Ciudad Juárez in Mexico, where I've been working, groups like the Zetas and the Sinaloa cartel are hijacking social media.
They're using it to recruit, to sell their products, to coerce, to intimidate and to kill.
Violence is going virtual.
So this is just a partial sketch of a fast-moving and dynamic and complex situation.
I mean, there are many other megarisks that are going to define fragility in our time, not least income inequality, poverty, climate change, impunity.
But we're facing a stark dilemma where some cities are going to thrive and drive global growth and others are going to stumble and pull it backwards.
If we're going to change course, we need to start a conversation.
We can't only focus on those cities that work, the Singapores, the Kuala Lumpurs, the Dubais, the Shanghais.
We've got to bring those fragile cities into the conversation.
One way to do this might be to start twinning our fragile cities with our healthier and wealthier ones, kickstarting a process of learning and collaboration and sharing of practices, of what works and what doesn't.
A wonderful example of this is coming from El Salvador and Los Angeles, where the mayors in San Salvador and Los Angeles are collaborating on getting ex-gang members to work with current gang members, offering tutoring, education, and in the process are helping incubate cease-fires and truces, and we've seen homicide rates go down in San Salvador, once the world's most violent city, by 50 percent.
We can also focus on hot cities, but also hot spots.
Place and location matter fundamentally in shaping violence in our cities.
Did you know that between one and two percent of street addresses in any fragile city can predict up to 99 percent of violent crime?
Take the case of São Paulo, where I've been working.
It's gone from being Brazil's most dangerous city to one of its safest, and it did this by doubling down on information collection, hot spot mapping, and police reform, and in the process, it dropped homicide by 70 percent in just over 10 years.
We also got to focus on those hot people.
It's tragic, but being young, unemployed, uneducated, male, increases the risks of being killed and killing.
We have to break this cycle of violence and get in there early with our children, our youngest children, and valorize them, not stigmatize them.
There's wonderful work that's happening that I've been involved with in Kingston, Jamaica and right here in Rio, which is putting education, employment, recreation up front for these high-risk groups, and as a result, we're seeing violence going down in their communities.
We've also got to make our cities safer, more inclusive, and livable for all.
The fact is, social cohesion matters.
Mobility matters in our cities.
We've got to get away from this model of segregation, exclusion, and cities with walls.
My favorite example of how to do this comes from Medellín.
When I lived in Colombia in the late 1990s, Medellín was the murder capital of the world, but it changed course, and it did this by deliberately investing in its low-income and most violent areas and integrating them with the middle-class ones through a network of cable cars, of public transport, and first-class infrastructure, and in the process, it dropped homicide by 79 percent in just under two decades.
And finally, there's technology.
Technology has enormous promise but also peril.
We've seen examples here of extraordinary innovation, and much of it coming from this room, The police are engaging in predictive analytics.
Citizens are engaging in new crowdsourcing solutions.
Even my own group is involved in developing applications to provide more accountability over police and increase safety among citizens.
But we need to be careful.
If I have one single message for you, it's this: There is nothing inevitable about lethal violence, and we can make our cities safer.
Folks, we have the opportunity of a lifetime to drop homicidal violence in half within our lifetime.
So I have just one question: What are we waiting for?
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's a simple idea about nature.
I want to say a word for nature because we haven't talked that much about it the last couple days.
I want to say a word for the soil and the bees and the plants and the animals, and tell you about a tool, a very simple tool that I have found.
Although it's really nothing more than a literary conceit; it's not a technology.
It's very powerful for, I think, changing our relationship to the natural world and to the other species on whom we depend.
And that tool is very simply, as Chris suggested, looking at us and the world from the plants' or the animals' point of view.
It's not my idea, other people have hit on it, but I've tried to take it to some new places.
Let me tell you where I got it.
Like a lot of my ideas, like a lot of the tools I use, I found it in the garden; I'm a very devoted gardener.
And there was a day about seven years ago: I was planting potatoes, it was the first week of May -- this is New England, when the apple trees are just vibrating with bloom; they're just white clouds above.
I was here, planting my chunks, cutting up potatoes and planting it, and the bees were working on this tree; bumblebees, just making this thing vibrate.
And one of the things I really like about gardening is that it doesn't take all your concentration, you really can't get hurt -- it's not like woodworking -- and you have plenty of kind of mental space for speculation.
And the question I asked myself that afternoon in the garden, working alongside that bumblebee, was: what did I and that bumblebee have in common?
How was our role in this garden similar and different?
And I realized we actually had quite a bit in common: both of us were disseminating the genes of one species and not another, and both of us -- probably, if I can imagine the bee's point of view -- thought we were calling the shots.
I had decided what kind of potato I wanted to plant -- I had picked my Yukon Gold or Yellow Finn, or whatever it was -- and I had summoned those genes from a seed catalog across the country, brought it, and I was planting it.
And that bee, no doubt, assumed that it had decided, "I'm going for that apple tree, I'm going for that blossom, I'm going to get the nectar and I'm going to leave."
We have a grammar that suggests that's who we are; that we are sovereign subjects in nature, the bee as well as me.
I plant the potatoes, I weed the garden, I domesticate the species.
But that day, it occurred to me: what if that grammar is nothing more than a self-serving conceit?
Because, of course, the bee thinks he's in charge or she's in charge, but we know better.
We know that what's going on between the bee and that flower is that bee has been cleverly manipulated by that flower.
And when I say manipulated, I'm talking about in a Darwinian sense, right?
I mean it has evolved a very specific set of traits -- color, scent, flavor, pattern -- that has lured that bee in.
And the bee has been cleverly fooled into taking the nectar, and also picking up some powder on its leg, and going off to the next blossom.
The bee is not calling the shots.
And I realized then, I wasn't either.
I had been seduced by that potato and not another into planting its -- into spreading its genes, giving it a little bit more habitat.
And that's when I got the idea, which was, "Well, what would happen if we kind of looked at us from this point of view of these other species who are working on us?"
And agriculture suddenly appeared to me not as an invention, not as a human technology, but as a co-evolutionary development in which a group of very clever species, mostly edible grasses, had exploited us, figured out how to get us to basically deforest the world.
The competition of grasses, right?
And suddenly everything looked different.
And suddenly mowing the lawn that day was a completely different experience.
I had thought always -- and in fact, had written this in my first book; this was a book about gardening -- that lawns were nature under culture's boot, that they were totalitarian landscapes, and that when we mowed them we were cruelly suppressing the species and never letting it set seed or die or have sex.
And that's what the lawn was.
But then I realized, "No, this is exactly what the grasses want us to do.
I'm a dupe. I'm a dupe of the lawns, whose goal in life is to outcompete the trees, who they compete with for sunlight."
And so by getting us to mow the lawn, we keep the trees from coming back, which in New England happens very, very quickly.
So I started looking at things this way and wrote a whole book about it called "The Botany of Desire."
And I realized that in the same way you can look at a flower and deduce all sorts of interesting things about the taste and the desires of bees -- that they like sweetness, that they like this color and not that color, that they like symmetry -- what could we find out about ourselves by doing the same thing?
That a certain kind of potato, a certain kind of drug, a sativa-indica Cannabis cross has something to say about us.
And that, wouldn't this be kind of an interesting way to look at the world?
Now, the test of any idea -- I said it was a literary conceit -- is what does it get us?
And when you're talking about nature, which is really my subject as a writer, how does it meet the Aldo Leopold test?
Which is, does it make us better citizens of the biotic community?
Get us to do things that leads to the support and perpetuation of the biota, rather than its destruction?
And I would submit that this idea does this.
So, let me go through what you gain when you look at the world this way, besides some entertaining insights about human desire.
As an intellectual matter, looking at the world from other species' points of view helps us deal with this weird anomaly, which is -- and this is in the realm of intellectual history -- which is that we have this Darwinian revolution 150 years ago ...
Ugh. Mini-Me. (Laughter) We have this intellectual, this Darwinian revolution in which, thanks to Darwin, we figured out we are just one species among many; evolution is working on us the same way it's working on all the others; we are acted upon as well as acting; we are really in the fiber, the fabric of life.
But the weird thing is, we have not absorbed this lesson 150 years later; none of us really believes this.
We are still Cartesians -- the children of Descartes -- who believe that subjectivity, consciousness, sets us apart; that the world is divided into subjects and objects; that there is nature on one side, culture on another.
As soon as you start seeing things from the plant's point of view or the animal's point of view, you realize that the real literary conceit is that -- is the idea that nature is opposed to culture, the idea that consciousness is everything -- and that's another very important thing it does.
Looking at the world from other species' points of view is a cure for the disease of human self-importance.
You suddenly realize that consciousness -- which we value and we consider the crowning achievement of nature, human consciousness -- is really just another set of tools for getting along in the world.
And it's kind of natural that we would think it was the best tool.
But, you know, there's a comedian who said, "Well, who's telling me that consciousness is so good and so important?
Well, consciousness."
So when you look at the plants, you realize that there are other tools and they're just as interesting.
I'll give you two examples, also from the garden: lima beans. You know what a lima bean does when it's attacked by spider mites?
It releases this volatile chemical that goes out into the world and summons another species of mite that comes in and attacks the spider mite, defending the lima bean.
So what plants have -- while we have consciousness, tool making, language, they have biochemistry.
And they have perfected that to a degree far beyond what we can imagine.
Their complexity, their sophistication, is something to really marvel at, and I think it's really the scandal of the Human Genome Project.
You know, we went into it thinking, 40,000 or 50,000 human genes and we came out with only 23,000.
Just to give you grounds for comparison, rice: 35,000 genes.
So who's the more sophisticated species?
Well, we're all equally sophisticated.
We've been evolving just as long, just along different paths.
So, cure for self-importance, way to sort of make us feel the Darwinian idea.
And that's really what I do as a writer, as a storyteller, is try to make people feel what we know and tell stories that actually help us think ecologically.
Now, the other use of this is practical.
And I'm going to take you to a farm right now, because I used this idea to develop my understanding of the food system and what I learned, in fact, is that we are all, now, being manipulated by corn.
And the talk you heard about ethanol earlier today, to me, is the final triumph of corn over good sense. (Laughter) (Applause) It is part of corn's scheme for world domination.
(Laughter) And you will see, the amount of corn planted this year will be up dramatically from last year and there will be that much more habitat because we've decided ethanol is going to help us.
So it helped me understand industrial agriculture, which of course is a Cartesian system.
It's based on this idea that we bend other species to our will and that we are in charge, and that we create these factories and we have these technological inputs and we get the food out of it or the fuel or whatever we want.
Let me take you to a very different kind of farm.
This is a farm in the Shenandoah Valley of Virginia.
I went looking for a farm where these ideas about looking at things from the species' point of view are actually implemented, and I found it in a man. The farmer's name is Joel Salatin.
And I spent a week as an apprentice on his farm, and I took away from this some of the most hopeful news about our relationship to nature that I've ever come across in 25 years of writing about nature.
And that is this: the farm is called Polyface, which means ...
the idea is he's got six different species of animals, as well as some plants, growing in this very elaborate symbiotic arrangement.
It's permaculture, those of you who know a little bit about this, such that the cows and the pigs and the sheep and the turkeys and the ...
what else does he have?
All the six different species -- rabbits, actually -- are all performing ecological services for one another, such that the manure of one is the lunch for the other and they take care of pests for one another.
It's a very elaborate and beautiful dance, but I'm going to just give you a close-up on one piece of it, and that is the relationship between his cattle and his chickens, his laying hens.
And I'll show you, if you take this approach, what you get, OK?
And this is a lot more than growing food, as you'll see; this is a different way to think about nature and a way to get away from the zero-sum notion, the Cartesian idea that either nature's winning or we're winning, and that for us to get what we want, nature is diminished.
So, one day, cattle in a pen.
The only technology involved here is this cheap electric fencing: relatively new, hooked to a car battery; even I could carry a quarter-acre paddock, set it up in 15 minutes.
Cows graze one day. They move, OK?
They graze everything down, intensive grazing.
He waits three days, and then we towed in something called the Eggmobile.
The Eggmobile is a very rickety contraption -- it looks like a prairie schooner made out of boards -- but it houses 350 chickens.
He tows this into the paddock three days later and opens the gangplank, turns them down, and 350 hens come streaming down the gangplank -- clucking, gossiping as chickens will -- and they make a beeline for the cow patties.
And what they're doing is very interesting: they're digging through the cow patties for the maggots, the grubs, the larvae of flies.
And the reason he's waited three days is because he knows that on the fourth day or the fifth day, those larvae will hatch and he'll have a huge fly problem.
But he waits that long to grow them as big and juicy and tasty as he can because they are the chickens' favorite form of protein.
So the chickens do their kind of little breakdance and they're pushing around the manure to get at the grubs, and in the process they're spreading the manure out.
Very useful second ecosystem service.
And third, while they're in this paddock they are, of course, defecating madly and their very nitrogenous manure is fertilizing this field.
They then move out to the next one, and in the course of just a few weeks, the grass just enters this blaze of growth.
And within four or five weeks, he can do it again.
He can graze again, he can cut, he can bring in another species, like the lambs, or he can make hay for the winter.
Now, I want you to just look really close up onto what's happened there.
So, it's a very productive system.
And what I need to tell you is that on 100 acres he gets 40,000 pounds of beef; 30,000 pounds of pork; 25,000 dozen eggs; 20,000 broilers; 1,000 turkeys; 1,000 rabbits -- an immense amount of food.
You know, you hear, "Can organic feed the world?"
Well, look how much food you can produce on 100 acres if you do this kind of ...
again, give each species what it wants, let it realize its desires, its physiological distinctiveness.
Put that in play.
But look at it from the point of view of the grass, now.
What happens to the grass when you do this?
When a ruminant grazes grass, the grass is cut from this height to this height, and it immediately does something very interesting.
Any one of you who gardens knows that there is something called the root-shoot ratio, and plants need to keep the root mass in some rough balance with the leaf mass to be happy.
So when they lose a lot of leaf mass, they shed roots; they kind of cauterize them and the roots die.
And the species in the soil go to work basically chewing through those roots, decomposing them -- the earthworms, the fungi, the bacteria -- and the result is new soil.
This is how soil is created.
It's created from the bottom up.
This is how the prairies were built, the relationship between bison and grasses.
And what I realized when I understood this -- and if you ask Joel Salatin what he is, he'll tell you he's not a chicken farmer, he's not a sheep farmer, he's not a cattle rancher; he's a grass farmer, because grass is really the keystone species of such a system -- is that, if you think about it, this completely contradicts the tragic idea of nature we hold in our heads, which is that for us to get what we want, nature is diminished.
More for us, less for nature.
Here, all this food comes off this farm, and at the end of the season there is actually more soil, more fertility and more biodiversity.
It's a remarkably hopeful thing to do.
There are a lot of farmers doing this today.
This is well beyond organic agriculture, which is still a Cartesian system, more or less.
And what it tells you is that if you begin to take account of other species, take account of the soil, that even with nothing more than this perspectival idea -- because there is no technology involved here except for those fences, which are so cheap they could be all over Africa in no time -- that we can take the food we need from the Earth and actually heal the Earth in the process.
This is a way to reanimate the world, and that's what's so exciting about this perspective.
When we really begin to feel Darwin's insights in our bones, the things we can do with nothing more than these ideas are something to be very hopeful about.
Thank you very much.
Vision is the most important and prioritized sense that we have.
We are constantly looking at the world around us, and quickly we identify and make sense of what it is that we see.
Let's just start with an example of that very fact.
I'm going to show you a photograph of a person, just for a second or two, and I'd like for you to identify what emotion is on his face.
Ready?
Here you go. Go with your gut reaction.
Okay. What did you see?
Well, we actually surveyed over 120 individuals, and the results were mixed.
People did not agree on what emotion they saw on his face.
Maybe you saw discomfort.
That was the most frequent response that we received.
But if you asked the person on your left, they might have said regret or skepticism, and if you asked somebody on your right, they might have said something entirely different, like hope or empathy.
So we are all looking at the very same face again.
We might see something entirely different, because perception is subjective.
What we think we see is actually filtered through our own mind's eye.
Of course, there are many other examples of how we see the world through own mind's eye.
I'm going to give you just a few.
So dieters, for instance, see apples as larger than people who are not counting calories.
Softball players see the ball as smaller if they've just come out of a slump, compared to people who had a hot night at the plate.
And actually, our political beliefs also can affect the way we see other people, including politicians.
So my research team and I decided to test this question.
In 2008, Barack Obama was running for president for the very first time, and we surveyed hundreds of Americans one month before the election.
What we found in this survey was that some people, some Americans, think photographs like these best reflect how Obama really looks.
Of these people, 75 percent voted for Obama in the actual election.
Other people, though, thought photographs like these best reflect how Obama really looks.
89 percent of these people voted for McCain.
We presented many photographs of Obama one at a time, so people did not realize that what we were changing from one photograph to the next was whether we had artificially lightened or darkened his skin tone.
So how is that possible?
How could it be that when I look at a person, an object, or an event, I see something very different than somebody else does?
Well, the reasons are many, but one reason requires that we understand a little bit more about how our eyes work.
So vision scientists know that the amount of information that we can see at any given point in time, what we can focus on, is actually relatively small.
What we can see with great sharpness and clarity and accuracy is the equivalent of the surface area of our thumb on our outstretched arm.
Everything else around that is blurry, rendering much of what is presented to our eyes as ambiguous.
But we have to clarify and make sense of what it is that we see, and it's our mind that helps us fill in that gap.
As a result, perception is a subjective experience, and that's how we end up seeing through our own mind's eye.
So, I'm a social psychologist, and it's questions like these that really intrigue me.
I am fascinated by those times when people do not see eye to eye.
Why is it that somebody might literally see the glass as half full, and somebody literally sees it as half empty?
What is it about what one person is thinking and feeling that leads them to see the world in an entirely different way?
And does that even matter?
So to begin to tackle these questions, my research team and I decided to delve deeply into an issue that has received international attention: our health and fitness.
Across the world, people are struggling to manage their weight, and there is a variety of strategies that we have to help us keep the pounds off.
For instance, we set the best of intentions to exercise after the holidays, but actually, the majority of Americans find that their New Year's resolutions are broken by Valentine's Day.
We talk to ourselves in very encouraging ways, telling ourselves this is our year to get back into shape, but that is not enough to bring us back to our ideal weight.
So why?
Of course, there is no simple answer, but one reason, I argue, is that our mind's eye might work against us.
Some people may literally see exercise as more difficult, and some people might literally see exercise as easier.
So, as a first step to testing these questions, we gathered objective measurements of individuals' physical fitness.
We measured the circumference of their waist, compared to the circumference of their hips.
A higher waist-to-hip ratio is an indicator of being less physically fit than a lower waist-to-hip ratio.
After gathering these measurements, we told our participants that they would walk to a finish line while carrying extra weight in a sort of race.
But before they did that, we asked them to estimate the distance to the finish line.
We thought that the physical states of their body might change how they perceived the distance.
So what did we find?
Well, waist-to-hip ratio predicted perceptions of distance.
People who were out of shape and unfit actually saw the distance to the finish line as significantly greater than people who were in better shape.
People's states of their own body changed how they perceived the environment.
But so too can our mind.
In fact, our bodies and our minds work in tandem to change how we see the world around us.
That led us to think that maybe people with strong motivations and strong goals to exercise might actually see the finish line as closer than people who have weaker motivations.
So to test whether motivations affect our perceptual experiences in this way, we conducted a second study.
Again, we gathered objective measurements of people's physical fitness, measuring the circumference of their waist and the circumference of their hips, and we had them do a few other tests of fitness.
Based on feedback that we gave them, some of our participants told us they're not motivated to exercise any more.
They felt like they already met their fitness goals and they weren't going to do anything else.
These people were not motivated.
Other people, though, based on our feedback, told us they were highly motivated to exercise.
They had a strong goal to make it to the finish line.
But again, before we had them walk to the finish line, we had them estimate the distance.
How far away was the finish line?
And again, like the previous study, we found that waist-to-hip ratio predicted perceptions of distance.
Unfit individuals saw the distance as farther, saw the finish line as farther away, than people who were in better shape.
Importantly, though, this only happened for people who were not motivated to exercise.
On the other hand, people who were highly motivated to exercise saw the distance as short.
Even the most out of shape individuals saw the finish line as just as close, if not slightly closer, than people who were in better shape.
So our bodies can change how far away that finish line looks, but people who had committed to a manageable goal that they could accomplish in the near future and who believed that they were capable of meeting that goal actually saw the exercise as easier.
That led us to wonder, is there a strategy that we could use and teach people that would help change their perceptions of the distance, help them make exercise look easier?
So we turned to the vision science literature to figure out what should we do, and based on what we read, we came up with a strategy that we called, "Keep your eyes on the prize."
So this is not the slogan from an inspirational poster.
It's an actual directive for how to look around your environment.
People that we trained in this strategy, we told them to focus their attention on the finish line, to avoid looking around, to imagine a spotlight was shining on that goal, and that everything around it was blurry and perhaps difficult to see.
We thought that this strategy would help make the exercise look easier.
We compared this group to a baseline group.
To this group we said, just look around the environment as you naturally would.
You will notice the finish line, but you might also notice the garbage can off to the right, or the people and the lamp post off to the left.
We thought that people who used this strategy would see the distance as farther.
So what did we find?
When we had them estimate the distance, was this strategy successful for changing their perceptual experience?
Yes.
People who kept their eyes on the prize saw the finish line as 30 percent closer than people who looked around as they naturally would.
We thought this was great.
We were really excited because it meant that this strategy helped make the exercise look easier, but the big question was, could this help make exercise actually better?
Could it improve the quality of exercise as well?
So next, we told our participants, you are going to walk to the finish line while wearing extra weight.
We added weights to their ankles that amounted to 15 percent of their body weight.
We told them to lift their knees up high and walk to the finish line quickly.
We designed this exercise in particular to be moderately challenging but not impossible, like most exercises that actually improve our fitness.
So the big question, then: Did keeping your eyes on the prize and narrowly focusing on the finish line change their experience of the exercise?
It did.
People who kept their eyes on the prize told us afterward that it required 17 percent less exertion for them to do this exercise than people who looked around naturally.
It changed their subjective experience of the exercise.
It also changed the objective nature of their exercise.
People who kept their eyes on the prize actually moved 23 percent faster than people who looked around naturally.
To put that in perspective, a 23 percent increase is like trading in your 1980 Chevy Citation for a 1980 Chevrolet Corvette.
We were so excited by this, because this meant that a strategy that costs nothing, that is easy for people to use, regardless of whether they're in shape or struggling to get there, had a big effect.
Keeping your eyes on the prize made the exercise look and feel easier even when people were working harder because they were moving faster.
Now, I know there's more to good health than walking a little bit faster, but keeping your eyes on the prize might be one additional strategy that you can use to help promote a healthy lifestyle.
If you're not convinced yet that we all see the world through our own mind's eye, let me leave you with one final example.
Here's a photograph of a beautiful street in Stockholm, with two cars.
The car in the back looks much larger than the car in the front.
However, in reality, these cars are the same size, but that's not how we see it.
So does this mean that our eyes have gone haywire and that our brains are a mess?
No, it doesn't mean that at all.
It's just how our eyes work.
We might see the world in a different way, and sometimes that might not line up with reality, but it doesn't mean that one of us is right and one of us is wrong.
We all see the world through our mind's eye, but we can teach ourselves to see it differently.
So I can think of days that have gone horribly wrong for me.
I'm fed up, I'm grumpy, I'm tired, and I'm so behind, and there's a big black cloud hanging over my head, and on days like these, it looks like everyone around me is down in the dumps too.
My colleague at work looks annoyed when I ask for an extension on a deadline, and my friend looks frustrated when I show up late for lunch because a meeting ran long, and at the end of the day, my husband looks disappointed because I'd rather go to bed than go to the movies.
And on days like these, when everybody looks upset and angry to me, I try to remind myself that there are other ways of seeing them.
Perhaps my colleague was confused, perhaps my friend was concerned, and perhaps my husband was feeling empathy instead.
So we all see the world through our own mind's eye, and on some days, it might look like the world is a dangerous and challenging and insurmountable place, but it doesn't have to look that way all the time.
We can teach ourselves to see it differently, and when we find a way to make the world look nicer and easier, it might actually become so.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Now, I'm an ethnobotanist.
That's a scientist who works in the rainforest to document how people use local plants.
I've been doing this for a long time, and I want to tell you, these people know these forests and these medicinal treasures better than we do and better than we ever will.
But also, these cultures, these indigenous cultures, are disappearing much faster than the forests themselves.
And the greatest and most endangered species in the Amazon Rainforest is not the jaguar, it's not the harpy eagle, it's the isolated and uncontacted tribes.
Now four years ago, I injured my foot in a climbing accident and I went to the doctor.
She gave me heat, she gave me cold, aspirin, narcotic painkillers, anti-inflammatories, cortisone shots.
It didn't work.
Several months later, I was in the northeast Amazon, walked into a village, and the shaman said, "You're limping."
And I'll never forget this as long as I live.
He looked me in the face and he said, "Take off your shoe and give me your machete."
(Laughter) He walked over to a palm tree and carved off a fern, threw it in the fire, applied it to my foot, threw it in a pot of water, and had me drink the tea.
The pain disappeared for seven months.
When it came back, I went to see the shaman again.
He gave me the same treatment, and I've been cured for three years now.
Who would you rather be treated by?
(Applause) Now, make no mistake — Western medicine is the most successful system of healing ever devised, but there's plenty of holes in it.
Where's the cure for breast cancer?
Where's the cure for schizophrenia?
Where's the cure for acid reflux?
Where's the cure for insomnia?
The fact is that these people can sometimes, sometimes, sometimes cure things we cannot.
Here you see a medicine man in the northeast Amazon treating leishmaniasis, a really nasty protozoal disease that afflicts 12 million people around the world.
Western treatment are injections of antimony.
They're painful, they're expensive, and they're probably not good for your heart; it's a heavy metal.
This man cures it with three plants from the Amazon Rainforest.
This is the magic frog.
My colleague, the late great Loren McIntyre, discoverer of the source lake of the Amazon, Laguna McIntyre in the Peruvian Andes, was lost on the Peru-Brazil border about 30 years ago.
He was rescued by a group of isolated Indians called the Matsés.
They beckoned for him to follow them into the forest, which he did.
There, they took out palm leaf baskets.
There, they took out these green monkey frogs — these are big suckers, they're like this — and they began licking them.
It turns out, they're highly hallucinogenic.
McIntyre wrote about this and it was read by the editor of High Times magazine.
You see that ethnobotanists have friends in all sorts of strange cultures.
This guy decided he would go down to the Amazon and give it a whirl, or give it a lick, and he did, and he wrote, "My blood pressure went through the roof, I lost full control of my bodily functions, I passed out in a heap, I woke up in a hammock six hours later, felt like God for two days."
(Laughter) An Italian chemist read this and said, "I'm not really interested in the theological aspects of the green monkey frog.
What's this about the change in blood pressure?"
Now, this is an Italian chemist who's working on a new treatment for high blood pressure based on peptides in the skin of the green monkey frog, and other scientists are looking at a cure for drug-resistant Staph aureus.
How ironic if these isolated Indians and their magic frog prove to be one of the cures.
Here's an ayahuasca shaman in the northwest Amazon, in the middle of a yage ceremony.
I took him to Los Angeles to meet a foundation officer looking for support for monies to protect their culture.
This fellow looked at the medicine man, and he said, "You didn't go to medical school, did you?"
The shaman said, "No, I did not."
He said, "Well, then what can you know about healing?"
The shaman looked at him and he said, "You know what? If you have an infection, go to a doctor.
But many human afflictions are diseases of the heart, the mind and the spirit.
Western medicine can't touch those. I cure them."
(Applause) But all is not rosy in learning from nature about new medicines.
This is a viper from Brazil, the venom of which was studied at the Universidade de São Paulo here.
It was later developed into ACE inhibitors.
This is a frontline treatment for hypertension.
Hypertension causes over 10 percent of all deaths on the planet every day.
This is a $4 billion industry based on venom from a Brazilian snake, and the Brazilians did not get a nickel.
This is not an acceptable way of doing business.
The rainforest has been called the greatest expression of life on Earth.
There's a saying in Suriname that I dearly love: "The rainforests hold answers to questions we have yet to ask."
But as you all know, it's rapidly disappearing.
Here in Brazil, in the Amazon, around the world.
I took this picture from a small plane flying over the eastern border of the Xingu indigenous reserve in the state of Mato Grosso to the northwest of here.
The top half of the picture, you see where the Indians live.
The line through the middle is the eastern border of the reserve.
Top half Indians, bottom half white guys.
Top half wonder drugs, bottom half just a bunch of skinny-ass cows.
Top half carbon sequestered in the forest where it belongs, bottom half carbon in the atmosphere where it's driving climate change.
In fact, the number two cause of carbon being released into the atmosphere is forest destruction.
But in talking about destruction, it's important to keep in mind that the Amazon is the mightiest landscape of all.
It's a place of beauty and wonder.
The biggest anteater in the world lives in the rain forest, tips the scale at 90 pounds.
The goliath bird-eating spider is the world's largest spider.
It's found in the Amazon as well.
The harpy eagle wingspan is over seven feet.
And the black cayman — these monsters can tip the scale at over half a ton.
They're known to be man-eaters.
The anaconda, the largest snake, the capybara, the largest rodent.
A specimen from here in Brazil tipped the scale at 201 pounds.
Let's visit where these creatures live, the northeast Amazon, home to the Akuriyo tribe.
Uncontacted peoples hold a mystical and iconic role in our imagination.
These are the people who know nature best.
These are the people who truly live in total harmony with nature.
By our standards, some would dismiss these people as primitive.
"They don't know how to make fire, or they didn't when they were first contacted."
But they know the forest far better than we do.
The Akuriyos have 35 words for honey, and other Indians look up to them as being the true masters of the emerald realm.
Here you see the face of my friend Pohnay.
When I was a teenager rocking out to the Rolling Stones in my hometown of New Orleans, Pohnay was a forest nomad roaming the jungles of the northeast Amazon in a small band, looking for game, looking for medicinal plants, looking for a wife, in other small nomadic bands.
But it's people like these that know things that we don't, and they have lots of lessons to teach us.
However, if you go into most of the forests of the Amazon, there are no indigenous peoples.
This is what you find: rock carvings which indigenous peoples, uncontacted peoples, used to sharpen the edge of the stone axe.
These cultures that once danced, made love, sang to the gods, worshipped the forest, all that's left is an imprint in stone, as you see here.
Let's move to the western Amazon, which is really the epicenter of isolated peoples.
Each of these dots represents a small, uncontacted tribe, and the big reveal today is we believe there are 14 or 15 isolated groups in the Colombian Amazon alone.
Why are these people isolated?
They know we exist, they know there's an outside world.
This is a form of resistance.
They have chosen to remain isolated, and I think it is their human right to remain so.
Why are these the tribes that hide from man?
Here's why.
Obviously, some of this was set off in 1492.
But at the turn of the last century was the rubber trade.
The demand for natural rubber, which came from the Amazon, set off the botanical equivalent of a gold rush.
Rubber for bicycle tires, rubber for automobile tires, rubber for zeppelins.
It was a mad race to get that rubber, and the man on the left, Julio Arana, is one of the true thugs of the story.
His people, his company, and other companies like them killed, massacred, tortured, butchered Indians like the Witotos you see on the right hand side of the slide.
Even today, when people come out of the forest, the story seldom has a happy ending.
These are Nukaks. They were contacted in the '80s.
Within a year, everybody over 40 was dead.
And remember, these are preliterate societies.
The elders are the libraries.
Every time a shaman dies, it's as if a library has burned down.
They have been forced off their lands.
The drug traffickers have taken over the Nukak lands, and the Nukaks live as beggars in public parks in eastern Colombia.
From the Nukak lands, I want to take you to the southwest, to the most spectacular landscape in the world: Chiribiquete National Park.
It was surrounded by three isolated tribes and thanks to the Colombian government and Colombian colleagues, it has now expanded.
It's bigger than the state of Maryland.
It is a treasure trove of botanical diversity.
It was first explored botanically in 1943 by my mentor, Richard Schultes, seen here atop the Bell Mountain, the sacred mountains of the Karijonas.
And let me show you what it looks like today.
Flying over Chiribiquete, realize that these lost world mountains are still lost.
No scientist has been atop them.
In fact, nobody has been atop the Bell Mountain since Schultes in '43.
And we'll end up here with the Bell Mountain just to the east of the picture.
Let me show you what it looks like today.
Not only is this a treasure trove of botanical diversity, not only is it home to three isolated tribes, but it's the greatest treasure trove of pre-Colombian art in the world: over 200,000 paintings.
The Dutch scientist Thomas van der Hammen described this as the Sistine Chapel of the Amazon Rainforest.
But move from Chiribiquete down to the southeast, again in the Colombian Amazon.
Remember, the Colombian Amazon is bigger than New England.
The Amazon's a big forest, and Brazil's got a big part of it, but not all of it.
Moving down to these two national parks, Cahuinari and Puré in the Colombian Amazon — that's the Brazilian border to the right — it's home to several groups of isolated and uncontacted peoples.
To the trained eye, you can look at the roofs of these malocas, these longhouses, and see that there's cultural diversity.
These are, in fact, different tribes.
As isolated as these areas are, let me show you how the outside world is crowding in.
Here we see trade and transport increased in Putumayo.
With the diminishment of the Civil War in Colombia, the outside world is showing up.
To the north, we have illegal gold mining, also from the east, from Brazil.
There's increased hunting and fishing for commercial purposes.
We see illegal logging coming from the south, and drug runners are trying to move through the park and get into Brazil.
This, in the past, is why you didn't mess with isolated Indians.
And if it looks like this picture is out of focus because it was taken in a hurry, here's why.
(Laughter) This looks like — (Applause) This looks like a hangar from the Brazilian Amazon.
This is an art exhibit in Havana, Cuba.
A group called Los Carpinteros.
This is their perception of why you shouldn't mess with uncontacted Indians.
But the world is changing.
These are Mashco-Piros on the Brazil-Peru border who stumbled out of the jungle because they were essentially chased out by drug runners and timber people.
And in Peru, there's a very nasty business.
It's called human safaris.
They will take you in to isolated groups to take their picture.
Of course, when you give them clothes, when you give them tools, you also give them diseases.
We call these "inhuman safaris."
These are Indians again on the Peru border, who were overflown by flights sponsored by missionaries.
They want to get in there and turn them into Christians.
We know how that turns out.
What's to be done?
Introduce technology to the contacted tribes, not the uncontacted tribes, in a culturally sensitive way.
This is the perfect marriage of ancient shamanic wisdom and 21st century technology.
We've done this now with over 30 tribes, mapped, managed and increased protection of over 70 million acres of ancestral rainforest.
(Applause) So this allows the Indians to take control of their environmental and cultural destiny.
They also then set up guard houses to keep outsiders out.
These are Indians, trained as indigenous park rangers, patrolling the borders and keeping the outside world at bay.
This is a picture of actual contact.
These are Chitonahua Indians on the Brazil-Peru border.
They've come out of the jungle asking for help.
They were shot at, their malocas, their longhouses, were burned.
Some of them were massacred.
Using automatic weapons to slaughter uncontacted peoples is the single most despicable and disgusting human rights abuse on our planet today, and it has to stop.
(Applause) But let me conclude by saying, this work can be spiritually rewarding, but it's difficult and it can be dangerous.
Two colleagues of mine passed away recently in the crash of a small plane.
They were serving the forest to protect those uncontacted tribes.
So the question is, in conclusion, is what the future holds.
These are the Uray people in Brazil.
What does the future hold for them, and what does the future hold for us?
Let's think differently.
Let's make a better world.
If the climate's going to change, let's have a climate that changes for the better rather than the worse.
Let's live on a planet full of luxuriant vegetation, in which isolated peoples can remain in isolation, can maintain that mystery and that knowledge if they so choose.
Let's live in a world where the shamans live in these forests and heal themselves and us with their mystical plants and their sacred frogs.
Thanks again.
(Applause)
I would like to start with the story of Mary, a woman from an African village.
Her first memories are of her family fleeing violent riots orchestrated by the ruling political party.
Her brother was murdered by the state-sponsored militia, and she was raped more than once just because she belonged to the wrong party.
One morning, a month before the election, Mary's village was called to another intimidation meeting.
In this meeting, there is a man standing in front of them, telling them, "We know who you are, we know who you will vote for, and if you're not going to drop the right paper, we're going to take revenge."
But for Mary, this meeting is different.
She feels different.
This time, she's waiting for this meeting, because this time, she's carrying a small hidden camera in her dress, a camera that nobody else can see.
Nobody is allowed to film in these meetings.
You risk your life if you do.
Mary knows that, but she also knows that the only way to stop them and to protect herself and her community is to expose their intimidation, to make sure they understand somebody is following them, to break the impunity they feel.
Mary and her friends were filming for months, undercover, the intimidation of the ruling political party.
(Video) ["Filmed with hidden cameras"] Man: We are now going to speak about the upcoming elections.
Nothing can stop us from doing what we want.
If we hear you are with [The Opposition] we will not forgive you.
["Militia intimidation rally"] [The Party] can torture you at any time.
The youth can beat you.
["Disruption of political meeting"] For those who lie, saying they are back with [The Party], your time is running out.
["Party youth militia"] Some have died because they rebelled.
Some have lost their homes.
If you don't work together with [The Party], you will lead a very bad life.
Oren Yakobovich: These images were broadcast all over the world, but more importantly, they have been broadcast back to the community.
The perpetrators saw them too.
They understood somebody is following them.
They got scared. Impunity was broken.
Mary and her friends forced the ruling political party not to use violence during the election, and saved hundreds of lives.
Mary is just one of hundreds of people that my organization had helped to document human rights violations using cameras.
My background should have led me to a different direction.
I was born in Israel to a right-wing family, and as long as I remember myself, I wanted to join the Israeli army to serve my country and prove what I believed was our right for the whole land.
I joined the Israeli army just after the first intifada, the first Palestinian uprising, and I served in one of the hard-minded, toughest, aggressive infantry units, and I got the biggest gun in my platoon.
Quite fast, I became an officer and got soldiers under my command, and as time passed, I started serving in the West Bank, and I saw these images.
I didn't like what I saw.
It took me a while, but eventually I refused to serve in the West Bank and had to spend time in jail.
It was a bit — (Applause) — It was not that bad, I have to say.
It was a bit like being in a hotel, but with very shitty food.
(Laughter) In jail, I kept thinking that I need people to know.
I need people to understand what the reality in the West Bank looks like.
I need them to hear what I heard, I need them to see what I saw, but I also understood, we need the Palestinians themselves, the people that are suffering, to be able to tell their own stories, not journalists or filmmakers that are coming outside of the situation.
I joined a human rights organization, an Israeli human rights organization called B'Tselem.
Together, we analyzed the West Bank and picked 100 families that are living in the most risky places: close to checkpoints, near army bases, side by side with settlers.
We gave them cameras and training.
Quite fast, we started getting very disturbing images about how the settlers and the soldiers are abusing them.
I would like to share with you two clips from this project.
Both of them were broadcast in Israel, and it created a massive debate.
And I have to warn you, some of you might find them quite explicit.
The masked men you will see in the first clips are Jewish settlers.
Minutes before the camera was turned on, they approached a Palestinian family that was working their land and told them that they have to leave the land, because this land belongs to the Jewish settlers.
The Palestinians refused.
Let's see what happened.
The masked men that are approaching are Jewish settlers.
They are approaching the Palestinian family.
This is a demonstration in the West Bank.
The guy in green is Palestinian.
He will be arrested in a second.
Here you see him blindfolded and handcuffed.
In a few seconds, he regrets he came to this demonstration.
He's been shot in the foot with a rubber bullet.
He is okay.
Not all the settlers and the soldiers are acting this way.
We're talking about a tiny minority, but they have to be brought to justice.
These clips, and others like them, forced the army and the police to start investigations.
They've been shown in Israel, of course, and the Israeli public was exposed to them also.
This project redefined the struggle for human rights in the occupied territories, and we managed to reduce the number of violent attacks in the West Bank.
The success of this project got me thinking how I can take the same methodology to other places in the world.
Now, we tend to believe that today, with all of the technology, the smartphones and the Internet, we are able to see and understand most of what's happening in the world, and people are able to tell their story — but it's only partly true.
Still today, with all the technology we have, less than half of the world's population has access to the Internet, and more than three billion people — I'm repeating the number — three billion people are consuming news that is censored by those in power.
More or less around the same time, I'm approached by a great guy named Uri Fruchtmann.
He's a filmmaker and an activist.
We understood we were thinking along the same lines, and we decided to establish Videre, our organization, together.
While building the organization in London, we've been traveling undercover to places where a community was suffering from abuses, where mass atrocities were happening, and there was a lack of reporting.
We tried to understand how we can help.
There were four things that I learned.
The first thing is that we have to engage with communities that are living in rural areas, where violations are happening far from the public eye.
We need to partner with them, and we need to understand which images are not making it out there and help them to document them.
The second thing I learned is that we have to enable them to film in a safe way.
Security has to be the priority.
Where I used to work before, in the West Bank, one can take a camera out, most likely not going to get shot, but in places we wanted to work, just try to pull a phone out, and you're dead — literally dead.
This is why we decided to take the operation undercover when necessary, and use mostly hidden cameras.
Unfortunately, I can't show you the hidden cameras we're using today — for obvious reasons — but these are cameras we used before.
You can buy them off the shelf.
Today, we're building a custom-made hidden camera, like the one that Mary was wearing in her dress to film the intimidation meeting of the ruling political party.
It's a camera that nobody can see, that blends into the environment, into the surroundings.
Now, filming securities go beyond using hidden cameras.
Being secure starts way before the activist is turning the camera on.
To keep our partners safe, we work to understand the risk of every location and of every shot before it's happened, building a backup plan if something goes wrong, and making sure we have everything in place before our operations start.
The third thing I learned is the importance of verification.
You can have an amazing shot of atrocity, but if you can't verify it, it's worth nothing.
Recently, like in the ongoing war in Syria or the war in Gaza, we've seen images that are staged or brought from a different conflict.
This misinformation destroyed the credibility of the source, and it's harmed the credibility of other reliable and trustworthy sources.
We use a variety of ways to make sure we can verify the information and we can trust the material.
It starts with vetting the partners, understanding who they are, and working with them very intensively.
How do you film a location?
You film road signs, you film watches, you film newspapers.
We are checking maps, looking at maps, double-checking the information, and looking also at the metadata of the material.
Now, the fourth and the most important thing I learned is how you use images to create a positive change.
To have an effect, the key thing is how you use the material.
Today, we're working with hundreds of activists filming undercover.
We work with them both to understand the situation on the ground and which images are missing to describe it, who are the ones that are influencing the situation, and when to release the material to advance the struggle.
Sometimes, it's about putting it in the media, mostly local ones, to create awareness.
Sometimes it's working with decision makers, to change laws.
Sometimes, it's working with lawyers to use as evidence in court.
But more than often, the most effective way to create a social change is to work within the community.
I want to give you one example.
Fatuma is part of a network of women that are fighting abuses in Kenya.
Women in her community have been harassed constantly on their way to school and on their way to work.
They are trying to change the behavior of the community from inside.
In the next clip, Fatuma is taking us with her on her journey to work.
Her voice is superimposed on images that she filmed herself using hidden cameras.
(Video) Fatuma Chiusiku: My name is Fatuma Chiusiku.
I'm 32 years old, a mother, And Ziwa La Ng'Ombe is my home.
Each morning, I ride the mini-bus Number 11.
But instead of a peaceful journey to work, each day begins with fear.
Come with me now and use my eyes to feel what I feel.
As I walk, I think to myself: Will I be touched?
Grabbed?
Violated by this conductor again?
Even the men inside the way they look at me touch my body, rub against me, grab me, and now, as I sit in my seat I only wish my mind was full of thoughts for my day, my dreams, my children at school, but instead I worry about the moment when we will arrive and I will be violated again.
OY: Today, there is a new front in the fight for human rights.
I used to carry a big gun.
Now, I am carrying this.
This is a much more powerful and much, much more effective weapon.
But we have to use its power wisely.
By putting the right images in the right hands at the right time, we can truly create an impact.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
So in the oasis of intelligentsia that is TED, I stand here before you this evening as an expert in dragging heavy stuff around cold places.
I've been leading polar expeditions for most of my adult life, and last month, my teammate Tarka L'Herpiniere and I finished the most ambitious expedition I've ever attempted.
In fact, it feels like I've been transported straight here from four months in the middle of nowhere, mostly grunting and swearing, straight to the TED stage.
So you can imagine that's a transition that hasn't been entirely seamless.
One of the interesting side effects seems to be that my short-term memory is entirely shot.
So I've had to write some notes to avoid too much grunting and swearing in the next 17 minutes.
This is the first talk I've given about this expedition, and while we weren't sequencing genomes or building space telescopes, this is a story about giving everything we had to achieve something that hadn't been done before.
So I hope in that you might find some food for thought.
It was a journey, an expedition in Antarctica, the coldest, windiest, driest and highest altitude continent on Earth.
It's a fascinating place. It's a huge place.
It's twice the size of Australia, a continent that is the same size as China and India put together.
As an aside, I have experienced an interesting phenomenon in the last few days, something that I expect Chris Hadfield may get at TED in a few years' time, conversations that go something like this: "Oh, Antarctica. Awesome.
My husband and I did Antarctica with Lindblad for our anniversary."
Or, "Oh cool, did you go there for the marathon?"
(Laughter) Our journey was, in fact, 69 marathons back to back in 105 days, an 1,800-mile round trip on foot from the coast of Antarctica to the South Pole and back again.
In the process, we broke the record for the longest human-powered polar journey in history by more than 400 miles.
(Applause) For those of you from the Bay Area, it was the same as walking from here to San Francisco, then turning around and walking back again.
So as camping trips go, it was a long one, and one I've seen summarized most succinctly here on the hallowed pages of Business Insider Malaysia.
["Two Explorers Just Completed A Polar Expedition That Killed Everyone The Last Time It Was Attempted"] Chris Hadfield talked so eloquently about fear and about the odds of success, and indeed the odds of survival.
Of the nine people in history that had attempted this journey before us, none had made it to the pole and back, and five had died in the process.
This is Captain Robert Falcon Scott.
He led the last team to attempt this expedition.
Scott and his rival Sir Ernest Shackleton, over the space of a decade, both led expeditions battling to become the first to reach the South Pole, to chart and map the interior of Antarctica, a place we knew less about, at the time, than the surface of the moon, because we could see the moon through telescopes.
Antarctica was, for the most part, a century ago, uncharted.
Some of you may know the story.
Scott's last expedition, the Terra Nova Expedition in 1910, started as a giant siege-style approach.
He had a big team using ponies, using dogs, using petrol-driven tractors, dropping multiple, pre-positioned depots of food and fuel through which Scott's final team of five would travel to the Pole, where they would turn around and ski back to the coast again on foot.
Scott and his final team of five arrived at the South Pole in January 1912 to find they had been beaten to it by a Norwegian team led by Roald Amundsen, who rode on dogsled.
Scott's team ended up on foot.
And for more than a century this journey has remained unfinished.
Scott's team of five died on the return journey.
And for the last decade, I've been asking myself why that is.
How come this has remained the high-water mark?
Scott's team covered 1,600 miles on foot.
No one's come close to that ever since.
So this is the high-water mark of human endurance, human endeavor, human athletic achievement in arguably the harshest climate on Earth.
It was as if the marathon record has remained unbroken since 1912.
And of course some strange and predictable combination of curiosity, stubbornness, and probably hubris led me to thinking I might be the man to try to finish the job.
Unlike Scott's expedition, there were just two of us, and we set off from the coast of Antarctica in October last year, dragging everything ourselves, a process Scott called "man-hauling."
When I say it was like walking from here to San Francisco and back, I actually mean it was like dragging something that weighs a shade more than the heaviest ever NFL player.
Our sledges weighed 200 kilos, or 440 pounds each at the start, the same weights that the weakest of Scott's ponies pulled.
Early on, we averaged 0.5 miles per hour.
Perhaps the reason no one had attempted this journey until now, in more than a century, was that no one had been quite stupid enough to try.
And while I can't claim we were exploring in the genuine Edwardian sense of the word — we weren't naming any mountains or mapping any uncharted valleys — I think we were stepping into uncharted territory in a human sense.
Certainly, if in the future we learn there is an area of the human brain that lights up when one curses oneself, I won't be at all surprised.
You've heard that the average American spends 90 percent of their time indoors.
We didn't go indoors for nearly four months.
We didn't see a sunset either.
It was 24-hour daylight.
Living conditions were quite spartan.
I changed my underwear three times in 105 days and Tarka and I shared 30 square feet on the canvas.
Though we did have some technology that Scott could never have imagined.
And we blogged live every evening from the tent via a laptop and a custom-made satellite transmitter, all of which were solar-powered: we had a flexible photovoltaic panel over the tent.
And the writing was important to me.
As a kid, I was inspired by the literature of adventure and exploration, and I think we've all seen here this week the importance and the power of storytelling.
So we had some 21st-century gear, but the reality is that the challenges that Scott faced were the same that we faced: those of the weather and of what Scott called glide, the amount of friction between the sledges and the snow.
The lowest wind chill we experienced was in the -70s, and we had zero visibility, what's called white-out, for much of our journey.
We traveled up and down one of the largest and most dangerous glaciers in the world, the Beardmore glacier.
It's 110 miles long; most of its surface is what's called blue ice.
You can see it's a beautiful, shimmering steel-hard blue surface covered with thousands and thousands of crevasses, these deep cracks in the glacial ice up to 200 feet deep.
Planes can't land here, so we were at the most risk, technically, when we had the slimmest chance of being rescued.
We got to the South Pole after 61 days on foot, with one day off for bad weather, and I'm sad to say, it was something of an anticlimax.
There's a permanent American base, the Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station at the South Pole.
They have an airstrip, they have a canteen, they have hot showers, they have a post office, a tourist shop, a basketball court that doubles as a movie theater.
So it's a bit different these days, and there are also acres of junk.
I think it's a marvelous thing that humans can exist 365 days of the year with hamburgers and hot showers and movie theaters, but it does seem to produce a lot of empty cardboard boxes.
You can see on the left of this photograph, several square acres of junk waiting to be flown out from the South Pole.
But there is also a pole at the South Pole, and we got there on foot, unassisted, unsupported, by the hardest route, 900 miles in record time, dragging more weight than anyone in history.
And if we'd stopped there and flown home, which would have been the eminently sensible thing to do, then my talk would end here and it would end something like this.
If you have the right team around you, the right tools, the right technology, and if you have enough self-belief and enough determination, then anything is possible.
But then we turned around, and this is where things get interesting.
High on the Antarctic plateau, over 10,000 feet, it's very windy, very cold, very dry, we were exhausted.
We'd covered 35 marathons, we were only halfway, and we had a safety net, of course, of ski planes and satellite phones and live, 24-hour tracking beacons that didn't exist for Scott, but in hindsight, rather than making our lives easier, the safety net actually allowed us to cut things very fine indeed, to sail very close to our absolute limits as human beings.
And it is an exquisite form of torture to exhaust yourself to the point of starvation day after day while dragging a sledge full of food.
For years, I'd been writing glib lines in sponsorship proposals about pushing the limits of human endurance, but in reality, that was a very frightening place to be indeed.
We had, before we'd got to the Pole, two weeks of almost permanent headwind, which slowed us down.
As a result, we'd had several days of eating half rations.
We had a finite amount of food in the sledges to make this journey, so we were trying to string that out by reducing our intake to half the calories we should have been eating.
As a result, we both became increasingly hypoglycemic — we had low blood sugar levels day after day — and increasingly susceptible to the extreme cold.
Tarka took this photo of me one evening after I'd nearly passed out with hypothermia.
We both had repeated bouts of hypothermia, something I hadn't experienced before, and it was very humbling indeed.
As much as you might like to think, as I do, that you're the kind of person who doesn't quit, that you'll go down swinging, hypothermia doesn't leave you much choice.
You become utterly incapacitated.
It's like being a drunk toddler.
You become pathetic.
I remember just wanting to lie down and quit.
It was a peculiar, peculiar feeling, and a real surprise to me to be debilitated to that degree.
And then we ran out of food completely, 46 miles short of the first of the depots that we'd laid on our outward journey.
We'd laid 10 depots of food, literally burying food and fuel, for our return journey — the fuel was for a cooker so you could melt snow to get water — and I was forced to make the decision to call for a resupply flight, a ski plane carrying eight days of food to tide us over that gap.
They took 12 hours to reach us from the other side of Antarctica.
Calling for that plane was one of the toughest decisions of my life.
And I sound like a bit of a fraud standing here now with a sort of belly.
I've put on 30 pounds in the last three weeks.
Being that hungry has left an interesting mental scar, which is that I've been hoovering up every hotel buffet that I can find.
(Laughter) But we were genuinely quite hungry, and in quite a bad way.
I don't regret calling for that plane for a second, because I'm still standing here alive, with all digits intact, telling this story.
But getting external assistance like that was never part of the plan, and it's something my ego is still struggling with.
This was the biggest dream I've ever had, and it was so nearly perfect.
On the way back down to the coast, our crampons — they're the spikes on our boots that we have for traveling over this blue ice on the glacier — broke on the top of the Beardmore.
We still had 100 miles to go downhill on very slippery rock-hard blue ice.
They needed repairing almost every hour.
To give you an idea of scale, this is looking down towards the mouth of the Beardmore Glacier.
You could fit the entirety of Manhattan in the gap on the horizon.
That's 20 miles between Mount Hope and Mount Kiffin.
I've never felt as small as I did in Antarctica.
When we got down to the mouth of the glacier, we found fresh snow had obscured the dozens of deep crevasses.
One of Shackleton's men described crossing this sort of terrain as like walking over the glass roof of a railway station.
We fell through more times than I can remember, usually just putting a ski or a boot through the snow.
Occasionally we went in all the way up to our armpits, but thankfully never deeper than that.
And less than five weeks ago, after 105 days, we crossed this oddly inauspicious finish line, the coast of Ross Island on the New Zealand side of Antarctica.
You can see the ice in the foreground and the sort of rubbly rock behind that.
Behind us lay an unbroken ski trail of nearly 1,800 miles.
We'd made the longest ever polar journey on foot, something I'd been dreaming of doing for a decade.
And looking back, I still stand by all the things I've been saying for years about the importance of goals and determination and self-belief, but I'll also admit that I hadn't given much thought to what happens when you reach the all-consuming goal that you've dedicated most of your adult life to, and the reality is that I'm still figuring that bit out.
As I said, there are very few superficial signs that I've been away.
I've put on 30 pounds.
I've got some very faint, probably covered in makeup now, frostbite scars.
I've got one on my nose, one on each cheek, from where the goggles are, but inside I am a very different person indeed.
If I'm honest, Antarctica challenged me and humbled me so deeply that I'm not sure I'll ever be able to put it into words.
I'm still struggling to piece together my thoughts.
That I'm standing here telling this story is proof that we all can accomplish great things, through ambition, through passion, through sheer stubbornness, by refusing to quit, that if you dream something hard enough, as Sting said, it does indeed come to pass.
But I'm also standing here saying, you know what, that cliche about the journey being more important than the destination?
There's something in that.
The closer I got to my finish line, that rubbly, rocky coast of Ross Island, the more I started to realize that the biggest lesson that this very long, very hard walk might be teaching me is that happiness is not a finish line, that for us humans, the perfection that so many of us seem to dream of might not ever be truly attainable, and that if we can't feel content here, today, now, on our journeys amidst the mess and the striving that we all inhabit, the open loops, the half-finished to-do lists, the could-do-better-next-times, then we might never feel it.
A lot of people have asked me, what next?
Right now, I am very happy just recovering and in front of hotel buffets.
But as Bob Hope put it, I feel very humble, but I think I have the strength of character to fight it. (Laughter) Thank you.
2014 is a very special year for me: 20 years as a consultant, 20 years of marriage, and I'm turning 50 in one month.
That means I was born in 1964 in a small town in Germany.
It was a gray November day, and I was overdue.
The hospital's maternity ward was really stressed out because a lot of babies were born on this gray November day.
As a matter of fact, 1964 was the year with the highest birth rate ever in Germany: more than 1.3 million.
Last year, we just hit over 600,000, so half of my number.
What you can see here is the German age pyramid, and there, the small black point at the top, that's me.
(Laughter) (Applause) In red, you can see the potential working-age population, so people over 15 and under 65, and I'm actually only interested in this red area.
Now, let's do a simple simulation of how this age structure will develop over the next couple of years.
As you can see, the peak is moving to the right, and I, with many other baby boomers, will retire in 2030.
By the way, I don't need any forecasts of birth rates for predicting this red area.
The red area, so the potential working-age population in 2030, is already set in stone today, except for much higher migration rates.
And if you compare this red area in 2030 with the red area in 2014, it is much, much smaller.
So before I show you the rest of the world, what does this mean for Germany?
So what we know from this picture is that the labor supply, so people who provide labor, will go down in Germany, and will go down significantly.
Now, what about labor demand?
That's where it gets tricky.
As you might know, the consultant's favorite answer to any question is, "It depends."
So I would say it depends.
We didn't want to forecast the future.
Highly speculative.
We did something else.
We looked at the GDP and productivity growth of Germany over the last 20 years, and calculated the following scenario: if Germany wants to continue this GDP and productivity growth, we could directly calculate how many people Germany would need to support this growth.
And this is the green line: labor demand.
So Germany will run into a major talent shortage very quickly.
Eight million people are missing, which is more than 20 percent of our current workforce, so big numbers, really big numbers.
And we calculated several scenarios, and the picture always looked like this.
Now, to close the gap, Germany has to significantly increase migration, get many more women in the workforce, increase retirement age — by the way, we just lowered it this year — and all these measures at once.
If Germany fails here, Germany will stagnate.
We won't grow anymore. Why?
Because the workers are not there who can generate this growth.
And companies will look for talents somewhere else.
But where?
Now, we simulated labor supply and labor demand for the largest 15 economies in the world, representing more than 70 percent of world GDP, and the overall picture looks like this by 2020.
Blue indicates a labor surplus, red indicates a labor shortfall, and gray are those countries which are borderline.
So by 2020, we still see a labor surplus in some countries, like Italy, France, the U.S., but this picture will change dramatically by 2030.
By 2030, we will face a global workforce crisis in most of our largest economies, including three out of the four BRIC countries.
China, with its former one-child policy, will be hit, as well as Brazil and Russia.
Now, to tell the truth, in reality, the situation will be even more challenging.
What you can see here are average numbers.
We de-averaged them and broke them down into different skill levels, and what we found were even higher shortfalls for high-skilled people and a partial surplus for low-skilled workers.
So on top of an overall labor shortage, we will face a big skill mismatch in the future, and this means huge challenges in terms of education, qualification, upskilling for governments and companies.
Now, the next thing we looked into was robots, automation, technology.
Will technology change this picture and boost productivity?
Now, the short answer would be that our numbers already include a significant growth in productivity driven by technology.
A long answer would go like this.
Let's take Germany again.
The Germans have a certain reputation in the world when it comes to productivity.
In the '90s, I worked in our Boston office for almost two years, and when I left, an old senior partner told me, literally, "Send me more of these Germans, they work like machines."
(Laughter) That was 1998.
Sixteen years later, you'd probably say the opposite.
"Send me more of these machines. They work like Germans."
(Laughter) (Applause) Technology will replace a lot of jobs, regular jobs.
Not only in the production industry, but even office workers are in jeopardy and might be replaced by robots, artificial intelligence, big data, or automation.
So the key question is not if technology replaces some of these jobs, but when, how fast, and to what extent?
Or in other words, will technology help us to solve this global workforce crisis?
Yes and no.
This is a more sophisticated version of "it depends."
(Laughter) Let's take the automotive industry as an example, because there, more than 40 percent of industrial robots are already working and automation has already taken place.
In 1980, less than 10 percent of the production cost of a car was caused by electronic parts.
Today, this number is more than 30 percent and it will grow to more than 50 percent by 2030.
And these new electronic parts and applications require new skills and have created a lot of new jobs, like the cognitive systems engineer who optimizes the interaction between driver and electronic system.
In 1980, no one had the slightest clue that such a job would ever exist.
As a matter of fact, the overall number of people involved in the production of a car has only changed slightly in the last decades, in spite of robots and automation.
So what does this mean?
Yes, technology will replace a lot of jobs, but we will also see a lot of new jobs and new skills on the horizon, and that means technology will worsen our overall skill mismatch.
And this kind of de-averaging reveals the crucial challenge for governments and businesses.
So people, high-skilled people, talents, will be the big thing in the next decade.
If they are the scarce resource, we have to understand them much better.
Are they actually willing to work abroad?
What are their job preferences?
To find out, this year we conducted a global survey among more than 200,000 job seekers from 189 countries.
Migration is certainly one key measure to close a gap, at least in the short term, so we asked about mobility.
More than 60 percent of these 200,000 job seekers are willing to work abroad.
For me, a surprisingly high number.
If you look at the employees aged 21 to 30, this number is even higher.
If you split this number up by country, yes, the world is mobile, but only partly.
The least mobile countries are Russia, Germany and the U.S.
Now where would these people like to move?
Number seven is Australia, where 28 percent could imagine moving.
Then France, Switzerland, Germany, Canada, U.K., and the top choice worldwide is the U.S.
Now, what are the job preferences of these 200,000 people?
So, what are they looking for?
Out of a list of 26 topics, salary is only number eight.
The top four topics are all around culture.
Number four, having a great relationship with the boss; three, enjoying a great work-life balance; two, having a great relationship with colleagues; and the top priority worldwide is being appreciated for your work.
So, do I get a thank you?
Not only once a year with the annual bonus payment, but every day.
And now, our global workforce crisis becomes very personal.
People are looking for recognition.
Aren't we all looking for recognition in our jobs?
Now, let me connect the dots.
We will face a global workforce crisis which consists of an overall labor shortage plus a huge skill mismatch, plus a big cultural challenge.
And this global workforce crisis is approaching very fast.
Right now, we are just at the turning point.
So what can we, what can governments, what can companies do?
Every company, but also every country, needs a people strategy, and to act on it immediately, and such a people strategy consists of four parts.
Number one, a plan for how to forecast supply and demand for different jobs and different skills.
Workforce planning will become more important than financial planning.
Two, a plan for how to attract great people: generation Y, women, but also retirees.
Three, a plan for how to educate and upskill them.
There's a huge upskilling challenge ahead of us.
And four, for how to retain the best people, or in other words, how to realize an appreciation and relationship culture.
However, one crucial underlying factor is to change our attitudes.
Employees are resources, are assets, not costs, not head counts, not machines, not even the Germans.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Ten years ago, I got a phone call that changed my life.
At the time, I was cardiologist at UCLA, specializing in cardiac imaging techniques.
The call came from a veterinarian at the Los Angeles Zoo.
An elderly female chimpanzee had woken up with a facial droop and the veterinarians were worried that she'd had a stroke.
They asked if I'd come to the zoo and image the animal's heart to look for a possible cardiac cause.
Now, to be clear, North American zoos are staffed by highly qualified, board-certified veterinarians who take outstanding care of their animal patients.
But occasionally, they do reach into the human medical community, particularly for some speciality consultation, and I was one of the lucky physicians who was invited in to help.
I had a chance to rule out a stroke in this chimpanzee and make sure that this gorilla didn't have a torn aorta, evaluate this macaw for a heart murmur, make sure that this California sea lion's paricardium wasn't inflamed, and in this picture, I'm listening to the heart of a lion after a lifesaving, collaborative procedure with veterinarians and physicians where we drained 700 cc's of fluid from the sac in which this lion's heart was contained.
And this procedure, which I have done on many human patients, was identical, with the exception of that paw and that tail.
Now most of the time, I was working at UCLA Medical Center with physicians, discussing symptoms and diagnoses and treatments for my human patients, but some of the time, I was working at the Los Angeles Zoo with veterinarians, discussing symptoms and diagnoses and treatments for their animal patients.
And occasionally, on the very same day, I went on rounds at UCLA Medical Center and at the Los Angeles Zoo.
And here's what started coming into very clear focus for me.
Physicians and veterinarians were essentially taking care of the same disorders in their animal and human patients: congestive heart failure, brain tumors, leukemia, diabetes, arthritis, ALS, breast cancer, even psychiatric syndromes like depression, anxiety, compulsions, eating disorders and self-injury.
Now, I've got a confession to make.
Even though I studied comparative physiology and evolutionary biology as an undergrad -- I had even written my senior thesis on Darwinian theory -- learning about the significant overlap between the disorders of animals and humans, it came as a much needed wake-up call for me.
So I started wondering, with all of these overlaps, how was it that I had never thought to ask a veterinarian, or consult the veterinary literature, for insights into one of my human patients?
Why had I never, nor had any of my physician friends and colleagues whom I asked, ever attended a veterinary conference?
For that matter, why was any of this a surprise?
I mean, look, every single physician accepts some biological connection between animals and humans.
Every medication that we prescribe or that we've taken ourselves or we've given to our families has first been tested on an animal.
But there's something very different about giving an animal a medication or a human disease and the animal developing congestive heart failure or diabetes or breast cancer on their own.
Now, maybe some of the surprise comes from the increasing separation in our world between the urban and the nonurban.
You know, we hear about these city kids who think that wool grows on trees or that cheese comes from a plant.
Well, today's human hospitals, increasingly, are turning into these gleaming cathedrals of technology.
And this creates a psychological distance between the human patients who are being treated there and animal patients who are living in oceans and farms and jungles.
But I think there's an even deeper reason.
Physicians and scientists, we accept intellectually that our species, Homo sapiens, is merely one species, no more unique or special than any other.
But in our hearts, we don't completely believe that.
I feel it myself when I'm listening to Mozart or looking at pictures of the Mars Rover on my MacBook.
I feel that tug of human exceptionalism, even as I recognize the scientifically isolating cost of seeing ourselves as a superior species, apart.
Well, I'm trying these days.
When I see a human patient now, I always ask, what do the animal doctors know about this problem that I don't know?
And, might I be taking better care of my human patient if I saw them as a human animal patient?
Here are a few examples of the kind of exciting connections that this kind of thinking has led me to.
Fear-induced heart failure.
Around the year 2000, human cardiologists "discovered" emotionally induced heart failure.
It was described in a gambling father who had lost his life's savings with a roll of the dice, in a bride who'd been left at the alter.
But it turns out, this "new" human diagnosis was neither new, nor was it uniquely human.
Veterinarians had been diagnosing, treating and even preventing emotionally induced symptoms in animals ranging from monkeys to flamingos, from to deer to rabbits, since the 1970s.
How many human lives might have been saved if this veterinary knowledge had been put into the hands of E.R. docs and cardiologists?
Self-injury.
Some human patients harm themselves.
Some pluck out patches of hair, others actually cut themselves.
Some animal patients also harm themselves.
There are birds that pluck out feathers.
There are stallions that repetitively bite their flanks until they bleed.
But veterinarians have very specific and very effective ways of treating and even preventing self-injury in their self-injuring animals.
Shouldn't this veterinary knowledge be put into the hands of psychotherapists and parents and patients struggling with self-injury?
Postpartum depression and postpartum psychosis.
Sometimes, soon after giving birth, some women become depressed, and sometimes they become seriously depressed and even psychotic.
They may neglect their newborn, and in some extreme cases, even harm the child.
Equine veterinarians also know that occasionally, a mare, soon after giving birth, will neglect the foal, refusing to nurse, and in some instances, kick the foal, even to death.
But veterinarians have devised an intervention to deal with this foal rejection syndrome that involves increasing oxytocin in the mare.
Oxytocin is the bonding hormone, and this leads to renewed interest, on the part of the mare, in her foal.
Shouldn't this information be put into the hands of ob/gyn's and family doctors and patients who are struggling with postpartum depression and psychosis?
Well, despite all of this promise, unfortunately the gulf between our fields remains large.
To explain it, I'm afraid I'm going to have to air some dirty laundry.
Some physicians can be real snobs about doctors who are not M.D.'s.
I'm talking about dentists and optometrists and psychologists, but maybe especially animal doctors.
Of course, most physicians don't realize that it is harder to get into vet school these days than medical school, and that when we go to medical school, we learn everything there is to know about one species, Homo sapiens, but veterinarians need to learn about health and disease in mammals, amphibians, reptiles, fish and birds.
So I don't blame the vets for feeling annoyed by my profession's condescension and ignorance.
But here's one from the vets: What do you call a veterinarian who can only take care of one species?
A physician. (Laughter) Closing the gap has become a passion for me, and I'm doing this through programs like Darwin on Rounds at UCLA, where we're bringing animal experts and evolutionary biologists and embedding them on our medical teams with our interns and our residents.
And through Zoobiquity conferences, where we bring medical schools together with veterinary schools for collabortive discussions of the shared diseases and disorders of animal and human patients.
At Zoobiquity conferences, participants learn how treating breast cancer in a tiger can help us better treat breast cancer in a kindergarten teacher; how understanding polycystic overies in a Holstein cow can help us better take care of a dance instructor with painful periods; and how better understanding the treatment of separation anxiety in a high-strung Sheltie can help an anxious young child struggling with his first days of school.
In the United States and now internationally, at Zoobiquity conferences physicians and veterinarians check their attitudes and their preconceptions at the door and come together as colleagues, as peers, as doctors.
After all, we humans are animals, too, and it's time for us physicians to embrace our patients' and our own animal natures and join veterinarians in a species-spanning approach to health.
Because it turns out, some of the best and most humanistic medicine is being practiced by doctors whose patients aren't human.
And one of the best ways we can take care of the human patient is by paying close attention to how all the other patients on the planet live, grow, get sick and heal.
Thank you.
(Applause).
When I arrived in Kiev, on February 1 this year, Independence Square was under siege, surrounded by police loyal to the government.
The protesters who occupied Maidan, as the square is known, prepared for battle, stockpiling homemade weapons and mass-producing improvised body armor.
The Euromaidan protests began peacefully at the end of 2013, after the president of Ukraine, Viktor Yanukovych, rejected a far-reaching accord with the European Union in favor of stronger ties with Russia.
In response, tens of thousands of dissatisfied citizens poured into central Kiev to demonstrate against this allegiance.
As the months passed, confrontations between police and civilians intensified.
I set up a makeshift portrait studio by the barricades on Hrushevsky Street.
There, I photographed the fighters against a black curtain, a curtain that obscured the highly seductive and visual backdrop of fire, ice and smoke.
In order to tell the individual human stories here, I felt that I needed to remove the dramatic visuals that had become so familiar and repetitive within the mainstream media.
What I was witnessing was not only news, but also history.
With this realization, I was free from the photojournalistic conventions of the newspaper and the magazine.
Oleg, Vasiliy and Maxim were all ordinary men, with ordinary lives from ordinary towns.
But the elaborate costumes that they had bedecked themselves in were quite extraordinary.
I say the word "costume" because these were not clothes that had been issued or coordinated by anyone.
They were improvised uniforms made up of decommissioned military equipment, irregular combat fatigues and trophies taken from the police.
I became interested in the way they were choosing to represent themselves, this outward expression of masculinity, the ideal of the warrior.
I worked slowly, using an analog film camera with a manual focusing loop and a handheld light meter.
The process is old-fashioned.
It gives me time to speak with each person and to look at them, in silence, while they look back at me.
Rising tensions culminated in the worst day of violence on February 20, which became known as Bloody Thursday.
Snipers, loyal to the government, started firing on the civilians and protesters on Institutskaya Street.
Many were killed in a very short space of time.
The reception of the Hotel Ukraine became a makeshift morgue.
There were lines of bodies laid in the street.
And there was blood all over the pavements.
The following day, President Yanukovych fled Ukraine.
In all, three months of protests resulted in more than 120 confirmed dead and many more missing.
History unfolded quickly, but celebration remained elusive in Maidan.
As the days passed in Kiev's central square, streams of armed fighters were joined by tens of thousands of ordinary people, filling the streets in an act of collective mourning.
Many were women who often carried flowers that they had brought to lay as marks of respect for the dead.
They came day after day and they covered the square with millions of flowers.
Sadness enveloped Maidan.
It was quiet and I could hear the birds singing.
I hadn't heard that before.
I stopped women as they approached the barricades to lay their tributes and asked to make their picture.
Most women cried when I photographed them.
On the first day, my fixer, Emine, and I cried with almost every woman who visited our studio.
There had been such a noticeable absence of women up until that point.
And the color of their pastel coats, their shiny handbags, and the bunches of red carnations, white tulips and yellow roses that they carried jarred with the blackened square and the blackened men who were encamped there.
It is clear to me that these two sets of pictures don't make much sense without the other.
They are about men and women and the way we are -- not the way we look, but the way we are.
They speak about different gender roles in conflict, not only in Maidan, and not only in Ukraine.
Men fight most wars and women mourn them.
If the men showed the ideal of the warrior, then the women showed the implications of such violence.
When I made these pictures, I believed that I was documenting the end of violent events in Ukraine.
But now I understand that it is a record of the beginning.
Today, the death toll stands around 3,000, while hundreds of thousands have been displaced.
I was in Ukraine again six weeks ago.
In Maidan, the barricades have been dismantled, and the paving stones which were used as weapons during the protests replaced, so that traffic flows freely through the center of the square.
The fighters, the women and the flowers are gone.
A huge billboard depicting geese flying over a wheat field covers the burned-out shell of the trade union's building and proclaims, "Glory to Ukraine.
Glory to heroes."
Thank you.
(Applause).
(Music) (Applause)
Thank you.
I have only got 18 minutes to explain something that lasts for hours and days, so I'd better get started.
Let's start with a clip from Al Jazeera's Listening Post.
Richard Gizbert: Norway is a country that gets relatively little media coverage.
Even the elections this past week passed without much drama.
And that's the Norwegian media in a nutshell: not much drama.
A few years back, Norway's public TV channel NRK decided to broadcast live coverage of a seven-hour train ride -- seven hours of simple footage, a train rolling down the tracks.
Norwegians, more than a million of them according to the ratings, loved it.
A new kind of reality TV show was born, and it goes against all the rules of TV engagement.
There is no story line, no script, no drama, no climax, and it's called Slow TV.
For the past two months, Norwegians have been watching a cruise ship's journey up the coast, and there's a lot of fog on that coast.
Executives at Norway's National Broadcasting Service are now considering broadcasting a night of knitting nationwide.
On the surface, it sounds boring, because it is, but something about this TV experiment has gripped Norwegians.
So we sent the Listening Post's Marcela Pizarro to Oslo to find out what it is, but first a warning: Viewers may find some of the images in the following report disappointing.
(Laughter) Thomas Hellum: And then follows an eight-minute story on Al Jazeera about some strange TV programs in little Norway.
Al Jazeera. CNN. How did we get there?
We have to go back to 2009, when one of my colleagues got a great idea.
Where do you get your ideas?
In the lunchroom.
So he said, why don't we make a radio program marking the day of the German invasion of Norway in 1940.
We tell the story at the exact time during the night.
Wow. Brilliant idea, except this was just a couple of weeks before the invasion day.
So we sat in our lunchroom and discussed what other stories can you tell as they evolve?
What other things take a really long time?
So one of us came up with a train.
The Bergen Railway had its 100-year anniversary that year It goes from western Norway to eastern Norway, and it takes exactly the same time as it did 40 years ago, over seven hours. (Laughter) So we caught our commissioning editors in Oslo, and we said, we want to make a documentary about the Bergen Railway, and we want to make it in full length, and the answer was, "Yes, but how long will the program be?"
"Oh," we said, "full length."
"Yes, but we mean the program."
And back and forth.
Luckily for us, they met us with laughter, very, very good laughter, so one bright day in September, we started a program that we thought should be seven hours and four minutes.
Actually, it turned out to be seven hours and 14 minutes due to a signal failure at the last station.
We had four cameras, three of them pointing out to the beautiful nature.
Some talking to the guests, some information.
(Video) Train announcement: We will arrive at Haugastøl Station.
TH: And that's about it, but of course, also the 160 tunnels gave us the opportunity to do some archives.
Narrator [in Norwegian]: Then a bit of flirting while the food is digested.
The last downhill stretch before we reach our destination.
We pass Mjølfjell Station.
Then a new tunnel.
(Laughter) TH: And now we thought, yes, we have a brilliant program.
It will fit for the 2,000 train spotters in Norway.
We brought it on air in November 2009.
But no, this was far more attractive.
This is the five biggest TV channels in Norway on a normal Friday, and if you look at NRK2 over here, look what happened when they put on the Bergen Railway show: 1.2 million Norwegians watched part of this program.
(Applause) And another funny thing: When the host on our main channel, after they have got news for you, she said, "And on our second channel, the train has now nearly reached Myrdal station."
Thousands of people just jumped on the train on our second channel like this. (Laughter) This was also a huge success in terms of social media.
It was so nice to see all the thousands of Facebook and Twitter users discussing the same view, talking to each other as if they were on the same train together.
And especially, I like this one. It's a 76-year-old man.
He's watched all the program, and at the end station, he rises up to pick up what he thinks is his luggage, and his head hit the curtain rod, and he realized he is in his own living room.
(Applause) So that's strong and living TV.
Four hundred and thirty-six minute by minute on a Friday night, and during that first night, the first Twitter message came: Why be a chicken?
Why stop at 436 when you can expand that to 8,040, minute by minute, and do the iconic journey in Norway, the coastal ship journey Hurtigruten from Bergen to Kirkenes, almost 3,000 kilometers, covering most of our coast.
It has 120-year-old, very interesting history, and literally takes part in life and death along the coast.
So just a week after the Bergen Railway, we called the Hurtigruten company and we started planning for our next show.
We wanted to do something different.
The Bergen Railway was a recorded program.
So when we sat in our editing room, we watched this picture -- it's all Ål Station -- we saw this journalist.
We had called him, we had spoken to him, and when we left the station, he took this picture of us and he waved to the camera, and we thought, what if more people knew that we were on board that train?
Would more people show up?
What would it look like?
So we decided our next project, it should be live.
We wanted this picture of us on the fjord and on the screen at the same time.
So this is not the first time NRK had been on board a ship.
This is back in 1964, when the technical managers have suits and ties and NRK rolled all its equipment on board a ship, and 200 meters out of the shore, transmitting the signal back, and in the machine room, they talked to the machine guy, and on the deck, they have splendid entertainment.
So being on a ship, it's not the first time.
But five and a half days in a row, and live, we wanted some help.
And we asked our viewers out there, what do you want to see?
What do you want us to film? How do you want this to look?
Do you want us to make a website? What do you want on it?
And we got some answers from you out there, and it helped us a very lot to build the program.
So in June 2011, 23 of us went on board the Hurtigruten coastal ship and we set off.
(Music) I have some really strong memories from that week, and it's all about people.
This guy, for instance, he's head of research at the University in Tromsø (Laughter) And I will show you a piece of cloth, this one.
It's the other strong memory.
It belongs to a guy called Erik Hansen.
And it's people like those two who took a firm grip of our program, and together with thousands of others along the route, they made the program what it became.
They made all the stories.
This is Karl. He's in the ninth grade.
It says, "I will be a little late for school tomorrow."
He was supposed to be in the school at 8 a.m.
He came at 9 a.m., and he didn't get a note from his teacher, because the teacher had watched the program.
(Laughter) How did we do this?
Yes, we took a conference room on board the Hurtigruten.
We turned it into a complete TV control room.
We made it all work, of course, and then we took along 11 cameras.
This is one of them.
This is my sketch from February, and when you give this sketch to professional people in the Norwegian broadcasting company NRK, you get some cool stuff back.
And with some very creative solutions.
(Video) Narrator [in Norwegian]: Run it up and down.
This is Norway's most important drill right now.
It regulates the height of a bow camera in NRK's live production, one of 11 that capture great shots from the MS Nord-Norge.
Eight wires keep the camera stable.
Cameraman: I work on different camera solutions.
They're just tools used in a different context.
TH: Another camera is this one. It's normally used for sports.
It made it possible for us to take close-up pictures of people 100 kilomteres away, like this one. (Laughter) People called us and asked, how is this man doing?
He's doing fine. Everything went well.
We also could take pictures of people waving at us, people along the route, thousands of them, and they all had a phone in their hand.
And when you take a picture of them, and they get the message, "Now we are on TV, dad," they start waving back.
This was waving TV for five and a half days, and people get so extremely happy when they can send a warm message to their loved ones.
It was also a great success on social media.
On the last day, we met Her Majesty the Queen of Norway, and Twitter couldn't quite handle it.
And we also, on the web, during this week we streamed more than 100 years of video to 148 nations, and the websites are still there and they will be forever, actually, because Hurtigruten was selected to be part of the Norwegian UNESCO list of documents, and it's also in the Guinness Book of Records as the longest documentary ever.
(Applause) Thank you.
But it's a long program, so some watched part of it, like the Prime Minister.
Some watched a little bit more.
It says, "I haven't used my bed for five days."
And he's 82 years old, and he hardly slept.
He kept watching because something might happen, though it probably won't. (Laughter) This is the number of viewers along the route.
You can see the famous Trollfjord and a day after, all-time high for NRK2.
If you see the four biggest channels in Norway during June 2011, they will look like this, and as a TV producer, it's a pleasure to put Hurtigruten on top of it.
It looks like this: 3.2 million Norwegians watched part of this program, and we are only five million here.
Even the passengers on board the Hurtigruten coastal ship -- (Laughter) -- they chose to watched the telly instead of turning 90 degrees and watching out the window.
So we were allowed to be part of people's living room with this strange TV program, with music, nature, people.
And Slow TV was now a buzzword, and we started looking for other things we could make Slow TV about.
So we could either take something long and make it a topic, like with the railway and the Hurtigruten, or we could take a topic and make it long.
This is the last project. It's the peep show.
It's 14 hours of birdwatching on a TV screen, actually 87 days on the web.
We have made 18 hours of live salmon fishing.
It actually took three hours before we got the first fish, and that's quite slow.
We have made 12 hours of boat ride into the beautiful Telemark Canal, and we have made another train ride with the northern railway, and because this we couldn't do live, we did it in four seasons just to give the viewer another experience on the way.
So our next project got us some attention outside Norway.
This is from the Colbert Report on Comedy Central.
(Video) Stephen Colbert: I've got my eye on a wildly popular program from Norway called "National Firewood Night," which consisted of mostly people in parkas chatting and chopping in the woods, and then eight hours of a fire burning in a fireplace. (Laughter) It destroyed the other top Norwegian shows, like "So You Think You Can Watch Paint Dry" and "The Amazing Glacier Race."
And get this, almost 20 percent of the Norwegian population tuned in, 20 percent.
TH: So, when wood fire and wood chopping can be that interesting, why not knitting?
So on our next project, we used more than eight hours to go live from a sheep to a sweater, and Jimmy Kimmel in the ABC show, he liked that.
(Music) (Video) Jimmy Kimmel: Even the people on the show are falling asleep, and after all that, the knitters actually failed to break the world record.
They did not succeed, but remember the old Norwegian saying, it's not whether you win or lose that counts.
In fact, nothing counts, and death is coming for us all.
(Laughter) TH: Exactly. So why does this stand out?
This is so completely different to other TV programming.
We take the viewer on a journey that happens right now in real time, and the viewer gets the feeling of actually being there, actually being on the train, on the boat, and knitting together with others, and the reason I think why they're doing that is because we don't edit the timeline.
It's important that we don't edit the timeline, and it's also important that what we make Slow TV about is something that we all can relate to, that the viewer can relate to, and that somehow has a root in our culture.
This is a picture from last summer when we traveled the coast again for seven weeks.
And of course this is a lot of planning, this is a lot of logistics.
So this is the working plan for 150 people last summer, but more important is what you don't plan.
You don't plan what's going to happen.
You have to just take your cameras with you.
It's like a sports event.
You rig them and you see what's happening.
So this is actually the whole running order for Hurtigruten, 134 hours, just written on one page.
We didn't know anything more when we left Bergen.
So you have to let the viewers make the stories themselves, and I'll give you an example of that.
This is from last summer, and as a TV producer, it's a nice picture, but now you can cut to the next one.
But this is Slow TV, so you have to keep this picture until it really starts hurting your stomach, and then you keep it a little bit longer, and when you keep it that long, I'm sure some of you now have noticed the cow.
Some of you have seen the flag.
Some of you start wondering, is the farmer at home?
Has he left? Is he watching the cow?
And where is that cow going?
So my point is, the longer you keep a picture like this, and we kept it for 10 minutes, you start making the stories in your own head.
That's Slow TV.
So we think that Slow TV is one nice way of telling a TV story, and we think that we can continue doing it, not too often, once or twice a year, so we keep the feeling of an event, and we also think that the good Slow TV idea, that's the idea when people say, "Oh no, you can't put that on TV."
When people smile, it might be a very good slow idea, so after all, life is best when it's a bit strange.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The shocking police crackdown on protestors in Ferguson, Missouri, in the wake of the police shooting of Michael Brown, underscored the extent to which advanced military weapons and equipment, designed for the battlefield, are making their way to small-town police departments across the United States.
Although much tougher to observe, this same thing is happening with surveillance equipment.
NSA-style mass surveillance is enabling local police departments to gather vast quantities of sensitive information about each and every one of us in a way that was never previously possible.
Location information can be very sensitive.
If you drive your car around the United States, it can reveal if you go to a therapist, attend an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting, if you go to church or if you don't go to church.
And when that information about you is combined with the same information about everyone else, the government can gain a detailed portrait of how private citizens interact.
This information used to be private.
Thanks to modern technology, the government knows far too much about what happens behind closed doors.
And local police departments make decisions about who they think you are based on this information.
One of the key technologies driving mass location tracking is the innocuous-sounding Automatic License Plate Reader.
If you haven't seen one, it's probably because you didn't know what to look for -- they're everywhere.
Mounted on roads or on police cars, Automatic License Plate Readers capture images of every passing car and convert the license plate into machine-readable text so that they can be checked against hot lists of cars potentially wanted for wrongdoing.
But more than that, increasingly, local police departments are keeping records not just of people wanted for wrongdoing, but of every plate that passes them by, resulting in the collection of mass quantities of data about where Americans have gone.
Did you know this was happening?
When Mike Katz-Lacabe asked his local police department for information about the plate reader data they had on him, this is what they got: in addition to the date, time and location, the police department had photographs that captured where he was going and often who he was with.
The second photo from the top is a picture of Mike and his two daughters getting out of their car in their own driveway.
The government has hundreds of photos like this about Mike going about his daily life.
And if you drive a car in the United States, I would bet money that they have photographs like this of you going about your daily life.
Mike hasn't done anything wrong.
Why is it okay that the government is keeping all of this information?
The reason it's happening is because, as the cost of storing this data has plummeted, the police departments simply hang on to it, just in case it could be useful someday.
The issue is not just that one police department is gathering this information in isolation or even that multiple police departments are doing it.
At the same time, the federal government is collecting all of these individual pots of data, and pooling them together into one vast database with hundreds of millions of hits, showing where Americans have traveled.
This document from the Federal Drug Enforcement Administration, which is one of the agencies primarily interested in this, is one of several that reveal the existence of this database.
Meanwhile, in New York City, the NYPD has driven police cars equipped with license plate readers past mosques in order to figure out who is attending.
The uses and abuses of this technology aren't limited to the United States.
In the U.K., the police department put 80-year-old John Kat on a plate reader watch list after he had attended dozens of lawful political demonstrations where he liked to sit on a bench and sketch the attendees.
License plate readers aren't the only mass location tracking technology available to law enforcement agents today.
Through a technique known as a cell tower dump, law enforcement agents can uncover who was using one or more cell towers at a particular time, a technique which has been known to reveal the location of tens of thousands and even hundreds of thousands of people.
Also, using a device known as a StingRay, law enforcement agents can send tracking signals inside people's houses to identify the cell phones located there.
And if they don't know which house to target, they've been known to drive this technology around through whole neighborhoods.
Just as the police in Ferguson possess high-tech military weapons and equipment, so too do police departments across the United States possess high-tech surveillance gear.
Just because you don't see it, doesn't mean it's not there.
The question is, what should we do about this?
I think this poses a serious civil liberties threat.
History has shown that once the police have massive quantities of data, tracking the movements of innocent people, it gets abused, maybe for blackmail, maybe for political advantage, or maybe for simple voyeurism.
Fortunately, there are steps we can take.
Local police departments can be governed by the city councils, which can pass laws requiring the police to dispose of the data about innocent people while allowing the legitimate uses of the technology to go forward.
Thank you.
(Applause).
I draw to better understand things.
Sometimes I make a lot of drawings and I still don't understand what it is I'm drawing.
Those of you who are comfortable with digital stuff and even smug about that relationship might be amused to know that the guy who is best known for "The Way Things Work," while preparing for part of a panel for called Understanding, spent two days trying to get his laptop to communicate with his new CD burner.
Who knew about extension managers?
I've always managed my own extensions so it never even occurred to me to read the instructions, but I did finally figure it out. I had to figure it out, because along with the invitation came the frightening reminder that there would be no projector, so bringing those carousels would no longer be necessary but some alternate form of communication would.
Now, I could talk about something that I'm known for, something that would be particularly appropriate for many of the more technically minded people here, or I could talk about something I really care about.
I decided to go with the latter.
I'm going to talk about Rome.
Now, why would I care about Rome, particularly?
Well, I went to Rhode Island School of Design in the second half of the '60s to study architecture.
I was lucky enough to spend my last year, my fifth year, in Rome as a student. It changed my life.
Not the least reason was the fact that I had spent those first four years living at home, driving into RISD everyday, driving back.
I missed the '60s. I read about them; (Laughter) I understand they were pretty interesting. I missed them, but I did spend that extraordinary year in Rome, and it's a place that is never far from my mind.
So, whenever given an opportunity, I try to do something in it or with it or for it.
I also make drawings to help people understand things.
Things that I want them to believe I understand.
And that's what I do as an illustrator, that's my job.
So, I'm going to show you some pictures of Rome.
I've made a lot of drawings of Rome over the years.
These are just drawings of Rome. I get back as often as possible -- I need to.
All different materials, all different styles, all different times, drawings from sketchbooks looking at the details of Rome.
Part of the reason I'm showing you these is that it sort of helps illustrate this process I go through of trying to figure out what it is I feel about Rome and why I feel it.
These are sketches of some of the little details.
Rome is a city full of surprises.
I mean, we're talking about unusual perspectives, we're talking about narrow little winding streets that suddenly open into vast, sun-drenched piazzas -- never, though, piazzas that are not humanly scaled.
Part of the reason for that is the fact that they grew up organically.
That amazing juxtaposition of old and new, the bits of light that come down between the buildings that sort of create a map that's traveling above your head of usually blue -- especially in the summer -- compared to the map that you would normally expect to see of conventional streets.
And I began to think about how I could communicate this in book form.
How could I share my sense of Rome, my understanding of Rome?
And I'm going to show you a bunch of dead ends, basically.
The primary reason for all these dead ends is when if you're not quite sure where you're going, you're certainly not going to get there with any kind of efficiency.
Here's a little map. And I thought of maps at the beginning; maybe I should just try and do a little atlas of my favorite streets and connections in Rome.
And here's a line of text that actually evolves from the exhaust of a scooter zipping across the page.
Here that same line of text wraps around a fountain in an illustration that can be turned upside down and read both ways.
Maybe that line of text could be a story to help give some human aspect to this.
Maybe I should get away from this map completely, and really be honest about wanting to show you my favorite bits and pieces of Rome and simply kick a soccer ball in the air -- which happens in so many of the squares in the city -- and let it bounce off of things. And I'll simply explain what each of those things is that the soccer ball hits.
That seemed like a sort of a cheap shot.
But even though I just started this presentation, this is not the first thing that I tried to do and I was getting sort of desperate.
Eventually, I realized that I had really no content that I could count on, so I decided to move towards packaging. (Laughter) I mean, it seems to work for a lot of things.
So I thought a little box set of four small books might do the trick.
But one of the ideas that emerged from some of those sketches was the notion of traveling through Rome in different vehicles at different speeds in order to show the different aspects of Rome.
Sort of an overview of Rome and the plan that you might see from a dirigible.
Quick snapshots of things you might see from a speeding motor scooter, and very slow walking through Rome, you might be able to study in more detail some of the wonderful surfaces and whatnot that you come across.
Anyways, I went back to the dirigible notion.
Went to Alberto Santos-Dumont.
Found one of his dirigibles that had enough dimensions so I could actually use it as a scale that I would then juxtapose with some of the things in Rome.
This thing would be flying over or past or be parked in front of, but it would be like having a ruler -- sort of travel through the pages without being a ruler.
Not that you know how long number 11 actually is, but you would be able to compare number 11 against the Pantheon with number 11 against the Baths of Caracalla, and so on and so forth. If you were interested.
This is Beatrix. She has a dog named Ajax, she has purchased a dirigible -- a small dirigible -- she's assembling the structure, Ajax is sniffing for holes in the balloon before they set off.
She launches this thing above the Spanish Steps and sets off for an aerial tour of the city.
Over the Spanish Steps we go.
A nice way to show that river, that stream sort of pouring down the hill.
Unfortunately, just across the road from it or quite close by is the Column of Marcus Aurelius, and the diameter of the dirigible makes an impression, as you can see, as she starts trying to read the story that spirals around the Column of Marcus Aurelius -- gets a little too close, nudges it.
This gives me a chance to suggest to you the structure of the Column of Marcus Aurelius, which is really no more than a pile of quarters high -- thick quarters. Over the Piazza of Saint Ignacio, completely ruining the symmetry, but that aside a spectacular place to visit.
A spectacular framework, inside of which you see, usually, extraordinary blue sky.
Over the Pantheon and the 26-foot diameter Oculus.
She parks her dirigible, lowers the anchor rope and climbs down for a closer look inside.
The text here is right side and upside down so that you are forced to turn the book around, and you can see it from ground point of view and from her point of view -- looking in the hole, getting a different kind of perspective, moving you around the space. Particularly appropriate in a building that can contain perfectly a sphere dimensions of the diameter being the same as the distance from the center of the floor to the center of the Oculus.
Unfortunately for her, the anchor line gets tangled around the feet of some Boy Scouts who are visiting the Pantheon, and they are immediately yanked out and given an extraordinary but terrifying tour of some of the domes of Rome, which would, from their point of view, naturally be hanging upside down.
They bail out as soon as they get to the top of Saint Ivo, that little spiral structure you see there.
She continues on her way over Piazza Navona.
Notices a lot of activity at the Tre Scalini restaurant, is reminded that it is lunchtime and she's hungry.
They keep on motoring towards the Campo de' Fiori, which they soon reach. Ajax the dog is put in a basket and lowered with a list of food into the marketplace, which flourishes there until about one in the afternoon, and then is completely removed and doesn't appear again until six or seven the following morning.
Anyway, the pooch gets back to the dirigible with the stuff.
Unfortunately, when she goes to unwrap the prosciutto, Ajax makes a lunge for it.
She's managed to save the prosciutto, but in the process she loses the tablecloth, which you can see flying away in the upper left-hand corner.
They continue without their tablecloth, looking for a place to land this thing so that they can actually have lunch.
They eventually discover a huge wall that's filled with small holes, ideal for docking a dirigible because you've got a place to tie up.
Turns out to be the exterior wall -- that part of it that remains -- of the Coliseum, so they park themselves there and have a terrific lunch and have a spectacular view.
At the end of lunch, they untie the anchor, they set off through the Baths of Caracalla and over the walls of the city and then an abandoned gatehouse and decide to take one more look at the Pyramid of Cestius, which has this lightning rod on top.
Unfortunately, that's a problem: they get a little too close, and when you're in a dirigible you have to be very careful about spikes.
So that sort of brings her little story to a conclusion.
Marcello, on the other hand, is sort of a lazy guy, but he's not due at work until about noon.
So, the alarm goes off and it's five to 12 or so.
He gets up, leaps onto his scooter, races through the city past the church of Santa Maria della Pace, down the alleys, through the streets that tourists may be wandering through, disturbing the quiet backstreet life of Rome at every turn.
That speed with which he is moving, I hope I have suggested in this little image, which, again, can be turned around and read from both sides because there's text on the bottom and text on the top, one of which is upside down in this image.
So, he keeps on moving, approaching an unsuspecting waiter who is trying to deliver two plates of linguine in a delicate white wine clam sauce to diners who are sitting at a table just outside of a restaurant in the street.
Waiter catches on, but it's too late.
And Marcello keeps moving in his scooter.
Everything he sees from this point on is slightly affected by the linguine, but keeps on moving because this guy's got a job to do.
Removes some scaffolding. One of the reasons Rome remains the extraordinary place it is that because of scaffolding and the determination to maintain the fabric, it is a city that continues to grow and adapt to the needs of the particular time in which it finds itself, or we find it.
Right through the Piazza della Rotonda, in front of the Pantheon -- again wreaking havoc -- and finally getting to work.
Marcello, as it turns out, is the driver of the number 64 bus, and if you've been on the number 64 bus, you know that it's driven with the same kind of exuberance as Marcello demonstrated on his scooter.
And finally Carletto. You see his apartment in the upper left-hand corner.
He's looking at his table; he's planning to propose this evening to his girlfriend of 40 years, (Laughter) and he wants it to be perfect.
He's got candles out, he's got flowers in the middle and he's trying to figure out where to put the plates and the glasses.
But he's not happy; something's wrong.
The phone rings anyway, he's called to the palazzo.
He saunters -- he saunters at a good clip, but as compared to all the traveling we've just seen, he's sauntering.
Everybody knows Carletto, because he's in entertainment, actually; he's in television.
He's actually in television repair, which is why people know him.
So they all have his number.
He arrives at the palazzo, arrives at the big front door.
Enters the courtyard and talks to the custodian, who tells him that there's been a disaster in the palazzo; nobody's TVs are working and there's a big soccer game coming up, and the crowd is getting a little restless and a little nervous.
He goes down to the basement and starts to check the wiring, and then gradually works his way up to the top of the building, apartment by apartment, checking every television, checking every connection, hoping to find out what this problem is.
He works his way up, finally, the grand staircase and then a smaller staircase until he reaches the attic.
He opens the window of the attic, of course, and there's a tablecloth wrapped around the building's television antenna.
He removes it, the problems are solved, everybody in the palazzo is happy.
And of course, he also solves his own problem.
All he has to do now, with a perfect table, is wait for her to arrive.
That was the first attempt, but it didn't seem substantial enough to convey whatever it was I wanted to convey about Rome.
So I thought, well, I'll just do piazzas, and I'll get inside and underneath and I'll show these things growing and show why they're shaped the way they are and so on.
And then I thought, that's too complicated. No, I'll just take my favorite bits and pieces and I'll put them inside the Pantheon but keep the scale, so you can see the top of Sant'Ivo and the Pyramid of Cestius and the Tempietto of Bramante all side by side in this amazing space.
Now that's one drawing, so I thought maybe it's time for Piranesi to meet Escher. (Laughter) You see that I'm beginning to really lose control here and also hope.
There's a very thin blue line of exhaust that sort of runs through this thing that would be kind of the trail that holds it all together.
Then I thought, "Wait a minute, what am I doing?"
A book is not only a neat way of collecting and storing information, it's a series of layers.
I mean, you always peel one layer off another; we think of them as pages, doing it a certain way.
But think of them as layers. I mean, Rome is a place of layers -- horizontal layers, vertical layers -- and I thought, well just peeling off a page would allow me to -- if I got you thinking about it the right way -- would allow me to sort of show you the depth of layers.
The stucco on the walls of most of the buildings in Rome covers the scars; the scars of centuries of change as these structures have been adapted rather than being torn down.
If I do a foldout page on the left-hand side and let you just unfold it, you see behind it what I mean by scar tissue.
You can see that in 1635, it became essential to make smaller windows because the bad guys were coming or whatever.
Adaptations all get buried under the stucco.
I could peel out a page of this palazzo to show you what's going on inside of it.
But more importantly, I could also show you what it looks like at the corner of one of those magnificent buildings with all the massive stone blocks, or the fake stone blocks done with brick and stucco, which is more often the case.
So it becomes slightly three-dimensional.
I could take you down one of those narrow little streets into one of those surprising piazzas by using a double gate fold -- double foldout page -- which, if you were like me reading a pop-up book as a child, you hopefully stick your head into.
You wrap the pages around your head and are in that piazza for that brief period of time.
And I've really not done anything much more complicated than make foldout pages.
But then I thought, maybe I could be simpler here.
Let's look at the Pantheon and the Piazza della Rotonda in front of it.
Here's a book completely wide open.
OK, if I don't open the book the whole way, if I just open it 90 degrees, we're looking down the front of the Pantheon, and we're looking sort of at the top, more or less down on the square.
And if I turn the book the other way, we're looking across the square at the front of the Pantheon.
No foldouts, no tricks -- just a book that isn't open the whole way.
That seemed promising. I thought, maybe I'll do it inside and I can even combine the foldouts with the only partially opened book.
So we get inside the Pantheon and it grows and so on and so forth.
And I thought, maybe I'm on the right track, but it sort of lost its human quality.
So I went back to the notion of story, which is always a good thing to have if you're trying to get people to pay attention to a book and pick up information along the way.
"Pigeon's Progress" struck me as a catchy title.
If it was a homing pigeon, it would be called "Homer's Odyssey."
But it was the journey of the ... (Laughter) I mean, if a title works, use it. But it would be a journey that went through Rome and showed all the things that I like about Rome.
It's a pigeon sitting on top of a church.
Goes off during the day and does normal pigeon stuff. Comes back, the whole place is covered with scaffolding and green netting and there's no way this pigeon can get home.
So it's a homeless pigeon now and it's going to have to find another place to live, and that allows me to go through my catalog of favorite things, and we start with the tall ones and so on.
Maybe it has to go back and live with family members; that's not always a good thing, but it does sort of bring pigeons together again.
And I thought, that's sort of interesting, but maybe there's a person who should be involved in this in some way.
So I kind of came up with this old guy who spends his life looking after sick pigeons.
He'll go anywhere to get them -- dangerous places and whatnot -- and they become really friends with this guy, and learn to do tricks for him and entertain him at lunchtime and stuff like that.
There's a real bond that develops between this old man and these pigeons.
But unfortunately he gets sick. He gets really sick at the end of the story.
He's taught them to spell his name, which is Aldo.
They show up one day after three or four days of not seeing him -- he lives in this little garret -- and they spell his name and fly around.
And he finally gets enough strength together to climb up the ladder onto the roof, and all the pigeons, a la Red Balloon, are there waiting for him and they carry him off over the walls of the city.
And I forgot to mention this: whenever he lost a pigeon, he would take that pigeon out beyond the walls of the city.
In the old Roman custom, the dead were never buried within the walls.
And I thought that's a really cheery story.
(Laughter). That's really going to go a long way.
So anyway, I went through ... And again, if packaging doesn't work and if the stories aren't going anywhere, I just come up with titles and hope that a title will sort of kick me off in the right direction.
And sometimes it does focus me enough and I'll even do a title page.
So, these are all title pages that eventually led me to the solution I settled on, which is the story of a young woman who sends a message on a homing pigeon -- she lives outside the walls of the city of Rome -- to someone in the city.
And the pigeon is flying down above the Appian Way here.
You can see the tombs and pines and so on and so forth along the way.
If you see the red line, you are seeing the trail of the pigeon; if you don't see the red line, you are the pigeon.
And it becomes necessary and possible, at this point, to try to convey what that sense would be like of flying over the city without actually moving.
Past the Pyramid of Cestius -- these will seem very familiar to you, even if you haven't been to Rome recently -- past the gatehouse.
This is something that's a little bit unusual.
This pigeon does something that most homing pigeons do not do: it takes the scenic route, (Laughter) which was a device that I felt was necessary to actually extend this book beyond about four pages.
So, we circle around the Coliseum, past the Church of Santa Maria in Cosmedin and the Temple of Hercules towards the river.
We almost collide with the cornice of the Palazzo Farnese -- designed by Michelangelo, built of stone taken from the Coliseum -- narrow escape.
We swoop down over the Campo de' Fiori.
This is one of those things I show to my students because it's a complete bastardization -- a denial of any rules of perspective.
The only rule of perspective that I think matters is if it looks believable, you've succeeded.
But you try and figure out where the vanishing points meet here; a couple are on Mars and a couple of others in Cremona.
But into the piazza in front of Santa Maria della Pace, where invariably a soccer game is going on, and we're hit by a soccer ball.
Now this is a terrible illustration of being hit by a soccer ball.
I have all the pieces: there's Santa Maria della Pace, there's a soccer ball, there's a little bit of a bird's wing -- nothing's happening, so I had to rethink it.
And if you do want to see Santa Maria della Pace, these books are really flexible, incredibly interactive -- just turn it around and look at it the other way.
Through the alley, we can see the impact is captured in the red line.
And then bird manages to pull itself together past this medieval tower -- one of the few remaining medieval towers -- towards the church of Sant'Agnese and around the dome looking down into Piazza Navona -- which we've already mentioned and seen and flown over a couple of times; there's the Bernini statue of the Four Rivers -- and then past the wonderful Borromini Sant'Ivo, stopping just long enough on the 26-foot diameter Oculus of the Pantheon to catch our breath.
And then we can swoop inside and around; and because we're flying, we don't really have to worry about gravity at this particular moment in time, so this drawing can be oriented in any way on the page.
We get a little exuberant as we pass Gesu; it's not surprising to sort of mimic the architecture in this way.
Past the wonderful wall filled with the juxtaposition that I was talking about; beautiful carvings set into the walls above the neon "Ristorante" sign, and so on.
And eventually, we arrive at the courtyard of the palazzo, which is our destination.
Straight up through the courtyard into a little window into the attic, where somebody is working at the drawing board.
He removes the message from the leg of the bird; this is what it says.
As we look at the drawing board, we see what he's working on is, in fact, a map of the journey that the pigeon has just taken, and the red line extends through all the sights.
And if you want the information, so that we complete this cycle of understanding, all you have to do is read these paragraphs.
Thank you very much.
When we think about mapping cities, we tend to think about roads and streets and buildings, and the settlement narrative that led to their creation, or you might think about the bold vision of an urban designer, but there's other ways to think about mapping cities and how they got to be made.
Today, I want to show you a new kind of map.
This is not a geographic map.
This is a map of the relationships between people in my hometown of Baltimore, Maryland, and what you can see here is that each dot represents a person, each line represents a relationship between those people, and each color represents a community within the network.
Now, I'm here on the green side, down on the far right where the geeks are, and TEDx also is down on the far right. (Laughter) Now, on the other side of the network, you tend to have primarily African-American and Latino folks who are really concerned about somewhat different things than the geeks are, but just to give some sense, the green part of the network we call Smalltimore, for those of us that inhabit it, because it seems as though we're living in a very small town.
We see the same people over and over again, but that's because we're not really exploring the full depth and breadth of the city.
On the other end of the network, you have folks who are interested in things like hip-hop music and they even identify with living in the DC/Maryland/Virginia area over, say, the Baltimore city designation proper.
But in the middle, you see that there's something that connects the two communities together, and that's sports.
We have the Baltimore Orioles, the Baltimore Ravens football team, Michael Phelps, the Olympian.
Under Armour, you may have heard of, is a Baltimore company, and that community of sports acts as the only bridge between these two ends of the network.
Let's take a look at San Francisco.
You see something a little bit different happening in San Francisco.
On the one hand, you do have the media, politics and news lobe that tends to exist in Baltimore and other cities, but you also have this very predominant group of geeks and techies that are sort of taking over the top half of the network, and there's even a group that's so distinct and clear that we can identify it as Twitter employees, next to the geeks, in between the gamers and the geeks, at the opposite end of the hip-hop spectrum.
So you can see, though, that the tensions that we've heard about in San Francisco in terms of people being concerned about gentrification and all the new tech companies that are bringing new wealth and settlement into the city are real, and you can actually see that documented here.
You can see the LGBT community is not really getting along with the geek community that well, the arts community, the music community.
And so it leads to things like this.
["Evict Twitter"] Somebody sent me this photo a few weeks ago, and it shows what is happening on the ground in San Francisco, and I think you can actually try to understand that through looking at a map like this.
Let's take a look at Rio de Janeiro.
I spent the last few weeks gathering data about Rio, and one of the things that stood out to me about this city is that everything's really kind of mixed up.
It's a very heterogenous city in a way that Baltimore or San Francisco is not.
You still have the lobe of people involved with government, newspapers, politics, columnists.
TEDxRio is down in the lower right, right next to bloggers and writers.
But then you also have this tremendous diversity of people that are interested in different kinds of music.
Even Justin Bieber fans are represented here.
Other boy bands, country singers, gospel music, funk and rap and stand-up comedy, and there's even a whole section around drugs and jokes.
How cool is that?
And then the Flamengo football team is also represented here.
So you have that same kind of spread of sports and civics and the arts and music, but it's represented in a very different way, and I think that maybe fits with our understanding of Rio as being a very multicultural, musically diverse city.
So we have all this data.
It's an incredibly rich set of data that we have about cities now, maybe even richer than any data set that we've ever had before.
So what can we do with it?
Well, I think the first thing that we can try to understand is that segregation is a social construct.
It's something that we choose to do, and we could choose not to do it, and if you kind of think about it, what we're doing with this data is aiming a space telescope at a city and looking at it as if was a giant high school cafeteria, and seeing how everybody arranged themselves in a seating chart.
Well maybe it's time to shake up the seating chart a little bit.
The other thing that we start to realize is that race is a really poor proxy for diversity.
We've got people represented from all different types of races across the entire map here -- only looking at race doesn't really contribute to our development of diversity.
So if we're trying to use diversity as a way to tackle some of our more intractable problems, we need to start to think about diversity in a new way.
And lastly, we have the ability to create interventions to start to reshape our cities in a new way, and I believe that if we have that capability, we may even bear some responsibility to do so.
So what is a city?
I think some might say that it is a geographical area or a collection of streets and buildings, but I believe that a city is the sum of the relationships of the people that live there, and I believe that if we can start to document those relationships in a real way then maybe we have a real shot at creating those kinds of cities that we'd like to have.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was on a long road trip this summer, and I was having a wonderful time listening to the amazing Isabel Wilkerson's "The Warmth of Other Suns."
It documents six million black folks fleeing the South from 1915 to 1970 looking for a respite from all the brutality and trying to get to a better opportunity up North, and it was filled with stories of the resilience and the brilliance of African-Americans, and it was also really hard to hear all the stories of the horrors and the humility, and all the humiliations.
It was especially hard to hear about the beatings and the burnings and the lynchings of black men.
And I said, "You know, this is a little deep.
I need a break. I'm going to turn on the radio."
I turned it on, and there it was: Ferguson, Missouri, Michael Brown, 18-year-old black man, unarmed, shot by a white police officer, laid on the ground dead, blood running for four hours while his grandmother and little children and his neighbors watched in horror, and I thought, here it is again.
This violence, this brutality against black men has been going on for centuries.
I mean, it's the same story. It's just different names.
It could have been Amadou Diallo.
It could have been Sean Bell.
It could have been Oscar Grant.
It could have been Trayvon Martin.
This violence, this brutality, is really something that's part of our national psyche.
It's part of our collective history.
What are we going to do about it?
You know that part of us that still crosses the street, locks the doors, clutches the purses, when we see young black men?
That part.
I mean, I know we're not shooting people down in the street, but I'm saying that the same stereotypes and prejudices that fuel those kinds of tragic incidents are in us.
We've been schooled in them as well.
I believe that we can stop these types of incidents, these Fergusons from happening, by looking within and being willing to change ourselves.
So I have a call to action for you.
There are three things that I want to offer us today to think about as ways to stop Ferguson from happening again; three things that I think will help us reform our images of young black men; three things that I'm hoping will not only protect them but will open the world so that they can thrive.
Can you imagine that?
Can you imagine our country embracing young black men, seeing them as part of our future, giving them that kind of openness, that kind of grace we give to people we love?
How much better would our lives be? How much better would our country be?
Let me just start with number one.
We gotta get out of denial.
Stop trying to be good people.
We need real people.
You know, I do a lot of diversity work, and people will come up to me at the beginning of the workshop.
They're like, "Oh, Ms. Diversity Lady, we're so glad you're here" -- (Laughter) -- "but we don't have a biased bone in our body."
And I'm like, "Really?
Because I do this work every day, and I see all my biases."
I mean, not too long ago, I was on a plane and I heard the voice of a woman pilot coming over the P.A. system, and I was just so excited, so thrilled.
I was like, "Yes, women, we are rocking it.
We are now in the stratosphere."
It was all good, and then it started getting turbulent and bumpy, and I was like, "I hope she can drive."
(Laughter) I know. Right.
But it's not even like I knew that was a bias until I was coming back on the other leg and there's always a guy driving and it's often turbulent and bumpy, and I've never questioned the confidence of the male driver.
The pilot is good.
Now, here's the problem.
If you ask me explicitly, I would say, "Female pilot: awesome."
But it appears that when things get funky and a little troublesome, a little risky, I lean on a bias that I didn't even know that I had.
You know, fast-moving planes in the sky, I want a guy.
That's my default.
Men are my default.
Who is your default?
Who do you trust?
Who are you afraid of?
Who do you implicitly feel connected to?
Who do you run away from?
I'm going to tell you what we have learned.
The implicit association test, which measures unconscious bias, you can go online and take it.
Five million people have taken it.
Turns out, our default is white. We like white people.
We prefer white. What do I mean by that?
When people are shown images of black men and white men, we are more quickly able to associate that picture with a positive word, that white person with a positive word, than we are when we are trying to associate positive with a black face, and vice versa.
When we see a black face, it is easier for us to connect black with negative than it is white with negative.
Seventy percent of white people taking that test prefer white.
Fifty percent of black people taking that test prefer white.
You see, we were all outside when the contamination came down.
What do we do about the fact that our brain automatically associates?
You know, one of the things that you probably are thinking about, and you're probably like, you know what, I'm just going to double down on my color blindness.
Yes, I'm going to recommit to that.
I'm going to suggest to you, no.
We've gone about as far as we can go trying to make a difference trying to not see color.
The problem was never that we saw color. It was what we did when we saw the color.
It's a false ideal.
And while we're busy pretending not to see, we are not being aware of the ways in which racial difference is changing people's possibilities, that's keeping them from thriving, and sometimes it's causing them an early death.
So in fact, what the scientists are telling us is, no way.
Don't even think about color blindness.
In fact, what they're suggesting is, stare at awesome black people.
(Laughter) Look at them directly in their faces and memorize them, because when we look at awesome folks who are black, it helps to dissociate the association that happens automatically in our brain.
Why do you think I'm showing you these beautiful black men behind me?
There were so many, I had to cut them.
Okay, so here's the thing: I'm trying to reset your automatic associations about who black men are.
I'm trying to remind you that young black men grow up to be amazing human beings who have changed our lives and made them better.
So here's the thing.
The other possibility in science, and it's only temporarily changing our automatic assumptions, but one thing we know is that if you take a white person who is odious that you know, and stick it up next to a person of color, a black person, who is fabulous, then that sometimes actually causes us to disassociate too.
So think Jeffrey Dahmer and Colin Powell.
Just stare at them, right? (Laughter) But these are the things. So go looking for your bias.
Please, please, just get out of denial and go looking for disconfirming data that will prove that in fact your old stereotypes are wrong.
Okay, so that's number one: number two, what I'm going to say is move toward young black men instead of away from them.
It's not the hardest thing to do, but it's also one of these things where you have to be conscious and intentional about it.
You know, I was in a Wall Street area one time several years ago when I was with a colleague of mine, and she's really wonderful and she does diversity work with me and she's a woman of color, she's Korean.
And we were outside, it was late at night, and we were sort of wondering where we were going, we were lost.
And I saw this person across the street, and I was thinking, "Oh great, black guy."
I was going toward him without even thinking about it.
And she was like, "Oh, that's interesting."
The guy across the street, he was a black guy.
I think black guys generally know where they're going.
I don't know why exactly I think that, but that's what I think.
So she was saying, "Oh, you were going, 'Yay, a black guy'?"
She said, "I was going, 'Ooh, a black guy.'" Other direction. Same need, same guy, same clothes, same time, same street, different reaction.
And she said, "I feel so bad. I'm a diversity consultant.
I did the black guy thing. I'm a woman of color. Oh my God!"
And I said, "You know what? Please. We really need to relax about this."
I mean, you've got to realize I go way back with black guys.
(Laughter) My dad is a black guy. You see what I'm saying?
I've got a 6'5" black guy son. I was married to a black guy.
My black guy thing is so wide and so deep that I can pretty much sort and figure out who that black guy is, and he was my black guy.
He said, "Yes, ladies, I know where you're going. I'll take you there."
You know, biases are the stories we make up about people before we know who they actually are.
But how are we going to know who they are when we've been told to avoid and be afraid of them?
So I'm going to tell you to walk toward your discomfort.
And I'm not asking you to take any crazy risks.
I'm saying, just do an inventory, expand your social and professional circles.
Who's in your circle?
Who's missing?
How many authentic relationships do you have with young black people, folks, men, women?
Or any other major difference from who you are and how you roll, so to speak?
Because, you know what? Just look around your periphery.
There may be somebody at work, in your classroom, in your house of worship, somewhere, there's some black young guy there.
And you're nice. You say hi.
I'm saying go deeper, closer, further, and build the kinds of relationships, the kinds of friendships that actually cause you to see the holistic person and to really go against the stereotypes.
I know some of you are out there, I know because I have some white friends in particular that will say, "You have no idea how awkward I am.
Like, I don't think this is going to work for me.
I'm sure I'm going to blow this."
Okay, maybe, but this thing is not about perfection. It's about connection.
And you're not going to get comfortable before you get uncomfortable.
I mean, you just have to do it.
And young black men, what I'm saying is if someone comes your way, genuinely and authentically, take the invitation.
Not everyone is out to get you.
Go looking for those people who can see your humanity.
You know, it's the empathy and the compassion that comes out of having relationships with people who are different from you.
Something really powerful and beautiful happens: you start to realize that they are you, that they are part of you, that they are you in your family, and then we cease to be bystanders and we become actors, we become advocates, and we become allies.
So go away from your comfort into a bigger, brighter thing, because that is how we will stop another Ferguson from happening.
That's how we create a community where everybody, especially young black men, can thrive.
So this last thing is going to be harder, and I know it, but I'm just going to put it out there anyway.
When we see something, we have to have the courage to say something, even to the people we love.
You know, it's holidays and it's going to be a time when we're sitting around the table and having a good time.
Many of us, anyways, will be in holidays, and you've got to listen to the conversations around the table.
You start to say things like, "Grandma's a bigot."
(Laughter) "Uncle Joe is racist."
And you know, we love Grandma and we love Uncle Joe. We do.
We know they're good people, but what they're saying is wrong.
And we need to be able to say something, because you know who else is at the table?
The children are at the table.
And we wonder why these biases don't die, and move from generation to generation?
Because we're not saying anything.
We've got to be willing to say, "Grandma, we don't call people that anymore."
"Uncle Joe, it isn't true that he deserved that.
No one deserves that."
And we've got to be willing to not shelter our children from the ugliness of racism when black parents don't have the luxury to do so, especially those who have young black sons.
We've got to take our lovely darlings, our future, and we've got to tell them we have an amazing country with incredible ideals, we have worked incredibly hard, and we have made some progress, but we are not done.
We still have in us this old stuff about superiority and it is causing us to embed those further into our institutions and our society and generations, and it is making for despair and disparities and a devastating devaluing of young black men.
We still struggle, you have to tell them, with seeing both the color and the character of young black men, but that you, and you expect them, to be part of the forces of change in this society that will stand against injustice and is willing, above all other things, to make a society where young black men can be seen for all of who they are.
So many amazing black men, those who are the most amazing statesmen that have ever lived, brave soldiers, awesome, hardworking laborers.
These are people who are powerful preachers.
They are incredible scientists and artists and writers.
They are dynamic comedians.
They are doting grandpas, caring sons.
They are strong fathers, and they are young men with dreams of their own.
Thank you.
(Applause)
While preparing for my talk I was reflecting on my life and trying to figure out where exactly was that moment when my journey began.
A long time passed by, and I simply couldn't figure out the beginning or the middle or the end of my story.
I always used to think that my beginning was one afternoon in my community when my mother had told me that I had escaped three arranged marriages by the time I was two.
Or one evening when electricity had failed for eight hours in our community, and my dad sat, surrounded by all of us, telling us stories of when he was a little kid struggling to go to school while his father, who was a farmer, wanted him to work in the fields with him.
Or that dark night when I was 16 when three little kids had come to me and they whispered in my ear that my friend was murdered in something called the honor killings.
But then I realized that, as much as I know that these moments have contributed on my journey, they have influenced my journey but they have not been the beginning of it, but the true beginning of my journey was in front of a mud house in upper Sindh of Pakistan, where my father held the hand of my 14-year-old mother and they decided to walk out of the village to go to a town where they could send their kids to school.
In a way, I feel like my life is kind of a result of some wise choices and decisions they've made.
And just like that, another of their decisions was to keep me and my siblings connected to our roots.
While we were living in a community I fondly remember as called Ribabad, which means community of the poor, my dad made sure that we also had a house in our rural homeland.
I come from an indigenous tribe in the mountains of Balochistan called Brahui.
Brahui, or Brohi, means mountain dweller, and it is also my language.
Thanks to my father's very strict rules about connecting to our customs, I had to live a beautiful life of songs, cultures, traditions, stories, mountains, and a lot of sheep.
But then, living in two extremes between the traditions of my culture, of my village, and then modern education in my school wasn't easy.
I was aware that I was the only girl who got to have such freedom, and I was guilty of it.
While going to school in Karachi and Hyderabad, a lot of my cousins and childhood friends were getting married off, some to older men, some in exchange, some even as second wives.
I got to see the beautiful tradition and its magic fade in front of me when I saw that the birth of a girl child was celebrated with sadness, when women were told to have patience as their main virtue.
Up until I was 16, I healed my sadness by crying, mostly at nights when everyone would sleep and I would sob in my pillow, until that one night when I found out my friend was killed in the name of honor.
Honor killings is a custom where men and women are suspected of having relationships before or outside of the marriage, and they're killed by their family for it.
Usually the killer is the brother or father or the uncle in the family.
The U.N. reports there are about 1,000 honor murders every year in Pakistan, and these are only the reported cases.
A custom that kills did not make any sense to me, and I knew I had to do something about it this time.
I was not going to cry myself to sleep.
I was going to do something, anything, to stop it.
I was 16 -- I started writing poetry and going door to door telling everybody about honor killings and why it happens, why it should be stopped, and raising awareness about it until I actually found a much, much better way to handle this issue.
In those days, we were living in a very small, one-roomed house in Karachi.
Every year, during the monsoon seasons, our house would flood up with water -- rainwater and sewage -- and my mom and dad would be taking the water out.
In those days, my dad brought home a huge machine, a computer.
It was so big it looked as if it was going to take up half of the only room we had, and had so many pieces and wires that needed to be connected.
But it was still the most exciting thing that has ever happened to me and my sisters.
My oldest brother Ali got to be in charge of taking care of the computer, and all of us were given 10 to 15 minutes every day to use it.
Being the oldest of eight kids, I got to use it the last, and that was after I had washed the dishes, cleaned the house, made dinner with my mom, and put blankets on the floor for everyone to sleep, and after that, I would run to the computer, connect it to the Internet, and have pure joy and wonder for 10 to 15 minutes.
In those days, I had discovered a website called Joogle.
[Google] (Laughter) In my frantic wish to do something about this custom, I made use of Google and discovered Facebook, a website where people can connect to anyone around the world, and so, from my very tiny, cement-roofed room in Karachi, I connected with people in the U.K., the U.S., Australia and Canada, and created a campaign called WAKE UP Campaign against Honor Killings.
It became enormous in just a few months.
I got a lot of support from all around the world.
Media was connecting to us.
A lot of people were reaching out trying to raise awareness with us.
It became so big that it went from online to the streets of my hometown, where we would do rallies and strikes trying to change the policies in Pakistan for women's support.
And while I thought everything was perfect, my team -- which was basically my friends and neighbors at that time -- thought everything was going so well, we had no idea a big opposition was coming to us.
My community stood up against us, saying we were spreading un-Islamic behavior.
We were challenging centuries-old customs in those communities.
I remember my father receiving anonymous letters saying, "Your daughter is spreading Western culture in the honorable societies."
Our car was stoned at one point.
One day I went to the office and found our metal signboard wrinkled and broken as if a lot of people had been hitting it with something heavy.
Things got so bad that I had to hide myself in many ways.
I would put up the windows of the car, veil my face, not speak while I was in public, but eventually situations got worse when my life was threatened, and I had to leave, back to Karachi, and our actions stopped.
Back in Karachi, as an 18-year-old, I thought this was the biggest failure of my entire life.
I was devastated.
As a teenager, I was blaming myself for everything that happened.
And it turns out, when we started reflecting, we did realize that it was actually me and my team's fault.
There were two big reasons why our campaign had failed big time.
One of those, the first reason, is we were standing against core values of people.
We were saying no to something that was very important to them, challenging their code of honor, and hurting them deeply in the process.
And number two, which was very important for me to learn, and amazing, and surprising for me to learn, was that we were not including the true heroes who should be fighting for themselves.
The women in the villages had no idea we were fighting for them in the streets.
Every time I would go back, I would find my cousins and friends with scarves on their faces, and I would ask, "What happened?"
And they'd be like, "Our husbands beat us."
But we are working in the streets for you!
We are changing the policies.
How is that not impacting their life?
So then we found out something which was very amazing for us.
The policies of a country do not necessarily always affect the tribal and rural communities.
It was devastating -- like, oh, we can't actually do something about this?
And we found out there's a huge gap when it comes to official policies and the real truth on the ground.
So this time, we were like, we are going to do something different.
We are going to use strategy, and we are going to go back and apologize.
Yes, apologize.
We went back to the communities and we said we are very ashamed of what we did.
We are here to apologize, and in fact, we are here to make it up to you.
How do we do that?
We are going to promote three of your main cultures.
We know that it's music, language, and embroidery.
Nobody believed us.
Nobody wanted to work with us.
It took a lot of convincing and discussions with these communities until they agreed that we are going to promote their language by making a booklet of their stories, fables and old tales in the tribe, and we would promote their music by making a CD of the songs from the tribe, and some drumbeating.
And the third, which was my favorite, was we would promote their embroidery by making a center in the village where women would come every day to make embroidery.
And so it began.
We worked with one village, and we started our first center.
It was a beautiful day.
We started the center.
Women were coming to make embroidery, and going through a life-changing process of education, learning about their rights, what Islam says about their rights, and enterprise development, how they can create money, and then how they can create money from money, how they can fight the customs that have been destroying their lives from so many centuries, because in Islam, in reality, women are supposed to be shoulder to shoulder with men.
Women have so much status that we have not been hearing, that they have not been hearing, and we needed to tell them that they need to know where their rights are and how to take them by themselves, because they can do it and we can't.
So this was the model which actually came out -- very amazing.
Through embroidery we were promoting their traditions.
We went into the village. We would mobilize the community.
We would make a center inside where 30 women will come for six months to learn about value addition of traditional embroidery, enterprise development, life skills and basic education, and about their rights and how to say no to those customs and how to stand as leaders for themselves and the society.
After six months, we would connect these women to loans and to markets where they can become local entrepreneurs in their communities.
We soon called this project Sughar.
Sughar is a local word used in many, many languages in Pakistan.
It means skilled and confident women.
I truly believe, to create women leaders, there's only one thing you have to do: Just let them know that they have what it takes to be a leader.
These women you see here, they have strong skills and potential to be leaders.
All we had to do was remove the barriers that surrounded them, and that's what we decided to do.
But then while we were thinking everything was going well, once again everything was fantastic, we found our next setback: A lot of men started seeing the visible changes in their wife.
She's speaking more, she's making decisions -- oh my gosh, she's handling everything in the house.
They stopped them from coming to the centers, and this time, we were like, okay, time for strategy two.
We went to the fashion industry in Pakistan and decided to do research about what happens there.
Turns out the fashion industry in Pakistan is very strong and growing day by day, but there is less contribution from the tribal areas and to the tribal areas, especially women.
So we decided to launch our first ever tribal women's very own fashion brand, which is now called Nomads.
And so women started earning more, they started contributing more financially to the house, and men had to think again before saying no to them when they were coming to the centers.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
In 2013, we launched our first Sughar Hub instead of a center.
We partnered with TripAdvisor and created a cement hall in the middle of a village and invited so many other organizations to work over there.
We created this platform for the nonprofits so they can touch and work on the other issues that Sughar is not working on, which would be an easy place for them to give trainings, use it as a farmer school, even as a marketplace, and anything they want to use it for, and they have been doing really amazingly.
And so far, we have been able to support 900 women in 24 villages around Pakistan.
(Applause) But that's actually not what I want.
My dream is to reach out to one million women in the next 10 years, and to make sure that happens, this year we launched Sughar Foundation in the U.S.
It is not just going to fund Sughar but many other organizations in Pakistan to replicate the idea and to find even more innovative ways to unleash the rural women's potential in Pakistan.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Khalida, you are quite the force of nature.
I mean, this story, in many ways, just seems beyond belief.
It's incredible that someone so young could do achieve this much through so much force and ingenuity.
So I guess one question: This is a spectacular dream to reach out and empower a million women -- how much of the current success depends on you, the force of this magnetic personality?
How does it scale?
Khalida Brohi: I think my job is to give the inspiration out, give my dream out.
I can't teach how to do it, because there are so many different ways.
We have been experimenting with three ways only.
There are a hundred different ways to unleash potential in women.
I would just give the inspiration and that's my job.
I will keep doing it. Sughar will still be growing.
We are planning to reach out to two more villages, and soon I believe we will be scaling out of Pakistan into South Asia and beyond.
CA: I love that when you talked about your team in the talk, I mean, you were all 18 at the time.
What did this team look like?
This was school friends, right?
KB: Do people here believe that I'm at an age where I'm supposed to be a grandmother in my village?
My mom was married at nine, and I am the oldest woman not married and not doing anything in my life in my village.
CA: Wait, wait, wait, not doing anything?
KB: No. CA: You're right.
KB: People feel sorry for me, a lot of times.
CA: But how much time are you spending now actually back in Balochistan?
KB: I live over there.
We live between, still, Karachi and Balochistan.
My siblings are all going to school.
I am still the oldest of eight siblings.
CA: But what you're doing is definitely threatening to some people there.
How do you handle safety? Do you feel safe?
Are there issues there?
KB: This question has come to me a lot of times before, and I feel like the word "fear" just comes to me and then drops, but there is one fear that I have that is different from that.
The fear is that if I get killed, what would happen to the people who love me so much?
My mom waits for me till late at night that I should come home.
My sisters want to learn so much from me, and there are many, many girls in my community who want to talk to me and ask me different things, and I recently got engaged. (Laughs) (Applause) CA: Is he here? You've got to stand up.
(Applause) KB: Escaping arranged marriages, I chose my own husband across the world in L.A., a really different world.
I had to fight for a whole year. That's totally a different story.
But I think that's the only thing that I'm afraid of, and I don't want my mom to not see anyone when she waits in the night.
CA: So people who want to help you on their way, they can go on, they can maybe buy some of these clothes that you're bringing over that are actually made, the embroidery is done back in Balochistan?
KB: Yeah.
CA: Or they can get involved in the foundation.
KB: Definitely. We are looking for as many people as we can, because now that the foundation's in the beginning process, I am trying to learn a lot about how to operate, how to get funding or reach out to more organizations, and especially in the e-commerce, which is very new for me.
I mean, I am not a fashion person, believe me.
CA: Well, it's been incredible to have you here.
Please go on being courageous, go on being smart, and please stay safe.
KB: Thank you so much. CA: Thank you, Khalida. (Applause)
Today I want to talk to you about the mathematics of love.
Now, I think that we can all agree that mathematicians are famously excellent at finding love.
(Laughter) But it's not just because of our dashing personalities, superior conversational skills and excellent pencil cases.
It's also because we've actually done an awful lot of work into the maths of how to find the perfect partner.
Now, in my favorite paper on the subject, which is entitled, "Why I Don't Have a Girlfriend" -- (Laughter) Peter Backus tries to rate his chances of finding love.
Now, Peter's not a very greedy man.
Of all of the available women in the UK, all Peter's looking for is somebody who lives near him, somebody in the right age range, somebody with a university degree, somebody he's likely to get on well with, somebody who's likely to be attractive, somebody who's likely to find him attractive.
(Laughter) And comes up with an estimate of 26 women in the whole of the UK.
(Laughter) It's not looking very good, is it Peter?
Now, just to put that into perspective, that's about 400 times fewer than the best estimates of how many intelligent extraterrestrial life forms there are.
And it also gives Peter a 1 in 285,000 chance of bumping into any one of these special ladies on a given night out.
I'd like to think that's why mathematicians don't really bother going on nights out anymore.
The thing is that I personally don't subscribe to such a pessimistic view.
Because I know, just as well as all of you do, that love doesn't really work like that.
Human emotion isn't neatly ordered and rational and easily predictable.
But I also know that that doesn't mean that mathematics hasn't got something that it can offer us, because, love, as with most of life, is full of patterns and mathematics is, ultimately, all about the study of patterns.
Patterns from predicting the weather to the fluctuations in the stock market, to the movement of the planets or the growth of cities.
And if we're being honest, none of those things are exactly neatly ordered and easily predictable, either.
Because I believe that mathematics is so powerful that it has the potential to offer us a new way of looking at almost anything.
Even something as mysterious as love.
And so, to try to persuade you of how totally amazing, excellent and relevant mathematics is, I want to give you my top three mathematically verifiable tips for love.
(Laughter) OK, so Top Tip #1: How to win at online dating.
So my favorite online dating website is OkCupid, not least because it was started by a group of mathematicians.
Now, because they're mathematicians, they have been collecting data on everybody who uses their site for almost a decade.
And they've been trying to search for patterns in the way that we talk about ourselves and the way that we interact with each other on an online dating website.
And they've come up with some seriously interesting findings.
But my particular favorite is that it turns out that on an online dating website, how attractive you are does not dictate how popular you are, and actually, having people think that you're ugly can work to your advantage.
(Laughter) Let me show you how this works.
In a thankfully voluntary section of OkCupid, you are allowed to rate how attractive you think people are on a scale between one and five.
Now, if we compare this score, the average score, to how many messages a selection of people receive, you can begin to get a sense of how attractiveness links to popularity on an online dating website.
This is the graph the OkCupid guys have come up with.
And the important thing to notice is that it's not totally true that the more attractive you are, the more messages you get.
But the question arises then of what is it about people up here who are so much more popular than people down here, even though they have the same score of attractiveness?
And the reason why is that it's not just straightforward looks that are important.
So let me try to illustrate their findings with an example.
So if you take someone like Portia de Rossi, for example, everybody agrees that Portia de Rossi is a very beautiful woman.
Nobody thinks that she's ugly, but she's not a supermodel, either.
If you compare Portia de Rossi to someone like Sarah Jessica Parker, now, a lot of people, myself included, I should say, think that Sarah Jessica Parker is seriously fabulous and possibly one of the most beautiful creatures to have ever have walked on the face of the Earth.
But some other people, i.e., most of the Internet ...
(Laughter) seem to think that she looks a bit like a horse.
(Laughter) Now, I think that if you ask people how attractive they thought Jessica Parker or Portia de Rossi were, and you ask them to give them a score between one and five I reckon that they'd average out to have roughly the same score.
But the way that people would vote would be very different.
So Portia's scores would all be clustered around the four because everybody agrees that she's very beautiful, whereas Sarah Jessica Parker completely divides opinion.
There'd be a huge spread in her scores.
And actually it's this spread that counts.
It's this spread that makes you more popular on an online Internet dating website.
So what that means then is that if some people think that you're attractive, you're actually better off having some other people think that you're a massive minger.
That's much better than everybody just thinking that you're the cute girl next door.
Now, I think this begins to make a bit more sense when you think in terms of the people who are sending these messages.
So let's say that you think somebody's attractive, but you suspect that other people won't necessarily be that interested.
That means there's less competition for you and it's an extra incentive for you to get in touch.
Whereas compare that to if you think somebody is attractive but you suspect that everybody is going to think they're attractive.
Well, why would you bother humiliating yourself, let's be honest?
But here's where the really interesting part comes.
Because when people choose the pictures that they use on an online dating website, they often try to minimize the things that they think some people will find unattractive.
The classic example is people who are, perhaps, a little bit overweight deliberately choosing a very cropped photo, (Laughter) or bald men, for example, deliberately choosing pictures where they're wearing hats.
But actually this is the opposite of what you should do if you want to be successful.
You should really, instead, play up to whatever it is that makes you different, even if you think that some people will find it unattractive.
Because the people who fancy you are just going to fancy you anyway, and the unimportant losers who don't, well, they only play up to your advantage.
OK, Top Tip #2: How to pick the perfect partner.
So let's imagine then that you're a roaring success on the dating scene.
But the question arises of how do you then convert that success into longer-term happiness, and in particular, how do you decide when is the right time to settle down?
Now generally, it's not advisable to just cash in and marry the first person who comes along and shows you any interest at all.
But, equally, you don't really want to leave it too long if you want to maximize your chance of long-term happiness.
As my favorite author, Jane Austen, puts it, "An unmarried woman of seven and twenty can never hope to feel or inspire affection again."
(Laughter) Thanks a lot, Jane.
(Laughter) So the question is then, how do you know when is the right time to settle down, given all the people that you can date in your lifetime?
Thankfully, there's a rather delicious bit of mathematics that we can use to help us out here, called optimal stopping theory.
So let's imagine, then, that you start dating when you're 15 and ideally, you'd like to be married by the time that you're 35.
And there's a number of people that you could potentially date across your lifetime, and they'll be at varying levels of goodness.
Now the rules are that once you cash in and get married, you can't look ahead to see what you could have had, and equally, you can't go back and change your mind.
In my experience at least, I find that typically people don't much like being recalled years after being passed up for somebody else, or that's just me.
So the math says then that what you should do in the first 37 percent of your dating window, you should just reject everybody as serious marriage potential.
(Laughter) And then, you should pick the next person that comes along that is better than everybody that you've seen before.
So here's the example.
Now if you do this, it can be mathematically proven, in fact, that this is the best possible way of maximizing your chances of finding the perfect partner.
Now unfortunately, I have to tell you that this method does come with some risks.
For instance, imagine if your perfect partner appeared during your first 37 percent.
Now, unfortunately, you'd have to reject them.
(Laughter) Now, if you're following the maths, I'm afraid no one else comes along that's better than anyone you've seen before, so you have to go on rejecting everyone and die alone.
(Laughter) Probably surrounded by cats ...
OK, another risk is, let's imagine, instead, that the first people that you dated in your first 37 percent are just incredibly dull, boring, terrible people.
That's OK, because you're in your rejection phase, so that's fine, you can reject them.
But then imagine the next person to come along is just marginally less boring, dull and terrible ...
(Laughter) than everybody that you've seen before.
Now, if you are following the maths, I'm afraid you have to marry them ...
(Laughter) and end up in a relationship which is, frankly, suboptimal.
Sorry about that.
But I do think that there's an opportunity here for Hallmark to cash in on and really cater for this market.
A Valentine's Day card like this.
(Laughter) "My darling husband, you are marginally less terrible than the first 37 percent of people I dated."
(Laughter) It's actually more romantic than I normally manage.
(Laughter) OK, so this method doesn't give you a 100 percent success rate, but there's no other possible strategy that can do any better.
And actually, in the wild, there are certain types of fish which follow and employ this exact strategy.
So they reject every possible suitor that turns up in the first 37 percent of the mating season, and then they pick the next fish that comes along after that window that's, I don't know, bigger and burlier than all of the fish that they've seen before.
I also think that subconsciously, humans, we do sort of do this anyway.
We give ourselves a little bit of time to play the field, get a feel for the marketplace or whatever when we're young.
And then we only start looking seriously at potential marriage candidates once we hit our mid-to-late 20s.
I think this is conclusive proof, if ever it were needed, that everybody's brains are prewired to be just a little bit mathematical.
OK, so that was Top Tip #2.
Now, Top Tip #3: How to avoid divorce.
OK, so let's imagine then that you picked your perfect partner and you're settling into a lifelong relationship with them.
Now, I like to think that everybody would ideally like to avoid divorce, apart from, I don't know, Piers Morgan's wife, maybe?
(Laughter) But it's a sad fact of modern life that one in two marriages in the States ends in divorce, with the rest of the world not being far behind.
Now, you can be forgiven, perhaps for thinking that the arguments that precede a marital breakup are not an ideal candidate for mathematical investigation.
For one thing, it's very hard to know what you should be measuring or what you should be quantifying.
But this didn't stop a psychologist, John Gottman, who did exactly that.
Gottman observed hundreds of couples having a conversation and recorded, well, everything you can think of.
So he recorded what was said in the conversation, he recorded their skin conductivity, he recorded their facial expressions, their heart rates, their blood pressure, basically everything apart from whether or not the wife was actually always right, which incidentally she totally is.
But what Gottman and his team found was that one of the most important predictors for whether or not a couple is going to get divorced was how positive or negative each partner was being in the conversation.
Now, couples that were very low-risk scored a lot more positive points on Gottman's scale than negative.
Whereas bad relationships, by which I mean, probably going to get divorced, they found themselves getting into a spiral of negativity.
Now just by using these very simple ideas, Gottman and his group were able to predict whether a given couple was going to get divorced with a 90 percent accuracy.
But it wasn't until he teamed up with a mathematician, James Murray, that they really started to understand what causes these negativity spirals and how they occur.
And the results that they found, I think, are just incredibly impressively simple and interesting.
So these equations predict how the wife or husband is going to respond in their next turn of the conversation, how positive or negative they're going to be.
And these equations depend on the mood of the person when they're on their own, the mood of the person when they're with their partner, but most importantly, they depend on how much the husband and wife influence one another.
Now, I think it's important to point out at this stage, that these exact equations have also been shown to be perfectly able at describing what happens between two countries in an arms race.
(Laughter) So that an arguing couple spiraling into negativity and teetering on the brink of divorce is actually mathematically equivalent to the beginning of a nuclear war.
(Laughter) But the really important term in this equation is the influence that people have on one another, and in particular, something called "the negativity threshold."
Now, the negativity threshold, you can think of as how annoying the husband can be before the wife starts to get really pissed off, and vice versa.
Now, I always thought that good marriages were about compromise and understanding and allowing the person to have the space to be themselves.
So I would have thought that perhaps the most successful relationships were ones where there was a really high negativity threshold.
Where couples let things go and only brought things up if they really were a big deal.
But actually, the mathematics and subsequent findings by the team have shown the exact opposite is true.
The best couples, or the most successful couples, are the ones with a really low negativity threshold.
These are the couples that don't let anything go unnoticed and allow each other some room to complain.
These are the couples that are continually trying to repair their own relationship, that have a much more positive outlook on their marriage.
Couples that don't let things go and couples that don't let trivial things end up being a really big deal.
Now of course, it takes a bit more than just a low negativity threshold and not compromising to have a successful relationship.
But I think that it's quite interesting to know that there is really mathematical evidence to say that you should never let the sun go down on your anger.
So those are my top three tips of how maths can help you with love and relationships.
But I hope, that aside from their use as tips, they also give you a little bit of insight into the power of mathematics.
Because for me, equations and symbols aren't just a thing.
They're a voice that speaks out about the incredible richness of nature and the startling simplicity in the patterns that twist and turn and warp and evolve all around us, from how the world works to how we behave.
So I hope that perhaps, for just a couple of you, a little bit of insight into the mathematics of love can persuade you to have a little bit more love for mathematics.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Has anyone among you ever been exposed to tear gas?
Tear gas? Anyone?
I'm sorry to hear that, so you might know that it's a very toxic substance, but you might not know that it's a very simple molecule with an unpronouncable name: it's called chlorobenzalmalononitrile.
I made it.
It's decades old, but it's becoming very trendy among police forces around the planet lately, it seems, and according to my experience as a non-voluntary breather of it, tear gas has two main but quite opposite effects.
One, it can really burn your eyes, and two, it can also help you to open them.
Tear gas definitely helped to open mine to something that I want to share with you this afternoon: that livestreaming the power of independent broadcasts through the web can be a game-changer in journalism, in activism, and as I see it, in the political discourse as well.
That idea started to dawn on me in early 2011 when I was covering a protest in São Paulo.
It was the marijuana march, a gathering of people asking for the legalization of cannabis.
When that group started to move, the riot police came from the back with rubber bullets, bombs, and then the gas.
But to make a long story short, I had entered that protest as the editor-in-chief of a well-established printed magazine where I'd worked for 11 years, and thanks to this unsolicited effects of tear gas, I left it as a journalist that was now committed to new ways of sharing the raw experience of what it's like to be there, actually.
So in the following week, I was back in the streets, but that time, I wasn't a member of any media outlet anymore.
I was there as an independent livestreamer, and all I had with me was basically borrowed equipment.
I had a very simple camera and a backpack with 3G modems.
And I had this weblink that could be shared through social media, could be put in any website, and that time, the protest went along fine.
There was no violence.
There was no action scenes.
But there was something really exciting, because I could see at a distance the TV channels covering it, and they had these big vans and the teams and the cameras, and I was basically doing the same thing and all I had was a backpack.
And that was really exciting to a journalist, but the most interesting part was when I got back home, actually, because I learned that I had been watched by more than 90,000 people, and I got hundreds of emails and messages of people asking me, basically, how did I do it, how it was possible to do such a thing.
And I learned something else, that that was actually the first time that somebody had ever done a livestreaming in a street protest in the country.
And that really shocked me, because I was no geek, I was no technology guy, and all the equipment needed was already there, was easily available.
And I realized that we had a frontier here, a very important one, that it was just a matter of changing the perspective, and the web could be actually used, already used, as a colossal and uncontrollable and highly anarchical TV channel, TV network, and anyone with very basic skills and very basic equipment, even someone like me who had this little stuttering issue, so if it happens, bear with me please, even someone like me could become a broadcaster.
And that sounded revolutionary in my mind.
So for the next couple of years, I started to experiment with livestreaming in different ways, not only in the streets but mostly in studios and in homes, until the beginning of 2013, last year, when I became the cofounder of a group called Mídia NINJA.
NINJA is an acronym that stands for Narrativas Independentes Jornalismo e Ação, or in English, independent narratives, journalism, and action.
It was a media group that had little media plan.
We didn't have any financial structure.
We were not planning to make money out of this, which was wise, because you shouldn't try to make money out of journalism now.
But we had a very solid and clear conviction, that we knew that the hyperconnected environment of social media could maybe allow us to consolidate a network of experimental journalists throughout the country.
So we launched a Facebook page first, and then a manifesto, and started to cover the streets in a very simple way.
But then something happened, something that wasn't predicted, that no one could have anticipated.
Street protests started to erupt in São Paulo.
They began as very local and specific.
They were against the bus fare hike that had just happened in the city.
This is a bus.
It's written there, "Theft."
But those kind of manifestations started to grow, and they kept happening.
So the police violence against them started to grow as well.
But there was another conflict, the one I believe that's more important here to make my point that it was a narrative conflict.
There was this mainstream media version of the facts that anyone who was on the streets could easily challenge if they presented their own vision of what was actually happening there.
And it was this clash of visions, this clash of narratives, that I think turned those protests into a long period in the country of political reckoning where hundreds of thousands of people, probably more than a million people took to the streets in the whole country.
But it wasn't about the bus fare hike anymore.
It was about everything.
The people's demands, their expectations, the reasons why they were on the streets could be as diverse as they could be contradictory in many cases.
If you could read it, you would understand me.
But it was in this environment of political catharsis that the country was going through that it had to do with politics, indeed, but it had to do also with a new way of organizing, through a new way of communicating.
It was in that environment that Mídia NINJA emerged from almost anonymity to become a national phenomenon, because we did have the right equipment.
We are not using big cameras.
We are using basically this.
We are using smartphones.
And that, actually, allowed us to become invisible in the middle of the protests, but it allowed us to do something else: to show what it was like to be in the protests, to present to people at home a subjective perspective.
But there was something that is more important, I think, than the equipment.
It was our mindset, because we are not behaving as a media outlet.
We are not competing for news.
We are trying to encourage people, to invite people, and to actually teach people how to do this, how they also could become broadcasters.
And that was crucial to turn Mídia NINJA from a small group of people, and in a matter of weeks, we multiplied and we grew exponentially throughout the country.
So in a matter of a week or two, as the protests kept happening, we were hundreds of young people connected in this network throughout the country.
We were covering more than 50 cities at the same time.
That's something that no TV channel could ever do.
That was responsible for turning us suddenly, actually, into kind of the mainstream media of social media.
So we had a couple of thousands of followers on our Facebook page, and soon we had a quarter of a million followers.
Our posts and our videos were being seen by more than 11 million timelines a week.
It was way more than any newspaper or any magazine could ever do.
And that turned Mídia NINJA into something else, more than a media outlet, than a media project.
It became almost like a public service to the citizen, to the protester, to the activist, because they had a very simple and efficient and peaceful tool to confront both police and media authority.
Many of our images started to be used in regular TV channels.
Our livestreams started to be broadcast even in regular televisions when things got really rough.
Some our images were responsible to take some people out of jail, people who were being arrested unfairly under false accusations, and we could prove them innocent.
And that also turned Mídia NINJA very soon to be seen as almost an enemy of cops, unfortunately, and we started to be severely beaten, and eventually arrested on the streets.
It happened in many cases.
But that was also useful, because we were still at the web, so that helped to trigger an important debate in the country on the role of the media itself and the state of the freedom of the press in the country.
So Mídia NINJA now evolved and finally consolidated itself in what we hoped it would become: a national network of hundreds of young people, self-organizing themselves locally to cover social, human rights issues, and expressing themselves not only politically but journalistically.
What I started to do in the beginning of this year, as Mídia NINJA is already a self-organizing network, I'm dedicating myself to another project.
It's called Fluxo, which is Portuguese for "stream."
It's a journalism studio in São Paulo downtown, where I used livestream to experiment with what I call post-television formats.
But I'm also trying to come up with ways to finance independent journalism through a direct relationship with an audience, with an active audience, because now I really want to try to make a living out of my tear gas resolution back then.
But there's something more significant here, something that I believe is more important and more crucial than my personal example.
I said that livestream could turn the web into a colossal TV network, but I believe it does something else, because after watching people using it, not only to cover things but to express, to organize themselves politically, I believe livestream can turn cyberspace into a global political arena where everyone might have a voice, a proper voice, because livestream takes the monopoly of the broadcast political discourse, of the verbal aspect of the political dialogue out of the mouths of just politicians and political pundits alone, and it empowers the citizen through this direct and non-mediated power of exchanging experiences and dialogue, empowers them to question and to influence authorities in ways in which we are about to see.
And I believe it does something else that might be even more important, that the simplicity of the technology can merge objectivity and subjectivity in a very political way, as I see it, because it really helps the audience, the citizen, to see the world through somebody else's eye, so it helps the citizen to put him- or herself in other people's place.
And that idea, I think, should be the intention, should be the goal of any good journalism, any good activism, but most of all, any good politics.
Thank you very much. It was an honor.
(Applause)
It used to be that if you wanted to get a computer to do something new, you would have to program it.
Now, programming, for those of you here that haven't done it yourself, requires laying out in excruciating detail every single step that you want the computer to do in order to achieve your goal.
Now, if you want to do something that you don't know how to do yourself, then this is going to be a great challenge.
So this was the challenge faced by this man, Arthur Samuel.
In 1956, he wanted to get this computer to be able to beat him at checkers.
How can you write a program, lay out in excruciating detail, how to be better than you at checkers?
So he came up with an idea: he had the computer play against itself thousands of times and learn how to play checkers.
And indeed it worked, and in fact, by 1962, this computer had beaten the Connecticut state champion.
So Arthur Samuel was the father of machine learning, and I have a great debt to him, because I am a machine learning practitioner.
I was the president of Kaggle, a community of over 200,000 machine learning practictioners.
Kaggle puts up competitions to try and get them to solve previously unsolved problems, and it's been successful hundreds of times.
So from this vantage point, I was able to find out a lot about what machine learning can do in the past, can do today, and what it could do in the future.
Perhaps the first big success of machine learning commercially was Google.
Google showed that it is possible to find information by using a computer algorithm, and this algorithm is based on machine learning.
Since that time, there have been many commercial successes of machine learning.
Companies like Amazon and Netflix use machine learning to suggest products that you might like to buy, movies that you might like to watch.
Sometimes, it's almost creepy.
Companies like LinkedIn and Facebook sometimes will tell you about who your friends might be and you have no idea how it did it, and this is because it's using the power of machine learning.
These are algorithms that have learned how to do this from data rather than being programmed by hand.
This is also how IBM was successful in getting Watson to beat the two world champions at "Jeopardy," answering incredibly subtle and complex questions like this one.
["The ancient 'Lion of Nimrud' went missing from this city's national museum in 2003 (along with a lot of other stuff)"] This is also why we are now able to see the first self-driving cars.
If you want to be able to tell the difference between, say, a tree and a pedestrian, well, that's pretty important.
We don't know how to write those programs by hand, but with machine learning, this is now possible.
And in fact, this car has driven over a million miles without any accidents on regular roads.
So we now know that computers can learn, and computers can learn to do things that we actually sometimes don't know how to do ourselves, or maybe can do them better than us.
One of the most amazing examples I've seen of machine learning happened on a project that I ran at Kaggle where a team run by a guy called Geoffrey Hinton from the University of Toronto won a competition for automatic drug discovery.
Now, what was extraordinary here is not just that they beat all of the algorithms developed by Merck or the international academic community, but nobody on the team had any background in chemistry or biology or life sciences, and they did it in two weeks.
How did they do this?
They used an extraordinary algorithm called deep learning.
So important was this that in fact the success was covered in The New York Times in a front page article a few weeks later.
This is Geoffrey Hinton here on the left-hand side.
Deep learning is an algorithm inspired by how the human brain works, and as a result it's an algorithm which has no theoretical limitations on what it can do.
The more data you give it and the more computation time you give it, the better it gets.
The New York Times also showed in this article another extraordinary result of deep learning which I'm going to show you now.
It shows that computers can listen and understand.
(Video) Richard Rashid: Now, the last step that I want to be able to take in this process is to actually speak to you in Chinese.
Now the key thing there is, we've been able to take a large amount of information from many Chinese speakers and produce a text-to-speech system that takes Chinese text and converts it into Chinese language, and then we've taken an hour or so of my own voice and we've used that to modulate the standard text-to-speech system so that it would sound like me.
Again, the result's not perfect.
There are in fact quite a few errors.
(In Chinese) (Applause) There's much work to be done in this area.
(In Chinese) (Applause) Jeremy Howard: Well, that was at a machine learning conference in China.
It's not often, actually, at academic conferences that you do hear spontaneous applause, although of course sometimes at TEDx conferences, feel free.
Everything you saw there was happening with deep learning.
(Applause) Thank you.
The transcription in English was deep learning.
The translation to Chinese and the text in the top right, deep learning, and the construction of the voice was deep learning as well.
So deep learning is this extraordinary thing.
It's a single algorithm that can seem to do almost anything, and I discovered that a year earlier, it had also learned to see.
In this obscure competition from Germany called the German Traffic Sign Recognition Benchmark, deep learning had learned to recognize traffic signs like this one.
Not only could it recognize the traffic signs better than any other algorithm, the leaderboard actually showed it was better than people, about twice as good as people.
So by 2011, we had the first example of computers that can see better than people.
Since that time, a lot has happened.
In 2012, Google announced that they had a deep learning algorithm watch YouTube videos and crunched the data on 16,000 computers for a month, and the computer independently learned about concepts such as people and cats just by watching the videos.
This is much like the way that humans learn.
Humans don't learn by being told what they see, but by learning for themselves what these things are.
Also in 2012, Geoffrey Hinton, who we saw earlier, won the very popular ImageNet competition, looking to try to figure out from one and a half million images what they're pictures of.
As of 2014, we're now down to a six percent error rate in image recognition.
This is better than people, again.
So machines really are doing an extraordinarily good job of this, and it is now being used in industry.
For example, Google announced last year that they had mapped every single location in France in two hours, and the way they did it was that they fed street view images into a deep learning algorithm to recognize and read street numbers.
Imagine how long it would have taken before: dozens of people, many years.
This is also happening in China.
Baidu is kind of the Chinese Google, I guess, and what you see here in the top left is an example of a picture that I uploaded to Baidu's deep learning system, and underneath you can see that the system has understood what that picture is and found similar images.
The similar images actually have similar backgrounds, similar directions of the faces, even some with their tongue out.
This is not clearly looking at the text of a web page.
All I uploaded was an image.
So we now have computers which really understand what they see and can therefore search databases of hundreds of millions of images in real time.
So what does it mean now that computers can see?
Well, it's not just that computers can see.
In fact, deep learning has done more than that.
Complex, nuanced sentences like this one are now understandable with deep learning algorithms.
As you can see here, this Stanford-based system showing the red dot at the top has figured out that this sentence is expressing negative sentiment.
Deep learning now in fact is near human performance at understanding what sentences are about and what it is saying about those things.
Also, deep learning has been used to read Chinese, again at about native Chinese speaker level.
This algorithm developed out of Switzerland by people, none of whom speak or understand any Chinese.
As I say, using deep learning is about the best system in the world for this, even compared to native human understanding.
This is a system that we put together at my company which shows putting all this stuff together.
These are pictures which have no text attached, and as I'm typing in here sentences, in real time it's understanding these pictures and figuring out what they're about and finding pictures that are similar to the text that I'm writing.
So you can see, it's actually understanding my sentences and actually understanding these pictures.
I know that you've seen something like this on Google, where you can type in things and it will show you pictures, but actually what it's doing is it's searching the webpage for the text.
This is very different from actually understanding the images.
This is something that computers have only been able to do for the first time in the last few months.
So we can see now that computers can not only see but they can also read, and, of course, we've shown that they can understand what they hear.
Perhaps not surprising now that I'm going to tell you they can write.
Here is some text that I generated using a deep learning algorithm yesterday.
And here is some text that an algorithm out of Stanford generated.
Each of these sentences was generated by a deep learning algorithm to describe each of those pictures.
This algorithm before has never seen a man in a black shirt playing a guitar.
It's seen a man before, it's seen black before, it's seen a guitar before, but it has independently generated this novel description of this picture.
We're still not quite at human performance here, but we're close.
In tests, humans prefer the computer-generated caption one out of four times.
Now this system is now only two weeks old, so probably within the next year, the computer algorithm will be well past human performance at the rate things are going.
So computers can also write.
So we put all this together and it leads to very exciting opportunities.
For example, in medicine, a team in Boston announced that they had discovered dozens of new clinically relevant features of tumors which help doctors make a prognosis of a cancer.
Very similarly, in Stanford, a group there announced that, looking at tissues under magnification, they've developed a machine learning-based system which in fact is better than human pathologists at predicting survival rates for cancer sufferers.
In both of these cases, not only were the predictions more accurate, but they generated new insightful science.
In the radiology case, they were new clinical indicators that humans can understand.
In this pathology case, the computer system actually discovered that the cells around the cancer are as important as the cancer cells themselves in making a diagnosis.
This is the opposite of what pathologists had been taught for decades.
In each of those two cases, they were systems developed by a combination of medical experts and machine learning experts, but as of last year, we're now beyond that too.
This is an example of identifying cancerous areas of human tissue under a microscope.
The system being shown here can identify those areas more accurately, or about as accurately, as human pathologists, but was built entirely with deep learning using no medical expertise by people who have no background in the field.
Similarly, here, this neuron segmentation.
We can now segment neurons about as accurately as humans can, but this system was developed with deep learning using people with no previous background in medicine.
So myself, as somebody with no previous background in medicine, I seem to be entirely well qualified to start a new medical company, which I did.
I was kind of terrified of doing it, but the theory seemed to suggest that it ought to be possible to do very useful medicine using just these data analytic techniques.
And thankfully, the feedback has been fantastic, not just from the media but from the medical community, who have been very supportive.
The theory is that we can take the middle part of the medical process and turn that into data analysis as much as possible, leaving doctors to do what they're best at.
I want to give you an example.
It now takes us about 15 minutes to generate a new medical diagnostic test and I'll show you that in real time now, but I've compressed it down to three minutes by cutting some pieces out.
Rather than showing you creating a medical diagnostic test, I'm going to show you a diagnostic test of car images, because that's something we can all understand.
So here we're starting with about 1.5 million car images, and I want to create something that can split them into the angle of the photo that's being taken.
So these images are entirely unlabeled, so I have to start from scratch.
With our deep learning algorithm, it can automatically identify areas of structure in these images.
So the nice thing is that the human and the computer can now work together.
So the human, as you can see here, is telling the computer about areas of interest which it wants the computer then to try and use to improve its algorithm.
Now, these deep learning systems actually are in 16,000-dimensional space, so you can see here the computer rotating this through that space, trying to find new areas of structure.
And when it does so successfully, the human who is driving it can then point out the areas that are interesting.
So here, the computer has successfully found areas, for example, angles.
So as we go through this process, we're gradually telling the computer more and more about the kinds of structures we're looking for.
You can imagine in a diagnostic test this would be a pathologist identifying areas of pathosis, for example, or a radiologist indicating potentially troublesome nodules.
And sometimes it can be difficult for the algorithm.
In this case, it got kind of confused.
The fronts and the backs of the cars are all mixed up.
So here we have to be a bit more careful, manually selecting these fronts as opposed to the backs, then telling the computer that this is a type of group that we're interested in.
So we do that for a while, we skip over a little bit, and then we train the machine learning algorithm based on these couple of hundred things, and we hope that it's gotten a lot better.
You can see, it's now started to fade some of these pictures out, showing us that it already is recognizing how to understand some of these itself.
We can then use this concept of similar images, and using similar images, you can now see, the computer at this point is able to entirely find just the fronts of cars.
So at this point, the human can tell the computer, okay, yes, you've done a good job of that.
Sometimes, of course, even at this point it's still difficult to separate out groups.
In this case, even after we let the computer try to rotate this for a while, we still find that the left sides and the right sides pictures are all mixed up together.
So we can again give the computer some hints, and we say, okay, try and find a projection that separates out the left sides and the right sides as much as possible using this deep learning algorithm.
And giving it that hint -- ah, okay, it's been successful.
It's managed to find a way of thinking about these objects that's separated out these together.
So you get the idea here.
This is a case not where the human is being replaced by a computer, but where they're working together.
What we're doing here is we're replacing something that used to take a team of five or six people about seven years and replacing it with something that takes 15 minutes for one person acting alone.
So this process takes about four or five iterations.
You can see we now have 62 percent of our 1.5 million images classified correctly.
And at this point, we can start to quite quickly grab whole big sections, check through them to make sure that there's no mistakes.
Where there are mistakes, we can let the computer know about them.
And using this kind of process for each of the different groups, we are now up to an 80 percent success rate in classifying the 1.5 million images.
And at this point, it's just a case of finding the small number that aren't classified correctly, and trying to understand why.
And using that approach, by 15 minutes we get to 97 percent classification rates.
So this kind of technique could allow us to fix a major problem, which is that there's a lack of medical expertise in the world.
The World Economic Forum says that there's between a 10x and a 20x shortage of physicians in the developing world, and it would take about 300 years to train enough people to fix that problem.
So imagine if we can help enhance their efficiency using these deep learning approaches?
So I'm very excited about the opportunities.
I'm also concerned about the problems.
The problem here is that every area in blue on this map is somewhere where services are over 80 percent of employment.
What are services?
These are services.
These are also the exact things that computers have just learned how to do.
So 80 percent of the world's employment in the developed world is stuff that computers have just learned how to do.
What does that mean?
Well, it'll be fine. They'll be replaced by other jobs.
For example, there will be more jobs for data scientists.
Well, not really.
It doesn't take data scientists very long to build these things.
For example, these four algorithms were all built by the same guy.
So if you think, oh, it's all happened before, we've seen the results in the past of when new things come along and they get replaced by new jobs, what are these new jobs going to be?
It's very hard for us to estimate this, because human performance grows at this gradual rate, but we now have a system, deep learning, that we know actually grows in capability exponentially.
And we're here.
So currently, we see the things around us and we say, "Oh, computers are still pretty dumb." Right?
But in five years' time, computers will be off this chart.
So we need to be starting to think about this capability right now.
We have seen this once before, of course.
In the Industrial Revolution, we saw a step change in capability thanks to engines.
The thing is, though, that after a while, things flattened out.
There was social disruption, but once engines were used to generate power in all the situations, things really settled down.
The Machine Learning Revolution is going to be very different from the Industrial Revolution, because the Machine Learning Revolution, it never settles down.
The better computers get at intellectual activities, the more they can build better computers to be better at intellectual capabilities, so this is going to be a kind of change that the world has actually never experienced before, so your previous understanding of what's possible is different.
This is already impacting us.
In the last 25 years, as capital productivity has increased, labor productivity has been flat, in fact even a little bit down.
So I want us to start having this discussion now.
I know that when I often tell people about this situation, people can be quite dismissive.
Well, computers can't really think, they don't emote, they don't understand poetry, we don't really understand how they work.
So what?
Computers right now can do the things that humans spend most of their time being paid to do, so now's the time to start thinking about how we're going to adjust our social structures and economic structures to be aware of this new reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The power of yet.
I heard about a high school in Chicago where students had to pass a certain number of courses to graduate, and if they didn't pass a course, they got the grade "Not Yet."
And I thought that was fantastic, because if you get a failing grade, you think, I'm nothing, I'm nowhere.
But if you get the grade "Not Yet", you understand that you're on a learning curve.
It gives you a path into the future.
"Not Yet" also gave me insight into a critical event early in my career, a real turning point.
I wanted to see how children coped with challenge and difficulty, so I gave 10-year-olds problems that were slightly too hard for them.
Some of them reacted in a shockingly positive way.
They said things like, "I love a challenge," or, "You know, I was hoping this would be informative."
They understood that their abilities could be developed.
They had what I call a growth mindset.
But other students felt it was tragic, catastrophic.
From their more fixed mindset perspective, their intelligence had been up for judgment, and they failed.
Instead of luxuriating in the power of yet, they were gripped in the tyranny of now.
So what do they do next?
I'll tell you what they do next.
In one study, they told us they would probably cheat the next time instead of studying more if they failed a test.
In another study, after a failure, they looked for someone who did worse than they did so they could feel really good about themselves.
And in study after study, they have run from difficulty.
Scientists measured the electrical activity from the brain as students confronted an error.
On the left, you see the fixed-mindset students.
There's hardly any activity.
They run from the error.
They don't engage with it.
But on the right, you have the students with the growth mindset, the idea that abilities can be developed.
They engage deeply.
Their brain is on fire with yet.
They engage deeply.
They process the error.
They learn from it and they correct it.
How are we raising our children?
Are we raising them for now instead of yet?
Are we raising kids who are obsessed with getting As?
Are we raising kids who don't know how to dream big dreams?
Their biggest goal is getting the next A, or the next test score?
And are they carrying this need for constant validation with them into their future lives?
Maybe, because employers are coming to me and saying, "We have already raised a generation of young workers who can't get through the day without an award."
So what can we do?
How can we build that bridge to yet?
Here are some things we can do.
First of all, we can praise wisely, not praising intelligence or talent.
That has failed.
Don't do that anymore.
But praising the process that kids engage in, their effort, their strategies, their focus, their perseverance, their improvement.
This process praise creates kids who are hardy and resilient.
There are other ways to reward yet.
We recently teamed up with game scientists from the University of Washington to create a new online math game that rewarded yet.
In this game, students were rewarded for effort, strategy and progress.
The usual math game rewards you for getting answers right, right now, but this game rewarded process.
And we got more effort, more strategies, more engagement over longer periods of time, and more perseverance when they hit really, really hard problems.
Just the words "yet" or "not yet," we're finding, give kids greater confidence, give them a path into the future that creates greater persistence.
And we can actually change students' mindsets.
In one study, we taught them that every time they push out of their comfort zone to learn something new and difficult, the neurons in their brain can form new, stronger connections, and over time, they can get smarter.
Look what happened: In this study, students who were not taught this growth mindset continued to show declining grades over this difficult school transition, but those who were taught this lesson showed a sharp rebound in their grades.
We have shown this now, this kind of improvement, with thousands and thousands of kids, especially struggling students.
So let's talk about equality.
In our country, there are groups of students who chronically underperform, for example, children in inner cities, or children on Native American reservations.
And they've done so poorly for so long that many people think it's inevitable.
But when educators create growth mindset classrooms steeped in yet, equality happens.
And here are just a few examples.
In one year, a kindergarten class in Harlem, New York scored in the 95th percentile on the national achievement test.
Many of those kids could not hold a pencil when they arrived at school.
In one year, fourth-grade students in the South Bronx, way behind, became the number one fourth-grade class in the state of New York on the state math test.
In a year, to a year and a half, Native American students in a school on a reservation went from the bottom of their district to the top, and that district included affluent sections of Seattle.
So the Native kids outdid the Microsoft kids.
This happened because the meaning of effort and difficulty were transformed.
Before, effort and difficulty made them feel dumb, made them feel like giving up, but now, effort and difficulty, that's when their neurons are making new connections, stronger connections.
That's when they're getting smarter.
I received a letter recently from a 13-year-old boy.
He said, "Dear Professor Dweck, I appreciate that your writing is based on solid scientific research, and that's why I decided to put it into practice.
I put more effort into my schoolwork, into my relationship with my family, and into my relationship with kids at school, and I experienced great improvement in all of those areas.
I now realize I've wasted most of my life."
Let's not waste any more lives, because once we know that abilities are capable of such growth, it becomes a basic human right for children, all children, to live in places that create that growth, to live in places filled with "yet".
Thank you.
(Applause)
Our world has many superheroes.
But they have the worst of all superpowers: invisibility.
For example, the catadores, workers who collect recyclable materials for a living.
Catadores emerged from social inequality, unemployment, and the abundance of solid waste from the deficiency of the waste collection system.
Catadores provide a heavy, honest and essential work that benefits the entire population. But they are not acknowledged for it.
Here in Brazil, they collect 90 percent of all the waste that's actually recycled.
Most of the catadores work independently, picking waste from the streets and selling to junk yards at very low prices.
They may collect over 300 kilos in their bags, shopping carts, bicycles and carroças.
Carroças are carts built from wood or metal and found in several streets in Brazil, much like graffiti and street art.
And this is how I first met these marginalized superheroes.
I am a graffiti artist and activist and my art is social, environmental and political in nature.
In 2007, I took my work beyond walls and onto the carroças, as a new urban support for my message.
But at this time, giving voice to the catadores.
By adding art and humor to the cause, it became more appealing, which helped call attention to the catadores and improve their self-esteem.
And also, they are famous now on the streets, on mass media and social.
So, the thing is, I plunged into this universe and have not stopped working since.
I have painted over 200 carroças in many cities and have been invited to do exhibitions and trips worldwide.
And then I realized that catadores, in their invisibility, are not exclusive to Brazil.
I met them in Argentina, Chile, Bolivia, South Africa, Turkey and even in developed countries such as the United States and Japan.
And this was when I realized that I needed to have more people join the cause because it's a big challenge.
And then, I created a collaborative movement called Pimp My Carroça -- (Laughter) -- which is a large crowdfunded event.
Thank you.
(Applause).
So Pimp My Carroça is a large crowdfunded event to help catadores and their carroças.
Catadores are assisted by well-being professionals and healthcare, like physicians, dentists, podiatrists, hair stylists, massage therapists and much more.
But also, they also receive safety shirts, gloves, raincoats and eyeglasses to see in high-definition the city, while their carroças are renovated by our incredible volunteers.
And then they receive safety items, too: reflective tapes, horns and mirrors.
Then, finally, painted by a street artist and become part of part of this huge, amazing mobile art exhibition.
Pimp My Carroça took to the streets of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro and Curitiba.
But to meet the demand in other cities, including outside of Brazil, we have created Pimpx, which is inspired by TEDx, and it's a simplified, do-it-yourself, crowdfunded edition of Pimp My Carroça.
So now everybody can join.
In two years, over 170 catadores, 800 volunteers and 200 street artists and more than 1,000 donors have been involved in the Pimp My Carroça movement, whose actions have even been used in teaching recycling at a local school.
So catadores are leaving invisibility behind and becoming increasingly respected and valued.
Because of their pimped carroças, they are able to fight back to prejudice, increase their income and their interaction with society.
So now, I'd like to challenge you to start looking at and acknowledging the catadores and other invisible superheroes from your city.
Try to see the world as one, without boundaries or frontiers.
Believe it or not, there are over 20 million catadores worldwide.
So next time you see one, recognize them as a vital part of our society.
Muito obrigado, thank you.
(Applause).
I'm a lexicographer.
I make dictionaries.
And my job as a lexicographer is to try to put all the words possible into the dictionary.
My job is not to decide what a word is; that is your job.
Everybody who speaks English decides together what's a word and what's not a word.
Every language is just a group of people who agree to understand each other.
Now, sometimes when people are trying to decide whether a word is good or bad, they don't really have a good reason.
So they say something like, "Because grammar!"
(Laughter) I don't actually really care about grammar too much -- don't tell anybody.
But the word "grammar," actually, there are two kinds of grammar.
There's the kind of grammar that lives inside your brain, and if you're a native speaker of a language or a good speaker of a language, it's the unconscious rules that you follow when you speak that language.
And this is what you learn when you learn a language as a child.
And here's an example: This is a wug, right?
It's a wug.
Now there is another one.
There are two of these.
There are two ...
Audience: Wugs.
Erin McKean: Exactly! You know how to make the plural of wug.
That rule lives in your brain.
You never had to be taught this rule, you just understand it.
This is an experiment that was invented by a professor at [Boston University] named Jean Berko Gleason back in 1958.
So we've been talking about this for a long time.
Now, these kinds of natural rules that exist in your brain, they're not like traffic laws, they're more like laws of nature.
And nobody has to remind you to obey a law of nature, right?
When you leave the house in the morning, your mom doesn't say, "Hey, honey, I think it's going to be cold, take a hoodie, don't forget to obey the law of gravity."
Nobody says this.
Now, there are other rules that are more about manners than they are about nature.
So you can think of a word as like a hat.
Once you know how hats work, nobody has to tell you, "Don't wear hats on your feet."
What they have to tell you is, "Can you wear hats inside?
Who gets to wear a hat?
What are the kinds of hats you get to wear?"
Those are more of the second kind of grammar, which linguists often call usage, as opposed to grammar.
Now, sometimes people use this kind of rules-based grammar to discourage people from making up words.
And I think that is, well, stupid.
So, for example, people are always telling you, "Be creative, make new music, do art, invent things, science and technology."
But when it comes to words, they're like, "Don't! No. Creativity stops right here, whippersnappers. Give it a rest."
(Laughter) But that makes no sense to me.
Words are great. We should have more of them.
I want you to make as many new words as possible.
And I'm going to tell you six ways that you can use to make new words in English.
The first way is the simplest way.
Basically, steal them from other languages.
["Go rob other people"] (Laughter) Linguists call this borrowing, but we never give the words back , so I'm just going to be honest and call it stealing.
We usually take words for things that we like, like delicious food.
We took "kumquat" from Chinese, we took "caramel" from French.
We also take words for cool things like "ninja," right?
We took that from Japanese, which is kind of a cool trick because ninjas are hard to steal from.
(Laughter) So another way that you can make words in English is by squishing two other English words together.
This is called compounding.
Words in English are like Lego: If you use enough force, you can put any two of them together.
(Laughter) We do this all the time in English: Words like "heartbroken," "bookworm," "sandcastle" all are compounds.
So go ahead and make words like "duckface," just don't make duckface.
(Laughter) Another way that you can make words in English is kind of like compounding, but instead you use so much force when you squish the words together that some parts fall off.
So these are blend words, like "brunch" is a blend of "breakfast" and "lunch."
"Motel" is a blend of "motor" and "hotel."
Who here knew that "motel" was a blend word?
Yeah, that word is so old in English that lots of people don't know that there are parts missing.
"Edutainment" is a blend of "education" and "entertainment."
And of course, "electrocute" is a blend of "electric" and "execute."
(Laughter) You can also make words by changing how they operate.
This is called functional shift.
You take a word that acts as one part of speech, and you change it into another part of speech.
Okay, who here knew that "friend" hasn't always been a verb?
"Friend" used to be noun and then we verbed it.
Almost any word in English can be verbed.
You can also take adjectives and make them into nouns.
"Commercial" used to be an adjective and now it's a noun.
And of course, you can "green" things.
Another way to make words in English is back-formation.
You can take a word and you can kind of squish it down a little bit.
So for example, in English we had the word "editor" before we had the word "edit."
"Edit" was formed from "editor."
Sometimes these back-formations sound a little silly: Bulldozers bulldoze, butlers butle and burglers burgle.
(Laughter) Another way to make words in English is to take the first letters of something and squish them together.
So National Aeronautics and Space Administration becomes NASA.
And of course you can do this with anything, OMG!
So it doesn't matter how silly the words are.
They can be really good words of English.
"Absquatulate" is a perfectly good word of English.
"Mugwump" is a perfectly good word of English.
So the words don't have have to sound normal, they can sound really silly.
Why should you make words?
You should make words because every word is a chance to express your idea and get your meaning across.
And new words grab people's attention.
They get people to focus on what you're saying and that gives you a better chance to get your meaning across.
A lot of people on this stage today have said, "In the future, you can do this, you can help with this, you can help us explore, you can help us invent."
You can make a new word right now.
English has no age limit.
Go ahead, start making words today, send them to me, and I will put them in my online dictionary, Wordnik.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
I am a visual artist, and I make revolutionary art to propel history forward.
I'm going to come right out and tell you something: I don't accept the economic foundation, the social relations or the governing ideas of America.
My art contributes to fundamental change by encouraging an audience to address big questions from that perspective.
Social change is hard, but ideas matter tremendously.
When I say I'm an artist, most people think, "Oh, he's a painter."
Behind me, you can see some of the kind of work I do.
"Imagine a World Without America" is a painting, but I work in a range of media, including photography, video and performance art.
A current project, "Slave Rebellion Reenactment," is going to be reenacted on the outskirts of New Orleans this November.
In 1989, I had an artwork that became the center of controversy over its transgressive use of the American flag.
"What is the Proper Way to Display a US Flag?"
is a conceptual work that encouraged audience participation.
It consisted of a photo montage that had text that read, "What is the Proper Way to Display a US Flag?"
Below that were books that people could write responses to that question in, and below that was a flag that people had the option of standing on.
The photo montage consisted of images of South Korean students burning American flags, holding signs that said, "Yankee go home. Son of a bitch," and below that were flag-draped coffins coming back from Vietnam.
People wrote long and short answers.
Thousands of people engaged with the work in a lot of different languages.
Some of the people said, "I'm a German girl.
If we Germans would admire our flag as you all do, we would be called Nazis again.
I think you do have too much trouble about this flag."
"I think that the artist should be returned to his heritage, i.e., the jungles of Africa, and then he can shovel manure in his artistic way."
"This flag I'm standing on stands for everything oppressive in this system: the murder of the Indians and all the oppressed around the world, including my brother who was shot by a pig, who kicked over his body to 'make sure the nigger was dead.' That pig was wearing the flag.
Thank you, Dread Scott, for this opportunity."
"As a veteran defending the flag, I personally would never defend your stupid ass!
You should be shot!" -- US Navy Seal Team.
As you can see, people had very strong reactions about the flag then, as they do now.
There were demonstrations of veterans in front of the Art Institute of Chicago.
They chanted things like, "The flag and the artist, hang them both high," evoking images of lynching.
I received numerous death threats, and bomb threats were phoned in to my school.
It was a very dangerous situation.
Later, President Bush called the work "disgraceful," which I viewed as a tremendous honor, and Congress outlawed the work.
(Laughter) I became part of a Supreme Court case when I and others defied that law, by burning flags on the steps of the Capitol.
That action and the subsequent legal and political battle led to a landmark First Amendment decision that prevented the government from demanding patriotism be mandatory.
But let me back up a bit.
These people literally wanted me dead.
What I would do at this moment would make a difference.
This is me at the exact same moment, eight stories above that crowd.
It was supposed to be for a photo shoot that was going to take place on the steps where the veterans were at that time.
It wouldn't have been safe for me to be there, to say the least.
But it was really important to do that shoot, because while some wanted to kill me, it was also a situation where those who viewed the American flag as standing for everything oppressive in this system felt that they had a voice, and that voice needed to be amplified.
The point is this: changing anything -- whether it's conventional ideas about US national symbols, traditional thinking challenged by scientific breakthroughs or ousting an authoritarian president -- requires a lot of things.
It requires courage, luck and also vision and boldness of action.
But on luck -- I have to say, the photo shoot we did might not have worked out so well.
We laughed after we were out of the area.
But the thing is, it was worth the risk because of the stakes that were involved.
And in this case, the luck led to a wonderful, profound and powerful situation that was also humorous.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So over the past few centuries, microscopes have revolutionized our world.
They revealed to us a tiny world of objects, life and structures that are too small for us to see with our naked eyes.
They are a tremendous contribution to science and technology.
Today I'd like to introduce you to a new type of microscope, a microscope for changes.
It doesn't use optics like a regular microscope to make small objects bigger, but instead it uses a video camera and image processing to reveal to us the tiniest motions and color changes in objects and people, changes that are impossible for us to see with our naked eyes.
And it lets us look at our world in a completely new way.
So what do I mean by color changes?
Our skin, for example, changes its color very slightly when the blood flows under it.
That change is incredibly subtle, which is why, when you look at other people, when you look at the person sitting next to you, you don't see their skin or their face changing color.
When we look at this video of Steve here, it appears to us like a static picture, but once we look at this video through our new, special microscope, suddenly we see a completely different image.
What you see here are small changes in the color of Steve's skin, magnified 100 times so that they become visible.
We can actually see a human pulse.
We can see how fast Steve's heart is beating, but we can also see the actual way that the blood flows in his face.
And we can do that not just to visualize the pulse, but also to actually recover our heart rates, and measure our heart rates.
And we can do it with regular cameras and without touching the patients.
So here you see the pulse and heart rate we extracted from a neonatal baby from a video we took with a regular DSLR camera, and the heart rate measurement we get is as accurate as the one you'd get with a standard monitor in a hospital.
And it doesn't even have to be a video we recorded.
We can do it essentially with other videos as well.
So I just took a short clip from "Batman Begins" here just to show Christian Bale's pulse.
(Laughter) And you know, presumably he's wearing makeup, the lighting here is kind of challenging, but still, just from the video, we're able to extract his pulse and show it quite well.
So how do we do all that?
We basically analyze the changes in the light that are recorded at every pixel in the video over time, and then we crank up those changes.
We make them bigger so that we can see them.
The tricky part is that those signals, those changes that we're after, are extremely subtle, so we have to be very careful when you try to separate them from noise that always exists in videos.
So we use some clever image processing techniques to get a very accurate measurement of the color at each pixel in the video, and then the way the color changes over time, and then we amplify those changes.
We make them bigger to create those types of enhanced videos, or magnified videos, that actually show us those changes.
But it turns out we can do that not just to show tiny changes in color, but also tiny motions, and that's because the light that gets recorded in our cameras will change not only if the color of the object changes, but also if the object moves.
So this is my daughter when she was about two months old.
It's a video I recorded about three years ago.
And as new parents, we all want to make sure our babies are healthy, that they're breathing, that they're alive, of course.
So I too got one of those baby monitors so that I could see my daughter when she was asleep.
And this is pretty much what you'll see with a standard baby monitor.
You can see the baby's sleeping, but there's not too much information there.
There's not too much we can see.
Wouldn't it be better, or more informative, or more useful, if instead we could look at the view like this.
So here I took the motions and I magnified them 30 times, and then I could clearly see that my daughter was indeed alive and breathing.
(Laughter) Here is a side-by-side comparison.
So again, in the source video, in the original video, there's not too much we can see, but once we magnify the motions, the breathing becomes much more visible.
And it turns out, there's a lot of phenomena we can reveal and magnify with our new motion microscope.
We can see how our veins and arteries are pulsing in our bodies.
We can see that our eyes are constantly moving in this wobbly motion.
And that's actually my eye, and again this video was taken right after my daughter was born, so you can see I wasn't getting too much sleep. (Laughter) Even when a person is sitting still, there's a lot of information we can extract about their breathing patterns, small facial expressions.
Maybe we could use those motions to tell us something about our thoughts or our emotions.
We can also magnify small mechanical movements, like vibrations in engines, that can help engineers detect and diagnose machinery problems, or see how our buildings and structures sway in the wind and react to forces.
Those are all things that our society knows how to measure in various ways, but measuring those motions is one thing, and actually seeing those motions as they happen is a whole different thing.
And ever since we discovered this new technology, we made our code available online so that others could use and experiment with it.
It's very simple to use.
It can work on your own videos.
Our collaborators at Quanta Research even created this nice website where you can upload your videos and process them online, so even if you don't have any experience in computer science or programming, you can still very easily experiment with this new microscope.
And I'd like to show you just a couple of examples of what others have done with it.
So this video was made by a YouTube user called Tamez85.
I don't know who that user is, but he, or she, used our code to magnify small belly movements during pregnancy.
It's kind of creepy.
(Laughter) People have used it to magnify pulsing veins in their hands.
And you know it's not real science unless you use guinea pigs, and apparently this guinea pig is called Tiffany, and this YouTube user claims it is the first rodent on Earth that was motion-magnified.
You can also do some art with it.
So this video was sent to me by a design student at Yale.
She wanted to see if there's any difference in the way her classmates move.
She made them all stand still, and then magnified their motions.
It's like seeing still pictures come to life.
And the nice thing with all those examples is that we had nothing to do with them.
We just provided this new tool, a new way to look at the world, and then people find other interesting, new and creative ways of using it.
But we didn't stop there.
This tool not only allows us to look at the world in a new way, it also redefines what we can do and pushes the limits of what we can do with our cameras.
So as scientists, we started wondering, what other types of physical phenomena produce tiny motions that we could now use our cameras to measure?
And one such phenomenon that we focused on recently is sound.
Sound, as we all know, is basically changes in air pressure that travel through the air.
Those pressure waves hit objects and they create small vibrations in them, which is how we hear and how we record sound.
But it turns out that sound also produces visual motions.
Those are motions that are not visible to us but are visible to a camera with the right processing.
So here are two examples.
This is me demonstrating my great singing skills.
(Singing) (Laughter) And I took a high-speed video of my throat while I was humming.
Again, if you stare at that video, there's not too much you'll be able to see, but once we magnify the motions 100 times, we can see all the motions and ripples in the neck that are involved in producing the sound.
That signal is there in that video.
We also know that singers can break a wine glass if they hit the correct note.
So here, we're going to play a note that's in the resonance frequency of that glass through a loudspeaker that's next to it.
Once we play that note and magnify the motions 250 times, we can very clearly see how the glass vibrates and resonates in response to the sound.
It's not something you're used to seeing every day.
But this made us think. It gave us this crazy idea.
Can we actually invert this process and recover sound from video by analyzing the tiny vibrations that sound waves create in objects, and essentially convert those back into the sounds that produced them.
In this way, we can turn everyday objects into microphones.
So that's exactly what we did.
So here's an empty bag of chips that was lying on a table, and we're going to turn that bag of chips into a microphone by filming it with a video camera and analyzing the tiny motions that sound waves create in it.
So here's the sound that we played in the room.
(Music: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") And this is a high-speed video we recorded of that bag of chips.
Again it's playing.
There's no chance you'll be able to see anything going on in that video just by looking at it, but here's the sound we were able to recover just by analyzing the tiny motions in that video.
(Music: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") I call it -- Thank you.
(Applause) I call it the visual microphone.
We actually extract audio signals from video signals.
And just to give you a sense of the scale of the motions here, a pretty loud sound will cause that bag of chips to move less than a micrometer.
That's one thousandth of a millimeter.
That's how tiny the motions are that we are now able to pull out just by observing how light bounces off objects and gets recorded by our cameras.
We can recover sounds from other objects, like plants.
(Music: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") And we can recover speech as well.
So here's a person speaking in a room.
Voice: Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, that lamb was sure to go.
Michael Rubinstein: And here's that speech again recovered just from this video of that same bag of chips.
Voice: Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, that lamb was sure to go.
MR: We used "Mary Had a Little Lamb" because those are said to be the first words that Thomas Edison spoke into his phonograph in 1877.
It was one of the first sound recording devices in history.
It basically directed the sounds onto a diaphragm that vibrated a needle that essentially engraved the sound on tinfoil that was wrapped around the cylinder.
Here's a demonstration of recording and replaying sound with Edison's phonograph.
(Video) Voice: Testing, testing, one two three.
Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, the lamb was sure to go.
Testing, testing, one two three.
Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, the lamb was sure to go.
MR: And now, 137 years later, we're able to get sound in pretty much similar quality but by just watching objects vibrate to sound with cameras, and we can even do that when the camera is 15 feet away from the object, behind soundproof glass.
So this is the sound that we were able to recover in that case.
Voice: Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, the lamb was sure to go.
MR: And of course, surveillance is the first application that comes to mind.
(Laughter) But it might actually be useful for other things as well.
Maybe in the future, we'll be able to use it, for example, to recover sound across space, because sound can't travel in space, but light can.
We've only just begun exploring other possible uses for this new technology.
It lets us see physical processes that we know are there but that we've never been able to see with our own eyes until now.
This is our team.
Everything I showed you today is a result of a collaboration with this great group of people you see here, and I encourage you and welcome you to check out our website, try it out yourself, and join us in exploring this world of tiny motions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here to enlist you in helping reshape the story about how humans and other critters get things done.
Here is the old story -- we've already heard a little bit about it: biology is war in which only the fiercest survive; businesses and nations succeed only by defeating, destroying and dominating competition; politics is about your side winning at all costs.
But I think we can see the very beginnings of a new story beginning to emerge.
It's a narrative spread across a number of different disciplines, in which cooperation, collective action and complex interdependencies play a more important role.
And the central, but not all-important, role of competition and survival of the fittest shrinks just a little bit to make room.
I started thinking about the relationship between communication, media and collective action when I wrote "Smart Mobs," and I found that when I finished the book, I kept thinking about it.
In fact, if you look back, human communication media and the ways in which we organize socially have been co-evolving for quite a long time.
Humans have lived for much, much longer than the approximately 10,000 years of settled agricultural civilization in small family groups. Nomadic hunters bring down rabbits, gathering food.
The form of wealth in those days was enough food to stay alive.
But at some point, they banded together to hunt bigger game.
And we don't know exactly how they did this, although they must have solved some collective action problems; it only makes sense that you can't hunt mastodons while you're fighting with the other groups.
And again, we have no way of knowing, but it's clear that a new form of wealth must have emerged.
More protein than a hunter's family could eat before it rotted.
So that raised a social question that I believe must have driven new social forms.
Did the people who ate that mastodon meat owe something to the hunters and their families?
And if so, how did they make arrangements?
Again, we can't know, but we can be pretty sure that some form of symbolic communication must have been involved.
Of course, with agriculture came the first big civilizations, the first cities built of mud and brick, the first empires.
And it was the administers of these empires who began hiring people to keep track of the wheat and sheep and wine that was owed and the taxes that was owed on them by making marks; marks on clay in that time.
Not too much longer after that, the alphabet was invented.
And this powerful tool was really reserved, for thousands of years, for the elite administrators (Laughter) who kept track of accounts for the empires.
And then another communication technology enabled new media: the printing press came along, and within decades, millions of people became literate.
And from literate populations, new forms of collective action emerged in the spheres of knowledge, religion and politics.
We saw scientific revolutions, the Protestant Reformation, constitutional democracies possible where they had not been possible before.
Not created by the printing press, but enabled by the collective action that emerges from literacy.
And again, new forms of wealth emerged.
Now, commerce is ancient. Markets are as old as the crossroads.
But capitalism, as we know it, is only a few hundred years old, enabled by cooperative arrangements and technologies, such as the joint-stock ownership company, shared liability insurance, double-entry bookkeeping.
Now of course, the enabling technologies are based on the Internet, and in the many-to-many era, every desktop is now a printing press, a broadcasting station, a community or a marketplace.
Evolution is speeding up.
More recently, that power is untethering and leaping off the desktops, and very, very quickly, we're going to see a significant proportion, if not the majority of the human race, walking around holding, carrying or wearing supercomputers linked at speeds greater than what we consider to be broadband today.
Now, when I started looking into collective action, the considerable literature on it is based on what sociologists call "social dilemmas."
And there are a couple of mythic narratives of social dilemmas.
I'm going to talk briefly about two of them: the prisoner's dilemma and the tragedy of the commons.
Now, when I talked about this with Kevin Kelly, he assured me that everybody in this audience pretty much knows the details of the prisoner's dilemma, so I'm just going to go over that very, very quickly.
If you have more questions about it, ask Kevin Kelly later. (Laughter) The prisoner's dilemma is actually a story that's overlaid on a mathematical matrix that came out of the game theory in the early years of thinking about nuclear war: two players who couldn't trust each other.
Let me just say that every unsecured transaction is a good example of a prisoner's dilemma.
Person with the goods, person with the money, because they can't trust each other, are not going to exchange.
Neither one wants to be the first one or they're going to get the sucker's payoff, but both lose, of course, because they don't get what they want.
If they could only agree, if they could only turn a prisoner's dilemma into a different payoff matrix called an assurance game, they could proceed.
Twenty years ago, Robert Axelrod used the prisoner's dilemma as a probe of the biological question: if we are here because our ancestors were such fierce competitors, how does cooperation exist at all?
He started a computer tournament for people to submit prisoner's dilemma strategies and discovered, much to his surprise, that a very, very simple strategy won -- it won the first tournament, and even after everyone knew it won, it won the second tournament -- that's known as tit for tat.
Another economic game that may not be as well known as the prisoner's dilemma is the ultimatum game, and it's also a very interesting probe of our assumptions about the way people make economic transactions.
Here's how the game is played: there are two players; they've never played the game before, they will not play the game again, they don't know each other, and they are, in fact, in separate rooms.
First player is offered a hundred dollars and is asked to propose a split: 50/50, 90/10, whatever that player wants to propose. The second player either accepts the split -- both players are paid and the game is over -- or rejects the split -- neither player is paid and the game is over.
Now, the fundamental basis of neoclassical economics would tell you it's irrational to reject a dollar because someone you don't know in another room is going to get 99.
Yet in thousands of trials with American and European and Japanese students, a significant percentage would reject any offer that's not close to 50/50.
And although they were screened and didn't know about the game and had never played the game before, proposers seemed to innately know this because the average proposal was surprisingly close to 50/50.
Now, the interesting part comes in more recently when anthropologists began taking this game to other cultures and discovered, to their surprise, that slash-and-burn agriculturalists in the Amazon or nomadic pastoralists in Central Asia or a dozen different cultures -- each had radically different ideas of what is fair.
Which suggests that instead of there being an innate sense of fairness, that somehow the basis of our economic transactions can be influenced by our social institutions, whether we know that or not.
The other major narrative of social dilemmas is the tragedy of the commons.
Garrett Hardin used it to talk about overpopulation in the late 1960s.
He used the example of a common grazing area in which each person by simply maximizing their own flock led to overgrazing and the depletion of the resource.
He had the rather gloomy conclusion that humans will inevitably despoil any common pool resource in which people cannot be restrained from using it.
Now, Elinor Ostrom, a political scientist, in 1990 asked the interesting question that any good scientist should ask, which is: is it really true that humans will always despoil commons?
So she went out and looked at what data she could find.
She looked at thousands of cases of humans sharing watersheds, forestry resources, fisheries, and discovered that yes, in case after case, humans destroyed the commons that they depended on.
But she also found many instances in which people escaped the prisoner's dilemma; in fact, the tragedy of the commons is a multiplayer prisoner's dilemma.
And she said that people are only prisoners if they consider themselves to be.
They escape by creating institutions for collective action.
And she discovered, I think most interestingly, that among those institutions that worked, there were a number of common design principles, and those principles seem to be missing from those institutions that don't work.
I'm moving very quickly over a number of disciplines. In biology, the notions of symbiosis, group selection, evolutionary psychology are contested, to be sure.
But there is really no longer any major debate over the fact that cooperative arrangements have moved from a peripheral role to a central role in biology, from the level of the cell to the level of the ecology.
And again, our notions of individuals as economic beings have been overturned.
Rational self-interest is not always the dominating factor.
In fact, people will act to punish cheaters, even at a cost to themselves.
And most recently, neurophysiological measures have shown that people who punish cheaters in economic games show activity in the reward centers of their brain.
Which led one scientist to declare that altruistic punishment may be the glue that holds societies together.
Now, I've been talking about how new forms of communication and new media in the past have helped create new economic forms.
Commerce is ancient. Markets are very old. Capitalism is fairly recent; socialism emerged as a reaction to that.
And yet we see very little talk about how the next form may be emerging.
Jim Surowiecki briefly mentioned Yochai Benkler's paper about open source, pointing to a new form of production: peer-to-peer production.
I simply want you to keep in mind that if in the past, new forms of cooperation enabled by new technologies create new forms of wealth, we may be moving into yet another economic form that is significantly different from previous ones.
Very briefly, let's look at some businesses. IBM, as you know, HP, Sun -- some of the most fierce competitors in the IT world are open sourcing their software, are providing portfolios of patents for the commons.
Eli Lilly -- in, again, the fiercely competitive pharmaceutical world -- has created a market for solutions for pharmaceutical problems.
Toyota, instead of treating its suppliers as a marketplace, treats them as a network and trains them to produce better, even though they are also training them to produce better for their competitors.
Now none of these companies are doing this out of altruism; they're doing it because they're learning that a certain kind of sharing is in their self-interest.
Open source production has shown us that world-class software, like Linux and Mozilla, can be created with neither the bureaucratic structure of the firm nor the incentives of the marketplace as we've known them.
Google enriches itself by enriching thousands of bloggers through AdSense.
Amazon has opened its Application Programming Interface to 60,000 developers, countless Amazon shops.
They're enriching others, not out of altruism but as a way of enriching themselves.
eBay solved the prisoner's dilemma and created a market where none would have existed by creating a feedback mechanism that turns a prisoner's dilemma game into an assurance game.
Instead of, "Neither of us can trust each other, so we have to make suboptimal moves," it's, "You prove to me that you are trustworthy and I will cooperate."
Wikipedia has used thousands of volunteers to create a free encyclopedia with a million and a half articles in 200 languages in just a couple of years.
We've seen that ThinkCycle has enabled NGOs in developing countries to put up problems to be solved by design students around the world, including something that's being used for tsunami relief right now: it's a mechanism for rehydrating cholera victims that's so simple to use it, illiterates can be trained to use it.
BitTorrent turns every downloader into an uploader, making the system more efficient the more it is used.
Millions of people have contributed their desktop computers when they're not using them to link together through the Internet into supercomputing collectives that help solve the protein folding problem for medical researchers -- that's Folding@home at Stanford -- to crack codes, to search for life in outer space.
I don't think we know enough yet.
I don't think we've even begun to discover what the basic principles are, but I think we can begin to think about them.
And I don't have enough time to talk about all of them, but think about self-interest.
This is all about self-interest that adds up to more.
In El Salvador, both sides that withdrew from their civil war took moves that had been proven to mirror a prisoner's dilemma strategy.
In the U.S., in the Philippines, in Kenya, around the world, citizens have self-organized political protests and get out the vote campaigns using mobile devices and SMS.
Is an Apollo Project of cooperation possible?
A transdisciplinary study of cooperation?
I believe that the payoff would be very big.
I think we need to begin developing maps of this territory so that we can talk about it across disciplines.
And I am not saying that understanding cooperation is going to cause us to be better people -- and sometimes people cooperate to do bad things -- but I will remind you that a few hundred years ago, people saw their loved ones die from diseases they thought were caused by sin or foreigners or evil spirits.
Descartes said we need an entire new way of thinking.
When the scientific method provided that new way of thinking and biology showed that microorganisms caused disease, suffering was alleviated.
What forms of suffering could be alleviated, what forms of wealth could be created if we knew a little bit more about cooperation?
I don't think that this transdisciplinary discourse is automatically going to happen; it's going to require effort.
So I enlist you to help me get the cooperation project started.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the 1600s, there were so many right whales in Cape Cod Bay off the east coast of the U.S.
that apparently you could walk across their backs from one end of the bay to the other.
Today, they number in the hundreds, and they're endangered.
Like them, many species of whales saw their numbers drastically reduced by 200 years of whaling, where they were hunted and killed for their whale meat, oil and whale bone.
We only have whales in our waters today because of the Save the Whales movement of the '70s.
It was instrumental in stopping commercial whaling, and was built on the idea that if we couldn't save whales, what could we save?
It was ultimately a test of our political ability to halt environmental destruction.
So in the early '80s, there was a ban on commercial whaling that came into force as a result of this campaign.
Whales in our waters are still low in numbers, however, because they do face a range of other human-induced threats.
Unfortunately, many people still think that whale conservationists like myself do what we do only because these creatures are charismatic and beautiful.
This is actually a disservice, because whales are ecosystem engineers.
They help maintain the stability and health of the oceans, and even provide services to human society.
So let's talk about why saving whales is critical to the resiliency of the oceans.
It boils down to two main things: whale poop and rotting carcasses.
As whales dive to the depths to feed and come up to the surface to breathe, they actually release these enormous fecal plumes.
This whale pump, as it's called, actually brings essential limiting nutrients from the depths to the surface waters where they stimulate the growth of phytoplankton, which forms the base of all marine food chains.
So really, having more whales in the oceans pooping is really beneficial to the entire ecosystem.
Whales are also known to undertake some of the longest migrations of all mammals.
Gray whales off America migrate 16,000 kilometers between productive feeding areas and less productive calving, or birthing, areas and back every year.
As they do so, they transport fertilizer in the form of their feces from places that have it to places that need it.
So clearly, whales are really important in nutrient cycling, both horizontally and vertically, through the oceans.
But what's really cool is that they're also really important after they're dead.
Whale carcasses are some of the largest form of detritus to fall from the ocean's surface, and they're called whale fall.
As these carcasses sink, they provide a feast to some 400-odd species, including the eel-shaped, slime-producing hagfish.
So over the 200 years of whaling, when we were busy killing and removing these carcasses from the oceans, we likely altered the rate and geographic distribution of these whale falls that would descend into deep oceans, and as a result, probably led to a number of extinctions of species that were most specialized and dependent on these carcasses for their survival.
Whale carcasses are also known to transport about 190,000 tons of carbon, which is the equivalent of that produced by 80,000 cars per year from the atmosphere to the deep oceans, and the deep oceans are what we call "carbon sinks," because they trap and hold excess carbon from the atmosphere, and therefore help to delay global warming.
Sometimes these carcasses also wash up on beaches and provide a meal to a number of predatory species on land.
The 200 years of whaling was clearly detrimental and caused a reduction in the populations of whales between 60 to 90 percent.
Clearly, the Save the Whales movement was instrumental in preventing commercial whaling from going on, but we need to revise this.
We need to address the more modern, pressing problems that these whales face in our waters today.
Amongst other things, we need to stop them from getting plowed down by container ships when they're in their feeding areas, and stop them from getting entangled in fishing nets as they float around in the ocean.
We also need to learn to contextualize our conservation messages, so people really understand the true ecosystem value of these creatures.
So, let's save the whales again, but this time, let's not just do it for their sake.
Let's also do it for ours.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a tourism entrepreneur and a peacebuilder, but this is not how I started.
When I was seven years old, I remember watching television and seeing people throwing rocks, and thinking, this must be a fun thing to do.
So I got out to the street and threw rocks, not realizing I was supposed to throw rocks at Israeli cars.
Instead, I ended up stoning my neighbors' cars. (Laughter) They were not enthusiastic about my patriotism.
This is my picture with my brother.
This is me, the little one, and I know what you're thinking: "You used to look cute, what the heck happened to you?"
But my brother, who is older than me, was arrested when he was 18, taken to prison on charges of throwing stones.
He was beaten up when he refused to confess that he threw stones, and as a result, had internal injuries that caused his death soon after he was released from prison.
I was angry, I was bitter, and all I wanted was revenge.
But that changed when I was 18.
I decided that I needed Hebrew to get a job, and going to study Hebrew in that classroom was the first time I ever met Jews who were not soldiers.
And we connected over really small things, like the fact that I love country music, which is really strange for Palestinians.
But it was then that I realized also that we have a wall of anger, of hatred and of ignorance that separates us.
I decided that it doesn't matter what happens to me.
What really matters is how I deal with it.
And therefore, I decided to dedicate my life to bringing down the walls that separate people.
I do so through many ways.
Tourism is one of them, but also media and education, and you might be wondering, really, can tourism change things?
Can it bring down walls? Yes.
Tourism is the best sustainable way to bring down those walls and to create a sustainable way of connecting with each other and creating friendships.
In 2009, I cofounded Mejdi Tours, a social enterprise that aims to connect people, with two Jewish friends, by the way, and what we'll do, the model we did, for example, in Jerusalem, we would have two tour guides, one Israeli and one Palestinian, guiding the trips together, telling history and narrative and archaeology and conflict from totally different perspectives.
I remember running a trip together with a friend named Kobi -- Jewish congregation from Chicago, the trip was in Jerusalem -- and we took them to a refugee camp, a Palestinian refugee camp, and there we had this amazing food.
By the way, this is my mother. She's cool.
And that's the Palestinian food called maqluba.
It means "upside-down."
You cook it with rice and chicken, and you flip it upside-down.
It's the best meal ever.
And we'll eat together.
Then we had a joint band, Israeli and Palestinian musicians, and we did some belly-dancing.
If you don't know any, I'll teach you later.
But when we left, both sides, they were crying because they did not want to leave.
Three years later, those relationships still exist.
Imagine with me if the one billion people who travel internationally every year travel like this, not being taken in the bus from one side to another, from one hotel to another, taking pictures from the windows of their buses of people and cultures, but actually connecting with people.
You know, I remember having a Muslim group from the U.K.
going to the house of an Orthodox Jewish family, and having their first Friday night dinners, that Sabbath dinner, and eating together hamin, which is a Jewish food, a stew, just having the connection of realizing, after a while, that a hundred years ago, their families came out of the same place in Northern Africa.
This is not a photo profile for your Facebook.
This is not disaster tourism.
This is the future of travel, and I invite you to join me to do that, to change your travel.
We're doing it all over the world now, from Ireland to Iran to Turkey, and we see ourselves going everywhere to change the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a confession to make.
As a scientist and engineer, I've focused on efficiency for many years.
But efficiency can be a cult, and today I'd like to tell you about a journey that moved me out of the cult and back to a far richer reality.
A few years ago, after finishing my Ph.D. in London, I moved to Boston.
I lived in Boston and worked in Cambridge.
I bought a racing bicycle that summer, and I bicycled every day to work.
To find my way, I used my phone.
It sent me over Mass. Ave., Massachusetts Avenue, the shortest route from Boston to Cambridge.
But after a month that I was cycling every day on the car-packed Mass. Ave., I took a different route one day.
I'm not entirely sure why I took a different route that day, a detour.
I just remember a feeling of surprise; surprise at finding a street with no cars, as opposed to the nearby Mass. Ave. full of cars; surprise at finding a street draped by leaves and surrounded by trees.
But after the feeling of surprise, I felt shame.
How could I have been so blind?
For an entire month, I was so trapped in my mobile app that a journey to work became one thing only: the shortest path.
In this single journey, there was no thought of enjoying the road, no pleasure in connecting with nature, no possibility of looking people in the eyes.
And why?
Because I was saving a minute out of my commute.
Now let me ask you: Am I alone here?
How many of you have never used a mapping app for finding directions?
Most of you, if not all, have.
And don't get me wrong -- mapping apps are the greatest game-changer for encouraging people to explore the city.
You take your phone out and you know immediately where to go.
However, the app also assumes there are only a handful of directions to the destination.
It has the power to make those handful of directions the definitive direction to that destination.
After that experience, I changed.
I changed my research from traditional data-mining to understanding how people experience the city.
I used computer science tools to replicate social science experiments at scale, at web scale.
I became captivated by the beauty and genius of traditional social science experiments done by Jane Jacobs, Stanley Milgram, Kevin Lynch.
The result of that research has been the creation of new maps, maps where you don't only find the shortest path, the blue one, but also the most enjoyable path, the red one.
How was that possible?
Einstein once said, "Logic will get you from A to B.
Imagination will take you everywhere."
So with a bit of imagination, we needed to understand which parts of the city people find beautiful.
At the University of Cambridge, with colleagues, we thought about this simple experiment.
If I were to show you these two urban scenes, and I were to ask you which one is more beautiful, which one would you say?
Don't be shy.
Who says A? Who says B?
Brilliant.
Based on that idea, we built a crowdsourcing platform, a web game.
Players are shown pairs of urban scenes, and they're asked to choose which one is more beautiful, quiet and happy.
Based on thousands of user votes, then we are able to see where consensus emerges.
We are able to see which are the urban scenes that make people happy.
After that work, I joined Yahoo Labs, and I teamed up with Luca and Rossano, and together, we aggregated those winning locations in London to build a new map of the city, a cartography weighted for human emotions.
On this cartography, you're not only able to see and connect from point A to point B the shortest segments, but you're also able to see the happy segment, the beautiful path, the quiet path.
In tests, participants found the happy, the beautiful, the quiet path far more enjoyable than the shortest one, and that just by adding a few minutes to travel time.
Participants also love to attach memories to places.
Shared memories -- that's where the old BBC building was; and personal memories -- that's where I gave my first kiss.
They also recalled how some paths smelled and sounded.
So what if we had a mapping tool that would return the most enjoyable routes based not only on aesthetics but also based on smell, sound, and memories?
That's where our research is going right now.
More generally, my research, what it tries to do is avoid the danger of the single path, to avoid robbing people of fully experiencing the city in which they live.
Walk the path through the park, not through the car park, and you have an entirely different path.
Walk the path full of people you love and not full of cars, and you have an entirely different path.
It's that simple.
I would like to end with this thought: do you remember "The Truman Show?"
It's a media satire in which a real person doesn't know he's living in a fabricated world.
Perhaps we live in a world fabricated for efficiency.
Look at some of your daily habits, and as Truman did in the movie, escape the fabricated world.
Why?
Well, if you think that adventure is dangerous, try routine. It's deadly.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It's said that to be a poet you have to go to hell and back.
The first time I visited the prison, I was not surprised by the noise of the padlocks, or the closing doors, or the cell bars, or by any of the things I had imagined.
Maybe because the prison is in a quite open space.
You can see the sky.
Seagulls fly overhead, and you feel like you're next to the sea, that you're really close to the beach.
But in fact, the gulls are looking for food in the dump near the prison.
I went farther inside and I suddenly saw inmates moving across the corridors.
Then it was as if I stepped back and thought that I could have very well been one of them.
If I had another story, another context, different luck.
Because nobody - nobody - can choose where they're born.
In 2009, I was invited to join a project that San Martín National University conducted at the Unit 48 penitentiary, to coordinate a writing workshop.
The prison service ceded some land at the end of the prison, which is where they constructed the University Center building.
The first time I met with the prisoners, I asked them why they were asking for a writing workshop and they told me they wanted to put on paper all that they couldn't say and do.
Right then I decided that I wanted poetry to enter the prison.
So I said to them why don't we work with poetry, if they knew what poetry was.
But nobody had a clue what poetry really was.
They also suggested to me that the workshop should be not just for the inmates taking university classes, but for all the inmates.
And so I said that to start this workshop, I needed to find a tool that we all had in common.
That tool was language.
We had language, we had the workshop. We could have poetry.
But what I hadn't considered was that inequality exists in prison, too.
Many of the prisoners hadn't even completed grammar school.
Many couldn't use cursive, could barely print.
They didn't write fluently, either.
So we started looking for short poems.
Very short, but very powerful.
And we started to read, and we'd read one author, then another author, and by reading such short poems, they all began to realize that what the poetic language did was to break a certain logic, and create another system.
Breaking the logic of language also breaks the logic of the system under which they've learned to respond.
So a new system appeared, new rules that made them understand very quickly, - very quickly - that with poetic language they would be able to say absolutely whatever they wanted.
It's said that to be a poet you have to go to hell and back.
And they have plenty of hell. Plenty of hell.
One of them once said: "In prison you never sleep.
You can never sleep in jail. You can never close your eyelids."
And so, like I’m doing now, I gave them a moment of silence, then said, “That's what poetry is, you guys.
It's in this prison universe that you have all around you.
Everything you say about how you never sleep, it exudes fear.
All the things that go unwritten -- all of that is poetry."
So we started appropriating that hell; we plunged ourselves, headfirst, into the seventh circle.
And in that seventh circle of hell, our very own, beloved circle, they learned that they could make the walls invisible, that they could make the windows yell, and that we could hide inside the shadows.
When the first year of the workshop had ended, we organized a little closing party, like you do when a job is done with so much love, and you want to celebrate with a party.
We called family, friends, the university authorities.
The only thing the inmates had to do was read a poem, and receive their diplomas and applause.
That was our simple party.
The only thing I want to leave you with is the moment in which those men, some of them just huge when standing next to me, or the young boys - so young, but with an enormous pride, held their papers and trembled like little kids and sweated, and read their poems with their voices completely broken.
That moment made me think a lot that for most of them, it was surely the very first time that someone applauded them for something they had done.
In prison there are things that can't be done.
In prison, you can't dream. In prison, you can't cry.
There are words that are virtually forbidden, like the word "time," the word "future," the word "wish".
But we dared to dream, and to dream a lot.
We decided that they were going to write a book.
Not only did they write a book, but they also bound it themselves.
That was at the end of 2010.
Then, we doubled the bet and wrote another book.
And we bound that one, too.
That was a short time ago, at the end of last year.
What I see week after week, is how they're turning into different people; how they're being transformed.
How words are empowering them with a dignity they had never known, that they couldn't even imagine.
They had no idea such dignity could come from them.
At the workshop, in that beloved hell we share, we all give something.
We open our hands and hearts and give what we have, what we can.
All of us; all of us equally.
And so you feel that at least in a small way you're repairing that huge social fracture which makes it so that for many of them, prison is their only destination.
I remember a verse by a tremendous poet, a great poet, from our Unit 48 workshop, Nicolás Dorado: "I will need an infinite thread to sew up this huge wound."
Poetry does that; it sews up the wounds of exclusion.
It opens doors. Poetry works as a mirror.
It creates a mirror, which is the poem.
They recognize themselves, they look at themselves in the poem and write from who they are, and are from what they write.
In order to write, they need to appropriate the moment of writing which is a moment of extraordinary freedom.
They have to get into their heads, search for that bit of freedom that can never be taken away when they write and that is also useful to realize that freedom is possible even inside a prison, and that the only bars we have in our wonderful space is the word "bars," and that all of us in our hell burn with happiness when we light the wick of the word.
(Applause) I told you a lot about the prison, a lot about what I experience every week, and how I enjoy it and transform myself with the inmates.
But you don't know how much I'd like it if you could feel, live, experience, even for a few seconds, what I enjoy every week and what makes me who I am.
(Applause) Martín Bustamante: The heart chews tears of time; blinded by that light, it hides the speed of existence where the images go rowing by.
It fights; it hangs on.
The heart cracks under sad gazes, rides on storms that spread fire, lifts chests lowered by shame, knows that it's not just reading and going on, it also wishes to see the infinite blue.
The heart sits down to think about things, fights to avoid being ordinary, tries to love without hurting, breathes the sun, giving courage to itself, surrenders, travels toward reason.
The heart fights among the swamps, skirts the edge of the underworld, falls exhausted, but won't give in to what's easy, while irregular steps of intoxication wake up, wake the stillness.
I'm Martín Bustamante, I'm a prisoner in Unit 48 of San Martín, today is my day of temporary release.
And for me, poetry and literature have changed my life.
Thank you very much!
Cristina Domenech: Thank you!
(Applause)
Guatemala is recovering from a 36-year armed conflict.
A conflict that was fought during the Cold War.
It was really just a small leftist insurgency and a devastating response by the state.
What we have as a result is 200,000 civilian victims, 160,000 of those killed in the communities: small children, men, women, the elderly even.
And then we have about 40,000 others, the missing, the ones we're still looking for today.
We call them the Desaparecidos.
Now, 83 percent of the victims are Mayan victims, victims that are the descendants of the original inhabitants of Central America.
And only about 17 percent are of European descent.
But the most important thing here is that the very people who are supposed to defend us, the police, the military, are the ones that committed most of the crimes.
Now the families, they want information.
They want to know what happened.
They want the bodies of their loved ones.
But most of all, what they want is they want you, they want everyone to know that their loved ones did nothing wrong.
Now, my case was that my father received death threats in 1980.
And we left.
We left Guatemala and we came here.
So I grew up in New York, I grew up in Brooklyn as a matter of fact, and I went to New Utrecht High School and I graduated from Brooklyn College.
The only thing was that I really didn't know what was happening in Guatemala.
I didn't care for it; it was too painful.
But it wasn't till 1995 that I decided to do something about it.
So I went back.
I went back to Guatemala, to look for the bodies, to understand what happened and to look for part of myself as well.
The way we work is that we give people information.
We talk to the family members and we let them choose.
We let them decide to tell us the stories, to tell us what they saw, to tell us about their loved ones.
And even more important, we let them choose to give us a piece of themselves.
A piece, an essence, of who they are.
And that DNA is what we're going to compare to the DNA that comes from the skeletons.
While we're doing that, though, we're looking for the bodies.
And these are skeletons by now, most of these crimes happened 32 years ago.
When we find the grave, we take out the dirt and eventually clean the body, document it, and exhume it.
We literally bring the skeleton out of the ground.
Once we have those bodies, though, we take them back to the city, to our lab, and we begin a process of trying to understand mainly two things: One is how people died.
So here you see a gunshot wound to the back of the head or a machete wound, for example.
The other thing we want to understand is who they are.
Whether it's a baby, or an adult.
Whether it's a woman or a man.
But when we're done with that analysis what we'll do is we'll take a small fragment of the bone and we'll extract DNA from it.
We'll take that DNA and then we'll compare it with the DNA of the families, of course.
The best way to explain this to you is by showing you two cases.
The first is the case of the military diary.
Now this is a document that was smuggled out of somewhere in 1999.
And what you see there is the state following individuals, people that, like you, wanted to change their country, and they jotted everything down.
And one of the things that they wrote down is when they executed them.
Inside that yellow rectangle, you see a code, it's a secret code: 300.
And then you see a date.
The 300 means "executed" and the date means when they were executed.
Now that's going to come into play in a second.
What we did is we conducted an exhumation in 2003, where we exhumed 220 bodies from 53 graves in a military base.
Grave 9, though, matched the family of Sergio Saul Linares.
Now Sergio was a professor at the university.
He graduted from Iowa State University and went back to Guatemala to change his country.
And he was captured on February 23, 1984.
And if you can see there, he was executed on March 29, 1984, which was incredible.
We had the body, we had the family's information and their DNA, and now we have documents that told us exactly what happened.
But most important is about two weeks later, we go another hit, another match from the same grave to Amancio Villatoro.
The DNA of that body also matched the DNA of that family.
And then we noticed that he was also in the diary.
But it was amazing to see that he was also executed on March 29, 1984.
So that led us to think, hmm, how many bodies were in the grave?
Six.
So then we said, how many people were executed on March 29, 1984?
That's right, six as well.
So we have Juan de Dios, Hugo, Moises and Zoilo.
All of them executed on the same date, all captured at different locations and at different moments.
All put in that grave.
The only thing we needed now was the DNA of those four families So we went and we looked for them and we found them.
And we identified those six bodies and gave them back to the families.
The other case I want to tell you about is that of a military base called CREOMPAZ.
It actually means, "to believe in peace," but the acronym really means Regional Command Center for Peacekeeping Operations.
And this is where the Guatemalan military trains peacekeepers from other countries, the ones that serve with the U.N.
and go to countries like Haiti and the Congo.
Well, we have testimony that said that within this military base, there were bodies, there were graves.
So we went in there with a search warrant and about two hours after we went in, we found the first of 84 graves, a total of 533 bodies.
Now, if you think about that, peacekeepers being trained on top of bodies.
It's very ironic.
But the bodies -- face down, most of them, hands tied behind their backs, blindfolded, all types of trauma -- these were people who were defenseless who were being executed.
People that 533 families are looking for.
So we're going to focus on Grave 15.
Grave 15, what we noticed, was a grave full of women and children, 63 of them.
And that immediately made us think, my goodness, where is there a case like this?
When I got to Guatemala in 1995, I heard of a case of a massacre that happened on May 14, 1982, where the army came in, killed the men, and took the women and children in helicopters to an unknown location.
Well, guess what?
The clothing from this grave matched the clothing from the region where these people were taken from, where these women and children were taken from.
So we conducted some DNA analysis, and guess what?
We identified Martina Rojas and Manuel Chen.
Both of them disappeared in that case, and now we could prove it.
We have physical evidence that proves that this happened and that those people were taken to this base.
Now, Manuel Chen was three years old.
His mother went to the river to wash clothes, and she left him with a neighbor.
That's when the army came and that's when he was taken away in a helicopter and never seen again until we found him in Grave 15.
So now with science, with archaeology, with anthropology, with genetics, what we're doing is, we're giving a voice to the voiceless.
But we're doing more than that.
We're actually providing evidence for trials, like the genocide trial that happened last year in Guatemala where General Ríos Montt was found guilty of genocide and sentenced to 80 years.
So I came here to tell you today that this is happening everywhere -- it's happening in Mexico right in front of us today -- and we can't let it go on anymore.
We have to now come together and decide that we're not going to have any more missing.
So no more missing, guys.
Okay? No more missing.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to imagine that you are a Child Protective Services worker.
And you have to respond to a report of child abuse.
You walk into a home, unannounced, unexpected, certainly uninvited.
The first thing you see is a mattress in the middle of the room, on the floor.
Three kids lying on it, asleep.
There's a small table nearby with a couple of ashtrays, empty beer cans.
Large rat traps are set in the corner, not too far from where the kids lie asleep.
So you make a note.
A part of your job is walking through the entire home.
So you start with the kitchen, where there's very little food.
You notice another mattress in the bedroom, on the floor, that the mother shares with her infant child.
Now, generally, at this point, two things may happen.
The children are deemed unsafe and removed from the home, and placed in state custody for a specified period of time.
Or the children remain with their family and the child welfare system provides help and support.
When I was a Child Protective Services worker, I saw things like this all the time.
Some far better, some far worse.
I asked you to imagine yourself in that home, because I wonder what crossed your mind.
What guides your decisions?
What's going to impact your opinion of that family?
What race, ethnicity, did you think the family was?
I want you to realize that if those children were white, it is more likely that their family stays together after that visit.
Research done at the University of Pennsylvania found that white families, on average, have access to more help and more support from the child welfare system.
And their cases are less likely to go through a full investigation.
But on the other hand, if those kids are black, they are four times more likely to be removed, they spend longer periods of time in foster care, and it's harder to find them a stable foster placement.
Foster care is meant to be an immediate shelter of protection for kids who are at high risk.
But it's also a confusing and traumatic exit from the family.
Research done at the University of Minnesota found that kids who went through foster care had more behavioral problems and internalized issues than kids who remain with their families while receiving help and support.
The scenario I mentioned earlier is not uncommon.
A single mother, living in low-income housing with her four children.
And the rats make it almost impossible to keep food, let alone fresh food in the home.
Does that mother deserve to have her children taken from her?
Emma Ketteringham, a family court attorney, says that if you live in a poor neighborhood, then you better be a perfect parent.
She says that we place unfair, often unreachable standards on parents who are raising their kids with very little money.
And their neighborhood and ethnicity impact whether or not their kids are removed.
In the two years I spent on the front lines of child welfare, I made high-stakes decisions.
And I saw firsthand how my personal values impacted my work.
Now, as social work faculty at Florida State University, I lead an institute that curates the most innovative and effective child welfare research.
And research tells us that there are twice as many black kids in foster care, twenty-eight percent, than there are in the general population, 14 percent.
And although there are several reasons why, I want to discuss one reason today: implicit bias.
Let's start with "implicit."
It's subconscious, something you're not aware of.
Bias -- those stereotypes and attitudes that we all have about certain groups of people.
So, implicit bias is what lurks in the background of every decision that we make.
So how can we fix it?
I have a promising solution that I want to share.
Now, in almost every state, there are high numbers of black kids going into foster care.
But data revealed that Nassau County, a community in New York, had managed to decrease the number of black kids being removed.
And in 2016, I went into that community with my team and led a research study, discovering the use of blind removal meetings.
This is how it works.
A case worker responds to a report of child abuse.
They go out to the home, but before the children are removed, the case worker must come back to the office and present what they found.
But here's the distinction: When they present to the committee, they delete names, ethnicity, neighborhood, race, all identifiable information.
They focus on what happened, family strength, relevant history and the parents' ability to protect the child.
With that information, the committee makes a recommendation, never knowing the race of the family.
Blind removals have made a drastic impact in that community.
In 2011, 57 percent of the kids going into foster care were black.
But after five years of blind removals, that is down to 21 percent.
(Applause) Here's what we learned from talking to some of the case workers.
"When a family has a history with the department, many of us hold that history against them, even if they're trying to do things differently."
"When I see a case from a certain apartment building, neighborhood or zip code, I just automatically think the worst."
"Child welfare is very subjective, because it's an emotional field.
There's no one who doesn't have emotions around this work.
And it's very hard to leave all of your stuff at the door when you do this work.
So let's take the subjectivity of race and neighborhood out of it, and you might get different outcomes."
Blind removals seem to be bringing us closer to solving the problem of implicit bias in foster-care decisions.
My next step is figuring out how to use artificial intelligence and machine learning to bring this project to scale and make it more accessible to other states.
I know we can transform child welfare.
We can hold organizations accountable to developing the social consciousness of their employees.
We can hold ourselves accountable to making sure our decisions are driven by ethics and safety.
Let's imagine a child welfare system that focuses on partnering with parents, empowering families, and no longer see poverty as failure.
Let's work together to build a system that wants to make families stronger instead of pulling them apart.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Cheering)
When is seeing not believing?
A couple years ago, my friend sent me this photo from Ürümqi, which is the capital of Xinjiang province in northwest China.
On this particular day, she couldn't believe her eyes.
Checking the quality of the air outside using this app on her iPad, the numbers were telling her the air quality was good, one on a scale of 500.
But when she looked outside, she saw something much different.
Yes, those are buildings in the background.
(Laughter) But the data were simply not telling the truth of what people were seeing and breathing, and it's because they were failing to measure PM2.5, or fine particulate pollution.
When PM2.5 levels went off the charts in 2012, or "crazy bad," as the US Embassy once described it in a tweet, Chinese denizens took to social media and they started to question why it was that they were seeing this disconnect between official air quality statistics and what they were seeing and breathing for themselves.
Now, this questioning has led to an environmental awakening of sorts in China, forcing China's government to tackle its pollution problems.
Now China has the opportunity to become a global environmental leader.
But the picture that I'll paint for you today is one that's mixed.
There are some signs that are very promising, and there are other trends that are more troubling that warrant closer attention.
But now let's go back to the story at hand.
I started to witness the beginnings of China's green evolution when I was a PhD student conducting fieldwork in China in 2011.
I traveled all across the country seeking answers to the question that I often got myself from the skeptical outsider: What, you mean China is doing something on the environment?
They have environmental policies?
What policies?
At that time, PM2.5 data was considered too politically sensitive and so the government was keeping it secret, but citizens were becoming aware of its harmful human health effects, and they were demanding greater transparency on the part of the government.
I actually started to see some of this growing evolution and awareness myself cropping up all over China.
Department stores, for example, started to market these air purifiers that could filter out harmful PM2.5.
Citizens were also adopting PM2.5 as the title of musical festivals.
(Laughter) And then I went to a golf course in Shenzhen, which is in southern China, and you can see from this banner, they're advertising a retreat from PM2.5.
Golf sub-par, but don't breathe sub-par air.
And then Shanghai's Environmental Protection Bureau decided to create a mascot named after the air quality index to better communicate the air quality data to its people.
I call her AQI Girl, and her expression and hair color changes depending on the quality of air outside.
Five years later and she's still the mostly smiling face of Shanghai's air quality.
And then in 2015, former CCTV reporter Chai Jing created this documentary called "Under the Dome."
It would be likened to Rachel Carson's "Silent Spring."
And much like Rachel Carson brought to attention the fact that pesticides were harming human health, "Under the Dome" stamped into the popular consciousness that air pollution was leading to one million premature deaths every year in China alone.
This video garnered more than a hundred million views in a single weekend before China's government, fearing that it might incite some type of social unrest, pulled it from the internet.
But the damage had already been done.
Public outcry over air pollution galvanized China's government, perhaps in an act of self-preservation, to think big and decisively about how it could tackle the root of its air pollution and many of its other environmental problems: its energy system.
For you see, in China, about two thirds of its electricity comes from coal.
China has more coal-fired power plants than any other country in the world, about 40 percent of the global total, and it's because of this fact that China's government has decided since 2014 to wage a war on coal, shutting down small coal mines, setting limits on coal consumption, even canceling an Australia's worth of coal-fired power plants.
They've also been making enormous investments when it comes to clean and renewable energy, like hydropower, wind and solar, and the pace and the scale of this transformation has been absolutely mind-blowing.
Let me give you a couple of statistics to show you what I mean.
China leads the world when it comes to hydropower, with a third of total capacity.
There's enough for every Chinese citizen to power two homes in a single year from hydropower alone.
You may have heard of the Three Gorges Dam, pictured here, which is the largest power station in the world, and it's powered by water.
In terms of wind power, China has a third of the global capacity.
This makes it the number one leader by far.
When we look at solar, China's also leading.
In fact, they crushed their 2020 target of installing 105 gigawatts of solar power.
This is after the government already revised upwards several times its solar energy target between 2009 and 2015.
Last year, in seven months alone, China was able to install a whopping 35 gigawatts of solar power.
This is more than half of what the US has combined in total and China did this in just seven months alone.
We can verify this remarkable growth in solar power from space, like the startup SpaceKnow has done in this slide.
By 2020, China is on track to generate Germany's entire electricity consumption from just wind and solar power alone.
It's pretty darn remarkable.
And we see some evidence now that China's efforts on clean energy is actually having an effect, not just on air pollution reduction, but also on global climate change, where China has the world's largest carbon footprint.
If we look at some of the data, we can see that China's coal consumption may have already reached a peak as early as 2013.
This is a major reason why China's government announced that actually they've already achieved their 2020 carbon reduction pledge ahead of schedule.
This reduction in coal consumption is also directly driving improvements in air quality across the country, as I've shown here in blue.
In most major Chinese cities, air pollution has fallen by as much as 30 percent.
And this reduction in air pollution is actually leading people to live longer lives in China, on average two and a half years more than they would have in 2013.
In yellow, we can see the cities that have experienced the greatest improvements in air quality.
But of course, as I mentioned at the beginning of this talk, we have to temper some of this optimism with a healthy dose of caution, and that's largely because the data are still being determined.
At the end of last year, after roughly three years of pretty steady global carbon emissions, scientific projections suggest that global emissions may be on the rise again and that could be due to increases in China's fossil fuel consumptions, so they may not have reached that peak that I showed earlier.
But of course, the statistics and the data are still murky and that's because China regularly revises its coal statistics after the fact.
Actually, it's funny, since I've been here I've been having a debate on Twitter with other climate modelers, trying to figure out whether China's carbon emissions have gone up, gone down or whether they're staying relatively stable.
And of course, China is still a rapidly developing country.
It's still experimenting with a range of policies, like dockless bike sharing, which has been hailed as a possible sustainable transport solution.
But then we have images of this bicycle graveyard that tell a more cautionary tale.
Sometimes, solutions can move too fast and outpace demand.
And of course, coal is still king in China, at least for now.
So why should we care about what China is doing on the environment?
Well, what China does at home on the environment can have global implications for the rest of us.
To borrow a line from Chai Jing, we're all under the same dome, and air pollution that originates in China can travel beyond its borders and affect populations as far away as those in North America.
China's not only exporting air pollution, but they're also exporting aid, infrastructure, technology abroad.
President Xi Jinping in 2013 announced the One Belt, One Road Initiative, a massive, one-trillion-US-dollar infrastructure investment project in more than 60 other countries.
And historically, when we've seen that China has made these infrastructure investments abroad, they haven't always been clean.
The Global Environment Institute, a Chinese civil society group, found that in the last 15 years, China has invested in more than 240 coal-fired power plants in more than 68 countries affiliated with the One Belt, One Road Initiative.
That's more than a quarter of China's own domestic coal-fired capacity that is exported abroad.
So we can see that even though China is cleaning up at home, it's exporting some of that pollution to other countries, and greenhouse gas emissions simply don't have a passport.
So when we're trying to evaluate this question of whether or not China is actually leading, we can see it's still very much an open debate.
But time is running out.
I've studied the climate models, and the outlook is not good.
We still have a gap between current policies and what needs to happen if we want to avoid dangerous climate change.
Leadership is what we desperately need, but it's not coming from the US, for example.
The US administration last June announced its intent to withdraw from the Paris Climate Agreement, so now people are looking towards China to fill that leadership void.
So China is very much in the driver's seat determining our global environmental future.
What they do on carbon trading, on clean energy, on air pollution, we can learn many lessons.
One of those lessons is that clean energy is not just good for the environment, it can save lives by reducing air pollution.
It's also good for the economy.
We can see that last year, China was responsible for 30 percent of the global growth in green jobs.
The US? Only six.
So the picture that I just painted for you hopefully seems much different from those murky, foggy air quality statistics to a much clearer picture of China's clean energy.
And even though China is headed in the right direction, we know that there's still a very long road ahead.
So let me ask you once more: Is seeing believing?
Can we trust the data and the statistics that show that China's air quality is coming down and that its war on coal is actually having an effect?
Well, let's take a look at some of the latest satellite images of China's solar power installations.
I want you to look very closely at this image.
Can you see?
The proof may just be in the pandas.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Let's go south.
All of you are actually going south.
This is the direction of south, this way, and if you go 8,000 kilometers out of the back of this room, you will come to as far south as you can go anywhere on Earth, the Pole itself.
Now, I am not an explorer.
I'm not an environmentalist.
I'm actually just a survivor, and these photographs that I'm showing you here are dangerous.
They are the ice melt of the South and North Poles.
And ladies and gentlemen, we need to listen to what these places are telling us, and if we don't, we will end up with our own survival situation here on planet Earth.
I have faced head-on these places, and to walk across a melting ocean of ice is without doubt the most frightening thing that's ever happened to me.
Antarctica is such a hopeful place.
It is protected by the Antarctic Treaty, signed in 1959.
In 1991, a 50-year agreement was entered into that stops any exploitation in Antarctica, and this agreement could be altered, changed, modified, or even abandoned starting in the year 2041.
Ladies and gentlemen, people already far up north from here in the Arctic are already taking advantage of this ice melt, taking out resources from areas already that have been covered in ice for the last 10, 20, 30,000, 100,000 years.
Can they not join the dots and think, "Why is the ice actually melting?"
This is such an amazing place, the Antarctic, and I have worked hard for the last 23 years on this mission to make sure that what's happening up here in the North does never happen, cannot happen in the South.
Where did this all begin?
It began for me at the age of 11.
Check out that haircut. It's a bit odd. (Laughter) And at the age of 11, I was inspired by the real explorers to want to try to be the first to walk to both Poles.
I found it incredibly inspiring that the idea of becoming a polar traveler went down pretty well with girls at parties when I was at university.
That was a bit more inspiring.
And after years, seven years of fundraising, seven years of being told no, seven years of being told by my family to seek counseling and psychiatric help, eventually three of us found ourselves marching to the South Geographic Pole on the longest unassisted march ever made anywhere on Earth in history.
In this photograph, we are standing in an area the size of the United States of America, and we're on our own.
We have no radio communications, no backup.
Beneath our feet, 90 percent of all the world's ice, 70 percent of all the world's fresh water.
We're standing on it.
This is the power of Antarctica.
On this journey, we faced the danger of crevasses, intense cold, so cold that sweat turns to ice inside your clothing, your teeth can crack, water can freeze in your eyes.
Let's just say it's a bit chilly. (Laughter) And after 70 desperate days, we arrive at the South Pole.
We had done it.
But something happened to me on that 70-day journey in 1986 that brought me here, and it hurt.
My eyes changed color in 70 days through damage.
Our faces blistered out.
The skin ripped off and we wondered why.
And when we got home, we were told by NASA that a hole in the ozone had been discovered above the South Pole, and we'd walked underneath it the same year it had been discovered.
Ultraviolet rays down, hit the ice, bounced back, fried out the eyes, ripped off our faces.
It was a bit of a shock -- (Laughter) -- and it started me thinking.
In 1989, we now head north.
Sixty days, every step away from the safety of land across a frozen ocean.
It was desperately cold again.
Here's me coming in from washing naked at -60 Celsius.
And if anybody ever says to you, "I am cold" -- (Laughter) -- if they look like this, they are cold, definitely.
(Applause) And 1,000 kilometers away from the safety of land, disaster strikes.
The Arctic Ocean melts beneath our feet four months before it ever had in history, and we're 1,000 kilometers from safety.
The ice is crashing around us, grinding, and I'm thinking, "Are we going to die?"
But something clicked in my head on this day, as I realized we, as a world, are in a survival situation, and that feeling has never gone away for 25 long years.
Back then, we had to march or die.
And we're not some TV survivor program.
When things go wrong for us, it's life or death, and our brave African-American Daryl, who would become the first American to walk to the North Pole, his heel dropped off from frostbite 200 klicks out.
He must keep going, he does, and after 60 days on the ice, we stood at the North Pole.
We had done it.
Yes, I became the first person in history stupid enough to walk to both Poles, but it was our success.
And sadly, on return home, it was not all fun.
I became very low.
To succeed at something is often harder than actually making it happen.
I was empty, lonely, financially destroyed.
I was without hope, but hope came in the form of the great Jacques Cousteau, and he inspired me to take on the 2041 mission.
Being Jacques, he gave me clear instructions: Engage the world leaders, talk to industry and business, and above all, Rob, inspire young people, because they will choose the future of the preservation of Antarctica.
For the world leaders, we've been to every world Earth Summit, all three of them, with our brave yacht, 2041, twice to Rio, once in '92, once in 2012, and for the Earth Summit in Johannesburg, we made the longest overland voyage ever made with a yacht, 13,000 kilometers around the whole of Southern Africa doing our best to inspire over a million young people in person about 2041 and about their environment.
For the last 11 years, we have taken over 1,000 people, people from industry and business, women and men from companies, students from all over the world, down to Antarctica, and during those missions, we've managed to pull out over 1,500 tons of twisted metal left in Antarctica.
That took eight years, and I'm so proud of it because we recycled all of it back here in South America.
I have been inspired ever since I could walk to recycle by my mum.
Here she is, and my mum -- (Applause) -- my mum is still recycling, and as she is in her 100th year, isn't that fantastic?
(Applause) And when -- I love my mum.
(Laughter) But when Mum was born, the population of our planet was only 1.8 billion people, and talking in terms of billions, we have taken young people from industry and business from India, from China.
These are game-changing nations, and will be hugely important in the decision about the preservation of the Antarctic.
Unbelievably, we've engaged and inspired women to come from the Middle East, often for the first time they've represented their nations in Antarctica.
Fantastic people, so inspired.
To look after Antarctica, you've got to first engage people with this extraordinary place, form a relationship, form a bond, form some love.
It is such a privilege to go to Antarctica, I can't tell you.
I feel so lucky, and I've been 35 times in my life, and all those people who come with us return home as great champions, not only for Antarctica, but for local issues back in their own nations.
Let's go back to where we began: the ice melt of the North and South Poles.
And it's not good news.
NASA informed us six months ago that the Western Antarctic Ice Shelf is now disintegrating.
Huge areas of ice -- look how big Antarctica is even compared to here -- Huge areas of ice are breaking off from Antarctica, the size of small nations.
And NASA have calculated that the sea level will rise, it is definite, by one meter in the next 100 years, the same time that my mum has been on planet Earth.
It's going to happen, and I've realized that the preservation of Antarctica and our survival here on Earth are linked.
And there is a very simple solution.
If we are using more renewable energy in the real world, if we are being more efficient with the energy here, running our energy mix in a cleaner way, there will be no financial reason to go and exploit Antarctica.
It won't make financial sense, and if we manage our energy better, we also may be able to slow down, maybe even stop, this great ice melt that threatens us.
It's a big challenge, and what is our response to it?
We've got to go back one last time, and at the end of next year, we will go back to the South Geographic Pole, where we arrived 30 years ago on foot, and retrace our steps of 1,600 kilometers, but this time only using renewable energy to survive.
We will walk across those icecaps, which far down below are melting, hopefully inspiring some solutions on that issue.
This is my son, Barney.
He is coming with me.
He is committed to walking side by side with his father, and what he will do is to translate these messages and inspire these messages to the minds of future young leaders.
I'm extremely proud of him.
Good on him, Barney.
Ladies and gentlemen, a survivor -- and I'm good -- a survivor sees a problem and doesn't go, "Whatever."
A survivor sees a problem and deals with that problem before it becomes a threat.
We have 27 years to preserve the Antarctic.
We all own it.
We all have responsibility.
The fact that nobody owns it maybe means that we can succeed.
Antarctica is a moral line in the snow, and on one side of that line we should fight, fight hard for this one beautiful, pristine place left alone on Earth.
I know it's possible.
We are going to do it.
And I'll leave you with these words from Goethe.
I've tried to live by them.
"If you can do, or dream you can, begin it now, for boldness has genius, power and magic in it."
Good luck to you all.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hercules, son of Zeus and champion of humankind, gazed in horror as he realized he had just committed the most unspeakable crime imaginable.
The goddess Hera, who hated Hercules for being born of her husband’s adultery, had stricken him with a temporary curse of madness.
And his own family were the casualties.
Consumed by grief, Hercules sought out the Oracle of Delphi, who told him the path to atonement lay with his cousin, King Eurystheus of Tiryns, a favorite of Hera’s.
Eurystheus hoped to humiliate Hercules with ten impossible tasks that pitted him against invincible monsters and unfathomable forces.
Instead, the king set the stage for an epic series of adventures that would come to be known as the Labors of Hercules.
The first labor was to slay the Nemean Lion, who kidnapped women and devoured warriors.
Its golden fur was impervious to arrows, but Hercules cornered the lion in its dark cave, stunned it with a club, and strangled it with his bare hands.
He found no tool sharp enough to skin the beast, until the goddess Athena suggested using one of its own claws.
Hercules returned to Tiryns wearing the lion’s hide, frightening King Eurystheus so much that he hid in a wine jar.
From then on, Hercules was ordered to present his trophies at a safe distance.
The second target was the Lernaean Hydra, a giant serpent with many heads.
Hercules fought fiercely, but every time he cut one head off, two more grew in its place.
The battle was hopeless until his nephew Iolaus thought to cauterize the necks with fire, keeping the heads from regrowing.
The dead serpent’s remains became the Hydra constellation.
Instead of slaying a beast, Hercules next had to catch one, alive.
The Ceryneian Hind was a female deer so fast it could outrun an arrow.
Hercules tracked it for a year, finally trapping it in the northern land of Hyperborea.
The animal turned out to be sacred to Artemis, goddess of the hunt, and Hercules swore to return it.
When Eurystheus saw the hind, he demanded to keep it instead, but as soon as Hercules let go, the animal ran to its mistress.
Thus, Hercules completed his task without breaking his promise.
The fourth mission was to capture the Erymanthian boar, which had ravaged many fields.
Advised by the wise centaur Chiron, Hercules trapped it by chasing it into thick snow.
For the fifth task, there were no animals, just their leftovers.
The stables where King Augeas kept his hundreds of divine cattle had not been maintained in ages.
Hercules promised to clean them in one day if he could keep one-tenth of the livestock.
Augeas expected the hero to fail.
Instead, Hercules dug massive trenches, rerouting two nearby rivers to flow through the stables until they were spotless.
Next came three more beastly foes, each requiring a clever strategy to defeat.
The carnivorous Stymphalian birds nested in an impenetrable swamp, but Hercules used Athena’s special rattle to frighten them into the air, at which point he shot them down.
No mortal could stand before the Cretan bull’s mad rampage, but a chokehold from behind did the trick.
And the mad King Diomedes, who had trained his horses to devour his guests, got a taste of his own medicine when Hercules wrestled him into his own stables.
The ensuing feast calmed the beasts enough for Hercules to bind their mouths.
But the ninth labor involved someone more dangerous than any beast, Hippolyta, Queen of the Amazons.
Hercules was to retrieve the belt given to her by her father Ares, the god of war.
He sailed to the Amazon land of Themyscira prepared for battle, but the queen was so impressed with the hero and his exploits that she gave the belt willingly.
For his tenth labor, Hercules had to steal a herd of magical red cattle from Geryon, a giant with three heads and three bodies.
On his way, Hercules was so annoyed by the Libyan desert heat that he shot an arrow at the Sun.
The sun god Helios admired the hero’s strength and lent his chariot for the journey to the island of Erytheia.
There, Hercules fought off Geryon’s herdsman and his two-headed dog, before killing the giant himself.
That should have been the end.
But Eurystheus announced that two labors hadn’t counted: the Hydra, because Iolaus had helped Hercules kill it, and the stables, because he’d accepted payment.
And so, the hero set about his eleventh task, obtaining golden apples from the garden of the Hesperides nymphs.
Hercules began by catching the Old Man of the Sea and holding the shape-shifting water-god until he revealed the garden’s location.
Once there, the hero found the titan Atlas holding up the heavens.
Hercules offered to take his place if Atlas would retrieve the apples.
Atlas eagerly complied, but Hercules then tricked him into trading places again, escaping with apples in hand.
The twelfth and final task was to bring back Cerberus, the three-headed hound guarding the underworld.
Helped by Hermes and Athena, Hercules descended and met Hades himself.
The lord of the dead allowed Hercules to take the beast if he could do it without weapons, which he achieved by grabbing all three of its heads at once.
When he presented the hound to a horrified Eurystheus, the king finally declared the hero’s service complete.
After 12 years of toil, Hercules had redeemed the tragic deaths of his family and earned a place in the divine pantheon.
But his victory held an even deeper importance.
In overcoming the chaotic and monstrous forces of the world, the hero swept away what remained of the Titans’ primordial order, reshaping it into one where humanity could thrive.
Through his labors, Hercules tamed the world’s madness by atoning for his own.
When the Portuguese arrived in Latin America about 500 years ago, they obviously found this amazing tropical forest.
And among all this biodiversity that they had never seen before, they found one species that caught their attention very quickly.
This species, when you cut the bark, you find a very dark red resin that was very good to paint and dye fabric to make clothes.
The indigenous people called this species pau brasil, and that's the reason why this land became "land of Brasil," and later on, Brazil.
That's the only country in the world that has the name of a tree.
So you can imagine that it's very cool to be a forester in Brazil, among other reasons.
Forest products are all around us.
Apart from all those products, the forest is very important for climate regulation.
In Brazil, almost 70 percent of the evaporation that makes rain actually comes from the forest.
Just the Amazon pumps to the atmosphere 20 billion tons of water every day.
This is more than what the Amazon River, which is the largest river in the world, puts in the sea per day, which is 17 billion tons.
If we had to boil water to get the same effect as evapotranspiration, we would need six months of the entire power generation capacity of the world.
So it's a hell of a service for all of us.
We have in the world about four billion hectares of forests.
This is more or less China, U.S., Canada and Brazil all together, in terms of size, to have an idea.
Three quarters of that is in the temperate zone, and just one quarter is in the tropics, but this one quarter, one billion hectares, holds most of the biodiversity, and very importantly, 50 percent of the living biomass, the carbon.
Now, we used to have six billion hectares of forest -- 50 percent more than what we have -- 2,000 years ago.
We've actually lost two billion hectares in the last 2,000 years.
But in the last 100 years, we lost half of that.
That was when we shifted from deforestation of temperate forests to deforestation of tropical forests.
So think of this: In 100 years, we lost the same amount of forest in the tropics that we lost in 2,000 years in temperate forests.
That's the speed of the destruction that we are having.
Now, Brazil is an important piece of this puzzle.
We have the second largest forest in the world, just after Russia.
It means 12 percent of all the world's forests are in Brazil, most of that in the Amazon.
It's the largest piece of forest we have. It's a very big, large area.
You can see that you could fit many of the European countries there.
We still have 80 percent of the forest cover.
That's the good news.
But we lost 15 percent in just 30 years.
So if you go with that speed, very soon, we will loose this powerful pump that we have in the Amazon that regulates our climate.
Deforestation was growing fast and accelerating at the end of the '90s and the beginning of the 2000s.
(Chainsaw sound) (Sound of falling tree) Twenty-seven thousand square kilometers in one year.
This is 2.7 million hectares.
It's almost like half of Costa Rica every year.
So at this moment -- this is 2003, 2004 -- I happened to be coming to work in the government.
And together with other teammates in the National Forest Department, we were assigned a task to join a team and find out the causes of deforestation, and make a plan to combat that at a national level, involving the local governments, the civil society, business, local communities, in an effort that could tackle those causes.
So we came up with this plan with 144 actions in different areas.
Now I will go through all of them one by one -- no, just giving some examples of what we had done in the next few years.
So the first thing, we set up a system with the national space agency that could actually see where deforestation is happening, almost in real time.
So now in Brazil, we have this system, DETER, where every month, or every two months, we get information on where deforestation is happening so we can actually act when it's happening.
And all the information is fully transparent so others can replicate that in independent systems.
This allows us, among other things, to apprehend 1.4 million cubic meters of logs that were illegally taken.
Part of that we saw and sell, and all the revenue becomes a fund that now funds conservation projects of local communities as an endowment fund.
This also allows us to make a big operation to seize corruption and illegal activities that ended up having 700 people in prison, including a lot of public servants.
Then we made the connection that areas that have been doing illegal deforestation should not get any kind of credit or finance.
So we cut this through the bank system and then linked this to the end users.
So supermarkets, the slaughterhouses, and so on that buy products from illegal clear-cut areas, they also can be liable for the deforestation.
So making all these connections to help to push the problem down.
And also we work a lot on land tenure issues.
It's very important for conflicts.
Fifty million hectares of protected areas were created, which is an area the size of Spain.
And of those, eight million were indigenous lands.
Now we start to see results.
So in the last 10 years, deforestation came down in Brazil 75 percent.
(Applause) So if we compare it with the average deforestation that we had in the last decade, we saved 8.7 million hectares, which is the size of Austria.
But more importantly, it avoided the emission of three billion tons of CO2 in the atmosphere.
This is by far the largest contribution to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, until today, as a positive action.
One may think that when you do these kinds of actions to decrease, to push down deforestation, you will have an economic impact because you will not have economic activity or something like that.
But it's interesting to know that it's quite the opposite.
In fact, in the period when we have the deepest decline of deforestation, the economy grew, on average, double from the previous decade, when deforestation was actually going up.
So it's a good lesson for us.
Maybe this is completely disconnected, as we just learned by having deforestation come down.
Now this is all good news, and it's quite an achievement, and we obviously should be very proud about that.
But it's not even close to sufficient.
In fact, if you think about the deforestation in the Amazon in 2013, that was over half a million hectares, which means that every minute, an area the size of two soccer fields is being cut in the Amazon last year, just last year.
If we sum up the deforestation we have in the other biomes in Brazil, we are talking about still the largest deforestation rate in the world.
It's more or less like we are forest heroes, but still deforestation champions.
So we can't be satisfied, not even close to satisfied.
So the next step, I think, is to fight to have zero loss of forest cover in Brazil and to have that as a goal for 2020.
That's our next step.
Now I've always been interested in the relationship between climate change and forests.
First, because 15 percent of greenhouse gas emissions come from deforestation, so it's a big part of the problem.
But also, forests can be a big part of the solution since that's the best way we know to sink, capture and store carbon.
Now, there is another relationship of climate and forests that really stuck me in 2008 and made me change my career from forests to working with climate change.
I went to visit Canada, in British Columbia, together with the chiefs of the forest services of other countries that we have a kind of alliance of them, like Canada, Russia, India, China, U.S.
And when we were there we learned about this pine beetle that is literally eating the forests in Canada.
What we see here, those brown trees, these are really dead trees.
They are standing dead trees because of the larvae of the beetle.
What happens is that this beetle is controlled by the cold weather in the winter.
For many years now, they don't have the sufficient cold weather to actually control the population of this beetle.
And it became a disease that is really killing billions of trees.
So I came back with this notion that the forest is actually one of the earliest and most affected victims of climate change.
So I was thinking, if I succeed in working with all my colleagues to actually help to stop deforestation, maybe we will lose the battle later on for climate change by floods, heat, fires and so on.
So I decided to leave the forest service and start to work directly on climate change, find a way to think and understand the challenge, and go from there.
Now, the challenge of climate change is pretty straightforward.
The goal is very clear.
We want to limit the increase of the average temperature of the planet to two degrees.
There are several reasons for that.
I will not get into that now.
But in order to get to this limit of two degrees, which is possible for us to survive, the IPCC, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, defines that we have a budget of emissions of 1,000 billion tons of CO2 from now until the end of the century.
So if we divide this by the number of years, what we have is an average budget of 11 billion tons of CO2 per year.
Now what is one ton of CO2?
It's more or less what one small car, running 20 kilometers a day, will emit in one year.
Or it's one flight, one way, from São Paulo to Johannesburg or to London, one way.
Two ways, two tons.
So 11 billion tons is twice that.
Now the emissions today are 50 billion tons, and it's growing.
It's growing and maybe it will be 61 by 2020.
Now we need to go down to 10 by 2050.
And while this happens, the population will grow from seven to nine billion people, the economy will grow from 60 trillion dollars in 2010 to 200 trillion dollars.
And so what we need to do is to be much more efficient in a way that we can go from seven tons of carbon per capita per person, per year, into something like one.
You have to choose. You take the airplane or you have a car.
So the question is, can we make it?
And that's the exactly the same question I got when I was developing a plan to combat deforestation.
It's such a big problem, so complex. Can we really do it?
I think so. Think of this: Deforestation means 60 percent of the greenhouse gas emissions in Brazil in the last decade.
Now it's a little bit less than 30 percent.
In the world, 60 percent is energy.
So if we can tackle directly the energy, the same way we could tackle deforestation, maybe we can have a chance.
So there are five things that I think we should do.
First, we need to disconnect development from carbon emissions.
We don't need to clear-cut all the forests to actually get more jobs and agriculture and have more economy.
That's what we proved when we decreased deforestation and the economy continued to grow.
Same thing could happen in the energy sector.
Second, we have to move the incentives to the right place.
Today, 500 billion dollars a year goes into subsidies for fossil fuels.
Why don't we put a price on carbon and transfer this to the renewable energy?
Third, we need to measure and make it transparent where, when and who is emitting greenhouse gases so we can have actions specifically for each one of those opportunities.
Fourth, we need to leapfrog the routes of development, which means, you don't need to go to the landline telephone before you get to the mobile phones.
Same way we don't need to go to fossil fuels to the one billion people who don't have access to energy before we get to the clean energy.
And fifth and last, we need to share responsibility between governments, business and civil society.
There is work to do for everybody, and we need to have everybody on board.
So to finalize, I think the future is not like a fate that you have to just go as business as usual goes.
We need to have the courage to actually change the route, invest in something new, think that we can actually change the route.
I think we are doing this with deforestation in Brazil, and I hope we can do it also with climate change in the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When you grow up in a developing country like India, as I did, you instantly learn to get more value from limited resources and find creative ways to reuse what you already have.
Take Mansukh Prajapati, a potter in India.
He has created a fridge made entirely of clay that consumes no electricity.
He can keep fruits and vegetables fresh for many days.
That's a cool invention, literally.
In Africa, if you run out of your cell phone battery, don't panic.
You will find some resourceful entrepreneurs who can recharge your cell phone using bicycles.
And since we are in South America, let's go to Lima in Peru, a region with high humidity that receives only one inch of rainfall each year.
An engineering college in Lima designed a giant advertising billboard that absorbs air humidity and converts it into purified water, generating over 90 liters of water every day.
The Peruvians are amazing.
They can literally create water out of thin air.
For the past seven years, I have met and studied hundreds of entrepreneurs in India, China, Africa and South America, and they keep amazing me.
Many of them did not go to school.
They don't invent stuff in big R&amp;D labs.
The street is the lab.
Why do they do that?
Because they don't have the kind of basic resources we take for granted, like capital and energy, and basic services like healthcare and education are also scarce in those regions.
When external resources are scarce, you have to go within yourself to tap the most abundant resource, human ingenuity, and use that ingenuity to find clever ways to solve problems with limited resources.
In India, we call it Jugaad.
Jugaad is a Hindi word that means an improvised fix, a clever solution born in adversity.
Jugaad solutions are not sophisticated or perfect, but they create more value at lower cost.
For me, the entrepreneurs who will create Jugaad solutions are like alchemists.
They can magically transform adversity into opportunity, and turn something of less value into something of high value.
In other words, they mastered the art of doing more with less, which is the essence of frugal innovation.
Frugal innovation is the ability to create more economic and social value using fewer resources.
Frugal innovation is not about making do; it's about making things better.
Now I want to show you how, across emerging markets, entrepreneurs and companies are adopting frugal innovation on a larger scale to cost-effectively deliver healthcare and energy to billions of people who may have little income but very high aspirations.
Let's first go to China, where the country's largest I.T. service provider, Neusoft, has developed a telemedicine solution to help doctors in cities remotely treat old and poor patients in Chinese villages.
This solution is based on simple-to-use medical devices that less qualified health workers like nurses can use in rural clinics.
China desperately needs these frugal medical solutions because by 2050 it will be home to over half a billion senior citizens.
Now let's go to Kenya, a country where half the population uses M-Pesa, a mobile payment solution.
This is a great solution for the African continent because 80 percent of Africans don't have a bank account, but what is exciting is that M-Pesa is now becoming the source of other disruptive business models in sectors like energy.
Take M-KOPA, the home solar solution that comes literally in a box that has a solar rooftop panel, three LED lights, a solar radio, and a cell phone charger.
The whole kit, though, costs 200 dollars, which is too expensive for most Kenyans, and this is where mobile telephony can make the solution more affordable.
Today, you can buy this kit by making an initial deposit of just 35 dollars, and then pay off the rest by making a daily micro-payment of 45 cents using your mobile phone.
Once you've made 365 micro-payments, the system is unlocked, and you own the product and you start receiving clean, free electricity.
This is an amazing solution for Kenya, where 70 percent of people live off the grid.
This shows that with frugal innovation what matters is that you take what is most abundant, mobile connectivity, to deal with what is scarce, which is energy.
With frugal innovation, the global South is actually catching up and in some cases even leap-frogging the North.
Instead of building expensive hospitals, China is using telemedicine to cost-effectively treat millions of patients, and Africa, instead of building banks and electricity grids, is going straight to mobile payments and distributed clean energy.
Frugal innovation is diametrically opposed to the way we innovate in the North.
I live in Silicon Valley, where we keep chasing the next big technology thing.
Think of the iPhone 5, 6, then 7, 8.
Companies in the West spend billions of dollars investing in R&amp;D, and use tons of natural resources to create ever more complex products, to differentiate their brands from competition, and they charge customers more money for new features.
So the conventional business model in the West is more for more.
But sadly, this more for more model is running out of gas, for three reasons: First, a big portion of customers in the West because of the diminishing purchasing power, can no longer afford these expensive products.
Second, we are running out of natural water and oil.
In California, where I live, water scarcity is becoming a big problem.
And third, most importantly, because of the growing income disparity between the rich and the middle class in the West, there is a big disconnect between existing products and services and basic needs of customers.
Do you know that today, there are over 70 million Americans today who are underbanked, because existing banking services are not designed to address their basic needs.
The prolonged economic crisis in the West is making people think that they are about to lose the high standard of living and face deprivation.
I believe that the only way we can sustain growth and prosperity in the West is if we learn to do more with less.
The good news is, that's starting to happen.
Several Western companies are now adopting frugal innovation to create affordable products for Western consumers.
Let me give you two examples.
When I first saw this building, I told myself it's some kind of postmodern house.
Actually, it's a small manufacturing plant set up by Grameen Danone, a joint venture between Grameen Bank of Muhammad Yunus and the food multinational Danone to make high-quality yogurt in Bangladesh.
This factory is 10 percent the size of existing Danone factories and cost much less to build.
I guess you can call it a low-fat factory.
Now this factory, unlike Western factories that are highly automated, relies a lot on manual processes in order to generate jobs for local communities.
Danone was so inspired by this model that combines economic efficiency and social sustainability, they are planning to roll it out in other parts of the world as well.
Now, when you see this example, you might be thinking, "Well, frugal innovation is low tech."
Actually, no.
Frugal innovation is also about making high tech more affordable and more accessible to more people.
Let me give you an example.
In China, the R&amp;D engineers of Siemens Healthcare have designed a C.T. scanner that is easy enough to be used by less qualified health workers, like nurses and technicians.
This device can scan more patients on a daily basis, and yet consumes less energy, which is great for hospitals, but it's also great for patients because it reduces the cost of treatment by 30 percent and radiation dosage by up to 60 percent.
This solution was initially designed for the Chinese market, but now it's selling like hotcakes in the U.S. and Europe, where hospitals are pressured to deliver quality care at lower cost.
But the frugal innovation revolution in the West is actually led by creative entrepreneurs who are coming up with amazing solutions to address basic needs in the U.S. and Europe.
Let me quickly give you three examples of startups that personally inspire me.
The first one happens to be launched by my neighbor in Silicon Valley.
It's called gThrive.
They make these wireless sensors designed like plastic rulers that farmers can stick in different parts of the field and start collecting detailed information like soil conditions.
This dynamic data allows farmers to optimize use of water energy while improving quality of the products and the yields, which is a great solution for California, which faces major water shortage.
It pays for itself within one year.
Second example is Be-Bound, also in Silicon Valley, that enables you to connect to the Internet even in no-bandwidth areas where there's no wi-fi or 3G or 4G.
How do they do that?
They simply use SMS, a basic technology, but that happens to be the most reliable and most widely available around the world.
Three billion people today with cell phones can't access the Internet.
This solution can connect them to the Internet in a frugal way.
And in France, there is a startup calle Compte Nickel, which is revolutionizing the banking sector.
It allows thousands of people to walk into a Mom and Pop store and in just five minutes activate the service that gives them two products: an international bank account number and an international debit card.
They charge a flat annual maintenance fee of just 20 Euros.
That means you can do all banking transactions -- send and receive money, pay with your debit card -- all with no additional charge.
This is what I call low-cost banking without the bank.
Amazingly, 75 percent of the customers using this service are the middle-class French who can't afford high banking fees.
Now, I talked about frugal innovation, initially pioneered in the South, now being adopted in the North.
Ultimately, we would like to see developed countries and developing countries come together and co-create frugal solutions that benefit the entire humanity.
The exciting news is that's starting to happen.
Let's go to Nairobi to find that out.
Nairobi has horrendous traffic jams.
When I first saw them, I thought, "Holy cow."
Literally, because you have to dodge cows as well when you drive in Nairobi.
To ease the situation, the engineers at the IBM lab in Kenya are piloting a solution called Megaffic, which initially was designed by the Japanese engineers.
Unlike in the West, Megaffic doesn't rely on roadside sensors, which are very expensive to install in Nairobi.
Instead they process images, traffic data, collected from a small number of low-resolution webcams in Nairobi streets, and then they use analytic software to predict congestion points, and they can SMS drivers alternate routes to take.
Granted, Megaffic is not as sexy as self-driving cars, but it promises to take Nairobi drivers from point A to point B at least 20 percent faster.
And earlier this year, UCLA Health launched its Global Lab for Innovation, which seeks to identify frugal healthcare solutions anywhere in the world that will be at least 20 percent cheaper than existing solutions in the U.S.
and yet more effective.
It also tries to bring together innovators from North and South to cocreate affordable healthcare solutions for all of humanity.
I gave tons of examples of frugal innovators from around the world, but the question is, how do you go about adopting frugal innovation?
Well, I gleaned out three principles from frugal innovators around the world that I want to share with you that you can apply in your own organization to do more with less.
The first principle is: Keep it simple.
Don't create solutions to impress customers.
Make them easy enough to use and widely accessible, like the C.T. scanner we saw in China.
Second principle: Do not reinvent the wheel.
Try to leverage existing resources and assets that are widely available, like using mobile telephony to offer clean energy or Mom and Pop stores to offer banking services.
Third principle is: Think and act horizontally.
Companies tend to scale up vertically by centralizing operations in big factories and warehouses, but if you want to be agile and deal with immense customer diversity, you need to scale out horizontally using a distributed supply chain with smaller manufacturing and distribution units, like Grameen Bank has shown.
The South pioneered frugal innovation out of sheer necessity.
The North is now learning to do more and better with less as it faces resource constraints.
As an Indian-born French national who lives in the United States, my hope is that we transcend this artificial North-South divide so that we can harness the collective ingenuity of innovators from around the world to cocreate frugal solutions that will improve the quality of life of everyone in the world, while preserving our precious planet.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So we humans have an extraordinary potential for goodness, but also an immense power to do harm.
Any tool can be used to build or to destroy.
That all depends on our motivation.
Therefore, it is all the more important to foster an altruistic motivation rather than a selfish one.
So now we indeed are facing many challenges in our times.
Those could be personal challenges.
Our own mind can be our best friend or our worst enemy.
There's also societal challenges: poverty in the midst of plenty, inequalities, conflict, injustice.
And then there are the new challenges, which we don't expect.
Ten thousand years ago, there were about five million human beings on Earth.
Whatever they could do, the Earth's resilience would soon heal human activities.
After the Industrial and Technological Revolutions, that's not the same anymore.
We are now the major agent of impact on our Earth.
We enter the Anthropocene, the era of human beings.
So in a way, if we were to say we need to continue this endless growth, endless use of material resources, it's like if this man was saying -- and I heard a former head of state, I won't mention who, saying -- "Five years ago, we were at the edge of the precipice.
Today we made a big step forward."
So this edge is the same that has been defined by scientists as the planetary boundaries.
And within those boundaries, they can carry a number of factors.
We can still prosper, humanity can still prosper for 150,000 years if we keep the same stability of climate as in the Holocene for the last 10,000 years.
But this depends on choosing a voluntary simplicity, growing qualitatively, not quantitatively.
So in 1900, as you can see, we were well within the limits of safety.
Now, in 1950 came the great acceleration.
Now hold your breath, not too long, to imagine what comes next.
Now we have vastly overrun some of the planetary boundaries.
Just to take biodiversity, at the current rate, by 2050, 30 percent of all species on Earth will have disappeared.
Even if we keep their DNA in some fridge, that's not going to be reversible.
So here I am sitting in front of a 7,000-meter-high, 21,000-foot glacier in Bhutan.
At the Third Pole, 2,000 glaciers are melting fast, faster than the Arctic.
So what can we do in that situation?
Well, however complex politically, economically, scientifically the question of the environment is, it simply boils down to a question of altruism versus selfishness.
I'm a Marxist of the Groucho tendency.
(Laughter) Groucho Marx said, "Why should I care about future generations?
What have they ever done for me?"
(Laughter) Unfortunately, I heard the billionaire Steve Forbes, on Fox News, saying exactly the same thing, but seriously.
He was told about the rise of the ocean, and he said, "I find it absurd to change my behavior today for something that will happen in a hundred years."
So if you don't care for future generations, just go for it.
So one of the main challenges of our times is to reconcile three time scales: the short term of the economy, the ups and downs of the stock market, the end-of-the-year accounts; the midterm of the quality of life -- what is the quality every moment of our life, over 10 years and 20 years? -- and the long term of the environment.
When the environmentalists speak with economists, it's like a schizophrenic dialogue, completely incoherent.
They don't speak the same language.
Now, for the last 10 years, I went around the world meeting economists, scientists, neuroscientists, environmentalists, philosophers, thinkers in the Himalayas, all over the place.
It seems to me, there's only one concept that can reconcile those three time scales.
It is simply having more consideration for others.
If you have more consideration for others, you will have a caring economics, where finance is at the service of society and not society at the service of finance.
You will not play at the casino with the resources that people have entrusted you with.
If you have more consideration for others, you will make sure that you remedy inequality, that you bring some kind of well-being within society, in education, at the workplace.
Otherwise, a nation that is the most powerful and the richest but everyone is miserable, what's the point?
And if you have more consideration for others, you are not going to ransack that planet that we have and at the current rate, we don't have three planets to continue that way.
So the question is, okay, altruism is the answer, it's not just a novel ideal, but can it be a real, pragmatic solution?
And first of all, does it exist, true altruism, or are we so selfish?
So some philosophers thought we were irredeemably selfish.
But are we really all just like rascals?
That's good news, isn't it?
Many philosophers, like Hobbes, have said so.
But not everyone looks like a rascal.
Or is man a wolf for man?
But this guy doesn't seem too bad.
He's one of my friends in Tibet.
He's very kind.
So now, we love cooperation.
There's no better joy than working together, is there?
And then not only humans.
Then, of course, there's the struggle for life, the survival of the fittest, social Darwinism.
But in evolution, cooperation -- though competition exists, of course -- cooperation has to be much more creative to go to increased levels of complexity.
We are super-cooperators and we should even go further.
So now, on top of that, the quality of human relationships.
The OECD did a survey among 10 factors, including income, everything.
The first one that people said, that's the main thing for my happiness, is quality of social relationships.
Not only in humans.
And look at those great-grandmothers.
So now, this idea that if we go deep within, we are irredeemably selfish, this is armchair science.
There is not a single sociological study, psychological study, that's ever shown that.
Rather, the opposite.
My friend, Daniel Batson, spent a whole life putting people in the lab in very complex situations.
And of course we are sometimes selfish, and some people more than others.
But he found that systematically, no matter what, there's a significant number of people who do behave altruistically, no matter what.
If you see someone deeply wounded, great suffering, you might just help out of empathic distress -- you can't stand it, so it's better to help than to keep on looking at that person.
So we tested all that, and in the end, he said, clearly people can be altruistic.
So that's good news.
And even further, we should look at the banality of goodness.
Now look at here.
When we come out, we aren't going to say, "That's so nice.
There was no fistfight while this mob was thinking about altruism."
No, that's expected, isn't it?
If there was a fistfight, we would speak of that for months.
So the banality of goodness is something that doesn't attract your attention, but it exists.
Now, look at this.
So some psychologists said, when I tell them I run 140 humanitarian projects in the Himalayas that give me so much joy, they said, "Oh, I see, you work for the warm glow.
That is not altruistic. You just feel good."
You think this guy, when he jumped in front of the train, he thought, "I'm going to feel so good when this is over?"
(Laughter) But that's not the end of it.
They say, well, but when you interviewed him, he said, "I had no choice. I had to jump, of course."
He has no choice. Automatic behavior. It's neither selfish nor altruistic.
No choice?
Well of course, this guy's not going to think for half an hour, "Should I give my hand? Not give my hand?"
He does it. There is a choice, but it's obvious, it's immediate.
And then, also, there he had a choice.
(Laughter) There are people who had choice, like Pastor André Trocmé and his wife, and the whole village of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon in France.
For the whole Second World War, they saved 3,500 Jews, gave them shelter, brought them to Switzerland, against all odds, at the risk of their lives and those of their family.
So altruism does exist.
So what is altruism?
It is the wish: May others be happy and find the cause of happiness.
Now, empathy is the affective resonance or cognitive resonance that tells you, this person is joyful, this person suffers.
But empathy alone is not sufficient.
If you keep on being confronted with suffering, you might have empathic distress, burnout, so you need the greater sphere of loving-kindness.
With Tania Singer at the Max Planck Institute of Leipzig, we showed that the brain networks for empathy and loving-kindness are different.
Now, that's all well done, so we got that from evolution, from maternal care, parental love, but we need to extend that.
It can be extended even to other species.
Now, if we want a more altruistic society, we need two things: individual change and societal change.
So is individual change possible?
Two thousand years of contemplative study said yes, it is.
Now, 15 years of collaboration with neuroscience and epigenetics said yes, our brains change when you train in altruism.
So I spent 120 hours in an MRI machine.
This is the first time I went after two and a half hours.
And then the result has been published in many scientific papers.
It shows without ambiguity that there is structural change and functional change in the brain when you train the altruistic love.
Just to give you an idea: this is the meditator at rest on the left, meditator in compassion meditation, you see all the activity, and then the control group at rest, nothing happened, in meditation, nothing happened.
They have not been trained.
So do you need 50,000 hours of meditation? No, you don't.
Four weeks, 20 minutes a day, of caring, mindfulness meditation already brings a structural change in the brain compared to a control group.
That's only 20 minutes a day for four weeks.
Even with preschoolers -- Richard Davidson did that in Madison.
An eight-week program: gratitude, loving- kindness, cooperation, mindful breathing.
You would say, "Oh, they're just preschoolers."
Look after eight weeks, the pro-social behavior, that's the blue line.
And then comes the ultimate scientific test, the stickers test.
Before, you determine for each child who is their best friend in the class, their least favorite child, an unknown child, and the sick child, and they have to give stickers away.
So before the intervention, they give most of it to their best friend.
Four, five years old, 20 minutes three times a week.
After the intervention, no more discrimination: the same amount of stickers to their best friend and the least favorite child.
That's something we should do in all the schools in the world.
Now where do we go from there?
(Applause) When the Dalai Lama heard that, he told Richard Davidson, "You go to 10 schools, 100 schools, the U.N., the whole world."
So now where do we go from there?
Individual change is possible.
Now do we have to wait for an altruistic gene to be in the human race?
That will take 50,000 years, too much for the environment.
Fortunately, there is the evolution of culture.
Cultures, as specialists have shown, change faster than genes.
That's the good news.
Look, attitude towards war has dramatically changed over the years.
So now individual change and cultural change mutually fashion each other, and yes, we can achieve a more altruistic society.
So where do we go from there?
Myself, I will go back to the East.
Now we treat 100,000 patients a year in our projects.
We have 25,000 kids in school, four percent overhead.
Some people say, "Well, your stuff works in practice, but does it work in theory?"
There's always positive deviance.
So I will also go back to my hermitage to find the inner resources to better serve others.
But on the more global level, what can we do?
We need three things.
Enhancing cooperation: Cooperative learning in the school instead of competitive learning, Unconditional cooperation within corporations -- there can be some competition between corporations, but not within.
We need sustainable harmony. I love this term.
Not sustainable growth anymore.
Sustainable harmony means now we will reduce inequality.
In the future, we do more with less, and we continue to grow qualitatively, not quantitatively.
We need caring economics.
The Homo economicus cannot deal with poverty in the midst of plenty, cannot deal with the problem of the common goods of the atmosphere, of the oceans.
We need a caring economics.
If you say economics should be compassionate, they say, "That's not our job."
But if you say they don't care, that looks bad.
We need local commitment, global responsibility.
We need to extend altruism to the other 1.6 million species.
Sentient beings are co-citizens in this world.
and we need to dare altruism.
So, long live the altruistic revolution.
Viva la revolución de altruismo.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a blogger, a filmmaker and a butcher, and I'll explain how these identities come together.
It started four years ago, when a friend and I opened our first Ramadan fast at one of the busiest mosques in New York City.
Crowds of men with beards and skullcaps were swarming the streets.
It was an FBI agent's wet dream. (Laughter) But being a part of this community, we knew how welcoming this space was.
For years, I'd seen photos of this space being documented as a lifeless and cold monolith, much like the stereotypical image painted of the American Muslim experience.
Frustrated by this myopic view, my friend and I had this crazy idea: Let's break our fast at a different mosque in a different state each night of Ramadan and share those stories on a blog.
We called it "30 Mosques in 30 Days," and we drove to all the 50 states and shared stories from over 100 vastly different Muslim communities, ranging from the Cambodian refugees in the L.A. projects to the black Sufis living in the woods of South Carolina.
What emerged was a beautiful and complicated portrait of America.
The media coverage forced local journalists to revisit their Muslim communities, but what was really exciting was seeing people from around the world being inspired to take their own 30-mosque journey.
There were even these two NFL athletes who took a sabbatical from the league to do so.
And as 30 Mosques was blossoming around the world, I was actually stuck in Pakistan working on a film.
My codirector, Omar, and I were at a breaking point with many of our friends on how to position the film.
The movie is called "These Birds Walk," and it is about wayward street kids who are struggling to find some semblance of family.
We focus on the complexities of youth and family discord, but our friends kept on nudging us to comment on drones and target killings to make the film "more relevant," essentially reducing these people who have entrusted us with their stories into sociopolitical symbols.
Of course, we didn't listen to them, and instead, we championed the tender gestures of love and headlong flashes of youth.
The agenda behind our cinematic immersion was only empathy, an emotion that's largely deficient from films that come from our region of the world.
And as "These Birds Walk" played at film festivals and theaters internationally, I finally had my feet planted at home in New York, and with all the extra time and still no real money, my wife tasked me to cook more for us.
And whenever I'd go to the local butcher to purchase some halal meat, something felt off.
For those that don't know, halal is a term used for meat that is raised and slaughtered humanely following very strict Islamic guidelines.
Unfortunately, the majority of halal meat in America doesn't rise to the standard that my faith calls for.
The more I learned about these unethical practices, the more violated I felt, particularly because businesses from my own community were the ones taking advantage of my orthodoxy.
So, with emotions running high, and absolutely no experience in butchery, some friends and I opened a meat store in the heart of the East Village fashion district.
(Laughter) We call it Honest Chops, and we're reclaiming halal by sourcing organic, humanely raised animals, and by making it accessible and affordable to working-class families.
There's really nothing like it in America.
The unbelievable part is actually that 90 percent of our in-store customers are not even Muslim.
For many, it is their first time interacting with Islam on such an intimate level.
So all these disparate projects -- (Laughter) -- are the result of a restlessness.
They are a visceral response to the businesses and curators who work hard to oversimplify my beliefs and my community, and the only way to beat their machine is to play by different rules.
We must fight with an inventive approach.
With the trust, with the access, with the love that only we can bring, we must unapologetically reclaim our beliefs in every moving image, in every cut of meat, because if we whitewash our stories for the sake of mass appeal, not only will we fail, but we will be trumped by those with more money and more resources to tell our stories.
But the call for creative courage is not for novelty or relevance.
It is simply because our communities are so damn unique and so damn beautiful.
They demand us to find uncompromising ways to be acknowledged and respected.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I think it'll be a relief to some people and a disappointment to others that I'm not going to talk about vaginas today.
I began "The Vagina Monologues" because I was worried about vaginas.
I'm very worried today about this notion, this world, this prevailing kind of force of security.
I see this word, hear this word, feel this word everywhere.
Real security, security checks, security watch, security clearance.
Why has all this focus on security made me feel so much more insecure?
What does anyone mean when they talk about real security?
And why have we, as Americans particularly, become a nation that strives for security above all else?
In fact, I think that security is elusive. It's impossible.
We all die. We all get old. We all get sick. People leave us.
People change us. Nothing is secure.
And that's actually the good news.
This is, of course, unless your whole life is about being secure.
I think that when that is the focus of your life, these are the things that happen.
You can't travel very far or venture too far outside a certain circle.
You can't allow too many conflicting ideas into your mind at one time, as they might confuse you or challenge you.
You can't open yourself to new experiences, new people, new ways of doing things -- they might take you off course.
You can't not know who you are, so you cling to hard-matter identity.
You become a Christian, Muslim, Jew.
You're an Indian, Egyptian, Italian, American.
You're a heterosexual or a homosexual, or you never have sex.
Or at least, that's what you say when you identify yourself.
You become part of an "us."
In order to be secure, you defend against "them."
You cling to your land because it is your secure place.
You must fight anyone who encroaches upon it.
You become your nation. You become your religion.
You become whatever it is that will freeze you, numb you and protect you from doubt or change.
But all this does, actually, is shut down your mind.
In reality, it does not really make you safer.
I was in Sri Lanka, for example, three days after the tsunami, and I was standing on the beaches and it was absolutely clear that, in a matter of five minutes, a 30-foot wave could rise up and desecrate a people, a population and lives.
All this striving for security, in fact, has made you much more insecure because now you have to watch out all the time.
There are people not like you -- people who you now call enemies.
You have places you cannot go, thoughts you cannot think, worlds that you can no longer inhabit.
And so you spend your days fighting things off, defending your territory and becoming more entrenched in your fundamental thinking.
Your days become devoted to protecting yourself.
This becomes your mission. That is all you do.
Ideas get shorter. They become sound bytes.
There are evildoers and saints, criminals and victims.
There are those who, if they're not with us, are against us.
It gets easier to hurt people because you do not feel what's inside them.
It gets easier to lock them up, force them to be naked, humiliate them, occupy them, invade them and kill them, because they are only obstacles now to your security.
In six years, I've had the extraordinary privilege through V-Day, a global movement against [violence against] women, to travel probably to 60 countries, and spend a great deal of time in different portions.
I've met women and men all over this planet, who through various circumstances -- war, poverty, racism, multiple forms of violence -- have never known security, or have had their illusion of security forever devastated.
I've spent time with women in Afghanistan under the Taliban, who were essentially brutalized and censored.
I've been in Bosnian refugee camps.
I was with women in Pakistan who have had their faces melted off with acid.
I've been with girls all across America who were date-raped, or raped by their best friends when they were drugged one night.
One of the amazing things that I've discovered in my travels is that there is this emerging species.
I loved when he was talking about this other world that's right next to this world.
I've discovered these people, who, in V-Day world, we call Vagina Warriors.
These particular people, rather than getting AK-47s, or weapons of mass destruction, or machetes, in the spirit of the warrior, have gone into the center, the heart of pain, of loss.
They have grieved it, they have died into it, and allowed and encouraged poison to turn into medicine.
They have used the fuel of their pain to begin to redirect that energy towards another mission and another trajectory.
These warriors now devote themselves and their lives to making sure what happened to them doesn't happen to anyone else.
There are thousands if not millions of them on the planet.
I venture there are many in this room.
They have a fierceness and a freedom that I believe is the bedrock of a new paradigm.
They have broken out of the existing frame of victim and perpetrator.
Their own personal security is not their end goal, and because of that, because, rather than worrying about security, because the transformation of suffering is their end goal, I actually believe they are creating real safety and a whole new idea of security.
I want to talk about a few of these people that I've met.
Tomorrow, I am going to Cairo, and I'm so moved that I will be with women in Cairo who are V-Day women, who are opening the first safe house for battered women in the Middle East.
That will happen because women in Cairo made a decision to stand up and put themselves on the line, and talk about the degree of violence that is happening in Egypt, and were willing to be attacked and criticized.
And through their work over the last years, this is not only happening that this house is opening, but it's being supported by many factions of the society who never would have supported it.
Women in Uganda this year, who put on "The Vagina Monologues" during V-Day, actually evoked the wrath of the government.
And, I love this story so much.
There was a cabinet meeting and a meeting of the presidents to talk about whether "Vaginas" could come to Uganda.
And in this meeting -- it went on for weeks in the press, two weeks where there was huge discussion.
The government finally made a decision that "The Vagina Monologues" could not be performed in Uganda.
But the amazing news was that because they had stood up, these women, and because they had been willing to risk their security, it began a discussion that not only happened in Uganda, but all of Africa.
As a result, this production, which had already sold out, every single person in that 800-seat audience, except for 10 people, made a decision to keep the money.
They raised 10,000 dollars on a production that never occurred.
There's a young woman named Carrie Rethlefsen in Minnesota.
She's a high school student.
She had seen "The Vagina Monologues" and she was really moved. And as a result, she wore an "I heart my vagina" button to her high school in Minnesota.
(Laughter) She was basically threatened to be expelled from school.
They told her she couldn't love her vagina in high school, that it was not a legal thing, that it was not a moral thing, that it was not a good thing.
So she really struggled with this, what to do, because she was a senior and she was doing well in her school and she was threatened expulsion. So what she did is she got all her friends together -- I believe it was 100, 150 students all wore "I love my vagina" T-shirts, and the boys wore "I love her vagina" T-shirts to school.
(Laughter) Now this seems like a fairly, you know, frivolous, but what happened as a result of that, is that that school now is forming a sex education class. It's beginning to talk about sex, it's beginning to look at why it would be wrong for a young high school girl to talk about her vagina publicly or to say that she loved her vagina publicly.
I know I've talked about Agnes here before, but I want to give you an update on Agnes.
I met Agnes three years ago in the Rift Valley.
When she was a young girl, she had been mutilated against her will.
That mutilation of her clitoris had actually obviously impacted her life and changed it in a way that was devastating.
She made a decision not to go and get a razor or a glass shard, but to devote her life to stopping that happening to other girls.
For eight years, she walked through the Rift Valley.
She had this amazing box that she carried and it had a torso of a woman's body in it, a half a torso, and she would teach people, everywhere she went, what a healthy vagina looked like and what a mutilated vagina looked like.
In the years that she walked, she educated parents, mothers, fathers.
She saved 1,500 girls from being cut.
When V-Day met her, we asked her how we could support her and she said, "Well, if you got me a Jeep, I could get around a lot faster." So, we bought her a Jeep.
In the year she had the Jeep, she saved 4,500 girls from being cut.
So, we said, what else could we do?
She said, "If you help me get money, I could open a house."
Three years ago, Agnes opened a safe house in Africa to stop mutilation.
When she began her mission eight years ago, she was reviled, she was detested, she was completely slandered in her community.
I am proud to tell you that six months ago, she was elected the deputy mayor of Narok.
(Applause) I think what I'm trying to say here is that if your end goal is security, and if that's all you're focusing on, what ends up happening is that you create not only more insecurity in other people, but you make yourself far more insecure.
Real security is contemplating death, not pretending it doesn't exist.
Not running from loss, but entering grief, surrendering to sorrow.
Real security is not knowing something, when you don't know it.
Real security is hungering for connection rather than power.
It cannot be bought or arranged or made with bombs.
It is deeper, it is a process, it is acute awareness that we are all utterly inter-bended, and one action by one being in one tiny town has consequences everywhere.
Real security is not only being able to tolerate mystery, complexity, ambiguity, but hungering for them and only trusting a situation when they are present.
Something happened when I began traveling in V-Day, eight years ago. I got lost.
I remember being on a plane going from Kenya to South Africa, and I had no idea where I was.
I didn't know where I was going, where I'd come from, and I panicked. I had a total anxiety attack.
And then I suddenly realized that it absolutely didn't matter where I was going, or where I had come from because we are all essentially permanently displaced people.
All of us are refugees.
We come from somewhere and we are hopefully traveling all the time, moving towards a new place.
Freedom means I may not be identified as any one group, but that I can visit and find myself in every group.
It does not mean that I don't have values or beliefs, but it does mean I am not hardened around them.
I do not use them as weapons.
In the shared future, it will be just that, shared.
The end goal will [be] becoming vulnerable, realizing the place of our connection to one another, rather than becoming secure, in control and alone.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: And how are you doing? Are you exhausted?
On a typical day, do you wake up with hope or gloom?
Eve Ensler: You know, I think Carl Jung once said that in order to survive the twentieth century, we have to live with two existing thoughts, opposite thoughts, at the same time.
And I think part of what I'm learning in this process is that one must allow oneself to feel grief.
And I think as long as I keep grieving, and weeping, and then moving on, I'm fine.
When I start to pretend that what I'm seeing isn't impacting me, and isn't changing my heart, then I get in trouble.
Because when you spend a lot of time going from place to place, country to country, and city to city, the degree to which women, for example, are violated, and the epidemic of it, and the kind of ordinariness of it, is so devastating to one's soul that you have to take the time, or I have to take the time now, to process that.
CA: There are a lot of causes out there in the world that have been talked about, you know, poverty, sickness and so on. You spent eight years on this one.
Why this one?
EE: I think that if you think about women, women are the primary resource of the planet. They give birth, we come from them, they are mothers, they are visionaries, they are the future. If you think that the U.N. now says that one out of three women on the planet will be raped or beaten in their lifetime, we're talking about the desecration of the primary resource of the planet, we're talking about the place where we come from, we're talking about parenting.
Imagine that you've been raped and you're bringing up a boy child.
How does it impact your ability to work, or envision a future, or thrive, as opposed to just survive? What I believe is if we could figure out how to make women safe and honor women, it would be parallel or equal to honoring life itself.
My students and I work on very tiny robots.
Now, you can think of these as robotic versions of something that you're all very familiar with: an ant.
We all know that ants and other insects at this size scale can do some pretty incredible things.
We've all seen a group of ants, or some version of that, carting off your potato chip at a picnic, for example.
But what are the real challenges of engineering these ants?
Well, first of all, how do we get the capabilities of an ant in a robot at the same size scale?
Well, first we need to figure out how to make them move when they're so small.
We need mechanisms like legs and efficient motors in order to support that locomotion, and we need the sensors, power and control in order to pull everything together in a semi-intelligent ant robot.
And finally, to make these things really functional, we want a lot of them working together in order to do bigger things.
So I'll start with mobility.
Insects move around amazingly well.
This video is from UC Berkeley.
It shows a cockroach moving over incredibly rough terrain without tipping over, and it's able to do this because its legs are a combination of rigid materials, which is what we traditionally use to make robots, and soft materials.
Jumping is another really interesting way to get around when you're very small.
So these insects store energy in a spring and release that really quickly to get the high power they need to jump out of water, for example.
So one of the big contributions from my lab has been to combine rigid and soft materials in very, very small mechanisms.
So this jumping mechanism is about four millimeters on a side, so really tiny.
The hard material here is silicon, and the soft material is silicone rubber.
And the basic idea is that we're going to compress this, store energy in the springs, and then release it to jump.
So there's no motors on board this right now, no power.
This is actuated with a method that we call in my lab "graduate student with tweezers." (Laughter) So what you'll see in the next video is this guy doing amazingly well for its jumps.
So this is Aaron, the graduate student in question, with the tweezers, and what you see is this four-millimeter-sized mechanism jumping almost 40 centimeters high.
That's almost 100 times its own length.
And it survives, bounces on the table, it's incredibly robust, and of course survives quite well until we lose it because it's very tiny.
Ultimately, though, we want to add motors to this too, and we have students in the lab working on millimeter-sized motors to eventually integrate onto small, autonomous robots.
But in order to look at mobility and locomotion at this size scale to start, we're cheating and using magnets.
So this shows what would eventually be part of a micro-robot leg, and you can see the silicone rubber joints and there's an embedded magnet that's being moved around by an external magnetic field.
So this leads to the robot that I showed you earlier.
The really interesting thing that this robot can help us figure out is how insects move at this scale.
We have a really good model for how everything from a cockroach up to an elephant moves.
We all move in this kind of bouncy way when we run.
But when I'm really small, the forces between my feet and the ground are going to affect my locomotion a lot more than my mass, which is what causes that bouncy motion.
So this guy doesn't work quite yet, but we do have slightly larger versions that do run around.
So this is about a centimeter cubed, a centimeter on a side, so very tiny, and we've gotten this to run about 10 body lengths per second, so 10 centimeters per second.
It's pretty quick for a little, small guy, and that's really only limited by our test setup.
But this gives you some idea of how it works right now.
We can also make 3D-printed versions of this that can climb over obstacles, a lot like the cockroach that you saw earlier.
But ultimately we want to add everything onboard the robot.
We want sensing, power, control, actuation all together, and not everything needs to be bio-inspired.
So this robot's about the size of a Tic Tac.
And in this case, instead of magnets or muscles to move this around, we use rockets.
So this is a micro-fabricated energetic material, and we can create tiny pixels of this, and we can put one of these pixels on the belly of this robot, and this robot, then, is going to jump when it senses an increase in light.
So the next video is one of my favorites.
So you have this 300-milligram robot jumping about eight centimeters in the air.
It's only four by four by seven millimeters in size.
And you'll see a big flash at the beginning when the energetic is set off, and the robot tumbling through the air.
So there was that big flash, and you can see the robot jumping up through the air.
So there's no tethers on this, no wires connecting to this.
Everything is onboard, and it jumped in response to the student just flicking on a desk lamp next to it.
So I think you can imagine all the cool things that we could do with robots that can run and crawl and jump and roll at this size scale.
Imagine the rubble that you get after a natural disaster like an earthquake.
Imagine these small robots running through that rubble to look for survivors.
Or imagine a lot of small robots running around a bridge in order to inspect it and make sure it's safe so you don't get collapses like this, which happened outside of Minneapolis in 2007.
Or just imagine what you could do if you had robots that could swim through your blood.
Right? "Fantastic Voyage," Isaac Asimov.
Or they could operate without having to cut you open in the first place.
Or we could radically change the way we build things if we have our tiny robots work the same way that termites do, and they build these incredible eight-meter-high mounds, effectively well ventilated apartment buildings for other termites in Africa and Australia.
So I think I've given you some of the possibilities of what we can do with these small robots.
And we've made some advances so far, but there's still a long way to go, and hopefully some of you can contribute to that destination.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
You’ve found Leonardo Da Vinci’s secret vault, secured by a series of combination locks.
Fortunately, your treasure map has three codes: 1210, 3211000, and… hmm.
The last one appears to be missing.
Looks like you’re gonna have to figure it out on your own.
There’s something those first two numbers have in common: they’re what’s called autobiographical numbers.
This is a special type of number whose structure describes itself.
Each of an autobiographical number’s digits indicates how many times the digit corresponding to that position occurs within the number.
The first digit indicates the quantity of zeroes, the second digit indicates the number of ones, the third digit the number of twos, and so on until the end.
The last lock takes a 10 digit number, and it just so happens that there’s exactly one ten-digit autobiographical number.
What is it?
Pause here if you want to figure it out for yourself!
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 Blindly trying different combinations would take forever.
So let’s analyze the autobiographical numbers we already have to see what kinds of patterns we can find.
By adding all the digits in 1210 together, we get 4 – the total number of digits.
This makes sense since each individual digit tells us the number of times a specific digit occurs within the total.
So the digits in our ten-digit autobiographical number must add up to ten.
This tells us another important thing – the number can’t have too many large digits.
For example, if it included a 6 and a 7, then some digit would have to appear 6 times, and another digit 7 times– making more than 10 digits.
We can conclude that there can be no more than one digit greater than 5 in the entire sequence.
So out of the four digits 6, 7, 8, and 9, only one – if any-- will make the cut.
And there will be zeroes in the positions corresponding to the numbers that aren’t used.
So now we know that our number must contain at least three zeroes – which also means that the leading digit must be 3 or greater.
Now, while this first digit counts the number of zeroes, every digit after it counts how many times a particular non-zero digit occurs.
If we add together all the digits besides the first one – and remember, zeroes don’t increase the sum – we get a count of how many non-zero digits appear in the sequence, including that leading digit.
For example, if we try this with the first code, we get 2 plus 1 equals 3 digits.
Now, if we subtract one, we have a count of how many non-zero digits there are after the first digit – two, in our example.
Why go through all that?
Well, we now know something important: the total quantity of non-zero digits that occur after the first digit is equal to the sum of these digits, minus one.
And how can you get a distribution where the sum is exactly 1 greater than the number of non-zero positive integers being added together?
The only way is for one of the addends to be a 2, and the rest 1s.
How many 1s?
Turns out there can only be two – any more would require additional digits like 3 or 4 to count them.
So now we have the leading digit of 3 or greater counting the zeroes, a 2 counting the 1s, and two 1s – one to count the 2s and another to count the leading digit.
And speaking of that, it’s time to find out what the leading digit is.
Since we know that the 2 and the double 1s have a sum of 4, we can subtract that from 10 to get 6.
Now it’s just a matter of putting them all in place: 6 zeroes, 2 ones, 1 two, 0 threes, 0 fours, 0 fives, 1 six, 0 sevens, 0 eights, and 0 nines.
The safe swings open, and inside you find...
Da Vinci’s long-lost autobiography.
2,300 years ago, the rulers of Alexandria set out to fulfill one of humanity’s most audacious goals: to collect all the knowledge in the world under one roof.
In its prime, the Library of Alexandria housed an unprecedented number of scrolls and attracted some of the Greek world’s greatest minds.
But by the end of the 5th century CE, the great library had vanished.
Many believed it was destroyed in a catastrophic fire.
The truth of the library’s rise and fall is much more complex.
The idea for the library came from Alexander the Great.
After establishing himself as a conqueror, the former student of Aristotle turned his attention to building an empire of knowledge headquartered in his namesake city.
He died before construction began, but his successor, Ptolemy I, executed Alexander’s plans for a museum and library.
Located in the royal district of the city, the Library of Alexandria may have been built with grand Hellenistic columns, native Egyptian influences, or a unique blend of the two--there are no surviving accounts of its architecture.
We do know it had lecture halls, classrooms, and, of course, shelves.
As soon as the building was complete, Ptolemy I began to fill it with primarily Greek and Egyptian scrolls.
He invited scholars to live and study in Alexandria at his expense.
The library grew as they contributed their own manuscripts, but the rulers of Alexandria still wanted a copy of every book in the world.
Luckily, Alexandria was a hub for ships traveling through the Mediterranean.
Ptolemy III instituted a policy requiring any ship that docked in Alexandria to turn over its books for copying.
Once the Library’s scribes had duplicated the texts, they kept the originals and sent the copies back to the ships.
Hired book hunters also scoured the Mediterranean in search of new texts, and the rulers of Alexandria attempted to quash rivals by ending all exports of the Egyptian papyrus used to make scrolls.
These efforts brought hundreds of thousands of books to Alexandria.
As the library grew, it became possible to find information on more subjects than ever before, but also much more difficult to find information on any specific subject.
Luckily, a scholar named Callimachus of Cyrene set to work on a solution, creating the pinakes, a 120-volume catalog of the library’s contents, the first of its kind.
Using the pinakes, others were able to navigate the Library’s swelling collection.
They made some astounding discoveries.
1,600 years before Columbus set sail, Eratosthenes not only realized the earth was round, but calculated its circumference and diameter within a few miles of their actual size.
Heron of Alexandria created the world’s first steam engine over a thousand years before it was finally reinvented during the Industrial Revolution.
For about 300 years after its founding in 283 BCE, the library thrived.
But then, in 48 BCE, Julius Caesar laid siege to Alexandria and set the ships in the harbor on fire.
For years, scholars believed the library burned as the blaze spread into the city.
It's possible the fire destroyed part of the sprawling collection, but we know from ancient writings that scholars continued to visit the library for centuries after the siege.
Ultimately, the library slowly disappeared as the city changed from Greek, to Roman, Christian, and eventually Muslim hands.
Each new set of rulers viewed its contents as a threat rather than a source of pride.
In 415 CE, the Christian rulers even had a mathematician named Hypatia murdered for studying the library’s ancient Greek texts, which they viewed as blasphemous.
Though the Library of Alexandria and its countless texts are long gone, we’re still grappling with the best ways to collect, access, and preserve our knowledge.
There’s more information available today and more advanced technology to preserve it, though we can’t know for sure that our digital archives will be more resistant to destruction than Alexandria’s ink and paper scrolls.
And even if our reservoirs of knowledge are physically secure, they will still have to resist the more insidious forces that tore the library apart: fear of knowledge, and the arrogant belief that the past is obsolete.
The difference is that, this time, we know what to prepare for.
When I was young, I prided myself as a nonconformist in the conservative U.S. state I live in, Kansas.
I didn't follow along with the crowd.
I wasn't afraid to try weird clothing trends or hairstyles.
I was outspoken and extremely social.
Even these pictures and postcards of my London semester abroad 16 years ago show that I obviously didn't care if I was perceived as weird or different.
(Laughter) But that same year I was in London, 16 years ago, I realized something about myself that actually was somewhat unique, and that changed everything.
I became the opposite of who I thought I once was.
I stayed in my room instead of socializing.
I stopped engaging in clubs and leadership activities.
I didn't want to stand out in the crowd anymore.
I told myself it was because I was growing up and maturing, not that I was suddenly looking for acceptance.
I had always assumed I was immune to needing acceptance.
After all, I was a bit unconventional.
But I realize now that the moment I realized something was different about me was the exact same moment that I began conforming and hiding.
Hiding is a progressive habit, and once you start hiding, it becomes harder and harder to step forward and speak out.
In fact, even now, when I was talking to people about what this talk was about, I made up a cover story and I even hid the truth about my TED Talk.
So it is fitting and scary that I have returned to this city 16 years later and I have chosen this stage to finally stop hiding.
What have I been hiding for 16 years?
I am a lesbian.
(Applause) Thank you.
I've struggled to say those words, because I didn't want to be defined by them.
Every time I would think about coming out in the past, I would think to myself, but I just want to be known as Morgana, uniquely Morgana, but not "my lesbian friend Morgana," or "my gay coworker Morgana."
Just Morgana.
For those of you from large metropolitan areas, this may not seem like a big deal to you.
It may seem strange that I have suppressed the truth and hidden this for so long.
But I was paralyzed by my fear of not being accepted.
And I'm not alone, of course.
A 2013 Deloitte study found that a surprisingly large number of people hide aspects of their identity.
Of all the employees they surveyed, 61 percent reported changing an aspect of their behavior or their appearance in order to fit in at work.
Of all the gay, lesbian and bisexual employees, 83 percent admitted to changing some aspects of themselves so they would not appear at work "too gay."
The study found that even in companies with diversity policies and inclusion programs, employees struggle to be themselves at work because they believe conformity is critical to their long-term career advancement.
And while I was surprised that so many people just like me waste so much energy trying to hide themselves, I was scared when I discovered that my silence has life-or-death consequences and long-term social repercussions.
Twelve years: the length by which life expectancy is shortened for gay, lesbian and bisexual people in highly anti-gay communities compared to accepting communities.
Twelve years reduced life expectancy.
When I read that in The Advocate magazine this year, I realized I could no longer afford to keep silent.
The effects of personal stress and social stigmas are a deadly combination.
The study found that gays in anti-gay communities had higher rates of heart disease, violence and suicide.
What I once thought was simply a personal matter I realized had a ripple effect that went into the workplace and out into the community for every story just like mine.
My choice to hide and not share who I really am may have inadvertently contributed to this exact same environment and atmosphere of discrimination.
I'd always told myself there's no reason to share that I was gay, but the idea that my silence has social consequences was really driven home this year when I missed an opportunity to change the atmosphere of discrimination in my own home state of Kansas.
In February, the Kansas House of Representatives brought up a bill for vote that would have essentially allowed businesses to use religious freedom as a reason to deny gays services.
A former coworker and friend of mine has a father who serves in the Kansas House of Representatives.
He voted in favor of the bill, in favor of a law that would allow businesses to not serve me.
How does my friend feel about lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and questioning people?
How does her father feel?
I don't know, because I was never honest with them about who I am.
And that shakes me to the core.
What if I had told her my story years ago?
Could she have told her father my experience?
Could I have ultimately helped change his vote?
I will never know, and that made me realize I had done nothing to try to make a difference.
How ironic that I work in human resources, a profession that works to welcome, connect and encourage the development of employees, a profession that advocates that the diversity of society should be reflected in the workplace, and yet I have done nothing to advocate for diversity.
When I came to this company one year ago, I thought to myself, this company has anti-discrimination policies that protect gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people.
Their commitment to diversity is evident through their global inclusion programs.
When I walk through the doors of this company, I will finally come out.
But I didn't.
Instead of taking advantage of the opportunity, I did nothing.
(Applause) When I was looking through my London journal and scrapbook from my London semester abroad 16 years ago, I came across this modified quote from Toni Morrison's book, "Paradise."
"There are more scary things inside than outside."
And then I wrote a note to myself at the bottom: "Remember this."
I'm sure I was trying to encourage myself to get out and explore London, but the message I missed was the need to start exploring and embracing myself.
What I didn't realize until all these years later is that the biggest obstacles I will ever have to overcome are my own fears and insecurities.
I believe that by facing my fears inside, I will be able to change reality outside.
I made a choice today to reveal a part of myself that I have hidden for too long.
I hope that this means I will never hide again, and I hope that by coming out today, I can do something to change the data and also to help others who feel different be more themselves and more fulfilled in both their professional and personal lives.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On June 12, 2014, precisely at 3:33 in a balmy winter afternoon in São Paulo, Brazil, a typical South American winter afternoon, this kid, this young man that you see celebrating here like he had scored a goal, Juliano Pinto, 29 years old, accomplished a magnificent deed.
Despite being paralyzed and not having any sensation from mid-chest to the tip of his toes as the result of a car crash six years ago that killed his brother and produced a complete spinal cord lesion that left Juliano in a wheelchair, Juliano rose to the occasion, and on this day did something that pretty much everybody that saw him in the six years deemed impossible.
Juliano Pinto delivered the opening kick of the 2014 Brazilian World Soccer Cup here just by thinking.
He could not move his body, but he could imagine the movements needed to kick a ball.
He was an athlete before the lesion. He's a para-athlete right now.
He's going to be in the Paralympic Games, I hope, in a couple years.
But what the spinal cord lesion did not rob from Juliano was his ability to dream.
And dream he did that afternoon, for a stadium of about 75,000 people and an audience of close to a billion watching on TV.
And that kick crowned, basically, 30 years of basic research studying how the brain, how this amazing universe that we have between our ears that is only comparable to universe that we have above our head because it has about 100 billion elements talking to each other through electrical brainstorms, what Juliano accomplished took 30 years to imagine in laboratories and about 15 years to plan.
When John Chapin and I, 15 years ago, proposed in a paper that we would build something that we called a brain-machine interface, meaning connecting a brain to devices so that animals and humans could just move these devices, no matter how far they are from their own bodies, just by imagining what they want to do, our colleagues told us that we actually needed professional help, of the psychiatry variety.
And despite that, a Scot and a Brazilian persevered, because that's how we were raised in our respective countries, and for 12, 15 years, we made demonstration after demonstration suggesting that this was possible.
And a brain-machine interface is not rocket science, it's just brain research.
It's nothing but using sensors to read the electrical brainstorms that a brain is producing to generate the motor commands that have to be downloaded to the spinal cord, so we projected sensors that can read hundreds and now thousands of these brain cells simultaneously, and extract from these electrical signals the motor planning that the brain is generating to actually make us move into space.
And by doing that, we converted these signals into digital commands that any mechanical, electronic, or even a virtual device can understand so that the subject can imagine what he, she or it wants to make move, and the device obeys that brain command.
By sensorizing these devices with lots of different types of sensors, as you are going to see in a moment, we actually sent messages back to the brain to confirm that that voluntary motor will was being enacted, no matter where -- next to the subject, next door, or across the planet.
And as this message gave feedback back to the brain, the brain realized its goal: to make us move.
So this is just one experiment that we published a few years ago, where a monkey, without moving its body, learned to control the movements of an avatar arm, a virtual arm that doesn't exist.
What you're listening to is the sound of the brain of this monkey as it explores three different visually identical spheres in virtual space.
And to get a reward, a drop of orange juice that monkeys love, this animal has to detect, select one of these objects by touching, not by seeing it, by touching it, because every time this virtual hand touches one of the objects, an electrical pulse goes back to the brain of the animal describing the fine texture of the surface of this object, so the animal can judge what is the correct object that he has to grab, and if he does that, he gets a reward without moving a muscle.
The perfect Brazilian lunch: not moving a muscle and getting your orange juice.
So as we saw this happening, we actually came and proposed the idea that we had published 15 years ago.
We reenacted this paper.
We got it out of the drawers, and we proposed that perhaps we could get a human being that is paralyzed to actually use the brain-machine interface to regain mobility.
The idea was that if you suffered -- and that can happen to any one of us.
Let me tell you, it's very sudden.
It's a millisecond of a collision, a car accident that transforms your life completely.
If you have a complete lesion of the spinal cord, you cannot move because your brainstorms cannot reach your muscles.
However, your brainstorms continue to be generated in your head.
Paraplegic, quadriplegic patients dream about moving every night.
They have that inside their head.
The problem is how to get that code out of it and make the movement be created again.
So what we proposed was, let's create a new body.
Let's create a robotic vest.
And that's exactly why Juliano could kick that ball just by thinking, because he was wearing the first brain-controlled robotic vest that can be used by paraplegic, quadriplegic patients to move and to regain feedback.
That was the original idea, 15 years ago.
What I'm going to show you is how 156 people from 25 countries all over the five continents of this beautiful Earth, dropped their lives, dropped their patents, dropped their dogs, wives, kids, school, jobs, and congregated to come to Brazil for 18 months to actually get this done.
Because a couple years after Brazil was awarded the World Cup, we heard that the Brazilian government wanted to do something meaningful in the opening ceremony in the country that reinvented and perfected soccer until we met the Germans, of course.
(Laughter) But that's a different talk, and a different neuroscientist needs to talk about that.
But what Brazil wanted to do is to showcase a completely different country, a country that values science and technology, and can give a gift to millions, 25 million people around the world that cannot move any longer because of a spinal cord injury.
Well, we went to the Brazilian government and to FIFA and proposed, well, let's have the kickoff of the 2014 World Cup be given by a Brazilian paraplegic using a brain-controlled exoskeleton that allows him to kick the ball and to feel the contact of the ball.
They looked at us, thought that we were completely nuts, and said, "Okay, let's try."
We had 18 months to do everything from zero, from scratch.
We had no exoskeleton, we had no patients, we had nothing done.
These people came all together and in 18 months, we got eight patients in a routine of training and basically built from nothing this guy, that we call Bra-Santos Dumont 1.
The first brain-controlled exoskeleton to be built was named after the most famous Brazilian scientist ever, Alberto Santos Dumont, who, on October 19, 1901, created and flew himself the first controlled airship on air in Paris for a million people to see.
Sorry, my American friends, I live in North Carolina, but it was two years before the Wright Brothers flew on the coast of North Carolina.
(Applause) Flight control is Brazilian. (Laughter) So we went together with these guys and we basically put this exoskeleton together, 15 degrees of freedom, hydraulic machine that can be commanded by brain signals recorded by a non-invasive technology called electroencephalography that can basically allow the patient to imagine the movements and send his commands to the controls, the motors, and get it done.
This exoskeleton was covered with an artificial skin invented by Gordon Cheng, one of my greatest friends, in Munich, to allow sensation from the joints moving and the foot touching the ground to be delivered back to the patient through a vest, a shirt.
It is a smart shirt with micro-vibrating elements that basically delivers the feedback and fools the patient's brain by creating a sensation that it is not a machine that is carrying him, but it is he who is walking again.
So we got this going, and what you'll see here is the first time one of our patients, Bruno, actually walked.
And he takes a few seconds because we are setting everything, and you are going to see a blue light cutting in front of the helmet because Bruno is going to imagine the movement that needs to be performed, the computer is going to analyze it, Bruno is going to certify it, and when it is certified, the device starts moving under the command of Bruno's brain.
And he just got it right, and now he starts walking.
After nine years without being able to move, he is walking by himself.
And more than that -- (Applause) -- more than just walking, he is feeling the ground, and if the speed of the exo goes up, he tells us that he is walking again on the sand of Santos, the beach resort where he used to go before he had the accident.
That's why the brain is creating a new sensation in Bruno's head.
So he walks, and at the end of the walk -- I am running out of time already -- he says, "You know, guys, I need to borrow this thing from you when I get married, because I wanted to walk to the priest and see my bride and actually be there by myself.
Of course, he will have it whenever he wants.
And this is what we wanted to show during the World Cup, and couldn't, because for some mysterious reason, FIFA cut its broadcast in half.
What you are going to see very quickly is Juliano Pinto in the exo doing the kick a few minutes before we went to the pitch and did the real thing in front of the entire crowd, and the lights you are going to see just describe the operation.
Basically, the blue lights pulsating indicate that the exo is ready to go.
It can receive thoughts and it can deliver feedback, and when Juliano makes the decision to kick the ball, you are going to see two streams of green and yellow light coming from the helmet and going to the legs, representing the mental commands that were taken by the exo to actually make that happen.
And in basically 13 seconds, Juliano actually did.
You can see the commands.
He gets ready, the ball is set, and he kicks.
And the most amazing thing is, 10 seconds after he did that, and looked at us on the pitch, he told us, celebrating as you saw, "I felt the ball."
And that's priceless.
(Applause) So where is this going to go?
I have two minutes to tell you that it's going to the limits of your imagination.
Brain-actuating technology is here.
This is the latest: We just published this a year ago, the first brain-to-brain interface that allows two animals to exchange mental messages so that one animal that sees something coming from the environment can send a mental SMS, a torpedo, a neurophysiological torpedo, to the second animal, and the second animal performs the act that he needed to perform without ever knowing what the environment was sending as a message, because the message came from the first animal's brain.
So this is the first demo.
I'm going to be very quick because I want to show you the latest.
But what you see here is the first rat getting informed by a light that is going to show up on the left of the cage that he has to press the left cage to basically get a reward.
He goes there and does it.
And the same time, he is sending a mental message to the second rat that didn't see any light, and the second rat, in 70 percent of the times is going to press the left lever and get a reward without ever experiencing the light in the retina.
Well, we took this to a little higher limit by getting monkeys to collaborate mentally in a brain net, basically to donate their brain activity and combine them to move the virtual arm that I showed you before, and what you see here is the first time the two monkeys combine their brains, synchronize their brains perfectly to get this virtual arm to move.
One monkey is controlling the x dimension, the other monkey is controlling the y dimension.
But it gets a little more interesting when you get three monkeys in there and you ask one monkey to control x and y, the other monkey to control y and z, and the third one to control x and z, and you make them all play the game together, moving the arm in 3D into a target to get the famous Brazilian orange juice.
And they actually do.
The black dot is the average of all these brains working in parallel, in real time.
That is the definition of a biological computer, interacting by brain activity and achieving a motor goal.
Where is this going?
We have no idea.
We're just scientists.
(Laughter) We are paid to be children, to basically go to the edge and discover what is out there.
But one thing I know: One day, in a few decades, when our grandchildren surf the Net just by thinking, or a mother donates her eyesight to an autistic kid who cannot see, or somebody speaks because of a brain-to-brain bypass, some of you will remember that it all started on a winter afternoon in a Brazilian soccer field with an impossible kick.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Bruno Giussani: Miguel, thank you for sticking to your time.
I actually would have given you a couple more minutes, because there are a couple of points we want to develop, and, of course, clearly it seems that we need connected brains to figure out where this is going.
So let's connect all this together.
So if I'm understanding correctly, one of the monkeys is actually getting a signal and the other monkey is reacting to that signal just because the first one is receiving it and transmitting the neurological impulse.
Miguel Nicolelis: No, it's a little different.
No monkey knows of the existence of the other two monkeys.
They are getting a visual feedback in 2D, but the task they have to accomplish is 3D.
They have to move an arm in three dimensions.
But each monkey is only getting the two dimensions on the video screen that the monkey controls.
And to get that thing done, you need at least two monkeys to synchronize their brains, but the ideal is three.
So what we found out is that when one monkey starts slacking down, the other two monkeys enhance their performance to get the guy to come back, so this adjusts dynamically, but the global synchrony remains the same.
Now, if you flip without telling the monkey the dimensions that each brain has to control, like this guy is controlling x and y, but he should be controlling now y and z, instantaneously, that animal's brain forgets about the old dimensions and it starts concentrating on the new dimensions.
So what I need to say is that no Turing machine, no computer can predict what a brain net will do.
So we will absorb technology as part of us.
Technology will never absorb us.
It's simply impossible.
BG: How many times have you tested this?
And how many times have you succeeded versus failed?
MN: Oh, tens of times.
With the three monkeys? Oh, several times.
I wouldn't be able to talk about this here unless I had done it a few times.
And I forgot to mention, because of time, that just three weeks ago, a European group just demonstrated the first man-to-man brain-to-brain connection.
BG: And how does that play?
MN: There was one bit of information -- big ideas start in a humble way -- but basically the brain activity of one subject was transmitted to a second object, all non-invasive technology.
So the first subject got a message, like our rats, a visual message, and transmitted it to the second subject.
The second subject received a magnetic pulse in the visual cortex, or a different pulse, two different pulses.
In one pulse, the subject saw something.
On the other pulse, he saw something different.
And he was able to verbally indicate what was the message the first subject was sending through the Internet across continents.
Moderator: Wow. Okay, that's where we are going.
That's the next TED Talk at the next conference.
Miguel Nicolelis, thank you. MN: Thank you, Bruno. Thank you.
It is very fashionable and proper to speak about food in all its forms, all its colors, aromas and tastes.
But after the food goes through the digestive system, when it is thrown out as crap, it is no longer fashionable to speak about it.
It is rather revolting.
I'm a guy who has graduated from bullshit to full-shit.
(Laughter) My organization, Gram Vikas, which means "village development organization," was working in the area of renewable energy.
On the most part, we were producing biogas, biogas for rural kitchens.
We produce biogas in India by using animal manure, which usually, in India, is called cow dung.
But as the gender-sensitive person that I am, I would like to call it bullshit.
But realizing later on how important were sanitation and the disposal of crap in a proper way, we went into the arena of sanitation.
Eighty percent of all diseases in India and most developing countries are because of poor quality water.
And when we look at the reason for poor quality water, you find that it is our abysmal attitude to the disposal of human waste.
Human waste, in its rawest form, finds its way back to drinking water, bathing water, washing water, irrigation water, whatever water you see.
And this is the cause for 80 percent of the diseases in rural areas.
In India, it is unfortunately only the women who carry water.
So for all domestic needs, women have to carry water.
So that is a pitiable state of affairs.
Open defecation is rampant.
Seventy percent of India defecates in the open.
They sit there out in the open, with the wind on their sails, hiding their faces, exposing their bases, and sitting there in pristine glory -- 70 percent of India.
And if you look at the world total, 60 percent of all the crap that is thrown into the open is by Indians.
A fantastic distinction.
I don't know if we Indians can be proud of such a distinction.
(Laughter) So we, together with a lot of villages, we began to talk about how to really address this situation of sanitation.
And we came together and formed a project called MANTRA.
MANTRA stands for Movement and Action Network for Transformation of Rural Areas.
So we are speaking about transformation, transformation in rural areas.
Villages that agree to implement this project, they organize a legal society where the general body consists of all members who elect a group of men and women who implement the project and, later on, who look after the operation and maintenance.
They decide to build a toilet and a shower room.
And from a protected water source, water will be brought to an elevated water reservoir and piped to all households through three taps: one in the toilet, one in the shower, one in the kitchen, 24 hours a day.
The pity is that our cities, like New Delhi and Bombay, do not have a 24-hour water supply.
But in these villages, we want to have it.
There is a distinct difference in the quality.
Well in India, we have a theory, which is very much accepted by the government bureaucracy and all those who matter, that poor people deserve poor solutions and absolutely poor people deserve pathetic solutions.
This, combined with a Nobel Prize-worthy theory that the cheapest is the most economic, is the heady cocktail that the poor are forced to drink.
We are fighting against this.
We feel that the poor have been humiliated for centuries.
And even in sanitation, they should not be humiliated.
Sanitation is more about dignity than about human disposal of waste.
And so you build these toilets and very often, we have to hear that the toilets are better than their houses.
And you can see that in front are the attached houses and the others are the toilets.
So these people, without a single exception of a family in a village, decide to build a toilet, a bathing room.
And for that, they come together, collect all the local materials -- local materials like rubble, sand, aggregates, usually a government subsidy is available to meet at least part of the cost of external materials like cement, steel, toilet commode.
And they build a toilet and a bathing room.
Also, all the unskilled laborers, that is daily wage earners, mostly landless, are given an opportunity to be trained as masons and plumbers.
So while these people are being trained, others are collecting the materials.
And when both are ready, they build a toilet, a shower room, and of course also a water tower, an elevated water reservoir.
We use a system of two leach pits to treat the waste.
From the toilet, the muck comes into the first leach pit.
And when it is full, it is blocked and it can go to the next.
But we discovered that if you plant banana trees, papaya trees on the periphery of these leach pits, they grow very well because they suck up all the nutrients and you get very tasty bananas, papayas.
If any of you come to my place, I would be happy to share these bananas and papayas with you.
So there you can see the completed toilets, the water towers.
This is in a village where most of the people are even illiterate.
It is always a 24-hour water supply because water gets polluted very often when you store it -- a child dips his or her hand into it, something falls into it.
So no water is stored. It's always on tap.
This is how an elevated water reservoir is constructed.
And that is the end product.
Because it has to go high, and there is some space available, two or three rooms are made under the water tower, which are used by the village for different committee meetings.
We have had clear evidence of the great impact of this program.
Before we started, there were, as usual, more than 80 percent of people suffering from waterborne diseases.
But after this, we have empirical evidence that 82 percent, on average, among all these villages -- 1,200 villages have completed it -- waterborne diseases have come down 82 percent.
(Applause) Women usually used to spend, especially in the summer months, about six to seven hours a day carrying water.
And when they went to carry water, because, as I said earlier, it's only women who carry water, they used to take their little children, girl children, also to carry water, or else to be back at home to look after the siblings.
So there were less than nine percent of girl children attending school, even if there was a school.
And boys, about 30 percent.
But girls, it has gone to about 90 percent and boys, almost to 100 percent.
(Applause) The most vulnerable section in a village are the landless laborers who are the daily wage-earners.
Because they have gone through this training to be masons and plumbers and bar benders, now their ability to earn has increased 300 to 400 percent.
So this is a democracy in action because there is a general body, a governing board, the committee.
People are questioning, people are governing themselves, people are learning to manage their own affairs, they are taking their own futures into their hands.
And that is democracy at the grassroots level in action.
More than 1,200 villages have so far done this.
It benefits over 400,000 people and it's still going on.
And I hope it continues to move ahead.
For India and such developing countries, armies and armaments, software companies and spaceships may not be as important as taps and toilets.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
I want to speak about a forgotten conflict.
It's a conflict that rarely hits the headlines.
It happens right here, in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Now, most people outside of Africa don't know much about the war in Congo, so let me give you a couple of key facts.
The Congolese conflict is the deadliest conflict since World War II.
It has caused almost four million deaths.
It has destabilized most of Central Africa for the past 18 years.
It is the largest ongoing humanitarian crisis in the world.
That's why I first went to Congo in 2001.
I was a young humanitarian aid worker, and I met this woman who was my age.
She was called Isabelle.
Local militias had attacked Isabelle's village.
They had killed many men, raped many women.
They had looted everything.
And then they wanted to take Isabelle, but her husband stepped in, and he said, "No, please don't take Isabelle.
Take me instead."
So he had gone to the forest with the militias, and Isabelle had never seen him again.
Well, it's because of people like Isabelle and her husband that I have devoted my career to studying this war that we know so little about.
Although there is one story about Congo that you may have heard.
It's a story about minerals and rape.
Policy statements and media reports both usually focus on a primary cause of violence in Congo -- the illegal exploitation and trafficking of natural resources -- and on a main consequence -- sexual abuse of women and girls as a weapon of war.
So, not that these two issues aren't important and tragic. They are.
But today I want to tell you a different story.
I want to tell you a story that emphasizes a core cause of the ongoing conflict.
Violence in Congo is in large part driven by local bottom-up conflicts that international peace efforts have failed to help address.
The story starts from the fact that not only is Congo notable for being the world's worst ongoing humanitarian crisis, but it is also home to some of the largest international peacebuilding efforts in the world.
Congo hosts the largest and most expensive United Nations peacekeeping mission in the world.
It was also the site of the first European-led peacekeeping mission, and for its first cases ever, the International Criminal Court chose to prosecute Congolese warlords.
In 2006, when Congo held the first free national elections in its history, many observers thought that an end to violence in the region had finally come.
The international community lauded the successful organization of these elections as finally an example of successful international intervention in a failed state.
But the eastern provinces have continued to face massive population displacements and horrific human rights violations.
Shortly before I went back there last summer, there was a horrible massacre in the province of South Kivu.
Thirty-three people were killed.
They were mostly women and children, and many of them were hacked to death.
During the past eight years, fighting in the eastern provinces has regularly reignited full-scale civil and international war.
So basically, every time we feel that we are on the brink of peace, the conflict explodes again.
Why?
Why have the massive international efforts failed to help Congo achieve lasting peace and security?
Well, my answer to this question revolves around two central observations.
First, one of the main reasons for the continuation of violence in Congo is fundamentally local -- and when I say local, I really mean at the level of the individual, the family, the clan, the municipality, the community, the district, sometimes the ethnic group.
For instance, you remember the story of Isabelle that I told you.
Well, the reason why militias had attacked Isabelle's village was because they wanted to take the land that the villagers needed to cultivate food and to survive.
The second central observation is that international peace efforts have failed to help address local conflicts because of the presence of a dominant peacebuilding culture.
So what I mean is that Western and African diplomats, United Nations peacekeepers, donors, the staff of most nongovernmental organizations that work with the resolution of conflict, they all share a specific way of seeing the world.
And I was one of these people, and I shared this culture, so I know all too well how powerful it is.
Throughout the world, and throughout conflict zones, this common culture shapes the intervener's understanding of the causes of violence as something that is primarily located in the national and international spheres.
It shapes our understanding of the path toward peace as something again that requires top-down intervention to address national and international tensions.
And it shapes our understanding of the roles of foreign actors as engaging in national and international peace processes.
Even more importantly, this common culture enables international peacebuilders to ignore the micro-level tensions that often jeopardize the macro-level settlements.
So for instance, in Congo, because of how they are socialized and trained, United Nations officials, donors, diplomats, the staff of most nongovernmental organizations, they interpret continued fighting and massacres as a top-down problem.
To them, the violence they see is the consequence of tensions between President Kabila and various national opponents, and tensions between Congo, Rwanda and Uganda.
In addition, these international peacebuilders view local conflicts as simply the result of national and international tensions, insufficient state authority, and what they call the Congolese people's so-called inherent penchant for violence.
The dominant culture also constructs intervention at the national and international levels as the only natural and legitimate task for United Nations staffers and diplomats.
And it elevates the organization of general elections, which is now a sort of cure-all, as the most crucial state reconstruction mechanism over more effective state-building approaches.
And that happens not only in Congo but also in many other conflict zones.
But let's dig deeper, into the other main sources of violence.
In Congo, continuing violence is motivated not only by the national and international causes but also by longstanding bottom-up agendas whose main instigators are villagers, traditional chiefs, community chiefs or ethnic leaders.
Many conflicts revolve around political, social and economic stakes that are distinctively local.
For instance, there is a lot of competition at the village or district level over who can be chief of village or chief of territory according to traditional law, and who can control the distribution of land and the exploitation of local mining sites.
This competition often results in localized fighting, for instance in one village or territory, and quite frequently, it escalates into generalized fighting, so across a whole province, and even at times into neighboring countries.
Take the conflict between Congolese of Rwandan descent and the so-called indigenous communities of the Kivus.
This conflict started in the 1930s during Belgian colonization, when both communities competed over access to land and to local power.
Then, in 1960, after Congolese independence, it escalated because each camp tried to align with national politicians, but still to advance their local agendas.
And then, at the time of the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, these local actors allied with Congolese and Rwandan armed groups, but still to advance their local agendas in the provinces of the Kivus.
And since then, these local disputes over land and local power have fueled violence, and they have regularly jeopardized the national and international settlements.
So we can wonder why in these circumstances the international peacebuilders have failed to help implement local peacebuilding programs.
And the answer is that international interveners deem the resolution of grassroots conflict an unimportant, unfamiliar, and illegitimate task.
The very idea of becoming involved at the local level clashes fundamentally with existing cultural norms, and it threatens key organizational interests.
For instance, the very identity of the United Nations as this macro-level diplomatic organization would be upended if it were to refocus on local conflicts.
And the result is that neither the internal resistance to the dominant ways of working nor the external shocks have managed to convince international actors that they should reevaluate their understanding of violence and intervention.
And so far, there have been only very few exceptions.
There have been exceptions, but only very few exceptions, to this broad pattern.
So to wrap up, the story I just told you is a story about how a dominant peacebuilding culture shapes the intervener's understanding of what the causes of violence are, how peace is made, and what interventions should accomplish.
These understandings enable international peacebuilders to ignore the micro-level foundations that are so necessary for sustainable peace.
The resulting inattention to local conflicts leads to inadequate peacebuilding in the short term and potential war resumption in the long term.
And what's fascinating is that this analysis helps us to better understand many cases of lasting conflict and international intervention failures, in Africa and elsewhere.
Local conflicts fuel violence in most war and post-war environments, from Afghanistan to Sudan to Timor-Leste, and in the rare cases where there have been comprehensive, bottom-up peacebuilding initiatives, these attempts have been successful at making peace sustainable.
One of the best examples is the contrast between the relatively peaceful situation in Somaliland, which benefited from sustained grassroots peacebuilding initiatives, and the violence prevalent in the rest of Somalia, where peacebuilding has been mostly top-down.
And there are several other cases in which local, grassroots conflict resolution has made a crucial difference.
So if we want international peacebuilding to work, in addition to any top-down intervention, conflicts must be resolved from the bottom up.
And again, it's not that national and international tensions don't matter.
They do.
And it's not that national and international peacebuilding isn't necessary.
It is.
Instead, it is that both macro-level and micro-level peacebuilding are needed to make peace sustainable, and local nongovernmental organizations, local authorities and civil society representatives should be the main actors in the bottom-up process.
So of course, there are obstacles.
Local actors often lack the funding and sometimes the logistical means and the technical capacity to implement effective, local peacebuilding programs.
So international actors should expand their funding and support for local conflict resolution.
As for Congo, what can be done?
After two decades of conflict and the deaths of millions, it's clear that we need to change our approach.
Based on my field research, I believe that international and Congolese actors should pay more attention to the resolution of land conflict and the promotion of inter-community reconciliation.
So for instance, in the province of the Kivus, the Life and Peace Institute and its Congolese partners have set up inter-community forums to discuss the specifics of local conflicts over land, and these forums have found solutions to help manage the violence.
That's the kind of program that is sorely needed throughout eastern Congo.
It's with programs like this that we can help people like Isabelle and her husband.
So these will not be magic wands, but because they take into account deeply rooted causes of the violence, they could definitely be game-changers.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi.
Today I'm going to share my personal journey with female genital mutilation, FGM.
Feel free to cry, laugh, cross your legs, or do anything your body feels like doing.
I'm not going to name the things your body does.
I was born in Sierra Leone.
Did anybody watch "Blood Diamond"?
If you have any thoughts -- I don't have any diamonds on me, by the way.
If you have heard of Ebola, well, that's in Sierra Leone as well.
I don't have Ebola. You're all safe.
Don't rush to the door.
Be seated. You're fine. I was checked before I got here.
My grandfather had three wives.
Don't ask me why a man needs more than one wife.
Men, do you need more than one wife?
I don't think so. There you go.
He was looking for a heart attack, that's what I say.
Oh yeah, he was.
When I was three, war broke out in Sierra Leone in 1991.
I remember literally going to bed one night, everything was good.
The next day, I woke up, bombs were dropping everywhere, and people were trying to kill me and my family.
We escaped the war and ended up in Gambia, in West Africa.
Ebola is there as well. Stay away from it.
While we were there as refugees, we didn't know what was going to become of us.
My mom applied for refugee status.
She's a wonderful, smart woman, that one, and we were lucky.
Australia said, we will take you in.
Good job, Aussies.
Before we were meant to travel, my mom came home one day, and said, "We're going on a little holiday, a little trip."
She put us in a car, and we drove for hours and ended up in a bush in a remote area in Gambia.
In this bush, we found two huts.
An old lady came towards us.
She was ethnic-looking, very old.
She had a chat with my mom, and went back.
Then she came back and walked away from us into a second hut.
I'm standing there thinking, "This is very confusing. I don't know what's going on."
The next thing I knew, my mom took me into this hut.
She took my clothes off, and then she pinned me down on the floor.
I struggled and tried to get her off me, but I couldn't.
Then the old lady came towards me with a rusty-looking knife, one of the sharp knives, orange-looking, has never seen water or sunlight before.
I thought she was going to slaughter me, but she didn't.
She slowly slid down my body and ended up where my vagina is.
She took hold of what I now know to be my clitoris, she took that rusty knife, and started cutting away, inch by inch.
I screamed, I cried, and asked my mom to get off me so this pain will stop, but all she did was say, "Be quiet."
This old lady sawed away at my flesh for what felt like forever, and then when she was done, she threw that piece of flesh across the floor as if it was the most disgusting thing she's ever touched.
They both got off me, and left me there bleeding, crying, and confused as to what just happened.
We never talked about this again.
Very soon, we found that we were coming to Australia, and this is when you had the Sydney Olympics at the time, and people said we were going to the end of the world, there was nowhere else to go after Australia.
Yeah, that comforted us a bit.
It took us three days to get here.
We went to Senegal, then France, and then Singapore.
We went to the bathroom to wash our hands.
We spent 15 minutes opening the tap like this.
Then somebody came in, slid their hand under and water came out, and we thought, is this what we're in for?
Like, seriously.
We got to Adelaide, small place, where literally they dumped us in Adelaide, that's what I would say.
They dumped us there.
We were very grateful.
We settled and we liked it.
We were like, "We're home, we're here."
Then somebody took us to Rundle Mall.
Adelaide has only one mall.
It's this small place.
And we saw a lot of Asian people.
My mom said all of a sudden, panicking, "You brought us to the wrong place. You must take us back to Australia."
Yeah. It had to be explained to her that there were a lot of Asians in Australia and we were in the right place.
So fine, it's all good.
My mom then had this brilliant idea that I should go to a girls school because they were less racist.
I don't know where she read that publication. (Laughter) Never found evidence of it to this day.
Six hundred white kids, and I was the only black child there.
No, I was the only person with a bit of a color on me.
Let me say that. Chocolate color.
There were no Asians, no indigenous.
All we had was some tan girls, girls who felt the need to be under the sun.
It wasn't the same as my chocolate, though. Not the same.
Settling in Australia was quite hard, but it became harder when I started volunteering for an organization called Women's Health Statewide, and I joined their female genital mutilation program without any awareness of what this program was actually about, or that it related to me in any way.
I spent months educating nurses and doctors about what female genital mutilation was and where it was practiced: Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and now, Australia and London and America, because, as we all know, we live in a multicultural society, and people who come from those backgrounds come with their culture, and sometimes they have cultural practices that we may not agree with, but they continue to practice them.
One day, I was looking at the chart of the different types of female genital mutilation, FGM, I will just say FGM for short.
Type I is when they cut off the hood.
Type II is when they cut off the whole clitoris and some of your labia majora, or your outer lips, and Type III is when they cut off the whole clitoris and then they sew you up so you only have a little hole to pee and have your period.
My eyes went onto Type II.
Before all of this, I pretty much had amnesia.
I was in so much shock and traumatized by what had happened, I didn't remember any of it.
Yes, I was aware something bad happened to me, but I had no recollection of what had happened.
I knew I had a scar down there, but I thought everybody had a scar down there.
This had happened to everybody else.
But when I looked at Type II, it all came back to me.
I remembered what was done to me.
I remembered being in that hut with that old lady and my mom holding me down.
Words cannot express the pain I felt, the confusion that I felt, because now I realized that what was done to me was a terrible thing that in this society was called barbaric, it was called mutilation.
My mother had said it was called circumcision, but here it was mutilation.
I was thinking, I'm mutilated? I'm a mutilated person.
Oh my God.
And then the anger came.
I was a black angry woman. (Laughter) Oh yeah.
A little one, but angry nevertheless.
I went home and said to my mom, "You did something."
This is not the African thing to do, pointing at your mother, but hey, I was ready for any consequences.
"You did something to me."
She's like, "What are you talking about, Khadija?"
She's used to me mouthing off.
I'm like, "Those years ago, You circumcised me.
You cut away something that belonged to me."
She said, "Yes, I did.
I did it for your own good.
It was in your best interest.
Your grandmother did it to me, and I did it to you.
It's made you a woman."
I'm like, "How?"
She said, "You're empowered, Khadija.
Do you get itchy down there?"
I'm like, "No, why would I get itchy down there?"
She said, "Well, if you were not circumcised, you would get itchy down there.
Women who are not circumcised get itchy all the time.
Then they sleep around with everybody.
You are not going to sleep around with anybody."
And I thought, her definition of empowerment was very strange. (Laughter) That was the end of our first conversation.
I went back to school.
These were the days when we had Dolly and Girlfriend magazines.
There was always the sealed section. Anybody remember those sealed sections?
The naughty bits, you know?
Oh yeah, I love those. (Laughter) Anyway, there was always an article about pleasure and relationships and, of course, sex.
But it always assumed that you had a clitoris, though, and I thought, this doesn't fit me.
This doesn't talk about people like me.
I don't have a clitoris.
I watched TV and those women would moan like, "Oh! Oh!"
I was like, these people and their damned clitoris.
(Laughter) What is a woman without a clitoris supposed to do with her life?
That's what I want to know.
I want to do that too -- "Oh! Oh!" and all of that.
Didn't happen.
So I came home once again and said to my mom, "Dolly and Girlfriend said I deserve pleasure, that I should be having orgasms, and that white men should figure out how to find the clitoris."
Apparently, white men have a problem finding the clitoris.
(Laughter) Just saying, it wasn't me. It was Dolly that said that.
And I thought to myself, I had an inner joke in my head that said, "I will marry a white man.
He won't have that problem with me." (Laughter) So I said to my mom, "Dolly and Girlfriend said I deserve pleasure, and do you know what you have taken away from me, what you have denied me?
You have invaded me in the most sacred way.
I want pleasure.
I want to get horny, dammit, as well."
And she said to me, "Who is Dolly and Girlfriend?
Are they your new friends, Khadija?"
I was like, "No, they're not. That's a magazine, mom, a magazine."
She didn't get it.
We came from two different worlds.
When she was growing up, not having a clitoris was the norm.
It was celebrated.
I was an African Australian girl.
I lived in a society that was very clitoris-centric.
It was all about the damn clitoris!
And I didn't have one!
That pissed me off.
So once I went through this strange phase of anger and pain and confusion, I remember booking an appointment with my therapist.
Yes, I'm an African who has a therapist. There you go.
And I said to her, "I was 13. I was a child.
I was settling in a new country, I was dealing with racism and discrimination, English is my third language, and then there it was."
I said to her, "I feel like I'm not a woman because of what was done to me.
I feel incomplete.
Am I going to be asexual?"
Because from what I knew about FGM, the whole aim of it was to control the sexuality of women.
It's so that we don't have any sexual desire.
And I said, "Am I asexual now?
Will I just live the rest of my life not feeling like having sex, not enjoying sex?"
She couldn't answer my questions, so they went unanswered.
When I started having my period around the age of 14, I realized I didn't have normal periods because of FGM.
My periods were heavy, they were long, and they were very painful.
Then they told me I had fibroids.
They're like these little balls sitting there.
One was covering one of my ovaries.
And there came then the big news.
"We don't think you can have children, Khadija."
And once again, I was an angry black woman.
I went home and I said to my mom, "Your act, your action, no matter what your may defense may be" -- because she thought she did it out love -- "what you did out of love is harming me, and it's hurting me.
What do you have to say for that?"
She said, "I did what I had to do as a mother."
I'm still waiting for an apology, by the way.
Then I got married.
And once again -- FGM is like the gift that keeps giving.
You figure that out very soon.
Sex was very painful.
It hurt all the time.
And of course I realized, they said, "You can't have kids."
I thought, "Wow, is this my existence? Is this what life is all about?"
I'm proud to tell you, five months ago, I was told I was pregnant.
(Applause) I am the lucky girl.
There are so many women out there who have gone through FGM who have infertility.
I know a nine-year-old girl who has incontinence, constant infections, pain.
It's that gift. It doesn't stop giving.
It affects every area of your life, and this happened to me because I was born a girl in the wrong place.
That's why it happened to me.
I channel all that anger, all that pain, into advocacy because I needed my pain to be worth something.
So I'm the director of an organization called No FGM Australia.
You heard me right.
Why No FGM Australia?
FGM is in Australia.
Two days ago, I had to call Child Protective Services, because somewhere in Australia, there's a four-year old there's a four-year-old whose mom is planning on performing FGM on her.
That child is in kindy. I'll let that sink in: four years old.
A couple of months ago, I met a lady who is married to a Malaysian man.
Her husband came home one day and said he was going to take their daughters back to Malaysia to cut off their clitoris.
And she said, "Why?" He said they were dirty.
And she said, "Well, you married me."
He said, "Oh, this is my cultural belief."
They then went into a whole discussion where she said to him, "Over my dead body will you do that to my daughters."
But imagine if this woman wasn't aware of what FGM was, if they never had that conversation?
Her children would have been flown over to Malaysia and they would have come back changed for the rest of their lives.
Do you know the millions of dollars it would take us to deal with an issue like that?
[Three children per day] in Australia are at risk of having FGM performed on them.
This is an Australian problem, people.
It's not an African problem. It's not a Middle Eastern problem.
It's not white, it's not black, it has no color, it's everybody's problem.
FGM is child abuse.
It's violence against women.
It's saying that women don't have a right to sexual pleasure.
It says we don't have a right to our bodies.
Well, I say no to that, and you know what? Bullshit.
That's what I have to say to that.
(Applause) I am proud to say that I'm doing my part in ending FGM.
What are you going to do?
There may be a child in your classroom who is at risk of FGM.
There may be a patient who comes to your hospital who is at risk of FGM.
But this is the reality, that even in our beloved Australia, the most wonderful place in the world, children are being abused because of a culture.
Culture should not be a defense for child abuse.
I want ever single one of you to see FGM as an issue for you.
Make it personal.
It could be your daughter, your sister, your cousin.
I can't fight FGM alone.
I could try, but I can't.
So my appeal to you is, please join me.
Sign my petition on Change.org and type in Khadija, my name, and it'll come up, and sign it.
The aim of that is to get support for FGM victims in Australia and to protect little girls growing up here to not have this evil done to them, because every child has a right to pleasure.
Every child has a right to their bodies being left intact, and dammit, ever child has a right to a clitoris.
So please join me in ending this act.
My favorite quote is, "All it takes for evil to prevail is for a few good men and women to do nothing."
Are you going to let this evil of female genital mutilation to prevail in Australia?
I don't think so, so please join me in ensuring that it ends in my generation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Have you every had to break your family's rules?
Today, I'm breaking mine, around money, secrecy and shame.
In 2006, on my brother Keith's 40th birthday, he called.
"Tam, I'm in dire straits.
I wouldn't ask unless I had to.
Can I borrow 7,500 dollars?"
This wasn't the first time he needed quick cash, but this time, his voice frightened me.
I had never heard him so beaten down and shameful, and it was on his 40th birthday.
After a few basic questions that we would all ask, I agreed to loan him the money, but under one condition: that as the financial professional in the family, I wanted to meet with him and his wife to see what was really happening.
Weeks later, we met at the local Starbucks, and I started right in with the tough-love budget conversation.
"You should sell the house, downsize to something you can afford, sell the toys.
And Starbucks?
Give up the five-dollar-a-day coffee."
You know, all the trappings that we do to keep up with the Joneses.
Quickly, my brother and his wife went into a fearsome blame game, and it got messy.
I vacillated between therapist and pissed-off sister.
I wanted them to be better than this.
"Come on, you two. Get your shit together.
You're parents.
Grow up and buck up."
After we left, I called my mom, but Keith beat me to it, and he told her that I wasn't helpful.
In fact, he was hurt and felt ganged-up on.
Of course he did. I shamed him with my tough-love budget conversation.
Two months went by when I received a call.
"Tam? I have bad news.
Keith committed suicide last night."
Days later, at his home, I went looking for answers, in his "office" -- the garage.
There, I found a stack of overdue credit card bills and a foreclosure notice served to him on the day that he died.
My brother left behind his beautiful 10-year-old daughter, his brilliant 18-year-old son, weeks before his high school graduation, and his wife of 20 years.
How did this happen?
My brother was caught in our family's money-shame cycle, and he was far from alone in this.
Suicide rates among adults ages 40 to 64 have risen nearly 40 percent since 1999.
Job loss, bankruptcy and foreclosures were present in nearly 40 percent of the deaths, with white middle-aged men accounting for seven out of 10 suicides.
What I've learned is that our self-destructive and self-defeating financial behaviors are not driven by our rational, logical minds.
Instead, they are a product of our subconscious belief systems rooted in our childhoods and so deeply ingrained in us, they shape the way that we deal with money our entire adult lives, and so many of you are left believing that you're lazy, crazy or stupid -- or just bad with money.
This is what I call money shame.
Dr. Brené Brown, a well-known shame researcher, defines shame as "the intensely painful feeling or experience of believing that we are flawed, and therefore unworthy of love and belonging."
Based on this definition, here's how I'm defining money shame: "the intensely painful feeling or experience of believing that we are flawed, and therefore unworthy of love and belonging, based on our bank account balances, our debts, our homes, our cars and our job titles."
Let me give you a couple of examples of what I mean.
I believe that we all have money shame, whether you earn 10,000 dollars a year or 10 million, and it's because we give money all of our power.
Here's what it would look like if someone that you love, or you, might have money shame.
They play the big shot, always picking up the check, financially rescuing family and friends.
They are financially secure, but they live in a state of chronic not-enoughness.
They drive a Mercedes, but their budget really only can afford a Honda.
And they're looking good at every cost.
I know that we can break free from the grips of money shame, because I did.
Shortly after my brother's death, the Recession hit.
I lost my business and faced bankruptcy.
Secretly, I was terrified.
I stayed in my home for a year, thinking I did something wrong, told myself, "What did you do? What happened?"
I stayed silent, while all along, I went outside and smiled.
Nobody knew.
That's money shame.
So what I had to do was let go of the grip that I had on knowing all the answers.
I was the know-it-all in my family, and I had to give up the idea that a new financial plan was the solution.
And so just like everything in my life, for me, I was sent a human to help, and I accepted the help, but I had to do major self-inquiry about my family's money history and my money beliefs.
We have to start having this conversation.
Money can no longer be a taboo topic.
We have to get honest with each other that we're suffering with money issues, and let's get real -- we have to stop numbing out our pain.
In order to uncover the painful parts of your money story and your money history, you can't be numb.
We have to let go of our past in order to be free.
Letting go of the past happens through surrender, faith and forgiveness.
Debt is the tangible manifestation of not forgiving.
If you have debt, you've not completely forgiven your past, so it's our work to forgive ourselves and others so that we can live freely.
Otherwise, our history will continue to repeat.
This is not a quick fix, and I know we all want one, but it's a slow wake-up.
This is another level of work.
We have to go higher to get it, to get at it.
So try this: follow your dollars.
Your money will show you right away what you value.
Where's it going?
And then ask yourself: Do I really value all this stuff?
And get curious about what you're feeling when you're spending.
Are you lonely?
Are you bored?
Or are you just excited?
But there's deeper work that needs to happen.
How did you get all these money beliefs to begin with?
I call this your money autobiography, and as a money coach, this is the first step I take with my clients.
Think back to your earliest childhood money memory.
What did it feel like when you got money?
Were you excited, proud or confused?
And what did you do with the money?
Did you run with the candy store, or did you run to the bank?
And what did you hear your parents say, and what did you see your parents do with the money?
My brother and I heard, "More money will make us happy."
Every day.
"More money will make us happy."
And we internalized that into the money belief that our self worth was equal to our net worth as we watched our mom live in a state of chronic not-enoughness.
And she numbed the pain with sugar and shopping.
So what did we do?
Keith played out my mother's life.
He was an underearner, longed to be financially rescued, and he numbed out the pain with alcohol.
I did the opposite.
I became a high earner, rescuer, and I numbed the pain out with self-help books.
But what we had in common was our money belief.
We both believed that our bank account balance was equal to our self worth.
Looking back at the Starbucks meeting with my brother ...
he didn't need a budget and my judgment.
He needed a breakthrough from his suffering, and he needed my compassion.
Keith was not able to be the one to speak up and break our family money shame cycle, so he left me to do the work and share his legacy.
Change is difficult, but in my family, not changing is fatal.
So I did the work, and I have experienced deep and profound forgiveness, and as I stand here today, I am living on purpose, I serve, and money serves me.
It only takes one person in your family to break through the money-shame cycle.
I want you to be the one.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So recently, we heard a lot about how social media helps empower protest, and that's true, but after more than a decade of studying and participating in multiple social movements, I've come to realize that the way technology empowers social movements can also paradoxically help weaken them.
This is not inevitable, but overcoming it requires diving deep into what makes success possible over the long term.
And the lessons apply in multiple domains.
Now, take Turkey's Gezi Park protests, July 2013, which I went back to study in the field.
Twitter was key to its organizing.
It was everywhere in the park -- well, along with a lot of tear gas.
It wasn't all high tech.
But the people in Turkey had already gotten used to the power of Twitter because of an unfortunate incident about a year before when military jets had bombed and killed 34 Kurdish smugglers near the border region, and Turkish media completely censored this news.
Editors sat in their newsrooms and waited for the government to tell them what to do.
One frustrated journalist could not take this anymore.
He purchased his own plane ticket, and went to the village where this had occurred.
And he was confronted by this scene: a line of coffins coming down a hill, relatives wailing.
He later he told me how overwhelmed he felt, and didn't know what to do, so he took out his phone, like any one of us might, and snapped that picture and tweeted it out.
And voila, that picture went viral and broke the censorship and forced mass media to cover it.
So when, a year later, Turkey's Gezi protests happened, it started as a protest about a park being razed, but became an anti-authoritarian protest.
It wasn't surprising that media also censored it, but it got a little ridiculous at times.
When things were so intense, when CNN International was broadcasting live from Istanbul, CNN Turkey instead was broadcasting a documentary on penguins.
Now, I love penguin documentaries, but that wasn't the news of the day.
An angry viewer put his two screens together and snapped that picture, and that one too went viral, and since then, people call Turkish media the penguin media. (Laughter) But this time, people knew what to do.
They just took out their phones and looked for actual news.
Better, they knew to go to the park and take pictures and participate and share it more on social media.
Digital connectivity was used for everything from food to donations.
Everything was organized partially with the help of these new technologies.
And using Internet to mobilize and publicize protests actually goes back a long way.
Remember the Zapatistas, the peasant uprising in the southern Chiapas region of Mexico led by the masked, pipe-smoking, charismatic Subcomandante Marcos?
That was probably the first movement that got global attention thanks to the Internet.
Or consider Seattle '99, when a multinational grassroots effort brought global attention to what was then an obscure organization, the World Trade Organization, by also utilizing these digital technologies to help them organize.
And more recently, movement after movement has shaken country after country: the Arab uprisings from Bahrain to Tunisia to Egypt and more; indignados in Spain, Italy, Greece; the Gezi Park protests; Taiwan; Euromaidan in Ukraine; Hong Kong.
And think of more recent initiatives, like the #BringBackOurGirls hashtags.
Nowadays, a network of tweets can unleash a global awareness campaign.
A Facebook page can become the hub of a massive mobilization.
Amazing.
But think of the moments I just mentioned.
The achievements they were able to have, their outcomes, are not really proportional to the size and energy they inspired.
The hopes they rightfully raised are not really matched by what they were able to have as a result in the end.
And this raises a question: As digital technology makes things easier for movements, why haven't successful outcomes become more likely as well?
In embracing digital platforms for activism and politics, are we overlooking some of the benefits of doing things the hard way?
Now, I believe so.
I believe that the rule of thumb is: Easier to mobilize does not always mean easier to achieve gains.
Now, to be clear, technology does empower in multiple ways.
It's very powerful.
In Turkey, I watched four young college students organize a countrywide citizen journalism network called 140Journos that became the central hub for uncensored news in the country.
In Egypt, I saw another four young people use digital connectivity to organize the supplies and logistics for 10 field hospitals, very large operations, during massive clashes near Tahrir Square in 2011.
And I asked the founder of this effort, called Tahrir Supplies, how long it took him to go from when he had the idea to when he got started.
"Five minutes," he said. Five minutes.
And he had no training or background in logistics.
Or think of the Occupy movement which rocked the world in 2011.
It started with a single email from a magazine, Adbusters, to 90,000 subscribers in its list.
About two months after that first email, there were in the United States 600 ongoing occupations and protests.
Less than one month after the first physical occupation in Zuccotti Park, a global protest was held in about 82 countries, 950 cities.
It was one of the largest global protests ever organized.
Now, compare that to what the Civil Rights Movement had to do in 1955 Alabama to protest the racially segregated bus system, which they wanted to boycott.
They'd been preparing for many years and decided it was time to swing into action after Rosa Parks was arrested.
But how do you get the word out -- tomorrow we're going to start the boycott -- when you don't have Facebook, texting, Twitter, none of that?
So they had to mimeograph 52,000 leaflets by sneaking into a university duplicating room and working all night, secretly.
They then used the 68 African-American organizations that criss-crossed the city to distribute those leaflets by hand.
And the logistical tasks were daunting, because these were poor people.
They had to get to work, boycott or no, so a massive carpool was organized, again by meeting.
No texting, no Twitter, no Facebook.
They had to meet almost all the time to keep this carpool going.
Today, it would be so much easier.
We could create a database, available rides and what rides you need, have the database coordinate, and use texting.
We wouldn't have to meet all that much.
But again, consider this: the Civil Rights Movement in the United States navigated a minefield of political dangers, faced repression and overcame, won major policy concessions, navigated and innovated through risks.
In contrast, three years after Occupy sparked that global conversation about inequality, the policies that fueled it are still in place.
Europe was also rocked by anti-austerity protests, but the continent didn't shift its direction.
In embracing these technologies, are we overlooking some of the benefits of slow and sustained?
To understand this, I went back to Turkey about a year after the Gezi protests and I interviewed a range of people, from activists to politicians, from both the ruling party and the opposition party and movements.
I found that the Gezi protesters were despairing.
They were frustrated, and they had achieved much less than what they had hoped for.
This echoed what I'd been hearing around the world from many other protesters that I'm in touch with.
And I've come to realize that part of the problem is that today's protests have become a bit like climbing Mt. Everest with the help of 60 Sherpas, and the Internet is our Sherpa.
What we're doing is taking the fast routes and not replacing the benefits of the slower work.
Because, you see, the kind of work that went into organizing all those daunting, tedious logistical tasks did not just take care of those tasks, they also created the kind of organization that could think together collectively and make hard decisions together, create consensus and innovate, and maybe even more crucially, keep going together through differences.
So when you see this March on Washington in 1963, when you look at that picture, where this is the march where Martin Luther King gave his famous "I have a dream" speech, 1963, you don't just see a march and you don't just hear a powerful speech, you also see the painstaking, long-term work that can put on that march.
And if you're in power, you realize you have to take the capacity signaled by that march, not just the march, but the capacity signaled by that march, seriously.
In contrast, when you look at Occupy's global marches that were organized in two weeks, you see a lot of discontent, but you don't necessarily see teeth that can bite over the long term.
And crucially, the Civil Rights Movement innovated tactically from boycotts to lunch counter sit-ins to pickets to marches to freedom rides.
Today's movements scale up very quickly without the organizational base that can see them through the challenges.
They feel a little like startups that got very big without knowing what to do next, and they rarely manage to shift tactically because they don't have the depth of capacity to weather such transitions.
Now, I want to be clear: The magic is not in the mimeograph.
It's in that capacity to work together, think together collectively, which can only be built over time with a lot of work.
To understand all this, I interviewed a top official from the ruling party in Turkey, and I ask him, "How do you do it?"
They too use digital technology extensively, so that's not it.
So what's the secret?
Well, he told me.
He said the key is he never took sugar with his tea.
I said, what has that got to do with anything?
Well, he said, his party starts getting ready for the next election the day after the last one, and he spends all day every day meeting with voters in their homes, in their wedding parties, circumcision ceremonies, and then he meets with his colleagues to compare notes.
With that many meetings every day, with tea offered at every one of them, which he could not refuse, because that would be rude, he could not take even one cube of sugar per cup of tea, because that would be many kilos of sugar, he can't even calculate how many kilos, and at that point I realized why he was speaking so fast.
We had met in the afternoon, and he was already way over-caffeinated.
But his party won two major elections within a year of the Gezi protests with comfortable margins.
To be sure, governments have different resources to bring to the table.
It's not the same game, but the differences are instructive.
And like all such stories, this is not a story just of technology.
It's what technology allows us to do converging with what we want to do.
Today's social movements want to operate informally.
They do not want institutional leadership.
They want to stay out of politics because they fear corruption and cooptation.
They have a point.
Modern representative democracies are being strangled in many countries by powerful interests.
But operating this way makes it hard for them to sustain over the long term and exert leverage over the system, which leads to frustrated protesters dropping out, and even more corrupt politics.
And politics and democracy without an effective challenge hobbles, because the causes that have inspired the modern recent movements are crucial.
Climate change is barreling towards us.
Inequality is stifling human growth and potential and economies.
Authoritarianism is choking many countries.
We need movements to be more effective.
Now, some people have argued that the problem is today's movements are not formed of people who take as many risks as before, and that is not true.
From Gezi to Tahrir to elsewhere, I've seen people put their lives and livelihoods on the line.
It's also not true, as Malcolm Gladwell claimed, that today's protesters form weaker virtual ties.
No, they come to these protests, just like before, with their friends, existing networks, and sometimes they do make new friends for life.
I still see the friends that I made in those Zapatista-convened global protests more than a decade ago, and the bonds between strangers are not worthless.
When I got tear-gassed in Gezi, people I didn't know helped me and one another instead of running away.
In Tahrir, I saw people, protesters, working really hard to keep each other safe and protected.
And digital awareness-raising is great, because changing minds is the bedrock of changing politics.
But movements today have to move beyond participation at great scale very fast and figure out how to think together collectively, develop strong policy proposals, create consensus, figure out the political steps and relate them to leverage, because all these good intentions and bravery and sacrifice by itself are not going to be enough.
And there are many efforts.
In New Zealand, a group of young people are developing a platform called Loomio for participatory decision making at scale.
In Turkey, 140Journos are holding hack-a-thons so that they support communities as well as citizen journalism.
In Argentina, an open-source platform called DemocracyOS is bringing participation to parliaments and political parties.
These are all great, and we need more, but the answer won't just be better online decision-making, because to update democracy, we are going to need to innovate at every level, from the organizational to the political to the social.
Because to succeed over the long term, sometimes you do need tea without sugar along with your Twitter.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was invited to give this talk a couple of months ago, we discussed a number of titles with the organizers, and a lot of different items were kicked around and were discussed.
But nobody suggested this one, and the reason for that was two months ago, Ebola was escalating exponentially and spreading over wider geographic areas than we had ever seen, and the world was terrified, concerned and alarmed by this disease, in a way we've not seen in recent history.
But today, I can stand here and I can talk to you about beating Ebola because of people whom you've never heard of, people like Peter Clement, a Liberian doctor who's working in Lofa County, a place that many of you have never heard of, probably, in Liberia.
The reason that Lofa County is so important is because about five months ago, when the epidemic was just starting to escalate, Lofa County was right at the center, the epicenter of this epidemic.
At that time, MSF and the treatment center there, they were seeing dozens of patients every single day, and these patients, these communities were becoming more and more terrified as time went by, with this disease and what it was doing to their families, to their communities, to their children, to their relatives.
And so Peter Clement was charged with driving that 12-hour-long rough road from Monrovia, the capital, up to Lofa County, to try and help bring control to the escalating epidemic there.
And what Peter found when he arrived was the terror that I just mentioned to you.
So he sat down with the local chiefs, and he listened.
And what he heard was heartbreaking.
He heard about the devastation and the desperation of people affected by this disease.
He heard the heartbreaking stories about not just the damage that Ebola did to people, but what it did to families and what it did to communities.
And he listened to the local chiefs there and what they told him -- They said, "When our children are sick, when our children are dying, we can't hold them at a time when we want to be closest to them.
When our relatives die, we can't take care of them as our tradition demands.
We are not allowed to wash the bodies to bury them the way our communities and our rituals demand.
And for this reason, they were deeply disturbed, deeply alarmed and the entire epidemic was unraveling in front of them.
People were turning on the healthcare workers who had come, the heroes who had come to try and help save the community, to help work with the community, and they were unable to access them.
And what happened then was Peter explained to the leaders.
The leaders listened. They turned the tables.
And Peter explained what Ebola was. He explained what the disease was.
He explained what it did to their communities.
And he explained that Ebola threatened everything that made us human.
Ebola means you can't hold your children the way you would in this situation.
You can't bury your dead the way that you would.
You have to trust these people in these space suits to do that for you.
And ladies and gentlemen, what happened then was rather extraordinary: The community and the health workers, Peter, they sat down together and they put together a new plan for controlling Ebola in Lofa County.
And the reason that this is such an important story, ladies and gentlemen, is because today, this county, which is right at the center of this epidemic you've been watching, you've been seeing in the newspapers, you've been seeing on the television screens, today Lofa County is nearly eight weeks without seeing a single case of Ebola.
(Applause) Now, this doesn't mean that the job is done, obviously.
There's still a huge risk that there will be additional cases there.
But what it does teach us is that Ebola can be beaten.
That's the key thing.
Even on this scale, even with the rapid kind of growth that we saw in this environment here, we now know Ebola can be beaten.
When communities come together with health care workers, work together, that's when this disease can be stopped.
But how did Ebola end up in Lofa County in the first place?
Well, for that, we have to go back 12 months, to the start of this epidemic.
And as many of you know, this virus went undetected, it evaded detection for three or four months when it began.
That's because this is not a disease of West Africa, it's a disease of Central Africa, half a continent away.
People hadn't seen the disease before; health workers hadn't seen the disease before.
They didn't know what they were dealing with, and to make it even more complicated, the virus itself was causing a symptom, a type of a presentation that wasn't classical of the disease.
So people didn't even recognize the disease, people who knew Ebola.
For that reason it evaded detection for some time, But contrary to public belief sometimes these days, once the virus was detected, there was a rapid surge in of support.
MSF rapidly set up an Ebola treatment center, as many of you know, in the area.
The World Health Organization and the partners that it works with deployed eventually hundreds of people over the next two months to be able to help track the virus.
The problem, ladies and gentlemen, is by then, this virus, well known now as Ebola, had spread too far.
It had already outstripped what was one of the largest responses that had been mounted so far to an Ebola outbreak.
By the middle of the year, not just Guinea but now Sierra Leone and Liberia were also infected.
As the virus was spreading geographically, the numbers were increasing and at this time, not only were hundreds of people infected and dying of the disease, but as importantly, the front line responders, the people who had gone to try and help, the health care workers, the other responders were also sick and dying by the dozens.
The presidents of these countries recognized the emergencies.
They met right around that time, they agreed on common action and they put together an emergency joint operation center in Conakry to try and work together to finish this disease and get it stopped, to implement the strategies we talked about.
But what happened then was something we had never seen before with Ebola.
What happened then was the virus, or someone sick with the virus, boarded an airplane, flew to another country, and for the first time, we saw in another distant country the virus pop up again.
This time it was in Nigeria, in the teeming metropolis of Lagos, 21 million people.
Now the virus was in that environment.
And as you can anticipate, there was international alarm, international concern on a scale that we hadn't seen in recent years caused by a disease like this.
The World Health Organization immediately called together an expert panel, looked at the situation, declared an international emergency.
And in doing so, the expectation would be that there would be a huge outpouring of international assistance to help these countries which were in so much trouble and concern at that time.
But what we saw was something very different.
There was some great response.
A number of countries came to assist -- many, many NGOs and others, as you know, but at the same time, the opposite happened in many places.
Alarm escalated, and very soon these countries found themselves not receiving the support they needed, but increasingly isolated.
What we saw was commercial airlines [stopped] flying into these countries and people who hadn't even been exposed to the virus were no longer allowed to travel.
This caused not only problems, obviously, for the countries themselves, but also for the response.
Those organizations that were trying to bring people in, to try and help them respond to the outbreak, they could not get people on airplanes, they could not get them into the countries to be able to respond.
In that situation, ladies and gentleman, a virus like Ebola takes advantage.
And what we saw then was something also we hadn't seen before.
Not only did this virus continue in the places where they'd already become infected, but then it started to escalate and we saw the case numbers that you see here, something we'd never seen before on such a scale, an exponential increase of Ebola cases not just in these countries or the areas already infected in these countries but also spreading further and deeper into these countries.
Ladies and gentleman, this was one of the most concerning international emergencies in public health we've ever seen.
And what happened in these countries then, many of you saw, again, on the television, read about in the newspapers, we saw the health system start to collapse under the weight of this epidemic.
We saw the schools begin to close, markets no longer started, no longer functioned the way that they should in these countries.
We saw that misinformation and misperceptions started to spread even faster through the communities, which became even more alarmed about the situation.
They started to recoil from those people that you saw in those space suits, as they call them, who had come to help them.
And then the situation deteriorated even further.
The countries had to declare a state of emergency.
Large populations needed to be quarantined in some areas, and then riots broke out.
It was a very, very terrifying situation.
Around the world, many people began to ask, can we ever stop Ebola when it starts to spread like this?
And they started to ask, how well do we really know this virus?
The reality is we don't know Ebola extremely well.
It's a relatively modern disease in terms of what we know about it.
We've known the disease only for 40 years, since it first popped up in Central Africa in 1976.
But despite that, we do know many things: We know that this virus probably survives in a type of a bat.
We know that it probably enters a human population when we come in contact with a wild animal that has been infected with the virus and probably sickened by it.
Then we know that the virus spreads from person to person through contaminated body fluids.
And as you've all seen, we know the horrific disease that it then causes in humans, where we see this disease cause severe fevers, diarrhea, vomiting, and then unfortunately, in 70 percent of the cases or often more, death.
This is a very dangerous, debilitating, and deadly disease.
But despite the fact that we've not known this disease for a particularly long time, and we don't know everything about it, we do know how to stop this disease.
There are four things that are critical to stopping Ebola.
First and foremost, the communities have got to understand this disease, they've got to understand how it spreads and how to stop it.
And then we've got to be able to have systems that can find every single case, every contact of those cases, and begin to track the transmission chains so that you can stop transmission.
We have to have treatment centers, specialized Ebola treatment centers, where the workers can be protected as they try to provide support to the people who are infected, so that they might survive the disease.
And then for those who do die, we have to ensure there is a safe, but at the same time dignified, burial process, so that there is no spread at that time as well.
So we do know how to stop Ebola, and these strategies work, ladies and gentlemen.
The virus was stopped in Nigeria by these four strategies and the people implementing them, obviously.
It was stopped in Senegal, where it had spread, and also in the other countries that were affected by this virus, in this outbreak.
So there's no question that these strategies actually work.
The big question, ladies and gentlemen, was whether these strategies could work on this scale, in this situation, with so many countries affected with the kind of exponential growth that you saw.
That was the big question that we were facing just two or three months ago.
Today we know the answer to that question.
And we know that answer because of the extraordinary work of an incredible group of NGOs, of governments, of local leaders, of U.N. agencies and many humanitarian and other organizations that came and joined the fight to try and stop Ebola in West Africa.
But what had to be done there was slightly different.
These countries took those strategies I just showed you; the community engagement, the case finding, contact tracing, etc., and they turned them on their head.
There was so much disease, they approached it differently.
What they decided to do was they would first try and slow down this epidemic by rapidly building as many beds as possible in specialized treatment centers so that they could prevent the disease from spreading from those were infected.
They would rapidly build out many, many burial teams so that they could safely deal with the dead, and with that, they would try and slow this outbreak to see if it could actually then be controlled using the classic approach of case finding and contact tracing.
And when I went to West Africa about three months ago, when I was there what I saw was extraordinary.
I saw presidents opening emergency operation centers themselves against Ebola so that they could personally coordinate and oversee and champion this surge of international support to try and stop this disease.
We saw militaries from within those countries and from far beyond coming in to help build Ebola treatment centers that could be used to isolate those who were sick.
We saw the Red Cross movement working with its partner agencies on the ground there to help train the communities so that they could actually safely bury their dead in a dignified manner themselves.
And we saw the U.N. agencies, the World Food Program, build a tremendous air bridge that could get responders to every single corner of these countries rapidly to be able to implement the strategies that we just talked about.
What we saw, ladies and gentlemen, which was probably most impressive, was this incredible work by the governments, by the leaders in these countries, with the communities, to try to ensure people understood this disease, understood the extraordinary things they would have to do to try and stop Ebola.
And as a result, ladies and gentlemen, we saw something that we did not know only two or three months earlier, whether or not it would be possible.
What we saw was what you see now in this graph, when we took stock on December 1.
What we saw was we could bend that curve, so to speak, change this exponential growth, and bring some hope back to the ability to control this outbreak.
And for this reason, ladies and gentlemen, there's absolutely no question now that we can catch up with this outbreak in West Africa and we can beat Ebola.
The big question, though, that many people are asking, even when they saw this curve, they said, "Well, hang on a minute -- that's great you can slow it down, but can you actually drive it down to zero?"
We already answered that question back at the beginning of this talk, when I spoke about Lofa County in Liberia.
We told you the story how Lofa County got to a situation where they have not seen Ebola for eight weeks.
But there are similar stories from the other countries as well.
From Gueckedou in Guinea, the first area where the first case was actually diagnosed.
We've seen very, very few cases in the last couple of months, and here in Kenema, in Sierra Leone, another area in the epicenter, we have not seen the virus for more than a couple of weeks -- way too early to declare victory, obviously, but evidence, ladies and gentlemen, not only can the response catch up to the disease, but this disease can be driven to zero.
The challenge now, of course, is doing this on the scale needed right across these three countries, and that is a huge challenge.
Because when you've been at something for this long, on this scale, two other big threats come in to join the virus.
The first of those is complacency, the risk that as this disease curve starts to bend, the media look elsewhere, the world looks elsewhere.
Complacency always a risk.
And the other risk, of course, is when you've been working so hard for so long, and slept so few hours over the past months, people are tired, people become fatigued, and these new risks start to creep into the response.
Ladies and gentlemen, I can tell you today I've just come back from West Africa.
The people of these countries, the leaders of these countries, they are not complacent.
They want to drive Ebola to zero in their countries.
And these people, yes, they're tired, but they are not fatigued.
They have an energy, they have a courage, they have the strength to get this finished.
What they need, ladies and gentlemen, at this point, is the unwavering support of the international community, to stand with them, to bolster and bring even more support at this time, to get the job finished.
Because finishing Ebola right now means turning the tables on this virus, and beginning to hunt it.
Remember, this virus, this whole crisis, rather, started with one case, and is going to finish with one case.
But it will only finish if those countries have got enough epidemiologists, enough health workers, enough logisticians and enough other people working with them to be able to find every one of those cases, track their contacts and make sure that this disease stops once and for all.
Ladies and gentleman, Ebola can be beaten.
Now we need you to take this story out to tell it to the people who will listen and educate them on what it means to beat Ebola, and more importantly, we need you to advocate with the people who can help us bring the resources we need to these countries, to beat this disease.
There are a lot of people out there who will survive and will thrive, in part because of what you do to help us beat Ebola.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Some years ago, I stumbled across a simple design exercise that helps people understand and solve complex problems, and like many of these design exercises, it kind of seems trivial at first, but under deep inspection, it turns out that it reveals unexpected truths about the way that we collaborate and make sense of things.
The exercise has three parts and begins with something that we all know how to do, which is how to make toast.
It begins with a clean sheet of paper, a felt marker, and without using any words, you begin to draw how to make toast.
And most people draw something like this.
They draw a loaf of bread, which is sliced, then put into a toaster.
The toast is then deposited for some time.
It pops up, and then voila! After two minutes, toast and happiness.
Now, over the years, I've collected many hundreds of drawings of these toasts, and some of them are very good, because they really illustrate the toast-making process quite clearly.
And then there are some that are, well, not so good.
They really suck, actually, because you don't know what they're trying to say.
Under close inspection, some reveal some aspects of toast-making while hiding others.
So there's some that are all about the toast, and all about the transformation of toast.
And there's others that are all about the toaster, and the engineers love to draw the mechanics of this.
(Laughter) And then there are others that are about people.
It's about visualizing the experience that people have.
And then there are others that are about the supply chain of making toast that goes all the way back to the store.
It goes through the supply chain networks of teleportation and all the way back to the field and wheat, and one all actually goes all the way back to the Big Bang.
So it's crazy stuff.
But I think it's obvious that even though these drawings are really wildly different, they share a common quality, and I'm wondering if you can see it.
Do you see it? What's common about these?
Most drawings have nodes and links.
So nodes represent the tangible objects like the toaster and people, and links represent the connections between the nodes.
And it's the combination of links and nodes that produces a full systems model, and it makes our private mental models visible about how we think something works.
So that's the value of these things.
What's interesting about these systems models is how they reveal our various points of view.
So for example, Americans make toast with a toaster.
That seems obvious.
Whereas many Europeans make toast with a frying pan, of course, and many students make toast with a fire.
I don't really understand this. A lot of MBA students do this.
So you can measure the complexity by counting the number of nodes, and the average illustration has between four and eight nodes.
Less than that, the drawing seems trivial, but it's quick to understand, and more than 13, the drawing produces a feeling of map shock.
So the sweet spot is between 5 and 13.
So if you want to communicate something visually, have between five and 13 nodes in your diagram.
So though we may not be skilled at drawing, the point is that we intuitively know how to break down complex things into simple things and then bring them back together again.
So this brings us to our second part of the exercise, which is how to make toast, but now with sticky notes or with cards.
So what happens then?
Well, with cards, most people tend to draw clear, more detailed, and more logical nodes.
You can see the step by step analysis that takes place, and as they build up their model, they move their nodes around, rearranging them like Lego blocks.
Now, though this might seem trivial, it's actually really important.
This rapid iteration of expressing and then reflecting and analyzing is really the only way in which we get clarity.
It's the essence of the design process.
And systems theorists do tell us that the ease with which we can change a representation correlates to our willingness to improve the model.
So sticky note systems are not only more fluid, they generally produce way more nodes than static drawings.
The drawings are much richer.
And this brings us to our third part of the exercise, which is to draw how to make toast, but this time in a group.
So what happens then?
Well, here's what happens.
It starts out messy, and then it gets really messy, and then it gets messier, but as people refine the models, the best nodes become more prominent, and with each iteration, the model becomes clearer because people build on top of each other's ideas.
What emerges is a unified systems model that integrates the diversity of everyone's individual points of view, so that's a really different outcome from what usually happens in meetings, isn't it?
So these drawings can contain 20 or more nodes, but participants don't feel map shock because they participate in the building of their models themselves.
Now, what's also really interesting, that the groups spontaneously mix and add additional layers of organization to it.
To deal with contradictions, for example, they add branching patterns and parallel patterns.
Oh, and by the way, if they do it in complete silence, they do it much better and much more quickly.
Really interesting -- talking gets in the way.
So here's some key lessons that can emerge from this.
First, drawing helps us understand the situations as systems with nodes and their relationships.
Movable cards produce better systems models, because we iterate much more fluidly.
And then the group notes produce the most comprehensive models because we synthesize several points of view.
So that's interesting.
When people work together under the right circumstances, group models are much better than individual models.
So this approach works really great for drawing how to make toast, but what if you wanted to draw something more relevant or pressing, like your organizational vision, or customer experience, or long-term sustainability?
There's a visual revolution that's taking place as more organizations are addressing their wicked problems by collaboratively drawing them out.
And I'm convinced that those who see their world as movable nodes and links really have an edge.
And the practice is really pretty simple.
You start with a question, you collect the nodes, you refine the nodes, you do it over again, you refine and refine and refine, and the patterns emerge, and the group gets clarity and you answer the question.
So this simple act of visualizing and doing over and over again produces some really remarkable outcomes.
What's really important to know is that it's the conversations that are the important aspects, not just the models themselves.
And these visual frames of reference can grow to several hundreds or even thousands of nodes.
So, one example is from an organization called Rodale.
Big publishing company.
They lost a bunch of money one year, and their executive team for three days visualized their entire practice.
And what's interesting is that after visualizing the entire business, systems upon systems, they reclaimed 50 million dollars of revenue, and they also moved from a D rating to an A rating from their customers.
Why? Because there's alignment from the executive team.
So I'm now on a mission to help organizations solve their wicked problems by using collaborative visualization, and on a site that I've produced called drawtoast.com, I've collected a bunch of best practices.
and so you can learn how to run a workshop here, you can learn more about the visual language and the structure of links and nodes that you can apply to general problem-solving, and download examples of various templates for unpacking the thorny problems that we all face in our organizations.
So the seemingly trivial design exercise of drawing toast helps us get clear, engaged and aligned.
So next time you're confronted with an interesting challenge, remember what design has to teach us.
Make your ideas visible, tangible, and consequential.
It's simple, it's fun, it's powerful, and I believe it's an idea worth celebrating.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Applause) Thank you. Ooh, I'm like, "Phew, phew, calm down. Get back into my body now." (Laughter) Usually when I play out, the first thing that happens is people scream out, "What's she doing?!"
I'll play at these rock shows, be on stage standing completely still, and they're like, "What's she doing?! What's she doing?!"
And then I'll kind of be like -- (Vvvwow!) -- and then they're like, "Whoa!"
(Laughter) I'm sure you're trying to figure out, "Well, how does this thing work?"
Well, what I'm doing is controlling the pitch with my left hand.
See, the closer I get to this antenna, the higher the note gets -- (Portamento) -- and you can get it really low.
And with this hand I'm controlling the volume, so the further away my right hand gets, the louder it gets.
(Tones) So basically, with both of your hands you're controlling pitch and volume and kind of trying to create the illusion that you're doing separate notes, when really it's continuously going ...
(Flourish ... Beep) (Laughter) Sometimes I startle myself: I'll forget that I have it on, and I'll lean over to pick up something, and then it goes like -- (Blip) -- "Oh!"
And it's like a funny sound effect that follows you around if you don't turn the thing off.
(Laughter) Maybe we'll go into the next tune, because I totally lost where this is going.
We're going to do a song by David Mash called "Listen: the Words Are Gone," and maybe I'll have words come back into me afterwards if I can relax.
(Music) (Applause) So, I'm trying to think of some of the questions that are commonly asked; there are so many.
And ... Well, I guess I could tell you a little of the history of the theremin.
It was invented around the 1920s, and the inventor, Léon Theremin -- he also was a musician besides an inventor -- he came up with the idea for making the theremin, I think, when he was working on some shortwave radios.
And there'd be that sound in the signal -- it's like (Screeching) -- and he thought, "Oh, what if I could control that sound and turn it into an instrument, because there are pitches in it."
And so somehow through developing that, he eventually came to make the theremin the way it is now.
And a lot of times, even kids nowadays, they'll make reference to a theremin by going, "Whoo-hoo-hoo-hoo," because in the '50s it was used in the sci-fi horror movies, that sound that's like ... (Woo-hoo-hoo-hoo) (Laughter) It's kind of a funny, goofy sound to do.
And sometimes if I have too much coffee, then my vibrato gets out of hand.
You're really sensitive to your body and its functions when you're behind this thing.
You have to stay so still if you want to have the most control.
It reminds me of the balancing act earlier on -- what Michael was doing -- because you're fighting so hard to keep the balance with what you're playing with and stay in tune, and at the same time you don't want to focus so much on being in tune all the time; you want to be feeling the music.
And then also, you're trying to stay very, very, very still because little movements with other parts of your body will affect the pitch, or sometimes if you're holding a low note -- (Tone rising out of key) -- and breathing will make it ...
(Laughter) If I pass out on the next song ...
(Laughter) I think of it almost like like a yoga instrument because it makes you so aware of every little crazy thing your body is doing, or just aware of what you don't want it to be doing while you're playing; you don't want to have any sudden movements.
And if I go to a club and play a gig, people are like, "Here, have some drinks on us!"
And it's like, "Well, I'm about to go on soon; I don't want to be like -- (Teetering tones) -- you know?"
It really does reflect the mood that you're in also, if you're ...
it's similar to being a vocalist, except instead of it coming out of your throat, you're controlling it just in the air and you don't really have a point of reference; you're always relying on your ears and adjusting constantly.
You just have to always adjust to what's happening and realize you'll have bummer notes come here and there and listen to it, adjust it, and just move on, or else you'll get too tied up and go crazy. Like me.
I think we will play another tune now.
I'm going to do "Lush Life." It's one of my favorite tunes to play.
(Music) (Applause)
I'm an artist and I cut books.
This is one of my first book works.
It's called "Alternate Route to Knowledge."
I wanted to create a stack of books so that somebody could come into the gallery and think they're just looking at a regular stack of books, but then as they got closer they would see this rough hole carved into it, and wonder what was happening, wonder why, and think about the material of the book.
So I'm interested in the texture, but I'm more interested in the text and the images that we find within books.
In most of my work, what I do is I seal the edges of a book with a thick varnish so it's creating sort of a skin on the outside of the book so it becomes a solid material, but then the pages inside are still loose, and then I carve into the surface of the book, and I'm not moving or adding anything.
I'm just carving around whatever I find interesting.
So everything you see within the finished piece is exactly where it was in the book before I began.
I think of my work as sort of a remix, in a way, because I'm working with somebody else's material in the same way that a D.J. might be working with somebody else's music.
This was a book of Raphael paintings, the Renaissance artist, and by taking his work and remixing it, carving into it, I'm sort of making it into something that's more new and more contemporary.
I'm thinking also about breaking out of the box of the traditional book and pushing that linear format, and try to push the structure of the book itself so that the book can become fully sculptural.
I'm using clamps and ropes and all sorts of materials, weights, in order to hold things in place before I varnish so that I can push the form before I begin, so that something like this can become a piece like this, which is just made from a single dictionary.
Or something like this can become a piece like this.
Or something like this, which who knows what that's going to be or why that's in my studio, will become a piece like this.
So I think one of the reasons people are disturbed by destroying books, people don't want to rip books and nobody really wants to throw away a book, is that we think about books as living things, we think about them as a body, and they're created to relate to our body, as far as scale, but they also have the potential to continue to grow and to continue to become new things.
So books really are alive.
So I think of the book as a body, and I think of the book as a technology.
I think of the book as a tool.
And I also think of the book as a machine.
I also think of the book as a landscape.
This is a full set of encyclopedias that's been connected and sanded together, and as I carve through it, I'm deciding what I want to choose.
So with encyclopedias, I could have chosen anything, but I specifically chose images of landscapes.
And with the material itself, I'm using sandpaper and sanding the edges so not only the images suggest landscape, but the material itself suggests a landscape as well.
So one of the things I do is when I'm carving through the book, I'm thinking about images, but I'm also thinking about text, and I think about them in a very similar way, because what's interesting is that when we're reading text, when we're reading a book, it puts images in our head, so we're sort of filling that piece.
We're sort of creating images when we're reading text, and when we're looking at an image, we actually use language in order to understand what we're looking at.
So there's sort of a yin-yang that happens, sort of a flip flop.
So I'm creating a piece that the viewer is completing themselves.
And I think of my work as almost an archaeology.
I'm excavating and I'm trying to maximize the potential and discover as much as I possibly can and exposing it within my own work.
But at the same time, I'm thinking about this idea of erasure, and what's happening now that most of our information is intangible, and this idea of loss, and this idea that not only is the format constantly shifting within computers, but the information itself, now that we don't have a physical backup, has to be constantly updated in order to not lose it.
And I have several dictionaries in my own studio, and I do use a computer every day, and if I need to look up a word, I'll go on the computer, because I can go directly and instantly to what I'm looking up.
I think that the book was never really the right format for nonlinear information, which is why we're seeing reference books becoming the first to be endangered or extinct.
So I don't think that the book will ever really die.
People think that now that we have digital technology, the book is going to die, and we are seeing things shifting and things evolving.
I think that the book will evolve, and just like people said painting would die when photography and printmaking became everyday materials, but what it really allowed painting to do was it allowed painting to quit its day job.
It allowed painting to not have to have that everyday chore of telling the story, and painting became free and was allowed to tell its own story, and that's when we saw Modernism emerge, and we saw painting go into different branches.
And I think that's what's happening with books now, now that most of our technology, most of our information, most of our personal and cultural records are in digital form, I think it's really allowing the book to become something new.
So I think it's a very exciting time for an artist like me, and it's very exciting to see what will happen with the book in the future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
About two and a half years ago, I watched this movie called "Her."
And it features Samantha, a superintelligent form of AI that cannot take physical form.
And because she can't appear in photographs, Samantha decides to write a piece of music that will capture a moment of her life just like a photograph would.
As a musician and an engineer, and someone raised in a family of artists, I thought that this idea of musical photographs was really powerful.
And I decided to create an AI composer.
Her name is AIVA, and she's an artificial intelligence that has learned the art of music composition by reading over 30,000 scores of history's greatest.
So here's what one score looks like to the algorithm in a matrix-like representation.
And here's what 30,000 scores, written by the likes of Mozart and Beethoven, look like in a single frame.
So, using deep neural networks, AIVA looks for patterns in the scores.
And from a couple of bars of existing music, it actually tries to infer what notes should come next in those tracks.
And once AIVA gets good at those predictions, it can actually build a set of mathematical rules for that style of music in order to create its own original compositions.
And in a way, this is kind of how we, humans, compose music, too.
It's a trial-and-error process, during which we may not get the right notes all the time.
But we can correct ourselves, either with our musical ear or our musical knowledge.
But for AIVA, this process is taken from years and years of learning, decades of learning as an artist, as a musician and a composer, down to a couple of hours.
But music is also a supersubjective art.
And we needed to teach AIVA how to compose the right music for the right person, because people have different preferences.
And to do that, we show to the algorithm over 30 different category labels for each score in our database.
So those category labels are like mood or note density or composer style of a piece or the epoch during which it was written.
And by seeing all this data, AIVA can actually respond to very precise requirements.
Like the ones, for example, we had for a project recently, where we were commissioned to create a piece that would be reminiscent of a science-fiction film soundtrack.
And the piece that was created is called "Among the Stars" and it was recorded with CMG Orchestra in Hollywood, under great conductor John Beal, and this is what they recorded, made by AIVA.
(Music) (Music ends) What do you think?
(Applause) Thank you.
So, as you've seen, AI can create beautiful pieces of music, and the best part of it is that humans can actually bring them to life.
And it's not the first time in history that technology has augmented human creativity.
Live music was almost always used in silent films to augment the experience.
But the problem with live music is that it didn't scale.
It's really hard to cram a full symphony into a small theater, and it's really hard to do that for every theater in the world.
So when music recording was actually invented, it allowed content creators, like film creators, to have prerecorded and original music tailored to each and every frame of their stories.
And that was really an enhancer of creativity.
Two and a half years ago, when I watched this movie "Her," I thought to myself that personalized music would be the next single biggest change in how we consume and create music.
Because nowadays, we have interactive content, like video games, that have hundreds of hours of interactive game plays, but only two hours of music, on average.
And it means that the music loops and loops and loops over and over again, and it's not very immersive.
So what we're working on is to make sure that AI can compose hundreds of hours of personalized music for those use cases where human creativity doesn't scale.
And we don't just want to do that for games.
Beethoven actually wrote a piece for his beloved, called "Für Elise," and imagine if we could bring back Beethoven to life.
And if he was sitting next to you, composing a music for your personality and your life story.
Or imagine if someone like Martin Luther King, for example, had a personalized AI composer.
Maybe then we would remember "I Have a Dream" not only as a great speech, but also as a great piece of music, part of our history, and capturing Dr. King's ideals.
And this is our vision at AIVA: to personalize music so that each and every one of you and every individual in the world can have access to a personalized live soundtrack, based on their story and their personality.
So this moment here together at TED is now part of our life story.
So it only felt fitting that AIVA would compose music for this moment.
And that's exactly what we did.
So my team and I worked on biasing AIVA on the style of the TED jingle, and on music that makes us feel a sense of awe and wonder.
And the result is called "The Age of Amazement."
Didn't take an AI to figure that one out.
(Laughter) And I couldn't be more proud to show it to you, so if you can, close your eyes and enjoy the music.
Thank you very much.
(Music) [The Age of Amazement Composed by AIVA] (Music ends) This was for all of you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So infectious diseases, right?
Infectious diseases are still the main cause of human suffering and death around the world.
Every year, millions of people die of diseases such as T.B., malaria, HIV, around the world and even in the United States.
Every year, thousands of Americans die of seasonal flu.
Now of course, humans, we are creative. Right?
We have come up with ways to protect ourselves against these diseases.
We have drugs and vaccines.
And we're conscious -- we learn from our experiences and come up with creative solutions.
We used to think we're alone in this, but now we know we're not.
We're not the only medical doctors.
Now we know that there's a lot of animals out there that can do it too.
Most famous, perhaps, chimpanzees.
Not so much different from us, they can use plants to treat their intestinal parasites.
But the last few decades have shown us that other animals can do it too: elephants, porcupines, sheep, goats, you name it.
And even more interesting than that is that recent discoveries are telling us that insects and other little animals with smaller brains can use medication too.
The problem with infectious diseases, as we all know, is that pathogens continue to evolve, and a lot of the drugs that we have developed are losing their efficacy.
And therefore, there is this great need to find new ways to discover drugs that we can use against our diseases.
Now, I think that we should look at these animals, and we can learn from them how to treat our own diseases.
As a biologist, I have been studying monarch butterflies for the last 10 years.
Now, monarchs are extremely famous for their spectacular migrations from the U.S. and Canada down to Mexico every year, where millions of them come together, but it's not why I started studying them.
I study monarchs because they get sick.
They get sick like you. They get sick like me.
And I think what they do can tell us a lot about drugs that we can develop for humans.
Now, the parasites that monarchs get infected with are called ophryocystis elektroscirrha -- a mouthful.
What they do is they produce spores, millions of spores on the outside of the butterfly that are shown as little specks in between the scales of the butterfly.
And this is really detrimental to the monarch.
It shortens their lifespan, it reduces their ability to fly, it can even kill them before they're even adults.
Very detrimental parasite.
As part of my job, I spend a lot of time in the greenhouse growing plants, and the reason for this is that monarchs are extremely picky eaters.
They only eat milkweed as larvae.
Luckily, there are several species of milkweed that they can use, and all these milkweeds have cardenolides in them.
These are chemicals that are toxic.
They're toxic to most animals, but not to monarchs.
In fact, monarchs can take up the chemicals, put it in their own bodies, and it makes them toxic against their predators, such as birds.
And what they do, then, is advertise this toxicity through their beautiful warning colorations with this orange, black and white.
So what I did during my job is grow plants in the greenhouse, different ones, different milkweeds.
Some were toxic, including the tropical milkweed, with very high concentrations of these cardenolides.
And some were not toxic.
Some of the monarchs were healthy. They had no disease.
But some of the monarchs were sick, and what I found is that some of these milkweeds are medicinal, meaning they reduce the disease symptoms in the monarch butterflies, meaning these monarchs can live longer when they are infected when feeding on these medicinal plants.
And when I found this, I had this idea, and a lot of people said it was a crazy idea, but I thought, what if monarchs can use this?
What if they can use these plants as their own form of medicine?
What if they can act as medical doctors?
So my team and I started doing experiments.
In the first types of experiments, we had caterpillars, and gave them a choice: medicinal milkweed versus non-medicinal milkweed.
And then we measured how much they ate of each species over their lifetime.
And the result, as so often in science, was boring: Fifty percent of their food was medicinal. Fifty percent was not.
These caterpillars didn't do anything for their own welfare.
So then we moved on to adult butterflies, and we started asking the question whether it's the mothers that can medicate their offspring.
Can the mothers lay their eggs on medicinal milkweed that will make their future offspring less sick?
We have done these experiments now over several years, and always get the same results.
What we do is we put a monarch in a big cage, a medicinal plant on one side, a non-medicinal plant on the other side, and then we measure the number of eggs that the monarchs lay on each plant.
And what we find when we do that is always the same.
What we find is that the monarchs strongly prefer the medicinal milkweed.
In other words, what these females are doing is they're laying 68 percent of their eggs in the medicinal milkweed.
Intriguingly, what they do is they actually transmit the parasites when they're laying the eggs.
They cannot prevent this.
They can also not medicate themselves.
But what these experiments tell us is that these monarchs, these mothers, can lay their eggs on medicinal milkweed that will make their future offspring less sick.
Now, this is a really important discovery, I think, not just because it tells us something cool about nature, but also because it may tell us something more about how we should find drugs.
Now, these are animals that are very small and we tend to think of them as very simple.
They have tiny little brains, yet they can do this very sophisticated medication.
Now, we know that even today, most of our drugs derive from natural products, including plants, and in indigenous cultures, traditional healers often look at animals to find new drugs.
In this way, elephants have told us how to treat stomach upset, and porcupines have told people how to treat bloody diarrhea.
What I think is important, though, is to move beyond these large-brained mammals and give these guys more credit, these simple animals, these insects that we tend to think of as very, very simple with tiny little brains.
The discovery that these animals can also use medication opens up completely new avenues, and I think that maybe one day, we will be treating human diseases with drugs that were first discovered by butterflies, and I think that is an amazing opportunity worth pursuing.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
On Mondays and Thursdays, I learn how to die.
I call them my terminal days.
My wife Fernanda doesn't like the term, but a lot of people in my family died of melanoma cancer and my parents and grandparents had it.
And I kept thinking, one day I could be sitting in front of a doctor who looks at my exams and says, "Ricardo, things don't look very good.
You have six months or a year to live."
And you start thinking about what you would do with this time.
And you say, "I'm going to spend more time with the kids.
I'm going to visit these places, I'm going to go up and down mountains and places and I'm going to do all the things I didn't do when I had the time."
But of course, we all know these are very bittersweet memories we're going to have.
It's very difficult to do.
You spend a good part of the time crying, probably.
So I said, I'm going to do something else.
Every Monday and Thursday, I'm going use my terminal days.
And I will do, during those days, whatever it is I was going to do if I had received that piece of news.
(Laughter) When you think about -- (Applause) when you think about the opposite of work, we, many times, think it's leisure.
And you say, ah, I need some leisure time, and so forth.
But the fact is that, leisure is a very busy thing.
You go play golf and tennis, and you meet people, and you're going for lunch, and you're late for the movies.
It's a very crowded thing that we do.
The opposite of work is idleness.
But very few of us know what to do with idleness.
When you look at the way that we distribute our lives in general, you realize that in the periods in which we have a lot of money, we have very little time.
And then when we finally have time, we have neither the money nor the health.
So we started thinking about that as a company for the last 30 years.
This is a complicated company with thousands of employees, hundreds of millions of dollars of business that makes rocket fuel propellent systems, runs 4,000 ATMs in Brazil, does income tax preparation for dozens of thousands.
So this is not a simple business.
We looked at it and we said, let's devolve to these people, let's give these people a company where we take away all the boarding school aspects of, this is when you arrive, this is how you dress, this is how you go to meetings, this is what you say, this is what you don't say, and let's see what's left.
So we started this about 30 years ago, and we started dealing with this very issue.
And so we said, look, the retirement, the whole issue of how we distribute our graph of life.
Instead of going mountain climbing when you're 82, why don't you do it next week?
And we'll do it like this, we'll sell you back your Wednesdays for 10 percent of your salary.
So now, if you were going to be a violinist, which you probably weren't, you go and do this on Wednesday.
And what we found -- we thought, these are the older people who are going to be really interested in this program.
And the average age of the first people who adhered were 29, of course.
And so we started looking, and we said, we have to do things in a different way.
So we started saying things like, why do we want to know what time you came to work, what time you left, etc.?
Can't we exchange this for a contract for buying something from you, some kind of work?
Why are we building these headquarters?
Is it not an ego issue that we want to look solid and big and important?
But we're dragging you two hours across town because of it?
So we started asking questions one by one.
We'd say it like this: One: How do we find people?
We'd go out and try and recruit people and we'd say, look, when you come to us, we're not going to have two or three interviews and then you're going to be married to us for life.
That's not how we do the rest of our lives.
So, come have your interviews.
Anyone who's interested in interviewing, you will show up.
And then we'll see what happens out of the intuition that rises from that, instead of just filling out the little items of whether you're the right person.
And then, come back.
Spend an afternoon, spend a whole day, talk to anybody you want.
Make sure we are the bride you thought we were and not all the bullshit we put into our own ads.
(Laughter) Slowly we went to a process where we'd say things like, we don't want anyone to be a leader in the company if they haven't been interviewed and approved by their future subordinates.
Every six months, everyone gets evaluated, anonymously, as a leader.
And this determines whether they should continue in that leadership position, which is many times situational, as you know.
And so if they don't have 70, 80 percent of a grade, they don't stay, which is probably the reason why I haven't been CEO for more than 10 years.
And over time, we started asking other questions.
We said things like, why can't people set their own salaries?
What do they need to know?
There's only three things you need to know: how much people make inside the company, how much people make somewhere else in a similar business and how much we make in general to see whether we can afford it.
So let's give people these three pieces of information.
So we started having, in the cafeteria, a computer where you could go in and you could ask what someone spent, how much someone makes, what they make in benefits, what the company makes, what the margins are, and so forth.
And this is 25 years ago.
As this information started coming to people, we said things like, we don't want to see your expense report, we don't want to know how many holidays you're taking, we don't want to know where you work.
We had, at one point, 14 different offices around town, and we'd say, go to the one that's closest to your house, to the customer that you're going to visit today.
Don't tell us where you are.
And more, even when we had thousands of people, 5,000 people, we had two people in the H.R. department, and thankfully one of them has retired.
(Laughter) And so, the question we were asking was, how can we be taking care of people?
People are the only thing we have.
We can't have a department that runs after people and looks after people.
So as we started finding that this worked, and we'd say, we're looking for -- and this is, I think, the main thing I was looking for in the terminal days and in the company, which is, how do you set up for wisdom?
We've come from an age of revolution, industrial revolution, an age of information, an age of knowledge, but we're not any closer to the age of wisdom.
How we design, how do we organize, for more wisdom?
So for example, many times, what's the smartest or the intelligent decision doesn't jive.
So we'd say things like, let's agree that you're going to sell 57 widgets per week.
If you sell them by Wednesday, please go to the beach.
Don't create a problem for us, for manufacturing, for application, then we have to buy new companies, we have to buy our competitors, we have to do all kinds of things because you sold too many widgets.
So go to the beach and start again on Monday.
(Laughter) (Applause) So the process is looking for wisdom.
And in the process, of course, we wanted people to know everything, and we wanted to be truly democratic about the way we ran things.
So our board had two seats open with the same voting rights, for the first two people who showed up.
(Laughter) And so we had cleaning ladies voting on a board meeting, which had a lot of other very important people in suits and ties.
And the fact is that they kept us honest.
This process, as we started looking at the people who came to us, we'd say, now wait a second, people come to us and they say, where am I supposed to sit?
How am I supposed to work? Where am I going to be in 5 years' time?
And we looked at that and we said, we have to start much earlier.
Where do we start?
We said, oh, kindergarten seems like a good place.
So we set up a foundation, which now has, for 11 years, three schools, where we started asking the same questions, how do you redesign school for wisdom?
It is one thing to say, we need to recycle the teachers, we need the directors to do more.
But the fact is that what we do with education is entirely obsolete.
The teacher's role is entirely obsolete.
Going from a math class, to biology, to 14th-century France is very silly.
(Applause) So we started thinking, what could it look like?
And we put together people, including people who like education, people like Paulo Freire, and two ministers of education in Brazil and we said, if we were to design a school from scratch, what would it look like?
And so we created this school, which is called Lumiar, and Lumiar, one of them is a public school, and Lumiar says the following: Let's divide this role of the teacher into two.
One guy, we'll call a tutor.
A tutor, in the old sense of the Greek "paideia": Look after the kid.
What's happening at home, what's their moment in life, etc..
But please don't teach, because the little you know compared to Google, we don't want to know.
Keep that to yourself.
(Laughter) Now, we'll bring in people who have two things: passion and expertise, and it could be their profession or not.
And we use the senior citizens, who are 25 percent of the population with wisdom that nobody wants anymore.
So we bring them to school and we say, teach these kids whatever you really believe in.
So we have violinists teaching math.
We have all kinds of things where we say, don't worry about the course material anymore.
We have approximately 10 great threads that go from 2 to 17.
Things like, how do we measure ourselves as humans?
So there's a place for math and physics and all that there.
How do we express ourselves?
So there's a place for music and literature, etc., but also for grammar.
And then we have things that everyone has forgotten, which are probably the most important things in life.
The very important things in life, we know nothing about.
We know nothing about love, we know nothing about death, we know nothing about why we're here.
So we need a thread in school that talks about everything we don't know.
So that's a big part of what we do.
(Applause) So over the years, we started going into other things.
We'd say, why do we have to scold the kids and say, sit down and come here and do that, and so forth.
We said, let's get the kids to do something we call a circle, which meets once a week.
And we'd say, you put the rules together and then you decide what you want to do with it.
So can you all hit yourself on the head?
Sure, for a week, try.
They came up with the very same rules that we had, except they're theirs.
And then, they have the power, which means, they can and do suspend and expel kids so that we're not playing school, they really decide.
And then, in this same vein, we keep a digital mosaic, because this is not constructivist or Montessori or something.
It's something where we keep the Brazilian curriculum with 600 tiles of a mosaic, which we want to expose these kids to by the time they're 17.
And follow this all the time and we know how they're doing and we say, you're not interested in this now, let's wait a year.
And the kids are in groups that don't have an age category, so the six-year-old kid who is ready for that with an 11-year-old, that eliminates all of the gangs and the groups and this stuff that we have in the schools, in general.
And they have a zero to 100 percent grading, which they do themselves with an app every couple of hours.
Until we know they're 37 percent of the way we'd like them to be on this issue, so that we can send them out in the world with them knowing enough about it.
And so the courses are World Cup Soccer, or building a bicycle.
And people will sign up for a 45-day course on building a bicycle.
Now, try to build a bicycle without knowing that pi is 3.1416.
You can't.
And try, any one of you, using 3.1416 for something.
You don't know anymore.
So this is lost and that's what we try to do there, which is looking for wisdom in that school.
And that brings us back to this graph and this distribution of our life.
I accumulated a lot of money when I think about it.
When you think and you say, now is the time to give back -- well, if you're giving back, you took too much.
(Laughter) (Applause) I keep thinking of Warren Buffet waking up one day and finding out he has 30 billion dollars more than he thought he had.
And he looks and he says, what am I going to do with this?
And he says, I'll give it to someone who really needs this.
I'll give it to Bill Gates. (Laughter) And my guy, who's my financial advisor in New York, he says, look, you're a silly guy because you would have 4.1 times more money today if you had made money with money instead of sharing as you go.
But I like sharing as you go better.
(Applause) I taught MBAs at MIT for a time and I ended up, one day, at the Mount Auburn Cemetery.
It is a beautiful cemetery in Cambridge.
And I was walking around. It was my birthday and I was thinking.
And the first time around, I saw these tombstones and these wonderful people who'd done great things and I thought, what do I want to be remembered for?
And I did another stroll around, and the second time, another question came to me, which did me better, which was, why do I want to be remembered at all?
(Laughter) And that, I think, took me different places.
When I was 50, my wife Fernanda and I sat for a whole afternoon, we had a big pit with fire, and I threw everything I had ever done into that fire.
This is a book in 38 languages, hundreds and hundreds of articles and DVDs, everything there was.
And that did two things.
One, it freed our five kids from following in our steps, our shadow -- They don't know what I do.
(Laughter) Which is good.
And I'm not going to take them somewhere and say, one day all of this will be yours.
(Laughter) The five kids know nothing, which is good.
And the second thing is, I freed myself from this anchor of past achievement or whatever.
I'm free to start something new every time and to decide things from scratch in part of those terminal days.
And some people would say, oh, so now you have this time, these terminal days, and so you go out and do everything.
No, we've been to the beaches, so we've been to Samoa and Maldives and Mozambique, so that's done.
I've climbed mountains in the Himalayas.
I've gone down 60 meters to see hammerhead sharks.
I've spent 59 days on the back of a camel from Chad to Timbuktu.
I've gone to the magnetic North Pole on a dog sled.
So, we've been busy.
It's what I'd like to call my empty bucket list.
(Laughter) And with this rationale, I look at these days and I think, I'm not retired. I don't feel retired at all.
And so I'm writing a new book.
We started three new companies in the last two years.
I'm now working on getting this school system for free out into the world, and I've found, very interestingly enough, that nobody wants it for free.
And so I've been trying for 10 years to get the public system to take over this school rationale, much as the public schools we have, which has instead of 43 out of 100, as their rating, as their grades, has 91 out of 100.
But for free, nobody wants it.
So maybe we'll start charging for it and then it will go somewhere.
But getting this out is one of the things we want to do.
And I think what this leaves us as a message for all of you, I think is a little bit like this: We've all learned how to go on Sunday night to email and work from home.
But very few of us have learned how to go to the movies on Monday afternoon.
And if we're looking for wisdom, we need to learn to do that as well.
And so, what we've done all of these years is very simple, is use the little tool, which is ask three whys in a row.
Because the first why you always have a good answer for.
The second why, it starts getting difficult.
By the third why, you don't really know why you're doing what you're doing.
What I want to leave you with is the seed and the thought that maybe if you do this, you will come to the question, what for?
What am I doing this for?
And hopefully, as a result of that, and over time, I hope that with this, and that's what I'm wishing you, you'll have a much wiser future.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: So Ricardo, you're kind of crazy.
(Laughter) To many people, this seems crazy.
And yet so deeply wise, also.
The pieces I'm trying to put together are this: Your ideas are so radical.
How, in business, for example, these ideas have been out for a while, probably the percentage of businesses that have taken some of them is still quite low.
Are there any times you've seen some big company take on one of your ideas and you've gone, "Yes!"?
Ricardo Semler: It happens. It happened about two weeks ago with Richard Branson, with his people saying, oh, I don't want to control your holidays anymore, or Netflix does a little bit of this and that, but I don't think it's very important.
I'd like to see it happen maybe a little bit in a bit of a missionary zeal, but that's a very personal one.
But the fact is that it takes a leap of faith about losing control.
And almost nobody who is in control is ready to take leaps of faith.
It will have to come from kids and other people who are starting companies in a different way.
CA: So that's the key thing?
From your point of view the evidence is there, in the business point of view this works, but people just don't have the courage to -- (Whoosh) RS: They don't even have the incentive.
You're running a company with a 90-day mandate.
It's a quarterly report.
If you're not good in 90 days, you're out.
So you say, "Here's a great program that, in less than one generation --" And the guy says, "Get out of here."
So this is the problem.
(Laughter) CA: What you're trying to do in education seems to me incredibly profound.
Everyone is bothered about their country's education system.
No one thinks that we've caught up yet to a world where there's Google and all these technological options.
So you've got actual evidence now that the kids so far going through your system, there's a dramatic increase in performance.
How do we help you move these ideas forward?
RS: I think it's that problem of ideas whose time has come.
And I've never been very evangelical about these things.
We put it out there.
Suddenly, you find people -- there's a group in Japan, which scares me very much, which is called the Semlerists, and they have 120 companies.
They've invited me. I've always been scared to go.
And there is a group in Holland that has 600 small, Dutch companies.
It's something that will flourish on its own.
Part of it will be wrong, and it doesn't matter.
This will find its own place.
And I'm afraid of the other one, which says, this is so good you've got to do this.
Let's set up a system and put lots of money into it and then people will do it no matter what.
CA: So you have asked extraordinary questions your whole life.
It seems to me that's the fuel that's driven a lot of this.
Do you have any other questions for us, for TED, for this group here?
RS: I always come back to variations of the question that my son asked me when he was three.
We were sitting in a jacuzzi, and he said, "Dad, why do we exist?"
There is no other question.
Nobody has any other question.
We have variations of this one question, from three onwards.
So when you spend time in a company, in a bureaucracy, in an organization and you're saying, boy -- how many people do you know who on their death beds said, boy, I wish I had spent more time at the office?
So there's a whole thing of having the courage now -- not in a week, not in two months, not when you find out you have something -- to say, no, what am I doing this for?
Stop everything. Let me do something else.
And it will be okay, it will be much better than what you're doing, if you're stuck in a process.
CA: So that strikes me as a profound and quite beautiful way to end this penultimate day of TED.
Ricardo Semler, thank you so much.
RS: Thank you so much.
(Applause)
Today I'm going to speak to you about the last 30 years of architectural history.
That's a lot to pack into 18 minutes.
It's a complex topic, so we're just going to dive right in at a complex place: New Jersey.
Because 30 years ago, I'm from Jersey, and I was six, and I lived there in my parents' house in a town called Livingston, and this was my childhood bedroom.
Around the corner from my bedroom was the bathroom that I used to share with my sister.
And in between my bedroom and the bathroom was a balcony that overlooked the family room.
And that's where everyone would hang out and watch TV, so that every time that I walked from my bedroom to the bathroom, everyone would see me, and every time I took a shower and would come back in a towel, everyone would see me.
And I looked like this.
I was awkward, insecure, and I hated it.
I hated that walk, I hated that balcony, I hated that room, and I hated that house.
And that's architecture.
(Laughter) Done.
That feeling, those emotions that I felt, that's the power of architecture, because architecture is not about math and it's not about zoning, it's about those visceral, emotional connections that we feel to the places that we occupy.
And it's no surprise that we feel that way, because according to the EPA, Americans spend 90 percent of their time indoors.
That's 90 percent of our time surrounded by architecture.
That's huge.
That means that architecture is shaping us in ways that we didn't even realize.
That makes us a little bit gullible and very, very predictable.
It means that when I show you a building like this, I know what you think: You think "power" and "stability" and "democracy."
And I know you think that because it's based on a building that was build 2,500 years ago by the Greeks.
This is a trick.
This is a trigger that architects use to get you to create an emotional connection to the forms that we build our buildings out of.
It's a predictable emotional connection, and we've been using this trick for a long, long time.
We used it [200] years ago to build banks.
We used it in the 19th century to build art museums.
And in the 20th century in America, we used it to build houses.
And look at these solid, stable little soldiers facing the ocean and keeping away the elements.
This is really, really useful, because building things is terrifying.
It's expensive, it takes a long time, and it's very complicated.
And the people that build things -- developers and governments -- they're naturally afraid of innovation, and they'd rather just use those forms that they know you'll respond to.
That's how we end up with buildings like this.
This is a nice building.
This is the Livingston Public Library that was completed in 2004 in my hometown, and, you know, it's got a dome and it's got this round thing and columns, red brick, and you can kind of guess what Livingston is trying to say with this building: children, property values and history.
But it doesn't have much to do with what a library actually does today.
That same year, in 2004, on the other side of the country, another library was completed, and it looks like this.
It's in Seattle.
This library is about how we consume media in a digital age.
It's about a new kind of public amenity for the city, a place to gather and read and share.
So how is it possible that in the same year, in the same country, two buildings, both called libraries, look so completely different?
And the answer is that architecture works on the principle of a pendulum.
On the one side is innovation, and architects are constantly pushing, pushing for new technologies, new typologies, new solutions for the way that we live today.
And we push and we push and we push until we completely alienate all of you.
We wear all black, we get very depressed, you think we're adorable, we're dead inside because we've got no choice.
We have to go to the other side and reengage those symbols that we know you love.
So we do that, and you're happy, we feel like sellouts, so we start experimenting again and we push the pendulum back and back and forth and back and forth we've gone for the last 300 years, and certainly for the last 30 years.
Okay, 30 years ago we were coming out of the '70s.
Architects had been busy experimenting with something called brutalism.
It's about concrete.
(Laughter) You can guess this.
Small windows, dehumanizing scale.
This is really tough stuff.
So as we get closer to the '80s, we start to reengage those symbols.
We push the pendulum back into the other direction.
We take these forms that we know you love and we update them.
We add neon and we add pastels and we use new materials.
And you love it.
And we can't give you enough of it.
We take Chippendale armoires and we turned those into skyscrapers, and skyscrapers can be medieval castles made out of glass.
Forms got big, forms got bold and colorful.
Dwarves became columns.
(Laughter) Swans grew to the size of buildings.
It was crazy.
But it's the '80s, it's cool.
(Laughter) We're all hanging out in malls and we're all moving to the suburbs, and out there, out in the suburbs, we can create our own architectural fantasies.
And those fantasies, they can be Mediterranean or French or Italian.
(Laughter) Possibly with endless breadsticks.
This is the thing about postmodernism.
This is the thing about symbols.
They're easy, they're cheap, because instead of making places, we're making memories of places.
Because I know, and I know all of you know, this isn't Tuscany.
This is Ohio.
(Laughter) So architects get frustrated, and we start pushing the pendulum back into the other direction.
In the late '80s and early '90s, we start experimenting with something called deconstructivism.
We throw out historical symbols, we rely on new, computer-aided design techniques, and we come up with new compositions, forms crashing into forms.
This is academic and heady stuff, it's super unpopular, we totally alienate you.
Ordinarily, the pendulum would just swing back into the other direction.
And then, something amazing happened.
In 1997, this building opened.
This is the Guggenheim Bilbao, by Frank Gehry.
And this building fundamentally changes the world's relationship to architecture.
Paul Goldberger said that Bilbao was one of those rare moments when critics, academics, and the general public were completely united around a building.
The New York Times called this building a miracle.
Tourism in Bilbao increased 2,500 percent after this building was completed.
So all of a sudden, everybody wants one of these buildings: L.A., Seattle, Chicago, New York, Cleveland, Springfield.
(Laughter) Everybody wants one, and Gehry is everywhere.
He is our very first starchitect.
Now, how is it possible that these forms -- they're wild and radical -- how is it possible that they become so ubiquitous throughout the world?
And it happened because media so successfully galvanized around them that they quickly taught us that these forms mean culture and tourism.
We created an emotional reaction to these forms.
So did every mayor in the world.
So every mayor knew that if they had these forms, they had culture and tourism.
This phenomenon at the turn of the new millennium happened to a few other starchitects.
It happened to Zaha and it happened to Libeskind, and what happened to these elite few architects at the turn of the new millennium could actually start to happen to the entire field of architecture, as digital media starts to increase the speed with which we consume information.
Because think about how you consume architecture.
A thousand years ago, you would have had to have walked to the village next door to see a building.
Transportation speeds up: You can take a boat, you can take a plane, you can be a tourist.
Technology speeds up: You can see it in a newspaper, on TV, until finally, we are all architectural photographers, and the building has become disembodied from the site.
Architecture is everywhere now, and that means that the speed of communication has finally caught up to the speed of architecture.
Because architecture actually moves quite quickly.
It doesn't take long to think about a building.
It takes a long time to build a building, three or four years, and in the interim, an architect will design two or eight or a hundred other buildings before they know if that building that they designed four years ago was a success or not.
That's because there's never been a good feedback loop in architecture.
That's how we end up with buildings like this.
Brutalism wasn't a two-year movement, it was a 20-year movement.
For 20 years, we were producing buildings like this because we had no idea how much you hated it.
It's never going to happen again, I think, because we are living on the verge of the greatest revolution in architecture since the invention of concrete, of steel, or of the elevator, and it's a media revolution.
So my theory is that when you apply media to this pendulum, it starts swinging faster and faster, until it's at both extremes nearly simultaneously, and that effectively blurs the difference between innovation and symbol, between us, the architects, and you, the public.
Now we can make nearly instantaneous, emotionally charged symbols out of something that's brand new.
Let me show you how this plays out in a project that my firm recently completed.
We were hired to replace this building, which burned down.
This is the center of a town called the Pines in Fire Island in New York State.
It's a vacation community.
We proposed a building that was audacious, that was different than any of the forms that the community was used to, and we were scared and our client was scared and the community was scared, so we created a series of photorealistic renderings that we put onto Facebook and we put onto Instagram, and we let people start to do what they do: share it, comment, like it, hate it.
But that meant that two years before the building was complete, it was already a part of the community, so that when the renderings looked exactly like the finished product, there were no surprises.
This building was already a part of this community, and then that first summer, when people started arriving and sharing the building on social media, the building ceased to be just an edifice and it became media, because these, these are not just pictures of a building, they're your pictures of a building.
And as you use them to tell your story, they become part of your personal narrative, and what you're doing is you're short-circuiting all of our collective memory, and you're making these charged symbols for us to understand.
That means we don't need the Greeks anymore to tell us what to think about architecture.
We can tell each other what we think about architecture, because digital media hasn't just changed the relationship between all of us, it's changed the relationship between us and buildings.
Think for a second about those librarians back in Livingston.
If that building was going to be built today, the first thing they would do is go online and search "new libraries."
They would be bombarded by examples of experimentation, of innovation, of pushing at the envelope of what a library can be.
That's ammunition.
That's ammunition that they can take with them to the mayor of Livingston, to the people of Livingston, and say, there's no one answer to what a library is today.
Let's be a part of this.
This abundance of experimentation gives them the freedom to run their own experiment.
Everything is different now.
Architects are no longer these mysterious creatures that use big words and complicated drawings, and you aren't the hapless public, the consumer that won't accept anything that they haven't seen anymore.
Architects can hear you, and you're not intimidated by architecture.
That means that that pendulum swinging back and forth from style to style, from movement to movement, is irrelevant.
We can actually move forward and find relevant solutions to the problems that our society faces.
This is the end of architectural history, and it means that the buildings of tomorrow are going to look a lot different than the buildings of today.
It means that a public space in the ancient city of Seville can be unique and tailored to the way that a modern city works.
It means that a stadium in Brooklyn can be a stadium in Brooklyn, not some red-brick historical pastiche of what we think a stadium ought to be.
It means that robots are going to build our buildings, because we're finally ready for the forms that they're going to produce.
And it means that buildings will twist to the whims of nature instead of the other way around.
It means that a parking garage in Miami Beach, Florida, can also be a place for sports and for yoga and you can even get married there late at night.
(Laughter) It means that three architects can dream about swimming in the East River of New York, and then raise nearly half a million dollars from a community that gathered around their cause, no one client anymore.
It means that no building is too small for innovation, like this little reindeer pavilion that's as muscly and sinewy as the animals it's designed to observe.
And it means that a building doesn't have to be beautiful to be lovable, like this ugly little building in Spain, where the architects dug a hole, packed it with hay, and then poured concrete around it, and when the concrete dried, they invited someone to come and clean that hay out so that all that's left when it's done is this hideous little room that's filled with the imprints and scratches of how that place was made, and that becomes the most sublime place to watch a Spanish sunset.
Because it doesn't matter if a cow builds our buildings or a robot builds our buildings.
It doesn't matter how we build, it matters what we build.
Architects already know how to make buildings that are greener and smarter and friendlier.
We've just been waiting for all of you to want them.
And finally, we're not on opposite sides anymore.
Find an architect, hire an architect, work with us to design better buildings, better cities, and a better world, because the stakes are high.
Buildings don't just reflect our society, they shape our society down to the smallest spaces: the local libraries, the homes where we raise our children, and the walk that they take from the bedroom to the bathroom.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What's the fastest growing threat to Americans' health?
Cancer? Heart attacks? Diabetes?
The answer is actually none of these; it's Alzheimer's disease.
Every 67 seconds, someone in the United States is diagnosed with Alzheimer's.
As the number of Alzheimer's patients triples by the year 2050, caring for them, as well as the rest of the aging population, will become an overwhelming societal challenge.
My family has experienced firsthand the struggles of caring for an Alzheimer's patient.
Growing up in a family with three generations, I've always been very close to my grandfather.
When I was four years old, my grandfather and I were walking in a park in Japan when he suddenly got lost.
It was one of the scariest moments I've ever experienced in my life, and it was also the first instance that informed us that my grandfather had Alzheimer's disease.
Over the past 12 years, his condition got worse and worse, and his wandering in particular caused my family a lot of stress.
My aunt, his primary caregiver, really struggled to stay awake at night to keep an eye on him, and even then often failed to catch him leaving the bed.
I became really concerned about my aunt's well-being as well as my grandfather's safety.
I searched extensively for a solution that could help my family's problems, but couldn't find one.
Then, one night about two years ago, I was looking after my grandfather and I saw him stepping out of the bed.
The moment his foot landed on the floor, I thought, why don't I put a pressure sensor on the heel of his foot?
Once he stepped onto the floor and out of the bed, the pressure sensor would detect an increase in pressure caused by body weight and then wirelessly send an audible alert to the caregiver's smartphone.
That way, my aunt could sleep much better at night without having to worry about my grandfather's wandering.
So now I'd like to perform a demonstration of this sock.
Could I please have my sock model on the stage?
Great.
So once the patient steps onto the floor -- (Ringing) -- an alert is sent to the caregiver's smartphone.
Thank you. (Applause) Thank you, sock model.
So this is a drawing of my preliminary design.
My desire to create a sensor-based technology perhaps stemmed from my lifelong love for sensors and technology.
When I was six years old, an elderly family friend fell down in the bathroom and suffered severe injuries.
I became concerned about my own grandparents and decided to invent a smart bathroom system.
Motion sensors would be installed inside the tiles of bathroom floors to detect the falls of elderly patients whenever they fell down in the bathroom.
Since I was only six years old at the time and I hadn't graduated from kindergarten yet, I didn't have the necessary resources and tools to translate my idea into reality, but nonetheless, my research experience really implanted in me a firm desire to use sensors to help the elderly people.
I really believe that sensors can improve the quality of life of the elderly.
When I laid out my plan, I realized that I faced three main challenges: first, creating a sensor; second, designing a circuit; and third, coding a smartphone app.
This made me realize that my project was actually much harder to realize than I initially had thought it to be.
First, I had to create a wearable sensor that was thin and flexible enough to be worn comfortably on the bottom of the patient's foot.
After extensive research and testing of different materials like rubber, which I realized was too thick to be worn snugly on the bottom of the foot, I decided to print a film sensor with electrically conductive pressure-sensitive ink particles.
Once pressure is applied, the connectivity between the particles increases.
Therefore, I could design a circuit that would measure pressure by measuring electrical resistance.
Next, I had to design a wearable wireless circuit, but wireless signal transmission consumes lots of power and requires heavy, bulky batteries.
Thankfully, I was able to find out about the Bluetooth low energy technology, which consumes very little power and can be driven by a coin-sized battery.
This prevented the system from dying in the middle of the night.
Lastly, I had to code a smartphone app that would essentially transform the care-giver's smartphone into a remote monitor.
For this, I had to expand upon my knowledge of coding with Java and XCode and I also had to learn about how to code for Bluetooth low energy devices by watching YouTube tutorials and reading various textbooks.
Integrating these components, I was able to successfully create two prototypes, one in which the sensor is embedded inside a sock, and another that's a re-attachable sensor assembly that can be adhered anywhere that makes contact with the bottom of the patient's foot.
I've tested the device on my grandfather for about a year now, and it's had a 100 percent success rate in detecting the over 900 known cases of his wandering.
Last summer, I was able to beta test my device at several residential care facilities in California, and I'm currently incorporating the feedback to further improve the device into a marketable product.
Testing the device on a number of patients made me realize that I needed to invent solutions for people who didn't want to wear socks to sleep at night.
So sensor data, collected on a vast number of patients, can be useful for improving patient care and also leading to a cure for the disease, possibly.
For example, I'm currently examining correlations between the frequency of a patient's nightly wandering and his or her daily activities and diet.
One thing I'll never forget is when my device first caught my grandfather's wandering out of bed at night.
At that moment, I was really struck by the power of technology to change lives for the better.
People living happily and healthfully -- that's the world that I imagine.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One of the first patients I had to see as a pediatrician was Sol, a beautiful month-old baby who was admitted with signs of a severe respiratory infection.
Until then, I had never seen a patient worsen so fast.
In just two days she was connected to a respirator and on the third day she died.
Sol had whooping cough.
After discussing the case in the room and after a quite distressing catharsis, I remember my chief resident said to me, "Okay, take a deep breath. Wash your face.
And now comes the hardest part: We have to go talk to her parents."
At that time, a thousand questions came to mind, from, "How could a one-month-old baby be so unfortunate?"
to, "Could we have done something about it?"
Before vaccines existed, many infectious diseases killed millions of people per year.
During the 1918 flu pandemic 50 million people died.
That's greater than Argentina's current population.
Perhaps, the older ones among you remember the polio epidemic that occurred in Argentina in 1956.
At that time, there was no vaccine available against polio.
People didn't know what to do. They were going crazy.
They would go painting trees with caustic lime.
They'd put little bags of camphor in their children's underwear, as if that could do something.
During the polio epidemic, thousands of people died.
And thousands of people were left with very significant neurological damage.
I know this because I read about it, because thanks to vaccines, my generation was lucky to not live through an epidemic as terrible as this.
Vaccines are one of the great successes of the 20th century's public health.
After potable water, they are the interventions that have most reduced mortality, even more than antibiotics.
Vaccines eradicated terrible diseases such as smallpox from the planet and succeeded in significantly reducing mortality due to other diseases such as measles, whooping cough, polio and many more.
All these diseases are considered vaccine-preventable diseases.
What does this mean?
That they are potentially preventable, but in order to be so, something must be done.
You need to get vaccinated.
I imagine that most, if not all of us here today, received a vaccine at some point in our life.
Now, I'm not so sure that many of us know which vaccines or boosters we should receive after adolescence.
Have you ever wondered who we are protecting when we vaccinate?
What do I mean by that?
Is there any other effect beyond protecting ourselves?
Let me show you something.
Imagine for a moment that we are in a city that has never had a case of a particular disease, such as the measles.
This would mean that no one in the city has ever had contact with the disease.
No one has natural defenses against, nor been vaccinated against measles.
If one day, a person sick with the measles appears in this city the disease won't find much resistance and will begin spreading from person to person, and in no time it will disseminate throughout the community.
After a certain time a big part of the population will be ill.
This happened when there were no vaccines.
Now, imagine the complete opposite case.
We are in a city where more than 90 percent of the population has defenses against the measles, which means that they either had the disease, survived, and developed natural defenses; or that they had been immunized against measles.
If one day, a person sick with the measles appears in this city, the disease will find much more resistance and won't be transmitted that much from person to person.
The spread will probably remain contained and a measles outbreak won't happen.
I would like you to pay attention to something.
People who are vaccinated are not only protecting themselves, but by blocking the dissemination of the disease within the community, they are indirectly protecting the people in this community who are not vaccinated.
They create a kind of protective shield which prevents them from coming in contact with the disease, so that these people are protected.
This indirect protection that the unvaccinated people within a community receive simply by being surrounded by vaccinated people, is called herd immunity.
Many people in the community depend almost exclusively on this herd immunity to be protected against disease.
The unvaccinated people you see in infographics are not just hypothetical.
Those people are our nieces and nephews, our children, who may be too young to receive their first shots.
They are our parents, our siblings, our acquaintances, who may have a disease, or take medication that lowers their defenses.
There are also people who are allergic to a particular vaccine.
They could even be among us, any of us who got vaccinated, but the vaccine didn't produce the expected effect, because not all vaccines are always 100 percent effective.
All these people depend almost exclusively on herd immunity to be protected against diseases.
To achieve this effect of herd immunity, it is necessary that a large percentage of the population be vaccinated.
This percentage is called the threshold.
The threshold depends on many variables: It depends on the germ's characteristics, and those of the immune response that the vaccine generates.
But they all have something in common.
If the percentage of the population in a vaccinated community is below this threshold number, the disease will begin to spread more freely and may generate an outbreak of this disease within the community.
Even diseases which were at some point controlled may reappear.
This is not just a theory.
This has happened, and is still happening.
In 1998, a British researcher published an article in one of the most important medical journals, saying that the MMR vaccine, which is given for measles, mumps and rubella, was associated with autism.
This generated an immediate impact.
People began to stop getting vaccinated, and stopped vaccinating their children.
And what happened?
The number of people vaccinated, in many communities around the world, fell below this threshold.
And there were outbreaks of measles in many cities in the world -- in the U.S., in Europe.
Many people got sick.
People died of measles.
What happened?
This article also generated a huge stir within the medical community.
Dozens of researchers began to assess if this was actually true.
Not only could no one find a causal association between MMR and autism at the population level, but it was also found that this article had incorrect claims.
Even more, it was fraudulent.
In fact, the journal publicly retracted the article in 2010.
One of the main concerns and excuses for not getting vaccinated are the adverse effects.
Vaccines, like other drugs, can have potential adverse effects.
Most are mild and temporary.
But the benefits are always greater than possible complications.
When we are ill, we want to heal fast.
Many of us who are here take antibiotics when we have an infection, we take anti-hypertensives when we have high blood pressure, we take cardiac medications.
Why? Because we are sick and we want to heal fast.
And we don't question it much.
Why is it so difficult to think of preventing diseases, by taking care of ourselves when we are healthy?
We take care of ourselves a lot when affected by an illness, or in situations of imminent danger.
I imagine most of us here, remember the influenza-A pandemic which broke out in 2009 in Argentina and worldwide.
When the first cases began to come to light, we, here in Argentina, were entering the winter season.
We knew absolutely nothing.
Everything was a mess.
People wore masks on the street, ran into pharmacies to buy alcohol gel.
People would line up in pharmacies to get a vaccine, without even knowing if it was the right vaccine that would protect them against this new virus.
We knew absolutely nothing.
At that time, in addition to doing my fellowship at the Infant Foundation, I worked as a home pediatrician for a prepaid medicine company.
I remember that I started my shift at 8 a.m., and by 8, I already had a list of 50 scheduled visits.
It was chaos; people didn't know what to do.
I remember the types of patients that I was examining.
The patients were a little older than what we were used to seeing in winter, with longer fevers.
And I mentioned that to my fellowship mentor, and he, for his part, had heard the same from a colleague, about the large number of pregnant women and young adults being hospitalized in intensive care, with hard-to-manage clinical profiles.
At that time, we set out to understand what was happening.
First thing Monday morning, we took the car and went to a hospital in Buenos Aires Province, that served as a referral hospital for cases of the new influenza virus.
We arrived at the hospital; it was crowded.
All health staff were dressed in NASA-like bio-safety suits.
We all had face masks in our pockets.
I, being a hypochondriac, didn't breathe for two hours.
But we could see what was happening.
Immediately, we started reaching out to pediatricians from six hospitals in the city and in Buenos Aires Province.
Our main goal was to find out how this new virus behaved in contact with our children, in the shortest time possible.
A marathon work.
In less than three months, we could see what effect this new H1N1 virus had on the 251 children hospitalized by this virus.
We could see which children got more seriously ill: children under four, especially those less than one year old; patients with neurological diseases; and young children with chronic pulmonary diseases.
Identifying these at-risk groups was important to include them as priority groups in the recommendations for getting the influenza vaccine, not only here in Argentina, but also in other countries which the pandemic not yet reached.
A year later, when a vaccine against the pandemic H1N1 virus became available, we wanted to see what happened.
After a huge vaccination campaign aimed at protecting at-risk groups, these hospitals, with 93 percent of the at-risk groups vaccinated, had not hospitalized a single patient for the pandemic H1N1 virus.
(Applause) In 2009: 251.
In 2010: zero.
Vaccination is an act of individual responsibility, but it has a huge collective impact.
If I get vaccinated, not only am I protecting myself, but I am also protecting others.
Sol had whooping cough.
Sol was very young, and she hadn't yet received her first vaccine against whooping cough.
I still wonder what would have happened if everyone around Sol had been vaccinated.
(Applause)
Imagine you're in a bar, or a club, and you start talking, and after a while, the question comes up, "So, what do you do for work?"
And since you think your job is interesting, you say, "I'm a mathematician." (Laughter) And inevitably, during that conversation one of these two phrases come up: A) "I was terrible at math, but it wasn't my fault.
It's because the teacher was awful." (Laughter) Or B) "But what is math really for?"
(Laughter) I'll now address Case B.
(Laughter) When someone asks you what math is for, they're not asking you about applications of mathematical science.
They're asking you, why did I have to study that bullshit I never used in my life again? (Laughter) That's what they're actually asking.
So when mathematicians are asked what math is for, they tend to fall into two groups: 54.51 percent of mathematicians will assume an attacking position, and 44.77 percent of mathematicians will take a defensive position.
There's a strange 0.8 percent, among which I include myself.
Who are the ones that attack?
The attacking ones are mathematicians who would tell you this question makes no sense, because mathematics have a meaning all their own -- a beautiful edifice with its own logic -- and that there's no point in constantly searching for all possible applications.
What's the use of poetry? What's the use of love?
What's the use of life itself? What kind of question is that?
(Laughter) Hardy, for instance, was a model of this type of attack.
And those who stand in defense tell you, "Even if you don't realize it, friend, math is behind everything."
(Laughter) Those guys, they always bring up bridges and computers.
"If you don't know math, your bridge will collapse."
(Laughter) It's true, computers are all about math.
And now these guys have also started saying that behind information security and credit cards are prime numbers.
These are the answers your math teacher would give you if you asked him.
He's one of the defensive ones.
Okay, but who's right then?
Those who say that math doesn't need to have a purpose, or those who say that math is behind everything we do?
Actually, both are right.
But remember I told you I belong to that strange 0.8 percent claiming something else?
So, go ahead, ask me what math is for.
Audience: What is math for?
Eduardo Sáenz de Cabezón: Okay, 76.34 percent of you asked the question, 23.41 percent didn't say anything, and the 0.8 percent -- I'm not sure what those guys are doing.
Well, to my dear 76.31 percent -- it's true that math doesn't need to serve a purpose, it's true that it's a beautiful structure, a logical one, probably one of the greatest collective efforts ever achieved in human history.
But it's also true that there, where scientists and technicians are looking for mathematical theories that allow them to advance, they're within the structure of math, which permeates everything.
It's true that we have to go somewhat deeper, to see what's behind science.
Science operates on intuition, creativity.
Math controls intuition and tames creativity.
Almost everyone who hasn't heard this before is surprised when they hear that if you take a 0.1 millimeter thick sheet of paper, the size we normally use, and, if it were big enough, fold it 50 times, its thickness would extend almost the distance from the Earth to the sun.
Your intuition tells you it's impossible.
Do the math and you'll see it's right.
That's what math is for.
It's true that science, all types of science, only makes sense because it makes us better understand this beautiful world we live in.
And in doing that, it helps us avoid the pitfalls of this painful world we live in.
There are sciences that help us in this way quite directly.
Oncological science, for example.
And there are others we look at from afar, with envy sometimes, but knowing that we are what supports them.
All the basic sciences support them, including math.
All that makes science, science is the rigor of math.
And that rigor factors in because its results are eternal.
You probably said or were told at some point that diamonds are forever, right?
That depends on your definition of forever!
A theorem -- that really is forever.
(Laughter) The Pythagorean theorem is still true even though Pythagoras is dead, I assure you it's true. (Laughter) Even if the world collapsed the Pythagorean theorem would still be true.
Wherever any two triangle sides and a good hypotenuse get together (Laughter) the Pythagorean theorem goes all out. It works like crazy.
(Applause) Well, we mathematicians devote ourselves to come up with theorems.
Eternal truths.
But it isn't always easy to know the difference between an eternal truth, or theorem, and a mere conjecture.
You need proof.
For example, let's say I have a big, enormous, infinite field.
I want to cover it with equal pieces, without leaving any gaps.
I could use squares, right?
I could use triangles. Not circles, those leave little gaps.
Which is the best shape to use?
One that covers the same surface, but has a smaller border.
In the year 300, Pappus of Alexandria said the best is to use hexagons, just like bees do.
But he didn't prove it.
The guy said, "Hexagons, great! Let's go with hexagons!"
He didn't prove it, it remained a conjecture.
"Hexagons!"
And the world, as you know, split into Pappists and anti-Pappists, until 1700 years later when in 1999, Thomas Hales proved that Pappus and the bees were right -- the best shape to use was the hexagon.
And that became a theorem, the honeycomb theorem, that will be true forever and ever, for longer than any diamond you may have. (Laughter) But what happens if we go to three dimensions?
If I want to fill the space with equal pieces, without leaving any gaps, I can use cubes, right?
Not spheres, those leave little gaps. (Laughter) What is the best shape to use?
Lord Kelvin, of the famous Kelvin degrees and all, said that the best was to use a truncated octahedron which, as you all know -- (Laughter) -- is this thing here!
(Applause) Come on.
Who doesn't have a truncated octahedron at home? (Laughter) Even a plastic one.
"Honey, get the truncated octahedron, we're having guests."
Everybody has one! (Laughter) But Kelvin didn't prove it.
It remained a conjecture -- Kelvin's conjecture.
The world, as you know, then split into Kelvinists and anti-Kelvinists (Laughter) until a hundred or so years later, someone found a better structure.
Weaire and Phelan found this little thing over here -- (Laughter) -- this structure to which they gave the very clever name "the Weaire-Phelan structure."
(Laughter) It looks like a strange object, but it isn't so strange, it also exists in nature.
It's very interesting that this structure, because of its geometric properties, was used to build the Aquatics Center for the Beijing Olympic Games.
There, Michael Phelps won eight gold medals, and became the best swimmer of all time.
Well, until someone better comes along, right?
As may happen with the Weaire-Phelan structure.
It's the best until something better shows up.
But be careful, because this one really stands a chance that in a hundred or so years, or even if it's in 1700 years, that someone proves it's the best possible shape for the job.
It will then become a theorem, a truth, forever and ever.
For longer than any diamond.
So, if you want to tell someone that you will love them forever you can give them a diamond.
But if you want to tell them that you'll love them forever and ever, give them a theorem!
(Laughter) But hang on a minute!
You'll have to prove it, so your love doesn't remain a conjecture.
(Applause)
A hostile artificial intelligence called NIM has taken over the world’s computers.
You’re the only person skilled enough to shut it down, and you’ll only have one chance.
You’ve broken into NIM’s secret lab, and now you’re floating in a raft on top of 25 stories of electrified water.
You’ve rigged up a remote that can lower the water level by ejecting it from grates in the sides of the room.
If you can lower the water level to 0, you can hit the manual override, shut NIM off, and save the day.
However, the AI knows that you’re here, and it can lower the water level, too, by sucking it through a trapdoor at the bottom of the lab.
If NIM is the one to lower the water level to 0, you’ll be sucked out of the lab, resulting in a failed mission.
Control over water drainage alternates between you and NIM, and neither can skip a turn.
Each of you can lower the water level by exactly 1, 3, or 4 stories at a time.
Whoever gets the level exactly to 0 on their turn will win this deadly duel.
Note that neither of you can lower the water below 0; if the water level is at 2, then the only move is to lower the water level 1 story.
You know that NIM has already computed all possible outcomes of the contest, and will play in a way that maximizes its chance of success.
You go first.
How can you survive and shut off the artificial intelligence?
Pause here if you want to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in: 3 Answer in: 2 Answer in: 1 You can’t leave anything up to chance - NIM will take any advantage it can get.
And you’ll need to have a response to any possible move it makes.
The trick here is to start from where you want to end and work backwards.
You want to be the one to lower the water level to 0, which means you need the water level to be at 1, 3, or 4 when control switches to you.
If the water level were at 2, your only option would be to lower it 1 story, which would lead to NIM making the winning move.
If we color code the water levels, we can see a simple principle at play: there are “losing” levels like 2, where no matter what whoever starts their turn there does, they’ll lose.
And there are winning levels, where whoever starts their turn there can either win or leave their opponent with a losing level.
So not only are 1, 3, and 4 winning levels, but so are 5 and 6, since you can send your opponent to 2 from there.
What about 7?
From 7, all possible moves would send your opponent to a winning level, making this another losing level.
And we can continue up the lab in this way.
If you start your turn 1, 3, or 4 levels above a losing level, then you’re at a winning level.
Otherwise, you’re destined to lose.
You could continue like this all the way to level 25.
But as a shortcut, you might notice that levels 8 through 11 are colored identically to 1 through 4.
Since a level’s color is determined by the levels 1, 3, and 4 stories below it, this means that level 12 will be the same color as level 5, 13 will match 6, 14 will match 7, and so on, In particular, the losing levels will always be multiple of 7, and two greater than multiples of 7.
Now, from your original starting level of 25, you have to make sure your opponent starts on a losing level every single turn— if NIM starts on a winning level even once, it’s game over for you.
So your only choice on turn 1 is to lower the water level by 4 stories.
No matter what the AI does, you can continue giving it losing levels until you reach 0 and trigger the manual override.
And with that, the crisis is averted.
Now, back to a less stressful kind of surfing.
Human beings are everywhere.
With settlements on every continent, we can be found in the most isolated corners of Earth’s jungles, oceans, and tundras.
Our impact is so profound, most scientists believe humanity has left a permanent mark on Earth’s geological record.
So what would happen if suddenly, every human on Earth disappeared?
With no one maintaining them, some of our creations backfire immediately.
Hours after we disappear, oil refineries malfunction, producing month-long blazes at plants like the ones in western India, the southern United States, and South Korea.
In underground rail systems like those in London, Moscow, and New York City, hundreds of drainage pumps are abandoned, flooding the tunnels in just three days.
By the end of the first week, most emergency generators have shut down, and once the fires have gone out, the earth goes dark for the first time in centuries.
After the first catastrophic month, changes come more gradually.
Within 20 years, sidewalks have been torn apart by weeds and tree roots.
Around this time, flooded tunnels erode the streets above into urban rivers.
In temperate climates, the cycle of seasons freezes and thaws these waterways, cracking pavement and concrete foundations.
Leaking pipes cause the same reaction in concrete buildings, and within 200 winters, most skyscrapers buckle and tumble down.
In cities built in river deltas like Houston, these buildings eventually wash away completely - filling nearby tributaries with crushed concrete.
Rural and suburban areas decay more slowly, but in largely unsurprising ways.
Leaks, mold, bug and rodent infestations - all the usual enemies of the homeowner- now go uncontested.
Within 75 years, most houses' supporting beams have rotted and sagged, and the resulting collapsed heap is now home to local rodents and lizards.
But in this post-human world, “local” has a new meaning.
Our cities are full of imported plants, which now run wild across their adopted homes.
Water hyacinth coat the waterways of Shanghai in a thick green carpet.
Poisonous giant hogweeds overgrow the banks of London’s Thames River.
Chinese Ailanthus trees burst through New York City streets.
And as sunken skyscrapers add crumbled concrete to the new forest floor, the soil acidity plummets, potentially allowing new plant life to thrive.
This post-human biodiversity extends into the animal kingdom, as well.
Animals follow the unchecked spread of native and non-native plants, venturing into new habitats with the help of our leftover bridges.
In general, our infrastructure saves some animals and dooms others.
Cockroaches continue to thrive in their native tropical habitats, but without our heating systems, their urban cousins likely freeze and die out in just two winters.
And most domesticated animals are unable to survive without us – save for a handful of resourceful pigs, dogs, and feral housecats.
Conversely, the reduced light pollution saves over a billion birds each year whose migrations were disrupted by blinking communication tower lights and high-tension wires.
And mosquitos multiply endlessly in one of their favorite manmade nurseries – rubber tires, which last for almost a thousand years.
As fauna and flora flourish, Earth’s climate slowly recovers from millennia of human impact.
Within 35,000 years, the plant cycle removes the last traces of lead left by the Industrial Revolution from Earth’s soil, and it may take up to 65,000 years beyond that for CO2 to return pre-human levels.
But even after several million years, humanity’s legacy lives on.
Carved in unyielding granite, America’s Mt. Rushmore survives for 7.2 million years.
The chemical composition of our bronze sculptures keeps them recognizable for over 10 million.
And buried deep underground, the remnants of cities built on floodplains have been preserved in time as a kind of technofossil.
Eventually, these traces, too, will be wiped from the planet’s surface.
Humanity hasn’t always been here, and we won’t be here forever.
But by investigating the world without us, perhaps we can learn more about the world we live in now.
At the annual Athenian drama festival in 426 BC, a comic play called The Babylonians, written by a young poet named Aristophanes, was awarded first prize.
But the play’s depiction of Athens’ conduct during the Peloponnesian War was so controversial that afterwards, a politician named Kleon took Aristophanes to court for "slandering the people of Athens in the presence of foreigners."
Aristophanes struck back two years later with a play called The Knights.
In it, he openly mocked Kleon, ending with Kleon’s character working as a lowly sausage seller outside the city gates.
This style of satire was a consequence of the unrestricted democracy of 5th century Athens and is now called "Old Comedy."
Aristophanes’ plays, the world’s earliest surviving comic dramas, are stuffed full of parodies, songs, sexual jokes, and surreal fantasy.
They often use wild situations, like a hero flying to heaven on a dung beetle, or a net cast over a house to keep the owner’s father trapped inside, in order to subvert audience expectations.
And they’ve shaped how comedy’s been written and performed ever since.
The word "comedy" comes from the Ancient Greek "komos," – revel, and "oide," – singing, and it differed from its companion art form, "tragedy" in many ways.
Where ancient Athenian tragedies dealt with the downfall of the high and mighty, their comedies usually ended happily.
And where tragedy almost always borrowed stories from legend, comedy addressed current events.
Aristophanes’ comedies celebrated ordinary people and attacked the powerful.
His targets were arrogant politicians, war-mongering generals, and self-important intellectuals, exactly the people who sat in the front row of the theatre, where everyone could see their reactions.
As a result, they were referred to as komoidoumenoi: "those made fun of in comedy."
Aristophanes’ vicious and often obscene mockery held these leaders to account, testing their commitment to the city.
One issue, in particular, inspired much of Aristophanes’ work: the Peloponnesian War between Athens and Sparta.
In Peace, written in 421 BC, a middle-aged Athenian frees the embodiment of peace from a cave, where she’d been exiled by profiteering politicians.
Then, in the aftermath of a crushing naval defeat for Athens in 411 BC, Aristophanes wrote "Lysistrata."
In this play, the women of Athens grow sick of war and go on a sex strike until their husbands make peace.
Other plays use similarly fantastic scenarios to skewer topical situations, such as in "Clouds," where Aristophanes mocked fashionable philosophical thinking.
The hero Strepsiades enrolls in Socrates’s new philosophical school, where he learns how to prove that wrong is right and that a debt is not a debt.
No matter how outlandish these plays get, the heroes always prevail in the end.
Aristophanes also became the master of the parabasis, a comic technique where actors address the audience directly, often praising the playwright or making topical comments and jokes.
For example, in "Birds," the Chorus takes the role of different birds and threatens the Athenian judges that if their play doesn’t win first prize, they’ll defecate on them as they walk around the city.
Perhaps the judges didn’t appreciate the joke, as the play came in second.
By exploring new ideas and encouraging self-criticism in Athenian society, Aristophanes not only mocked his fellow citizens, but he shaped the nature of comedy itself.
Hailed by some scholars as the father of comedy, his fingerprints are visible upon comic techniques everywhere, from slapstick to double acts to impersonations to political satire.
Through the praise of free speech and the celebration of ordinary heroes, his plays made his audience think while they laughed.
And his retort to Kleon in 425 BC still resonates today: “I’m a comedian, so I’ll speak about justice, no matter how hard it sounds to your ears.”
So, what I'd like to talk about is something that was very dear to Kahn's heart, which is: how do we discover what is really particular about a project?
How do you discover the uniqueness of a project as unique as a person?
Because it seems to me that finding this uniqueness has to do with dealing with the whole force of globalization; that the particular is central to finding the uniqueness of place and the uniqueness of a program in a building.
And so I'll take you to Wichita, Kansas, where I was asked some years ago to do a science museum on a site, right downtown by the river.
And I thought the secret of the site was to make the building of the river, part of the river.
Unfortunately, though, the site was separated from the river by McLean Boulevard so I suggested, "Let's reroute McLean," and that gave birth instantly to Friends of McLean Boulevard.
(Laughter) And it took six months to reroute it.
The first image I showed the building committee was this astronomic observatory of Jantar Mantar in Jaipur because I talked about what makes a building a building of science.
And it seemed to me that this structure -- complex, rich and yet totally rational: it's an instrument -- had something to do with science, and somehow a building for science should be different and unique and speak of that.
And so my first sketch after I left was to say, "Let's cut the channel and make an island and make an island building."
And I got all excited and came back, and they sort of looked at me in dismay and said, "An island?
This used to be an island -- Ackerman Island -- and we filled in the channel during the Depression to create jobs."
(Laughter) And so the process began and they said, "You can't put it all on an island; some of it has to be on the mainland because we don't want to turn our back to the community."
And there emerged a design: the galleries sort of forming an island and you could walk through them or on the roof.
And there were all kinds of exciting features: you could come in through the landside buildings, walk through the galleries into playgrounds in the landscape.
If you were cheap you could walk on top of a bridge to the roof, peek in the exhibits and then get totally seduced, come back and pay the five dollars admission.
(Laughter) And the client was happy -- well, sort of happy because we were four million dollars over the budget, but essentially happy.
But I was still troubled, and I was troubled because I felt this was capricious.
It was complex, but there was something capricious about its complexity.
It was, what I would say, compositional complexity, and I felt that if I had to fulfill what I talked about -- a building for science -- there had to be some kind of a generating idea, some kind of a generating geometry.
And this gave birth to the idea of having toroidal generating geometry, one with its center deep in the earth for the landside building and a toroid with its center in the sky for the island building.
A toroid, for those who don't know, is the surface of a doughnut or, for some of us, a bagel.
And out of this idea started spinning off many, many kinds of variations of different plans and possibilities, and then the plan itself evolved in relationship to the exhibits, and you see the intersection of the plan with the toroidal geometry.
And finally the building -- this is the model.
And when there were complaints about budget, I said, "Well, it's worth doing the island because you get twice for your money: reflections."
And here's the building as it opened, with a channel overlooking downtown, and as seen from downtown.
And the bike route's going right through the building, so those traveling the river would see the exhibits and be drawn to the building.
The toroidal geometry made for a very efficient building: every beam in this building is the same radius, all laminated wood.
Every wall, every concrete wall is resisting the stresses and supporting the building.
Every piece of the building works.
These are the galleries with the light coming in through the skylights, and at night, and on opening day.
Going back to 1976.
(Applause) In 1976, I was asked to design a children's memorial museum in a Holocaust museum in Yad Vashem in Jerusalem, which you see here the campus.
I was asked to do a building, and I was given all the artifacts of clothing and drawings.
And I felt very troubled.
I worked on it for months and I couldn't deal with it because I felt people were coming out of the historic museum, they are totally saturated with information and to see yet another museum with information, it would make them just unable to digest.
And so I made a counter-proposal: I said, "No building." There was a cave on the site; we tunnel into the hill, descend through the rock into an underground chamber.
There's an anteroom with photographs of children who perished and then you come into a large space.
There is a single candle flickering in the center; by an arrangement of reflective glasses, it reflects into infinity in all directions.
You walk through the space, a voice reads the names, ages and place of birth of the children.
This voice does not repeat for six months.
And then you descend to light and to the north and to life.
Well, they said, "People won't understand, they'll think it's a discotheque. You can't do that."
And they shelved the project. And it sat there for 10 years, and then one day Abe Spiegel from Los Angeles, who had lost his three-year-old son at Auschwitz, came, saw the model, wrote the check and it got built 10 years later.
So, many years after that in 1998, I was on one of my monthly trips to Jerusalem and I got a call from the foreign ministry saying, "We've got the Chief Minister of the Punjab here.
He is on a state visit. We took him on a visit to Yad Vashem, we took him to the children's memorial; he was extremely moved.
He's demanding to meet the architect. Could you come down and meet him in Tel Aviv?"
And I went down and Chief Minister Badal said to me, "We Sikhs have suffered a great deal, as you have Jews.
I was very moved by what I saw today.
We are going to build our national museum to tell the story of our people; we're about to embark on that.
I'd like you to come and design it."
And so, you know, it's one of those things that you don't take too seriously.
But two weeks later, I was in this little town, Anandpur Sahib, outside Chandigarh, the capital of the Punjab, and the temple and also next to it the fortress that the last guru of the Sikhs, Guru Gobind, died in as he wrote the Khalsa, which is their holy scripture.
And I got to work and they took me somewhere down there, nine kilometers away from the town and the temple, and said, "That's where we have chosen the location."
And I said, "This just doesn't make any sense.
The pilgrims come here by the hundreds of thousands -- they're not going to get in trucks and buses and go down there.
Let's get back to the town and walk to the site."
And I recommended they do it right there, on that hill and this hill, and bridge all the way into the town.
And, as things are a little easier in India, the site was purchased within a week and we were working.
(Laughter) And my proposal was to split the museum into two -- the permanent exhibits at one end, the auditorium, library, and changing exhibitions on the other -- to flood the valley into a series of water gardens and to link it all to the fort and to the downtown.
And the structures rise from the sand cliffs -- they're built in concrete and sandstones; the roofs are stainless steel -- they are facing south and reflecting light towards the temple itself, pedestrians crisscross from one side to the other.
And as you come from the north, it is all masonry growing out of the sand cliffs as you come from the Himalayas and evoking the tradition of the fortress.
And then I went away for four months and there was going to be groundbreaking.
And I came back and, lo and behold, the little model I'd left behind had been built ten times bigger for public display on site and ... the bridge was built!
(Laughter) Within the working drawings!
And half a million people gathered for the celebrations; you can see them on the site itself as the foundations are beginning.
I was renamed Safdie Singh. And there it is under construction; there are 1,800 workers at work and it will be finished in two years.
Back to Yad Vashem three years ago. After all this episode began, Yad Vashem decided to rebuild completely the historic museum because now Washington was built -- the Holocaust Museum in Washington -- and that museum is so much more comprehensive in terms of information.
And Yad Vashem needs to deal with three million visitors a year at this point.
They said, "Let's rebuild the museum."
But of course, the Sikhs might give you a job on a platter -- the Jews make it hard: international competition, phase one, phase two, phase three.
(Laughter) And again, I felt kind of uncomfortable with the notion that a building the size of the Washington building -- 50,000 square feet -- will sit on that fragile hill and that we will go into galleries -- rooms with doors and sort of familiar rooms -- to tell the story of the Holocaust.
And I proposed that we cut through the mountain. That was my first sketch.
Just cut the whole museum through the mountain -- enter from one side of the mountain, come out on the other side of the mountain -- and then bring light through the mountain into the chambers.
And here you see the model: a reception building and some underground parking.
You cross a bridge, you enter this triangular room, 60 feet high, which cuts right into the hill and extends right through as you go towards the north.
And all of it, then, all the galleries are underground, and you see the openings for the light.
And at night, just one line of light cuts through the mountain, which is a skylight on top of that triangle.
And all the galleries, as you move through them and so on, are below grade.
And there are chambers carved in the rock -- concrete walls, stone, the natural rock when possible -- with the light shafts.
This is actually a Spanish quarry, which sort of inspired the kind of spaces that these galleries could be.
And then, coming towards the north, it opens up: it bursts out of the mountain into, again, a view of light and of the city and of the Jerusalem hills.
I'd like to conclude with a project I've been working on for two months.
It's the headquarters for the Institute of Peace in Washington, the U.S. Institute of Peace.
The site chosen is across from the Lincoln Memorial; you see it there directly on the Mall. It's the last building on the Mall, on access of the Roosevelt Bridge that comes in from Virginia.
That too was a competition, and it is something I'm just beginning to work on.
But one recognized the kind of uniqueness of the site.
If it were to be anywhere in Washington, it would be an office building, a conference center, a place for negotiating peace and so on -- all of which the building is -- but by virtue of the choice of putting it on the Mall and by the Lincoln Memorial, this becomes the structure that is the symbol of peace on the Mall.
And that was a lot of heat to deal with.
The first sketch recognizes that the building is many spaces -- spaces where research goes on, conference centers, a public building because it will be a museum devoted to peacemaking -- and these are the drawings that we submitted for the competition, the plans showing the spaces which radiate outwards from the entry.
You see the structure as, in the sequence of structures on the Mall, very transparent and inviting and looking in.
And then as you enter it again, looking in all directions towards the city.
And what I felt about that building is that it really was a building that had to do with a lightness of being -- to quote Kundera -- that it had to do with whiteness, it had to do with a certain dynamic quality and it had to do with optimism.
And this is where it is; it's sort of evolving.
Studies for the structure of the roof, which demands maybe new materials: how to make it white, how to make it translucent, how to make it glowing, how to make it not capricious.
And here studying, in three dimensions, how to give some kind, again, of order, a structure; not something you feel you could just change because you stop the design of that particular process.
And so it goes.
I'd like to conclude by saying something ...
(Applause) I'd like to conclude by relating all of what I've said to the term "beauty."
And I know it is not a fashionable term these days, and certainly not fashionable in the discourse of architectural schools, but it seems to me that all this, in one way or the other, is a search for beauty.
Beauty in the most profound sense of fit.
I have a quote that I like by a morphologist, 1917, Theodore Cook, who said, "Beauty connotes humanity.
We call a natural object beautiful because we see that its form expresses fitness, the perfect fulfillment of function."
Well, I would have said the perfect fulfillment of purpose.
Nevertheless, beauty as the kind of fit; something that tells us that all the forces that have to do with our natural environment have been fulfilled -- and our human environment -- for that.
Twenty years ago, in a conference Richard and I were at together, I wrote a poem, which seems to me to still hold for me today.
"He who seeks truth shall find beauty. He who seeks beauty shall find vanity.
He who seeks order shall find gratification.
He who seeks gratification shall be disappointed.
He who considers himself the servant of his fellow beings shall find the joy of self-expression. He who seeks self-expression shall fall into the pit of arrogance.
Arrogance is incompatible with nature.
Through nature, the nature of the universe and the nature of man, we shall seek truth. If we seek truth, we shall find beauty."
Thank you very much. (Applause)
I grew up with my identical twin, who was an incredibly loving brother.
Now, one thing about being a twin is, it makes you an expert at spotting favoritism.
If his cookie was even slightly bigger than my cookie, I had questions.
(Laughter) When I became a psychologist, I began to notice favoritism of a different kind; and that is, how much more we value the body than we do the mind.
I spent nine years at university earning my doctorate in psychology, and I can't tell you how many people look at my business card and say, "Oh -- a psychologist. So, not a real doctor," as if it should say that on my card.
[Dr. Guy Winch, Just a Psychologist (Not a Real Doctor)] (Laughter) This favoritism we show the body over the mind -- I see it everywhere.
I recently was at a friend's house, and their five-year-old was getting ready for bed.
He was standing on a stool by the sink, brushing his teeth, when he slipped and scratched his leg on the stool when he fell.
He cried for a minute, but then he got back up, got back on the stool, and reached out for a box of Band-Aids to put one on his cut.
Now, this kid could barely tie his shoelaces, but he knew you have to cover a cut so it doesn't become infected, and you have to care for your teeth by brushing twice a day.
We all know how to maintain our physical health and how to practice dental hygiene, right?
We've known it since we were five years old.
But what do we know about maintaining our psychological health?
Well, nothing.
What do we teach our children about emotional hygiene?
Nothing.
How is it that we spend more time taking care of our teeth than we do our minds?
Why is it that our physical health is so much more important to us than our psychological health?
We sustain psychological injuries even more often than we do physical ones, injuries like failure or rejection or loneliness.
And they can also get worse if we ignore them, and they can impact our lives in dramatic ways.
And yet, even though there are scientifically proven techniques we could use to treat these kinds of psychological injuries, we don't.
It doesn't even occur to us that we should.
"Oh, you're feeling depressed? Just shake it off; it's all in your head."
Can you imagine saying that to somebody with a broken leg: "Oh, just walk it off; it's all in your leg."
(Laughter) It is time we closed the gap between our physical and our psychological health.
It's time we made them more equal, more like twins.
Speaking of which, my brother is also a psychologist.
So he's not a real doctor, either.
(Laughter) We didn't study together, though.
In fact, the hardest thing I've ever done in my life is move across the Atlantic to New York City to get my doctorate in psychology.
We were apart then for the first time in our lives, and the separation was brutal for both of us.
But while he remained among family and friends, I was alone in a new country.
We missed each other terribly, but international phone calls were really expensive then, and we could only afford to speak for five minutes a week.
When our birthday rolled around, it was the first we wouldn't be spending together.
We decided to splurge, and that week, we would talk for 10 minutes.
(Laughter) I spent the morning pacing around my room, waiting for him to call -- and waiting ...
Given the time difference, I assumed, "OK, he's out with friends, he'll call later."
There were no cell phones then.
But he didn't.
And I began to realize that after being away for over 10 months, he no longer missed me the way I missed him.
I knew he would call in the morning, but that night was one of the saddest and longest nights of my life.
I woke up the next morning.
I glanced down at the phone, and I realized I had kicked it off the hook when pacing the day before.
I stumbled out of bed, I put the phone back on the receiver, and it rang a second later.
And it was my brother, and boy, was he pissed.
(Laughter) It was the saddest and longest night of his life as well.
Now, I tried to explain what happened, but he said, "I don't understand.
If you saw I wasn't calling you, why didn't you just pick up the phone and call me?"
He was right.
I didn't have an answer then.
But I do today, and it's a simple one: loneliness.
Loneliness creates a deep psychological wound, one that distorts our perceptions and scrambles our thinking.
It makes us believe that those around us care much less than they actually do.
It make us really afraid to reach out, because why set yourself up for rejection and heartache when your heart is already aching more than you can stand?
I was in the grips of real loneliness back then, but I was surrounded by people all day, so it never occurred to me.
But loneliness is defined purely subjectively.
It depends solely on whether you feel emotionally or socially disconnected from those around you.
And I did.
There is a lot of research on loneliness, and all of it is horrifying.
Loneliness won't just make you miserable; it will kill you.
I'm not kidding.
Chronic loneliness increases your likelihood of an early death by 14 percent.
Loneliness causes high blood pressure, high cholesterol.
It even suppress the functioning of your immune system, making you vulnerable to all kinds of illnesses and diseases.
In fact, scientists have concluded that taken together, chronic loneliness poses as significant a risk for your long-term health and longevity as cigarette smoking.
Now, cigarette packs come with warnings saying, "This could kill you."
But loneliness doesn't.
And that's why it's so important that we prioritize our psychological health, that we practice emotional hygiene.
Because you can't treat a psychological wound if you don't even know you're injured.
Loneliness isn't the only psychological wound that distorts our perceptions and misleads us.
Failure does that as well.
I once visited a day care center, where I saw three toddlers play with identical plastic toys.
You had to slide the red button, and a cute doggie would pop out.
One little girl tried pulling the purple button, then pushing it, and then she just sat back and looked at the box with her lower lip trembling.
The little boy next to her watched this happen, then turned to his box and burst into tears without even touching it.
Meanwhile, another little girl tried everything she could think of until she slid the red button, the cute doggie popped out, and she squealed with delight.
So: three toddlers with identical plastic toys, but with very different reactions to failure.
The first two toddlers were perfectly capable of sliding a red button.
The only thing that prevented them from succeeding was that their mind tricked them into believing they could not.
Now, adults get tricked this way as well, all the time.
In fact, we all have a default set of feelings and beliefs that gets triggered whenever we encounter frustrations and setbacks.
Are you aware of how your mind reacts to failure?
You need to be.
Because if your mind tries to convince you you're incapable of something, and you believe it, then like those two toddlers, you'll begin to feel helpless and you'll stop trying too soon, or you won't even try at all.
And then you'll be even more convinced you can't succeed.
You see, that's why so many people function below their actual potential.
Because somewhere along the way, sometimes a single failure convinced them that they couldn't succeed, and they believed it.
Once we become convinced of something, it's very difficult to change our mind.
I learned that lesson the hard way when I was a teenager with my brother.
We were driving with friends down a dark road at night, when a police car stopped us.
There had been a robbery in the area and they were looking for suspects.
The officer approached the car, and shined his flashlight on the driver, then on my brother in the front seat, and then on me.
And his eyes opened wide and he said, "Where have I seen your face before?"
(Laughter) And I said, "In the front seat."
(Laughter) But that made no sense to him whatsoever, so now he thought I was on drugs.
(Laughter) So he drags me out of the car, he searches me, he marches me over to the police car, and only when he verified I didn't have a police record, could I show him I had a twin in the front seat.
But even as we were driving away, you could see by the look on his face he was convinced that I was getting away with something.
(Laughter) Our mind is hard to change once we become convinced.
So it might be very natural to feel demoralized and defeated after you fail.
But you cannot allow yourself to become convinced you can't succeed.
You have to fight feelings of helplessness.
You have to gain control over the situation.
And you have to break this kind of negative cycle before it begins.
[Stop Emotional Bleeding] Our minds and our feelings -- they're not the trustworthy friends we thought they were.
They're more like a really moody friend, who can be totally supportive one minute, and really unpleasant the next.
I once worked with this woman who, after 20 years marriage and an extremely ugly divorce, was finally ready for her first date.
She had met this guy online, and he seemed nice and he seemed successful, and most importantly, he seemed really into her.
So she was very excited, she bought a new dress, and they met at an upscale New York City bar for a drink.
Ten minutes into the date, the man stands up and says, "I'm not interested," and walks out.
Rejection is extremely painful.
The woman was so hurt she couldn't move.
Here's what the friend said: "Well, what do you expect?
You have big hips, you have nothing interesting to say.
Why would a handsome, successful man like that ever go out with a loser like you?"
Shocking, right, that a friend could be so cruel?
But it would be much less shocking if I told you it wasn't the friend who said that.
It's what the woman said to herself.
And that's something we all do, especially after a rejection.
We all start thinking of all our faults and all our shortcomings, what we wish we were, what we wish we weren't.
We call ourselves names.
Maybe not as harshly, but we all do it.
And it's interesting that we do, because our self-esteem is already hurting.
Why would we want to go and damage it even further?
We wouldn't make a physical injury worse on purpose.
You wouldn't get a cut on your arm and decide, "Oh! I know -- I'm going to take a knife and see how much deeper I can make it."
But we do that with psychological injuries all the time.
Why? Because of poor emotional hygiene.
Because we don't prioritize our psychological health.
We know from dozens of studies that when your self-esteem is lower, you are more vulnerable to stress and to anxiety; that failures and rejections hurt more, and it takes longer to recover from them.
So when you get rejected, the first thing you should be doing is to revive your self-esteem, not join Fight Club and beat it into a pulp.
When you're in emotional pain, treat yourself with the same compassion you would expect from a truly good friend.
[Protect Your Self-Esteem] We have to catch our unhealthy psychological habits and change them.
And one of unhealthiest and most common is called rumination.
To ruminate means to chew over.
It's when your boss yells at you or your professor makes you feel stupid in class, or you have big fight with a friend and you just can't stop replaying the scene in your head for days, sometimes for weeks on end.
Now, ruminating about upsetting events in this way can easily become a habit, and it's a very costly one, because by spending so much time focused on upsetting and negative thoughts, you are actually putting yourself at significant risk for developing clinical depression, alcoholism, eating disorders, and even cardiovascular disease.
The problem is, the urge to ruminate can feel really strong and really important, so it's a difficult habit to stop.
I know this for a fact, because a little over a year ago, I developed the habit myself.
You see, my twin brother was diagnosed with stage 3 non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.
His cancer was extremely aggressive.
He had visible tumors all over his body.
And he had to start a harsh course of chemotherapy.
And I couldn't stop thinking about what he was going through.
I couldn't stop thinking about how much he was suffering, even though he never complained, not once.
He had this incredibly positive attitude.
His psychological health was amazing.
I was physically healthy, but psychologically, I was a mess.
But I knew what to do.
Studies tell us that even a two-minute distraction is sufficient to break the urge to ruminate in that moment.
And so each time I had a worrying, upsetting, negative thought, I forced myself to concentrate on something else until the urge passed.
And within one week, my whole outlook changed and became more positive and more hopeful.
[Battle Negative Thinking] Nine weeks after he started chemotherapy, my brother had a CAT scan, and I was by his side when he got the results.
All the tumors were gone.
He still had three more rounds of chemotherapy to go, but we knew he would recover.
This picture was taken two weeks ago.
By taking action when you're lonely, by changing your responses to failure, by protecting your self-esteem, by battling negative thinking, you won't just heal your psychological wounds, you will build emotional resilience, you will thrive.
A hundred years ago, people began practicing personal hygiene, and life expectancy rates rose by over 50 percent in just a matter of decades.
I believe our quality of life could rise just as dramatically if we all began practicing emotional hygiene.
Can you imagine what the world would be like if everyone was psychologically healthier?
If there were less loneliness and less depression?
If people knew how to overcome failure?
If they felt better about themselves and more empowered?
If they were happier and more fulfilled?
I can, because that's the world I want to live in.
And that's the world my brother wants to live in as well.
And if you just become informed and change a few simple habits, well -- that's the world we can all live in.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
How do we explain the unexplainable?
This question has inspired numerous myths, religious practices, and scientific inquiries.
But Zen Buddhists practicing throughout China from the 9th to 13th century asked a different question – why do we need an explanation?
For these monks, blindly seeking answers was a vice to overcome, and learning to accept the mysteries of existence was the true path to enlightenment.
But fighting the urge to explain the unexplainable can be difficult.
So to help practice living with these mysteries, the meditating monks used a collection of roughly 1,700 bewildering and ambiguous philosophical thought experiments called kōans.
The name, originally gong-an in Chinese, translates to “public record or case."
But unlike real-world court cases, kōans were intentionally incomprehensible.
They were surprising, surreal, and frequently contradicted themselves.
On the surface, they contained a proverb about the Zen Buddhist monastic code - such as living without physical or mental attachments, avoiding binary thinking, and realizing one’s true “Buddha-nature."
But by framing those lessons as illogical anecdotes, they became tests to help practicing monks learn to live with ambiguity and paradox.
By puzzling through these confusing “cases," meditating monks could both internalize and practice Buddhist teachings.
Hopefully, they would let go of the search for one true answer and trigger a spiritual breakthrough.
Since these are intentionally unexplainable, it would be misguided to try and decipher these stories ourselves.
But like the monks before us, we can puzzle over them together, and investigate just how resistant they are to simple explanations.
Consider this kōan illustrating the practice of no-attachment.
Two monks, Tanzan and Ekido, are traveling together down a muddy road.
Ahead they see an attractive traveler, unable to cross the muddy path.
Tanzan politely offers his help, carrying the traveler on his back across the street, and placing her down without a word.
Ekido was shocked.
According to monastic law, monks were not supposed to go near women, let alone touch a beautiful stranger.
After miles of walking, Ekido could no longer restrain himself.
“How could you carry that woman?” Tanzan smiled, “I left the traveler there. Are you still carrying her?” Like all kōans, this story has numerous interpretations.
But one popular reading suggests that despite never having physically carried the traveler, Ekido broke monastic law by mentally "clinging to" the woman.
This type of conflict – examining the grey area between the letter of the law and the spirit of the law – was common in kōans.
In addition to exploring ambiguity, kōans often ridiculed characters claiming total understanding of the world around them.
One such example finds three monks debating a temple flag rippling in the wind.
The first monk refers to the flag as a moving banner, while the second monk insists that they are not seeing the flag move, but rather the wind blowing.
They argue back and forth, until finally, a third monk intervenes, “It is not the flag moving, nor the wind blowing, but rather the movement of your minds!” One interpretation of this kōan plays on the supposed wisdom of the arguing monks – the first asserting the importance of the observable world, the second favoring deeper knowledge we can infer from that world.
But each monk’s commitment to his own “answer” blinds him to the other’s insight, and in doing so, defies an essential Buddhist ideal: abolishing binary thinking.
The third monk identifies their conflict as a perceptual one – both arguing monks fail to see the larger picture.
Of course, all these interpretations only hint at how to wrestle with these kōans.
Neither the wisdom from practicing monks before us, nor the supposedly wise characters in these stories can resolve them for you.
That’s because the purpose of these kōans isn’t reaching a simple solution.
It’s the very act of struggling with these paradoxical puzzles which challenge our desire for resolution, and our understanding of understanding itself.
In the mid-'90s, the CDC and Kaiser Permanente discovered an exposure that dramatically increased the risk for seven out of 10 of the leading causes of death in the United States.
In high doses, it affects brain development, the immune system, hormonal systems, and even the way our DNA is read and transcribed.
Folks who are exposed in very high doses have triple the lifetime risk of heart disease and lung cancer and a 20-year difference in life expectancy.
And yet, doctors today are not trained in routine screening or treatment.
Now, the exposure I'm talking about is not a pesticide or a packaging chemical.
It's childhood trauma.
Okay. What kind of trauma am I talking about here?
I'm not talking about failing a test or losing a basketball game.
I am talking about threats that are so severe or pervasive that they literally get under our skin and change our physiology: things like abuse or neglect, or growing up with a parent who struggles with mental illness or substance dependence.
Now, for a long time, I viewed these things in the way I was trained to view them, either as a social problem -- refer to social services -- or as a mental health problem -- refer to mental health services.
And then something happened to make me rethink my entire approach.
When I finished my residency, I wanted to go someplace where I felt really needed, someplace where I could make a difference.
So I came to work for California Pacific Medical Center, one of the best private hospitals in Northern California, and together, we opened a clinic in Bayview-Hunters Point, one of the poorest, most underserved neighborhoods in San Francisco.
Now, prior to that point, there had been only one pediatrician in all of Bayview to serve more than 10,000 children, so we hung a shingle, and we were able to provide top-quality care regardless of ability to pay.
It was so cool. We targeted the typical health disparities: access to care, immunization rates, asthma hospitalization rates, and we hit all of our numbers.
We felt very proud of ourselves.
But then I started noticing a disturbing trend.
A lot of kids were being referred to me for ADHD, or Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder, but when I actually did a thorough history and physical, what I found was that for most of my patients, I couldn't make a diagnosis of ADHD.
Most of the kids I was seeing had experienced such severe trauma that it felt like something else was going on.
Somehow I was missing something important.
Now, before I did my residency, I did a master's degree in public health, and one of the things that they teach you in public health school is that if you're a doctor and you see 100 kids that all drink from the same well, and 98 of them develop diarrhea, you can go ahead and write that prescription for dose after dose after dose of antibiotics, or you can walk over and say, "What the hell is in this well?"
So I began reading everything that I could get my hands on about how exposure to adversity affects the developing brains and bodies of children.
And then one day, my colleague walked into my office, and he said, "Dr. Burke, have you seen this?"
In his hand was a copy of a research study called the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study.
That day changed my clinical practice and ultimately my career.
The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study is something that everybody needs to know about.
It was done by Dr. Vince Felitti at Kaiser and Dr. Bob Anda at the CDC, and together, they asked 17,500 adults about their history of exposure to what they called "adverse childhood experiences," or ACEs.
Those include physical, emotional, or sexual abuse; physical or emotional neglect; parental mental illness, substance dependence, incarceration; parental separation or divorce; or domestic violence.
For every yes, you would get a point on your ACE score.
And then what they did was they correlated these ACE scores against health outcomes.
What they found was striking.
Two things: Number one, ACEs are incredibly common.
Sixty-seven percent of the population had at least one ACE, and 12.6 percent, one in eight, had four or more ACEs.
The second thing that they found was that there was a dose-response relationship between ACEs and health outcomes: the higher your ACE score, the worse your health outcomes.
For a person with an ACE score of four or more, their relative risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease was two and a half times that of someone with an ACE score of zero.
For hepatitis, it was also two and a half times.
For depression, it was four and a half times.
For suicidality, it was 12 times.
A person with an ACE score of seven or more had triple the lifetime risk of lung cancer and three and a half times the risk of ischemic heart disease, the number one killer in the United States of America.
Well, of course this makes sense.
Some people looked at this data and they said, "Come on.
You have a rough childhood, you're more likely to drink and smoke and do all these things that are going to ruin your health.
This isn't science. This is just bad behavior."
It turns out this is exactly where the science comes in.
We now understand better than we ever have before how exposure to early adversity affects the developing brains and bodies of children.
It affects areas like the nucleus accumbens, the pleasure and reward center of the brain that is implicated in substance dependence.
It inhibits the prefrontal cortex, which is necessary for impulse control and executive function, a critical area for learning.
And on MRI scans, we see measurable differences in the amygdala, the brain's fear response center.
So there are real neurologic reasons why folks exposed to high doses of adversity are more likely to engage in high-risk behavior, and that's important to know.
But it turns out that even if you don't engage in any high-risk behavior, you're still more likely to develop heart disease or cancer.
The reason for this has to do with the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis, the brain's and body's stress response system that governs our fight-or-flight response.
How does it work?
Well, imagine you're walking in the forest and you see a bear.
Immediately, your hypothalamus sends a signal to your pituitary, which sends a signal to your adrenal gland that says, "Release stress hormones! Adrenaline! Cortisol!"
And so your heart starts to pound, Your pupils dilate, your airways open up, and you are ready to either fight that bear or run from the bear.
And that is wonderful if you're in a forest and there's a bear.
(Laughter) But the problem is what happens when the bear comes home every night, and this system is activated over and over and over again, and it goes from being adaptive, or life-saving, to maladaptive, or health-damaging.
Children are especially sensitive to this repeated stress activation, because their brains and bodies are just developing.
High doses of adversity not only affect brain structure and function, they affect the developing immune system, developing hormonal systems, and even the way our DNA is read and transcribed.
So for me, this information threw my old training out the window, because when we understand the mechanism of a disease, when we know not only which pathways are disrupted, but how, then as doctors, it is our job to use this science for prevention and treatment.
That's what we do.
So in San Francisco, we created the Center for Youth Wellness to prevent, screen and heal the impacts of ACEs and toxic stress.
We started simply with routine screening of every one of our kids at their regular physical, because I know that if my patient has an ACE score of 4, she's two and a half times as likely to develop hepatitis or COPD, she's four and half times as likely to become depressed, and she's 12 times as likely to attempt to take her own life as my patient with zero ACEs.
I know that when she's in my exam room.
For our patients who do screen positive, we have a multidisciplinary treatment team that works to reduce the dose of adversity and treat symptoms using best practices, including home visits, care coordination, mental health care, nutrition, holistic interventions, and yes, medication when necessary.
But we also educate parents about the impacts of ACEs and toxic stress the same way you would for covering electrical outlets, or lead poisoning, and we tailor the care of our asthmatics and our diabetics in a way that recognizes that they may need more aggressive treatment, given the changes to their hormonal and immune systems.
So the other thing that happens when you understand this science is that you want to shout it from the rooftops, because this isn't just an issue for kids in Bayview.
I figured the minute that everybody else heard about this, it would be routine screening, multi-disciplinary treatment teams, and it would be a race to the most effective clinical treatment protocols.
Yeah. That did not happen.
And that was a huge learning for me.
What I had thought of as simply best clinical practice I now understand to be a movement.
In the words of Dr. Robert Block, the former President of the American Academy of Pediatrics, "Adverse childhood experiences are the single greatest unaddressed public health threat facing our nation today."
And for a lot of people, that's a terrifying prospect.
The scope and scale of the problem seems so large that it feels overwhelming to think about how we might approach it.
But for me, that's actually where the hopes lies, because when we have the right framework, when we recognize this to be a public health crisis, then we can begin to use the right tool kit to come up with solutions.
From tobacco to lead poisoning to HIV/AIDS, the United States actually has quite a strong track record with addressing public health problems, but replicating those successes with ACEs and toxic stress is going to take determination and commitment, and when I look at what our nation's response has been so far, I wonder, why haven't we taken this more seriously?
You know, at first I thought that we marginalized the issue because it doesn't apply to us.
That's an issue for those kids in those neighborhoods.
Which is weird, because the data doesn't bear that out.
The original ACEs study was done in a population that was 70 percent Caucasian, 70 percent college-educated.
But then, the more I talked to folks, I'm beginning to think that maybe I had it completely backwards.
If I were to ask how many people in this room grew up with a family member who suffered from mental illness, I bet a few hands would go up.
And then if I were to ask how many folks had a parent who maybe drank too much, or who really believed that if you spare the rod, you spoil the child, I bet a few more hands would go up.
Even in this room, this is an issue that touches many of us, and I am beginning to believe that we marginalize the issue because it does apply to us.
Maybe it's easier to see in other zip codes because we don't want to look at it.
We'd rather be sick.
Fortunately, scientific advances and, frankly, economic realities make that option less viable every day.
The science is clear: Early adversity dramatically affects health across a lifetime.
Today, we are beginning to understand how to interrupt the progression from early adversity to disease and early death, and 30 years from now, the child who has a high ACE score and whose behavioral symptoms go unrecognized, whose asthma management is not connected, and who goes on to develop high blood pressure and early heart disease or cancer will be just as anomalous as a six-month mortality from HIV/AIDS.
People will look at that situation and say, "What the heck happened there?"
This is treatable.
This is beatable.
The single most important thing that we need today is the courage to look this problem in the face and say, this is real and this is all of us.
I believe that we are the movement.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As an Arab female photographer, I have always found ample inspiration for my projects in personal experiences.
The passion I developed for knowledge, which allowed me to break barriers towards a better life was the motivation for my project I Read I Write.
Pushed by my own experience, as I was not allowed initially to pursue my higher education, I decided to explore and document stories of other women who changed their lives through education, while exposing and questioning the barriers they face.
I covered a range of topics that concern women's education, keeping in mind the differences among Arab countries due to economic and social factors.
These issues include female illiteracy, which is quite high in the region; educational reforms; programs for dropout students; and political activism among university students.
As I started this work, it was not always easy to convince the women to participate.
Only after explaining to them how their stories might influence other women's lives, how they would become role models for their own community, did some agree.
Seeking a collaborative and reflexive approach, I asked them to write their own words and ideas on prints of their own images.
Those images were then shared in some of the classrooms, and worked to inspire and motivate other women going through similar educations and situations.
Aisha, a teacher from Yemen, wrote, "I sought education in order to be independent and to not count on men with everything."
One of my first subjects was Umm El-Saad from Egypt.
When we first met, she was barely able to write her name.
She was attending a nine-month literacy program run by a local NGO in the Cairo suburbs.
Months later, she was joking that her husband had threatened to pull her out of the classes, as he found out that his now literate wife was going through his phone text messages.
(Laughter) Naughty Umm El-Saad.
Of course, that's not why Umm El-Saad joined the program.
I saw how she was longing to gain control over her simple daily routines, small details that we take for granted, from counting money at the market to helping her kids in homework.
Despite her poverty and her community's mindset, which belittles women's education, Umm El-Saad, along with her Egyptian classmates, was eager to learn how to read and write.
In Tunisia, I met Asma, one of the four activist women I interviewed.
The secular bioengineering student is quite active on social media.
Regarding her country, which treasured what has been called the Arab Spring, she said, "I've always dreamt of discovering a new bacteria.
Now, after the revolution, we have a new one every single day."
Asma was referring to the rise of religious fundamentalism in the region, which is another obstacle to women in particular.
Out of all the women I met, Fayza from Yemen affected me the most.
Fayza was forced to drop out of school at the age of eight when she was married.
That marriage lasted for a year.
At 14, she became the third wife of a 60-year-old man, and by the time she was 18, she was a divorced mother of three.
Despite her poverty, despite her social status as a divorcée in an ultra-conservative society, and despite the opposition of her parents to her going back to school, Fayza knew that her only way to control her life was through education.
She is now 26.
She received a grant from a local NGO to fund her business studies at the university.
Her goal is to find a job, rent a place to live in, and bring her kids back with her.
The Arab states are going through tremendous change, and the struggles women face are overwhelming.
Just like the women I photographed, I had to overcome many barriers to becoming the photographer I am today, many people along the way telling me what I can and cannot do.
Umm El-Saad, Asma and Fayza, and many women across the Arab world, show that it is possible to overcome barriers to education, which they know is the best means to a better future.
And here I would like to end with a quote by Yasmine, one of the four activist women I interviewed in Tunisia.
Yasmine wrote, "Question your convictions.
Be who you to want to be, not who they want you to be.
Don't accept their enslavement, for your mother birthed you free."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am multidisciplinary.
As a scientist, I've been a crew commander for a NASA Mars simulation last year, and as an artist, I create multicultural community art all over the planet.
And recently, I've actually been combining both.
But let me first talk a little more about that NASA mission.
This is the HI-SEAS program.
HI-SEAS is a NASA-funded planetary surface analogue on the Mauna Loa volcano in Hawaii, and it's a research program that is specifically designed to study the effects of long-term isolation of small crews.
I lived in this dome for four months with a crew of six, a very interesting experience, of course.
We did all kinds of research.
Our main research was actually a food study, but apart from that food study -- developing a new food system for astronauts living in deep space -- we also did all kinds of other research.
We did extra-vehicular activities, as you can see here, wearing mock-up space suits, but we also had our chores and lots of other stuff to do, like questionnaires at the end of every day.
Busy, busy work.
Now, as you can imagine, it's quite challenging to live with just a small group of people in a small space for a long time.
There's all kinds of psychological challenges: how to keep a team together in these circumstances; how to deal with the warping of time you start to sense when you're living in these circumstances; sleep problems that arise; etc.
But also we learned a lot.
I learned a lot about how individual crew members actually cope with a situation like this; how you can keep a crew productive and happy, for example, giving them a good deal of autonomy is a good trick to do that; and honestly, I learned a lot about leadership, because I was a crew commander.
So doing this mission, I really started thinking more deeply about our future in outer space.
We will venture into outer space, and we will start inhabiting outer space.
I have no doubt about it.
It might take 50 years or it might take 500 years, but it's going to happen nevertheless.
So I came up with a new art project called Seeker.
And the Seeker project is actually challenging communities all over the world to come up with starship prototypes that re-envision human habitation and survival.
That's the core of the project.
Now, one important thing: This is not a dystopian project.
This is not about, "Oh my God, the world is going wrong and we have to escape because we need another future somewhere else."
No, no.
The project is basically inviting people to take a step away from earthbound constraints and, as such, reimagine our future.
And it's really helpful, and it works really well, so that's really the important part of what we're doing.
Now, in this project, I'm using a cocreation approach, which is a slightly different approach from what you would expect from many artists.
I'm essentially dropping a basic idea into a group, into a community, people start gravitating to the idea, and together, we shape and build the artwork.
It's a little bit like termites, really.
We just work together, and even, for example, when architects visit what we're doing, sometimes they have a bit of a hard time understanding how we build without a master plan.
We always come up with these fantastic large-scale scupltures that actually we can also inhabit.
The first version was done in Belgium and Holland.
It was built with a team of almost 50 people.
This is the second iteration of that same project, but in Slovenia, in a different country, and the new group was like, we're going to do the architecture differently.
So they took away the architecture, they kept the base of the artwork, and they built an entirely new, much more biomorphic architecture on top of that.
And that's another crucial part of the project.
It's an evolving artwork, evolving architecture.
This was the last version that was just presented a few weeks ago in Holland, which was using caravans as modules to build a starship.
We bought some second-hand caravans, cut them open, and reassembled them into a starship.
Now, when we're thinking about starships, we're not just approaching it as a technological challenge.
We're really looking at it as a combination of three systems: ecology, people and technology.
So there's always a strong ecological component in the project.
Here you can see aquaponic systems that are actually surrounding the astronauts, so they're constantly in contact with part of the food that they're eating.
Now, a very typical thing for this project is that we run our own isolation missions inside these art and design projects.
We actually lock ourselves up for multiple days on end, and test what we build.
And this is, for example, on the right hand side you can see an isolation mission in the Museum of Modern Art in Ljubljana in Slovenia, where six artists and designers locked themselves up -- I was part of that -- for four days inside the museum.
And, of course, obviously, this is a very performative and very strong experience for all of us.
Now, the next version of the project is currently being developed together with Camilo Rodriguez-Beltran, who is also a TED Fellow, in the Atacama Desert in Chile, a magical place.
First of all, it's really considered a Mars analogue.
It really does look like Mars in certain locations and has been used by NASA to test equipment.
And it has a long history of being connected to space through observations of the stars.
It's now home to ALMA, the large telescope that's being developed there.
But also, it's the driest location on the planet, and that makes it extremely interesting to build our project, because suddenly, sustainability is something we have to explore fully.
We have no other option, so I'm very curious to see what's going to happen.
Now, a specific thing for this particular version of the project is that I'm very interested to see how we can connect with the local population, the native population.
These people have been living there for a very long time and can be considered experts in sustainability, and so I'm very interested to see what we can learn from them, and have an input of indigenous knowledge into space exploration.
So we're trying to redefine how we look at our future in outer space by exploring integration, biology, technology and people; by using a cocreation approach; and by using and exploring local traditions and to see how we can learn from the past and integrate that into our deep future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
That's a long walk.
I feel like we have to practice with that.
So, first off, what an honor, what a privilege to be on this stage, getting to have this conversation with you all.
The truth is that I've spent the past three years in college locker rooms, having conversations with young men about the importance of respecting women.
I was recently invited to a major university, and as I was being "debriefed" on the way in, they were telling me what was going on specific to their locker room.
I was informed that there was one player who had punched his baby mama; that there were four other players that were facing rape allegations with four separate women; that there were another two players who had filmed and watched one of the rapes of an unconscious girl; and knowing all of this, one of the head coaches came in the day after the election, and he started the chant, "We can grab women by the pussy because this is America."
Well, that is not the America that I know, and the truth is that sexual assault is but a symptom of the problem.
The problem is the mindset of how these young men are being programmed to think about, to talk about, and to treat women.
Before I dive into the whole talk, I feel like I have to preface a few disclaimers.
Number one: I'm going to mess up.
I just accepted that that's going to happen.
I'm probably going to blank out at some point, so please be gentle with me.
On top of it, there are brilliant people who have dedicated their entire lives to this conversation, and institutions who have paved the way, so I am but offering my humble two cents.
Number two: ProtectHer is but a starting place for us.
We recognize that men are also sexually assaulted, one in 16.
We know that the LGBT community is also assaulted, and while those communities absolutely deserve our attention, for the sake of this conversation, I am going to be speaking about "her," because violence against women is a house on fire, and I will be speaking in heterosexual stereotypes.
Number three: ProtectHer is not implying that women are weak and that we can't protect ourselves, so we need men to come and help protect us.
ProtectHer is an invitation for all of humanity to better prioritize the women and girls.
Now, what's interesting is that some schools call me because, you know, at the end of the day, they care about what's going on in their locker rooms.
But before I ever started in locker rooms, I worked in girl empowerment for a decade.
When I was 19 years old, I founded a nonprofit called I AM THAT GIRL.
We're basically a bad-ass version of scout girls for college girls.
(Laughter) We have about a million girls involved now, and we just opened up a chapter in our 20th country.
So the truth is - thank you, man !
I dig that!
(Applause) So, the truth is that I have a name, and a face, and a story for every time someone talks about girls in statistic form.
And it wasn't until three years ago that Yogi Roth and Trent Dilfer called me, and they asked me to come and give a talk to the top 18 high school quarterbacks for a TV show called "Elite Eleven."
What I didn't realize was that when it aired on ESPN, a week later, everything with Ray Rice would come out.
And suddenly, I was that girl in the locker room, having tough love conversations with men about the importance of respecting women.
It probably helped that I worked at FOX Sports and ESPN, and that I grew up in Texas where football is a religion, that I grew up with four older brothers.
My father's the very best man that I know, my husband was a professional athlete for nine years.
What's interesting is all of a sudden being hired by division one schools all over the country, that I was invited behind the velvet curtain to better understand what was going on with them.
Like I said, some schools were hiring me because they had an incident going on in their locker rooms, and other schools were just legitimately concerned, and I had one head coach call me, and he said he was worried because he had a daughter, and the way in which these young men were talking about women, that was so disrespectful.
Sure enough, I fly out and I am sitting there, and halfway through my talk - we're sitting in a circle in the locker, you can imagine, the only girl - and halfway through my talk, one of the guys raises his hand and he says: "You know, I get it, it's important to 'respect' chicks, but it's cool to fuck chicks."
You can imagine, the coach is like, "You gotta be kidding me."
(Laughter) He is sitting there, shaking his head, looking down at the ground.
And so, I look up at this kid, and I said, "Okay, says who?"
There is this long pause, and immediately he is looking at his boys left and right who are equally mortified, staring down at the ground like, "You gotta be kidding me.
We're for sure running sprints now."
(Laughter) And so, after a minute of awkward silence goes by, I look up and I say, "Here is the thing, I am not necessarily disagreeing, I'm just saying you made a really opinionated statement, you said, 'It's cool to fuck girls,' I'm just saying, 'Says who?'" And finally, he looks up at me and he says, "I don't know."
And I said, "Yeah, that's the problem: you're on autopilot and you've been programmed to think that way; you were handed a script; someone gave you a definition of cool that's not even yours, and you have the audacity to pawn it off as though you're being original."
Mother, father, preacher, teacher, I'm not here to tell you how to live your life, I am simply inviting you to be brave enough to author your own life, to come up with your own definitions, and to think for yourself.
He came up to me after the talk, and he gave me a really awkward hug, and he said, "Thank you," and I looked at him, and I said, "For what?"
And he said, "No one has ever asked me to think for myself.
I want to thank you for the invitation."
Now, I have a thousand stories of adventures, being the only girl in the locker room.
I have stories that would make you laugh, and make you cry, and they would make you cringe, and they would break your heart.
But more than anything else, they would leave you hopeful.
You see, I was put on the planet to empower women.
I was made known of that at a really young age, but it wasn't until I stood in a room full of alpha dudes that I realized that I'd been missing the point, only preaching to half the sky.
That violence against women is not a women's issue, although we are incredibly capable creatures.
Violence against women is a human issue, and it requires all of us participating.
And the truth is, the majority of these young men feel that they have never been invited to sit at our table.
And because I'm not Santa, and I can't fly to every single school - although Lord knows I have tried, I have spent 220 days a year on the road for the past three years.
So, we created the first ever ProtectHer program, that can be integrated into college locker rooms, to invite young men to broaden their definition of manhood.
Because we believe that in order to protect the dorm rooms, that we have to activate the hearts and the minds of the locker rooms.
A few things that I have learned being in the trenches with these guys is first and foremost, we have to make them aware of their programming.
We have to get the most distracted generation in history to pause long enough to be introspective, to ask the hard questions: "Says who?"
We know that they consume ten hours of media a day.
Media that glorifies violence against women, that's inherently disrespectful, that's hyper sexualizing and objectifying.
We know that they consume 3,000 brand images every day, spoon-feeding them a definition of manhood that's been hijacked by a cheap cologne-wearing Ken doll, lacking a moral constitution, self-respect, and authentic confidence.
We know that the majority of these young men learn about sex through porn.
So, maybe we can stop being so shocked because they're doing exactly what we, as a society, are programming them to do, and they're doing it very well.
So maybe, as a society, we can better educate them on sex and healthy relationships.
We need to have a conversation about identity.
We have to broaden their definition of manhood because the consensus in the locker room, right now, is very easy and pretty achievable.
It's be as rich as you can, be as famous as you can, and bang as many girls as you can.
Now, it's interesting, because my husband had a brilliant idea, he said, "What we have to do" - and my husband is here, he is a 6'9" poster boy of feminism - (Laughter) (Applause) And his brilliant suggestion was, "We have to get these young men to stop viewing women just as sexual objects, but to remind them that women are human beings, too."
He said, "So honestly, if I were you, I would just pull pictures of their girlfriends, and sisters, and moms from social media.
I'd put it in your presentation."
That's my husband voice, by the way.
(Laughter) It was this brilliant idea.
So, for the first talk that I ever gave for Elite Eleven, I pulled pictures of all the women that they love, and I put up a slide, and it says, "One in four girls will be sexually assaulted on a college campus."
And of course, their eyes glazed over, like, "Here we go, we're going to have this conversation."
Then I click the next slide, and I said, "But it's different when it's her."
And I memorized ten to fifteen names, I said, "It's different when it's Sarah, and when it's Lauren, and when it's Jenny."
And now these guys are looking at their 16-year-old sister.
Half the guys in the room started crying.
We have to reframe this issue to make this extremely personal to them.
Number three, we have to have a conversation about respect.
You can't give something that you don't have.
We have to imbue these young men with more self-respect, so that they're able to treat others with more dignity.
What dawned on me was that we are not teaching enough emotional education in school right now, we are certainly not teaching these young men how to create an authentic confidence, so they are sourcing it from exactly where they know how.
Through performance, through popularity, and through possessions.
We have to broaden a definition of confidence that is not contingent on social media highlight reels and external validation.
Number four: We have to have real talk with these guys.
I have yet to come into a locker room where they use words like "consent" and "bystander."
Those are words that we use, in our shiny star studded PSAs.
I have yet to hear of a guy come in, and raise his hand, and be like, "There's this really great opportunity for us, bystanders, to intervene."
(Laughter) I have never heard of a guy be like, "We were in the middle of hooking up, I'm not gonna lie, I paused, I was like, 'I just wanna make sure that I officially have your consent moving forward.'" (Laughter) That's not me poking fun at the intention behind these words.
That's just we have to give them real language and real tools for the moments that we are asking them to be brave.
We have to work with them, and be in conversation with them, to offer them language when they see something sketchy, being able to say, "Yo, we don't do that."
That in the middle of hooking up, to give them language like, "Yo, I just wanna make sure that you're cool with us having sex."
Because as long as we're talking to them like academic robots, I think we're setting them up to fail.
And as far as a few calls to action, anyone in media, please stop crucifying coaches and universities when this stuff happens in their locker room; we're at pandemic levels, this is happening everywhere.
Instead, just celebrate the universities who are doing it right, so that we can inspire others to follow suit.
For coaches and educators, please invest in programs like these, that are preventative medicine, we cannot continue to triage these symptoms, putting band-aids on bullet wounds.
For parents out there, you hold all the power in your wallets.
Demand that, in order for you to pay tuition, these schools have to invest in the safety of both your daughters and your sons.
For students out there, ask your administration to invest in these kinds of programs.
And for student athletes out there, say that you are not going to sign with any university that isn't making prevention a priority.
For policy makers out there, if you have to have a driver's license to drive a car, why would you not have to take a mandatory sexual assault prevention program, in order to attend a college or play sports?
For the National League team owners, would you be so audacious as to sign a ProtectHer pledge that says that you won't draft any students who have sexual assault convictions.
To be a professional athlete is a privilege, it's a real-life superhero in this country, and you literally have the ability to change the entire game with those kinds of standards.
Lastly, ProtectHer is a battle cry, it's a belief system, it is a cultural identity that is rooted in the inherent respect for women.
Right now, as we sit in this auditorium, we have women and bad-ass men all over the country, marching, standing at their capital, saying that this is the shift - (Applause) (Cheers) saying that this is the shift that our country wants to make, and it's easy for us to sit in an auditorium, and it's easy for us to hear these different talks and to be inspired by them, but the truth is, this kind of audacious shift in culture is going to demand that the warrior, that the gladiator, that the protector in you and in me rises to the occasion to create a new definition of normal, where girls, and women, and all people are treated with dignity and respect.
Because the truth is that men are not simply the problem when it comes to violence against women, they're also the cure, and we have never needed them so much.
So, for the real men out there, consider this your invitation.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) (Cheers)
Hi everyone.
I would like to introduce you to Laika.
To most of us, Laika is simply a very cute pig.
However, to hundreds of thousands of patients in need of a lifesaving organ Laika is a symbol of hope.
You see, ever since the 1970s, when organ transplants became a real option for patients with kidney failure and other organ diseases, organ supply has been an issue.
Over the last few decades, the issue only worsened as organ demand has exponentially increased.
Currently in the US, there are close to 115,000 patients in need of a lifesaving organ transplant.
By the end of my talk, one more patient will be added to this list.
Today, about 100 people will get a new organ, a chance to start their life anew, and yet by the end of today, 20 others will die waiting.
The situation is heartbreaking for patients, for their families and for the doctors who want to do more.
In some parts of the world, the situation also becomes a disturbing social issue.
In Asia, for example, media outlets reported that desperate patients are obtaining organs from the cruel black market.
It is clear that a solution is needed to this crisis.
Human lives are at stake.
As a biologist and a geneticist, it has become my mission to help solve this problem.
Today, I am optimistic to say that we are on our way there, thanks to Laika.
Using gene editing technology, it's now possible to exquisitely create a human-transplantable organ that can be safely grown in pigs.
Before we jump into the incredible science that makes it happen, let's have a better understanding what xenotransplantation is.
It's a process of transplanting animal organs into humans.
You may want to ask, why pig organs?
Because some pigs carry organs with similar size and physiology to human organs.
Over the last half a century, pioneers of transplantation have tried hard to make it happen, but with limited to no success.
Why is that?
Two fundamental hurdles stood in the way.
First is a problem of rejection.
When our immune system sees a new organ as foreign, it will reject it.
Second, and this one is specific to the organs from the pig, every pig carries a virus that is benign to the pig, but can be transmitted into humans.
It is called the porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV), and this virus has the potential to cause a viral epidemic similar to HIV.
Without an effective way to address these issues, the field of xenotransplantation has been on hold for more than one decade.
Little progress has been made, until now.
Let me share with you how I got here today with Laika.
My journey started from Emei Mountain in China.
That is the place well described in a lot of legendary stories, like the "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
That is the place I call home.
Growing up in the mountain, I started to have a strong connection with nature.
This is me when I was seven years old standing in front of an ancient Buddhist temple with a monkey on my shoulder.
I still vividly remember how my friends and I would toss peanuts around to distract the monkeys so that we could cross to hike through the valley.
I love nature.
When it was time to choose a field of study, I chose to study biology at Peking University in Beijing.
However, the more I learned, the more questions I had.
How could our genetic makeup be so similar to animals and yet we look so different?
How is our immune system capable of fighting off so many pathogens but smart enough not to attack ourselves.
Questions like this tormented me.
I know it sounds nerdy, but you know I'm a scientist.
After college, I decided I didn't want to just ask the questions, I wanted to answer them, so I did.
In 2008, I was lucky enough to be accepted into the PhD program at Harvard University and worked with Dr. George Church.
While working in Church's lab, I started to learn and experiment with the genetic makeup of mammals.
Among all the experiments, one particular one took me closer to Laika.
In 2013, my colleagues and I made changes in a human cell using a tool you may have heard about called CRISPR.
We were one of the first two groups to report the successful use of such a tool in changing our DNA.
It was an exciting moment in scientific discovery.
The gene-editing tool CRISPR has two components.
It has a scissor called the enzyme CRISPR and what is called a guide RNA.
Think about it as genetic scissors with a microscope.
The microscope is a guide RNA, which brings the scissors to the place we want to cut and says, "Here it is," and the enzyme CRISPR just cuts and repairs the DNA in the way we want.
Shortly after we reported our study, physicians at Mass General Hospital were intrigued by the medical applications of our research.
They reached out to us, and together, we began to see the potential to use CRISPR to solve the organ shortage crisis.
How do we do it?
It is simple, yet very complex.
We started by making changes in a pig's cell to make it virus-free and human-immune-compatible.
The nucleus of that cell is then implanted into a pig egg and allowed to divide into an embryo.
The resulting embryo is then placed into the uterus of a surrogate mother and allowed to divide into a pig.
Basically, it's a process of cloning.
The piglet then carries organs whose genetic makeup hopefully wouldn't be rejected by the human immune system.
In 2015, our team decided to tackle the viral transmission problem first.
We wanted to take out all 62 copies of the PERV virus from the pig genome, but at the time, it was nearly mission impossible.
Even with CRISPR, we could only do one or two modifications within a cell.
The record for number of modifications we can do in a particular cell was five.
We had to increase the throughput by more than tenfold to achieve that.
With very careful design and hundreds of trials, we successfully took out all the virus, broke the record.
More importantly, our studies showed that we could eliminate the possibility of this dangerous virus being transmitted into humans.
Last year, with a modified cell and cloning technology, our startup, eGenesis, produced Laika, the first pig of its kind born without PERV.
(Applause) Laika represents the first critical step in establishing safe xenotransplantation.
It is also a platform that we can do further genetic modification on to solve the immunology problem.
Since then, we have created more than 30 pigs without PERV, and they may be the most advanced geno-modified animal living on earth.
We named Laika after the Soviet dog who was the first animal to orbit the earth.
We hope Laika and her siblings can lead us into a new frontier of science and medicine.
Imagine a world where patients who suffer from liver failure can be saved with a new liver without having to wait for a donation or another human to die.
Imagine a world where people with diabetes do not have to rely on insulin after every meal because we can provide them with good pancreatic cells that can produce insulin on their own.
And imagine a world where patients with kidney failure do not have to face the burden of dialysis.
We are striving to create that world, a world without organ shortage.
We finally have the tool to tackle the problem we could never tackle before, and Laika is just the beginning of our journey.
We have to be very humble in front of nature, because there are more issues to be addressed, including immunology and things we couldn't even anticipate at this point.
However, it is our responsibility to translate the cutting-edge science into medicine to save the lives of all the patients who are waiting.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: I mean, Luhan, this is extraordinary work here.
Come forward.
So what's the next steps here? You've got rid of the virus.
The next steps involve trying to get to the point where a human body won't reject a transplant.
What's involved in solving that?
Luhan Yang: It's a very complicated process.
So we need to take out the antigen of the pigs.
In addition, we can learn a lot from cancer.
How can cancer invade or circumvent our immune system so that we can utilize the trick of cancer and implement that on the pig organ to fool our immune system to not attack the organ.
CA: When would you estimate, when do you hope that the first successful transplant would happen?
LY: It would be irresponsible for me to give you any number.
CA: We're at TED. We're always irresponsible.
LY: But we are working day and night trying to make this happen for the patients.
CA: So not even, you won't say that you think it could happen within a decade or within five years or something?
LY: For sure we hope it happens within one decade.
(Laughter) CA: So there's a lot of people here who would be very, very excited at that, the potential is extraordinary.
There will be some other people here who are going, "That pig is too cute.
Humans shouldn't be exploiting something so cute for our benefit."
Do you have any response to that?
LY: Yeah, sure.
So imagine one pig can save eight people's lives.
In addition, similar to human donation, if we only harvest one kidney from the pig, the pig can still be alive, so we are very mindful about the issues, but I think our goal is just to address the unmet medical need for those patients and their families.
CA: Plus, no one can say that to you if they eat bacon, right?
LY: That's a good point.
(Laughter) CA: Luhan, thank you so much. LY: Thank you so much.
(Applause)
One day in 1965, while driving to Acapulco for a vacation with his family, Colombian journalist Gabriel García Márquez abruptly turned his car around, asked his wife to take care of the family’s finances for the coming months, and returned home.
The beginning of a new book had suddenly come to him: “Many years later, as he faced the firing squad, Colonel Aureliano Buendía was to remember that distant afternoon when his father took him to discover ice.” Over the next eighteen months, those words would blossom into One Hundred Years of Solitude.
A novel that would go on to bring Latin American literature to the forefront of the global imagination, earning García Márquez the 1982 Nobel Prize for Literature.
What makes One Hundred Years of Solitude so remarkable?
The novel chronicles the fortunes and misfortunes of the Buendía family over seven generations.
With its lush, detailed sentences, large cast of characters, and tangled narrative, One Hundred Years of Solitude is not an easy book to read.
But it’s a deeply rewarding one, with an epic assortment of intense romances, civil war, political intrigue, globe-trotting adventurers, and more characters named Aureliano than you’d think possible.
Yet this is no mere historical drama.
One Hundred Years of Solitude is one of the most famous examples of a literary genre known as magical realism.
Here, supernatural events or abilities are described in a realistic and matter-of-fact tone, while the real events of human life and history reveal themselves to be full of fantastical absurdity.
Surreal phenomena within the fictional village of Macondo intertwine seamlessly with events taking place in the real country of Colombia.
The settlement begins in a mythical state of isolation, but is gradually exposed to the outside world, facing multiple calamities along the way.
As years pass, characters grow old and die, only to return as ghosts, or to be seemingly reincarnated in the next generation.
When the American fruit company comes to town, so does a romantic mechanic who is always followed by yellow butterflies.
A young woman up and floats away.
Although the novel moves forward through subsequent generations, time moves in an almost cyclical manner.
Many characters have similar names and features to their forebears, whose mistakes they often repeat.
Strange prophecies and visits from mysterious gypsies give way to the skirmishes and firing squads of repeated civil wars.
An American fruit company opens a plantation near the village and ends up massacring thousands of striking workers, mirroring the real-life ‘Banana Massacre’ of 1928.
Combined with the novel’s magical realism, this produces a sense of history as a downward spiral the characters seem powerless to escape.
Beneath the magic is a story about the pattern of Colombian and Latin American history from colonial times onward.
This is a history that the author experienced firsthand.
Gabriel García Márquez grew up in a Colombia torn apart by civil conflict between its Conservative and Liberal political parties.
He also lived in an autocratic Mexico and covered the 1958 Venezuelan coup d’état as a journalist.
But perhaps his biggest influences were his maternal grandparents.
Nicolás Ricardo Márquez was a decorated veteran of the Thousand Days War whose accounts of the rebellion against Colombia's conservative government led Gabriel García Márquez to a socialist outlook.
Meanwhile, Doña Tranquilina Iguarán Cotes’ omnipresent superstition became the foundation of One Hundred Years of Solitude’s style.
Their small house in Aracataca where the author spent his childhood formed the main inspiration for Macondo.
With One Hundred Years of Solitude, Gabriel García Márquez found a unique way to capture the unique history of Latin America.
He was able to depict the strange reality of living in a post-colonial society, forced to relive the tragedies of the past.
In spite of all this fatalism, the novel still holds hope.
At his Nobel Lecture, García Marquez reflected on Latin America’s long history of civil strife and rampant iniquity.
Yet he ended the speech by affirming the possibility of building a better world, to quote, “where no one will be able to decide for others how they die, where love will prove true and happiness be possible, and where the races condemned to one hundred years of solitude will have, at last and forever, a second chance on earth."
An 18-year-old, African-American male joined the United States Air Force and was assigned to Mountain Home Air Force Base and was a part of the air police squadron.
Upon first arriving there, the first goal that I had was for me to identify an apartment, so I could bring my wife and my new baby, Melanie, out to join me in Idaho.
I immediately went to the personnel office, and talking with the guys in personnel, they said, "Hey, no problem finding an apartment in Mountain Home, Idaho.
The people down there love us because they know if they have an airman who is coming in to rent one of their apartments, they'll always get their money."
And that was a really important thing.
He said, "So here is a list of people that you can call, and then they will then allow you to select the apartment that you want."
So I got the list; I made the call.
The lady answered on the other end and I told her what I wanted.
She said, "Oh, great you called.
We have four or five apartments available right now."
She said, "Do you want a one-bedroom or two-bedroom?"
Then she said, "Let's not talk about that.
Just come on down, select the apartment that you want.
We'll sign the contract and you'll have keys in your hand to get your family out here right away."
So I was excited.
I jumped in my car. I went downtown and knocked on the door.
When I knocked on the door, the woman came to the door, and she looked at me, and she said, "Can I help you?"
I said, "Yes, I'm the person who called about the apartments.
I was just coming down to make my selection."
She said, "You know what? I'm really sorry, but my husband rented those apartments and didn't tell me about them."
I said, "You mean he rented all five of them in one hour?"
She didn't give me a response, and what she said was this: She said, "Why don't you leave your number, and if we have some openings, I'll give you a call?"
Needless to say, I did not get a call from her.
Nor did I get any responses from the other people that they gave me on the list where I could get apartments.
So as a result of that, and feeling rejected, I went back to the base, and I talked to the squadron commander.
His name was McDow, Major McDow.
I said, "Major McDow, I need your help."
I told him what happened, and here's what he said to me: He said, "James, I would love to help you.
But you know the problem: We can't make people rent to folks that they don't want to rent to.
And besides, we have a great relationship with people in the community and we really don't want to damage that."
He said, "So maybe this is what you should do.
Why don't you let your family stay home, because you do know that you get a 30-day leave.
So once a year, you can go home to your family, spend 30 days and then come on back."
Needless to say, that didn't resonate for me.
So after leaving him, I went back to personnel, and talking to the clerk, he said, "Jim, I think I have a solution for you.
There's an airman who is leaving and he has a trailer.
If you noticed, in Mountain Home, there are trailer parks and trailers all over the place.
You can buy his trailer, and you'd probably get a really good deal because he wants to get out of town as soon as possible.
And that would take care of your problem, and that would provide the solution for you."
So I immediately jumped in my car, went downtown, saw the trailer -- it was a small trailer, but under the circumstances, I figured that was the best thing that I could do.
So I bought the trailer.
And then I asked him, "Can I just leave the trailer here, and that would take care of all my problems, I wouldn't have to find another trailer park?"
He said, "Before I say yes to that, I need to check with management."
So I get back to the base, he called me back and management said, "No, you can't leave the trailer here because we had promised that slot to some other people."
And that was strange to me because there were several other slots that were open, but it just so happened that he had promised that slot to someone else.
So, what I did -- and he said, "You shouldn't worry, Jim, because there are a lot of trailer parks."
So I put out another exhaustive list of going to trailer parks.
I went to one after another, after another.
And I got the same kind of rejection there that I received when I was looking for the apartment.
And as a result, the kind of comments that they made to me, in addition to saying that they didn't have any slots open, one person said, "Jim, the reason why we can't rent to you, we already have a Negro family in the trailer park."
He said, "And it's not me, because I like you people."
(Laughs) And that's what I did, too. I chuckled, too.
He said, "But here's the problem: If I let you in, the other tenants will move out and I can't afford to take that kind of a hit."
He said, "I just can't rent to you."
Even though that was discouraging, it didn't stop me.
I kept looking, and I looked at the far end of the town in Mountain Home, and there was a small trailer park.
I mean, a really small trailer park.
It didn't have any paved roads in it, it didn't have the concrete slabs, it didn't have fencing to portion off your trailer slot from other trailer slots.
It didn't have a laundry facility.
But the conclusion I reached at that moment was that I didn't have a lot of other options.
So I called my wife, and I said, "We're going to make this one work."
And we moved into it and we became homeowners in Mountain Home, Idaho.
And of course, eventually things settled down.
Four years after that, I received papers to move from Mountain Home, Idaho to a place called Goose Bay, Labrador.
We won't even talk about that. It was another great location. (Laughter) So my challenge then was to get my family from Mountain Home, Idaho to Sharon, Pennsylvania.
That wasn't a problem because we had just purchased a brand-new automobile.
My mother called and said she'll fly out.
She'll be with us as we drive, she'll help us manage the children.
So she came out, her and Alice put a lot of food together for the trip.
That morning, we left at about 5 a.m.
Great trip, having a great time, good conversation.
Somewhere around 6:30, 7 o'clock, we got a little bit tired, and we said, "Why don't we get a motel so that we can rest and then have an early start in the morning?"
So we were looking at a number of the motels as we drove down the road, and we saw one, it was a great big, bright flashing light that said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacanies."
So we stopped in.
They were in the parking lot, I went inside.
When I walked inside, the lady was just finishing up one contract with some folks, some other people were coming in behind me.
And so I walked to the counter, and she said, "How can I help you?"
I said, "I would like to get a motel for the evening for my family."
She said, "You know, I'm really sorry, I just rented the last one.
We will not have any more until the morning."
She said, "But if you go down the road about an hour, 45 minutes, there's another trailer park down there."
I said, "Yeah, but you still have the 'Vacancies' light on, and it's flashing."
She said, "Oh, I forgot."
And she reached over and turned the light off.
She looked at me and I looked at her.
There were other people in the room.
She kind of looked at them. No one said anything.
So I just got the hint and I left, and went outside to the parking lot.
And I told my mother and I told my wife and also Melanie, and I said, "It looks like we're going to have to drive a little bit further down the road to be able to sleep tonight."
And we did drive down the road, but just before we took off and pulled out of the parking lot, guess what happened?
The light came back on.
And it said, "Vacancies, Vacancies, Vacancies."
We were able to find a nice place.
It wasn't our preference, but it was secure and it was clean.
And so we had a great sleep that night.
The piece that's important about that is that we had similar kinds of experiences from Idaho all the way through to Pennsylvania, where we were rejected from hotels, motels and restaurants.
But we made it to Pennsylvania.
We got the family settled. Everyone was glad to see the kids.
I jumped on a plane and shot off to Goose Bay, Labrador, which is another story, right?
(Laughter) Here it is, 53 years later, I now have nine grandchildren, two great-grandchildren.
Five of the grandchildren are boys.
I have master's, Ph.D., undergrad, one in medical school.
I have a couple that are trending.
They're almost there but not quite. (Laughter) I have one who has been in college now for eight years.
(Laughter) He doesn't have a degree yet, but he wants to be a comedian.
So we're just trying to get him to stay in school.
Because you never know, just because you're funny at home, does not make you a comedian, right?
(Laughter) But the thing about it, they're all good kids -- no drugs, no babies in high school, no crime.
So with that being the backdrop, I was sitting in my TV room watching TV, and they were talking about Ferguson and all the hullabaloo that was going on.
And all of a sudden, one of the news commentators got on the air and she said, "In the last three months, eight unarmed African-American males have been killed by police, white homeowners, or white citizens."
For some reason, at that moment it just all hit me.
I said, "What is it? It is so insane.
What is the hatred that's causing people to do these kinds of things?"
Just then, one of my grandsons called.
He said, "Granddad, did you hear what they said on TV?"
I said, "Yes, I did."
He said, "I'm just so confused.
We do everything we do, but it seems that driving while black, walking while black, talking while black, it's just dangerous.
What can we do? We do everything that you told us to do.
When stopped by the police, we place both hands on the steering wheel at the 12 o'clock position.
If asked to get identification, we tell them, 'I am slowly reaching over into the glove compartment to get my I.D.' When pulled out of the car to be searched, when laid on the ground to be searched, when our trunks are opened to be searched, we don't push back, we don't challenge because we know, you've told us, 'Don't you challenge the police.
After it's over, call us and we'll be the ones to challenge."
He said, "And this is the piece that really bugs me: Our white friends, our buddies, we kind of hang together.
When they hear about these kinds of things happening to us, they say, 'Why do you take it?
You need to push back. You need to challenge.
You need to ask them for their identification.'" And here's what the boys have been taught to tell them: "We know that you can do that, but please do not do that while we're in the car because the consequences for you are significantly different than the consequences for us."
And so as a grandparent, what do I tell my grandsons?
How do I keep them safe? How do I keep them alive?
As a result of this, people have come to me and said, "Jim, are you angry?"
And my response to that is this: "I don't have the luxury of being angry, and I also know the consequences of being enraged."
So therefore, the only thing that I can do is take my collective intellect and my energy and my ideas and my experiences and dedicate myself to challenge, at any point in time, anything that looks like it might be racist.
So the first thing I have to do is to educate, the second thing I have to do is to unveil racism, and the last thing I need to do is do everything within my power to eradicate racism in my lifetime by any means necessary.
The second thing I do is this: I want to appeal to Americans.
I want to appeal to their humanity, to their dignity, to their civic pride and ownership to be able to not react to these heinous crimes in an adverse manner.
But instead, to elevate your level of societal knowledge, your level of societal awareness and societal consciousness to then collectively come together, all of us come together, to make sure that we speak out against and we challenge any kind of insanity, any kind of insanity that makes it okay to kill unarmed people, regardless of their ethnicity, regardless of their race, regardless of their diversity makeup.
We have to challenge that. It doesn't make any sense.
The only way I think we can do that is through a collective.
We need to have black and white and Asian and Hispanic just to step forward and say, "We are not going to accept that kind of behavior anymore."
Six thousand miles of road, 600 miles of subway track, 400 miles of bike lanes and a half a mile of tram track, if you've ever been to Roosevelt Island.
These are the numbers that make up the infrastructure of New York City.
These are the statistics of our infrastructure.
They're the kind of numbers you can find released in reports by city agencies.
For example, the Department of Transportation will probably tell you how many miles of road they maintain.
The MTA will boast how many miles of subway track there are.
Most city agencies give us statistics.
This is from a report this year from the Taxi and Limousine Commission, where we learn that there's about 13,500 taxis here in New York City.
Pretty interesting, right?
But did you ever think about where these numbers came from?
Because for these numbers to exist, someone at the city agency had to stop and say, hmm, here's a number that somebody might want want to know.
Here's a number that our citizens want to know.
So they go back to their raw data, they count, they add, they calculate, and then they put out reports, and those reports will have numbers like this.
The problem is, how do they know all of our questions?
We have lots of questions.
In fact, in some ways there's literally an infinite number of questions that we can ask about our city.
The agencies can never keep up.
So the paradigm isn't exactly working, and I think our policymakers realize that, because in 2012, Mayor Bloomberg signed into law what he called the most ambitious and comprehensive open data legislation in the country.
In a lot of ways, he's right.
In the last two years, the city has released 1,000 datasets on our open data portal, and it's pretty awesome.
So you go and look at data like this, and instead of just counting the number of cabs, we can start to ask different questions.
So I had a question.
When's rush hour in New York City?
It can be pretty bothersome. When is rush hour exactly?
And I thought to myself, these cabs aren't just numbers, these are GPS recorders driving around in our city streets recording each and every ride they take.
There's data there, and I looked at that data, and I made a plot of the average speed of taxis in New York City throughout the day.
You can see that from about midnight to around 5:18 in the morning, speed increases, and at that point, things turn around, and they get slower and slower and slower until about 8:35 in the morning, when they end up at around 11 and a half miles per hour.
The average taxi is going 11 and a half miles per hour on our city streets, and it turns out it stays that way for the entire day.
(Laughter) So I said to myself, I guess there's no rush hour in New York City.
There's just a rush day.
Makes sense. And this is important for a couple of reasons.
If you're a transportation planner, this might be pretty interesting to know.
But if you want to get somewhere quickly, you now know to set your alarm for 4:45 in the morning and you're all set.
New York, right?
But there's a story behind this data.
This data wasn't just available, it turns out.
It actually came from something called a Freedom of Information Law Request, or a FOIL Request.
This is a form you can find on the Taxi and Limousine Commission website.
In order to access this data, you need to go get this form, fill it out, and they will notify you, and a guy named Chris Whong did exactly that.
Chris went down, and they told him, "Just bring a brand new hard drive down to our office, leave it here for five hours, we'll copy the data and you take it back."
And that's where this data came from.
Now, Chris is the kind of guy who wants to make the data public, and so it ended up online for all to use, and that's where this graph came from.
And the fact that it exists is amazing. These GPS recorders -- really cool.
But the fact that we have citizens walking around with hard drives picking up data from city agencies to make it public -- it was already kind of public, you could get to it, but it was "public," it wasn't public.
And we can do better than that as a city.
We don't need our citizens walking around with hard drives.
Now, not every dataset is behind a FOIL Request.
Here is a map I made with the most dangerous intersections in New York City based on cyclist accidents.
So the red areas are more dangerous.
And what it shows is first the East side of Manhattan, especially in the lower area of Manhattan, has more cyclist accidents.
That might make sense because there are more cyclists coming off the bridges there.
But there's other hotspots worth studying.
There's Williamsburg. There's Roosevelt Avenue in Queens.
And this is exactly the kind of data we need for Vision Zero.
This is exactly what we're looking for.
But there's a story behind this data as well.
This data didn't just appear.
How many of you guys know this logo?
Yeah, I see some shakes.
Have you ever tried to copy and paste data out of a PDF and make sense of it?
I see more shakes.
More of you tried copying and pasting than knew the logo. I like that.
So what happened is, the data that you just saw was actually on a PDF.
In fact, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of pages of PDF put out by our very own NYPD, and in order to access it, you would either have to copy and paste for hundreds and hundreds of hours, or you could be John Krauss.
John Krauss was like, I'm not going to copy and paste this data. I'm going to write a program.
It's called the NYPD Crash Data Band-Aid, and it goes to the NYPD's website and it would download PDFs.
Every day it would search; if it found a PDF, it would download it and then it would run some PDF-scraping program, and out would come the text, and it would go on the Internet, and then people could make maps like that.
And the fact that the data's here, the fact that we have access to it -- Every accident, by the way, is a row in this table.
You can imagine how many PDFs that is.
The fact that we have access to that is great, but let's not release it in PDF form, because then we're having our citizens write PDF scrapers.
It's not the best use of our citizens' time, and we as a city can do better than that.
Now, the good news is that the de Blasio administration actually recently released this data a few months ago, and so now we can actually have access to it, but there's a lot of data still entombed in PDF.
For example, our crime data is still only available in PDF.
And not just our crime data, our own city budget.
Our city budget is only readable right now in PDF form.
And it's not just us that can't analyze it -- our own legislators who vote for the budget also only get it in PDF.
So our legislators cannot analyze the budget that they are voting for.
And I think as a city we can do a little better than that as well.
Now, there's a lot of data that's not hidden in PDFs.
This is an example of a map I made, and this is the dirtiest waterways in New York City.
Now, how do I measure dirty?
Well, it's kind of a little weird, but I looked at the level of fecal coliform, which is a measurement of fecal matter in each of our waterways.
The larger the circle, the dirtier the water, so the large circles are dirty water, the small circles are cleaner.
What you see is inland waterways.
This is all data that was sampled by the city over the last five years.
And inland waterways are, in general, dirtier.
That makes sense, right?
And the bigger circles are dirty. And I learned a few things from this.
Number one: Never swim in anything that ends in "creek" or "canal."
But number two: I also found the dirtiest waterway in New York City, by this measure, one measure.
In Coney Island Creek, which is not the Coney Island you swim in, luckily.
It's on the other side.
But Coney Island Creek, 94 percent of samples taken over the last five years have had fecal levels so high that it would be against state law to swim in the water.
And this is not the kind of fact that you're going to see boasted in a city report, right?
It's not going to be the front page on nyc.gov.
You're not going to see it there, but the fact that we can get to that data is awesome.
But once again, it wasn't super easy, because this data was not on the open data portal.
If you were to go to the open data portal, you'd see just a snippet of it, a year or a few months.
It was actually on the Department of Environmental Protection's website.
And each one of these links is an Excel sheet, and each Excel sheet is different.
Every heading is different: you copy, paste, reorganize.
When you do you can make maps and that's great, but once again, we can do better than that as a city, we can normalize things.
And we're getting there, because there's this website that Socrata makes called the Open Data Portal NYC.
This is where 1,100 data sets that don't suffer from the things I just told you live, and that number is growing, and that's great.
You can download data in any format, be it CSV or PDF or Excel document.
Whatever you want, you can download the data that way.
The problem is, once you do, you will find that each agency codes their addresses differently.
So one is street name, intersection street, street, borough, address, building, building address.
So once again, you're spending time, even when we have this portal, you're spending time normalizing our address fields.
And that's not the best use of our citizens' time.
We can do better than that as a city.
We can standardize our addresses, and if we do, we can get more maps like this.
This is a map of fire hydrants in New York City, but not just any fire hydrants.
These are the top 250 grossing fire hydrants in terms of parking tickets.
(Laughter) So I learned a few things from this map, and I really like this map.
Number one, just don't park on the Upper East Side.
Just don't. It doesn't matter where you park, you will get a hydrant ticket.
Number two, I found the two highest grossing hydrants in all of New York City, and they're on the Lower East Side, and they were bringing in over 55,000 dollars a year in parking tickets.
And that seemed a little strange to me when I noticed it, so I did a little digging and it turns out what you had is a hydrant and then something called a curb extension, which is like a seven-foot space to walk on, and then a parking spot.
And so these cars came along, and the hydrant -- "It's all the way over there, I'm fine," and there was actually a parking spot painted there beautifully for them.
They would park there, and the NYPD disagreed with this designation and would ticket them.
And it wasn't just me who found a parking ticket.
This is the Google Street View car driving by finding the same parking ticket.
So I wrote about this on my blog, on I Quant NY, and the DOT responded, and they said, "While the DOT has not received any complaints about this location, we will review the roadway markings and make any appropriate alterations."
And I thought to myself, typical government response, all right, moved on with my life.
But then, a few weeks later, something incredible happened.
They repainted the spot, and for a second I thought I saw the future of open data, because think about what happened here.
For five years, this spot was being ticketed, and it was confusing, and then a citizen found something, they told the city, and within a few weeks the problem was fixed.
It's amazing. And a lot of people see open data as being a watchdog.
It's not, it's about being a partner.
We can empower our citizens to be better partners for government, and it's not that hard.
All we need are a few changes.
If you're FOILing data, if you're seeing your data being FOILed over and over again, let's release it to the public, that's a sign that it should be made public.
And if you're a government agency releasing a PDF, let's pass legislation that requires you to post it with the underlying data, because that data is coming from somewhere.
I don't know where, but it's coming from somewhere, and you can release it with the PDF.
And let's adopt and share some open data standards.
Let's start with our addresses here in New York City.
Let's just start normalizing our addresses.
Because New York is a leader in open data.
Despite all this, we are absolutely a leader in open data, and if we start normalizing things, and set an open data standard, others will follow. The state will follow, and maybe the federal government, Other countries could follow, and we're not that far off from a time where you could write one program and map information from 100 countries.
It's not science fiction. We're actually quite close.
And by the way, who are we empowering with this?
Because it's not just John Krauss and it's not just Chris Whong.
There are hundreds of meetups going on in New York City right now, active meetups.
There are thousands of people attending these meetups.
These people are going after work and on weekends, and they're attending these meetups to look at open data and make our city a better place.
Groups like BetaNYC, who just last week released something called citygram.nyc that allows you to subscribe to 311 complaints around your own home, or around your office.
You put in your address, you get local complaints.
And it's not just the tech community that are after these things.
It's urban planners like the students I teach at Pratt.
It's policy advocates, it's everyone, it's citizens from a diverse set of backgrounds.
And with some small, incremental changes, we can unlock the passion and the ability of our citizens to harness open data and make our city even better, whether it's one dataset, or one parking spot at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Even after writing eleven books and winning several prestigious awards, Maya Angelou couldn’t escape the nagging doubt that she hadn’t really earned her accomplishments.
Albert Einstein experienced something similar: he described himself as an “involuntary swindler” whose work didn’t deserve as much attention as it had received.
Accomplishments at the level of Angelou’s or Einstein’s are rare, but their feeling of fraudulence is extremely common.
Why can’t so many of us shake feelings that we haven’t earned our accomplishments, or that our ideas and skills aren’t worthy of others’ attention?
Psychologist Pauline Rose Clance was the first to study this unwarranted sense of insecurity.
In her work as a therapist, she noticed many of her undergraduate patients shared a concern: though they had high grades, they didn’t believe they deserved their spots at the university.
Some even believed their acceptance had been an admissions error.
While Clance knew these fears were unfounded, she could also remember feeling the exact same way in graduate school.
She and her patients experienced something that goes by a number of names-- imposter phenomenon, imposter experience, and imposter syndrome.
Together with colleague Suzanne Imes, Clance first studied imposterism in female college students and faculty.
Their work established pervasive feelings of fraudulence in this group.
Since that first study, the same thing has been established across gender, race, age, and a huge range of occupations, though it may be more prevalent and disproportionately affect the experiences of underrepresented or disadvantaged groups.
To call it a syndrome is to downplay how universal it is.
It's not a disease or an abnormality, and it isn’t necessarily tied to depression, anxiety, or self-esteem.
Where do these feelings of fraudulence come from?
People who are highly skilled or accomplished tend to think others are just as skilled.
This can spiral into feelings that they don’t deserve accolades and opportunities over other people.
And as Angelou and Einstein experienced, there’s often no threshold of accomplishment that puts these feelings to rest.
Feelings of imposterism aren’t restricted to highly skilled individuals, either.
Everyone is susceptible to a phenomenon known as pluralistic ignorance, where we each doubt ourselves privately, but believe we’re alone in thinking that way because no one else voices their doubts.
Since it’s tough to really know how hard our peers work, how difficult they find certain tasks, or how much they doubt themselves, there’s no easy way to dismiss feelings that we’re less capable than the people around us.
Intense feelings of imposterism can prevent people from sharing their great ideas or applying for jobs and programs where they’d excel.
At least so far, the most surefire way to combat imposter syndrome is to talk about it.
Many people suffering from imposter syndrome are afraid that if they ask about their performance, their fears will be confirmed.
And even when they receive positive feedback, it often fails to ease feelings of fraudulence.
But on the other hand, hearing that an advisor or mentor has experienced feelings of imposterism can help relieve those feelings.
The same goes for peers.
Even simply finding out there’s a term for these feelings can be an incredible relief.
Once you’re aware of the phenomenon, you can combat your own imposter syndrome by collecting and revisiting positive feedback.
One scientist who kept blaming herself for problems in her lab started to document the causes every time something went wrong.
Eventually, she realized most of the problems came from equipment failure, and came to recognize her own competence.
We may never be able to banish these feelings entirely, but we can have open conversations about academic or professional challenges.
With increasing awareness of how common these experiences are, perhaps we can feel freer to be frank about our feelings and build confidence in some simple truths: you have talent, you are capable, and you belong.
I'm Michael Shermer, director of the Skeptics Society, publisher of "Skeptic" magazine.
We investigate claims of the paranormal, pseudo-science, fringe groups and cults, and claims of all kinds between, science and pseudo-science and non-science and junk science, voodoo science, pathological science, bad science, non-science, and plain old non-sense.
And unless you've been on Mars recently, you know there's a lot of that out there.
Some people call us debunkers, which is kind of a negative term.
But let's face it, there's a lot of bunk.
We are like the bunko squads of the police departments out there -- well, we're sort of like the Ralph Naders of bad ideas, (Laughter) trying to replace bad ideas with good ideas.
I'll show you an example of a bad idea.
I brought this with me, this was given to us by NBC Dateline to test.
It's produced by the Quadro Corporation of West Virginia.
It's called the Quadro 2000 Dowser Rod.
(Laughter) This was being sold to high-school administrators for $900 apiece.
It's a piece of plastic with a Radio Shack antenna attached to it.
You could dowse for all sorts of things, but this particular one was built to dowse for marijuana in students' lockers.
(Laughter) So the way it works is you go down the hallway, and you see if it tilts toward a particular locker, and then you open the locker.
So it looks something like this.
I'll show you.
(Laughter) Well, it has kind of a right-leaning bias.
Well, this is science, so we'll do a controlled experiment.
It'll go this way for sure.
(Laughter) Sir, do you want to empty your pockets, please, sir?
(Laughter) So the question was, can it actually find marijuana in students' lockers?
And the answer is, if you open enough of them, yes.
(Laughter) (Applause) But in science, we have to keep track of the misses, not just the hits.
And that's probably the key lesson to my short talk here: This is how psychics work, astrologers, tarot card readers and so on.
People remember the hits and forget the misses.
In science, we keep the whole database, and look to see if the number of hits somehow stands out from the total number you'd expect by chance.
In this case, we tested it.
We had two opaque boxes: one with government-approved THC marijuana, and one with nothing.
And it got it 50 percent of the time -- (Laughter) which is exactly what you'd expect with a coin-flip model.
So that's just a fun little example here of the sorts of things we do.
"Skeptic" is the quarterly publication. Each one has a particular theme.
Are people getting smarter or dumber?
I have an opinion of this myself because of the business I'm in, but in fact, people, it turns out, are getting smarter.
Sort of an interesting thing.
With science, don't think of skepticism as a thing, or science as a thing.
Are science and religion compatible?
It's like, are science and plumbing compatible?
They're just two different things.
Science is not a thing. It's a verb.
It's a way of thinking about things.
It's a way of looking for natural explanations for all phenomena.
I mean, what's more likely: that extraterrestrial intelligences or multi-dimensional beings travel across vast distances of interstellar space to leave a crop circle in Farmer Bob's field in Puckerbrush, Kansas to promote skeptic.com, our web page?
And in all cases we have to ask -- (Laughter) What's the more likely explanation?
Before we say something is out of this world, we should first make sure that it's not in this world.
What's more likely: that Arnold had extraterrestrial help in his run for the governorship, or that the "World Weekly News" makes stuff up?
(Laughter) The same theme is expressed nicely here in this Sidney Harris cartoon.
I think you need to be more explicit here in step two."
This single slide completely dismantles the intelligent design arguments.
There's nothing more to it than that.
(Applause) You can say a miracle occurs, it's just that it doesn't explain anything or offer anything.
There's nothing to test.
It's the end of the conversation for intelligent design creationists.
And it's true, scientists sometimes throw terms out as linguistic place fillers -- dark energy or dark matter, something like that -- until we figure out what it is, we'll call it this.
It's the beginning of the causal chain for science.
For intelligent design creationists, it's the end of the chain.
So again, we can ask this: what's more likely?
Are UFOs alien spaceships, or perceptual cognitive mistakes, or even fakes?
This is a UFO shot from my house in Altadena, California, looking down over Pasadena.
And if it looks a lot like a Buick hubcap, it's because it is.
You don't even need Photoshop or high-tech equipment, you don't need computers.
This was shot with a throwaway Kodak Instamatic camera.
You just have somebody off on the side with a hubcap ready to go.
Camera's ready -- that's it.
(Laughter) So, although it's possible that most of these things are fake or illusions or so on, and that some of them are real, it's more likely that all of them are fake, like the crop circles.
On a more serious note, in all of science we're looking for a balance between data and theory.
In the case of Galileo, he had two problems when he turned his telescope to Saturn.
First of all, there was no theory of planetary rings.
Second of all, his data was grainy and fuzzy, and he couldn't quite make out what he was looking at.
So he wrote that he had seen -- "I have observed that the furthest planet has three bodies."
And this is what he ended up concluding that he saw.
So without a theory of planetary rings and with only grainy data, you can't have a good theory.
It wasn't solved until 1655.
This is Christiaan Huygens's book that catalogs all the mistakes people made trying to figure out what was going on with Saturn.
It wasn't till Huygens had two things: He had a good theory of planetary rings and how the solar system operated, and he had better telescopic, more fine-grain data in which he could figure out that as the Earth is going around faster -- according to Kepler's Laws -- than Saturn, then we catch up with it.
And we see the angles of the rings at different angles, there.
And that, in fact, turns out to be true.
The problem with having a theory is that it may be loaded with cognitive biases.
So one of the problems of explaining why people believe weird things is that we have things, on a simple level, and then I'll go to more serious ones.
This is the face on Mars.
In 1976, where there was a whole movement to get NASA to photograph that area because people thought this was monumental architecture made by Martians.
Here's the close-up of it from 2001.
If you squint, you can still see the face.
And when you're squinting, you're turning that from fine-grain to coarse-grain, so you're reducing the quality of your data.
And if I didn't tell you what to look for, you'd still see the face, because we're programmed by evolution to see faces.
Faces are important for us socially.
And of course, happy faces, faces of all kinds are easy to see.
You see the happy face on Mars, there.
(Laughter) If astronomers were frogs, perhaps they'd see Kermit the Frog.
Do you see him there? Little froggy legs.
Or if geologists were elephants?
Religious iconography.
(Laughter) Discovered by a Tennessee baker in 1996.
He charged five bucks a head to come see the nun bun till he got a cease-and-desist from Mother Teresa's lawyer.
Here's Our Lady of Guadalupe and Our Lady of Watsonville, just down the street, or is it up the street from here?
Tree bark is particularly good because it's nice and grainy, branchy, black-and-white splotchy and you can get the pattern-seeking -- humans are pattern-seeking animals.
Here's the Virgin Mary on the side of a glass window in Sao Paulo.
Here's when the Virgin Mary made her appearance on a cheese sandwich -- which I got to actually hold in a Las Vegas casino -- of course, this being America.
(Laughter) This casino paid $28,500 on eBay for the cheese sandwich.
(Laughter) But who does it really look like? The Virgin Mary?
(Laughter) It has that sort of puckered lips, 1940s-era look.
Virgin Mary in Clearwater, Florida.
I actually went to see this one.
There was a lot of people there.
The faithful come in their wheelchairs and crutches, and so on.
We went down and investigated.
Just to give you a size, that's Dawkins, me and The Amazing Randi, next to this two, two and a half story-sized image.
All these candles, thousands of candles people had lit in tribute to this.
So we walked around the backside, to see what was going on.
It turns out wherever there's a sprinkler head and a palm tree, you get the effect.
Here's the Virgin Mary on the backside, which they started to wipe off.
I guess you can only have one miracle per building.
(Laughter) So is it really a miracle of Mary, or is it a miracle of Marge?
(Laughter) And now I'm going to finish up with another example of this, with auditory illusions.
There's this film, "White Noise," with Michael Keaton, about the dead talking back to us.
By the way, the whole business of talking to the dead is not that big a deal.
Anybody can do it, turns out.
It's getting the dead to talk back that's the really hard part.
(Laughter) In this case, supposedly, these messages are hidden in electronic phenomena.
There's a ReverseSpeech.com web page where I downloaded this stuff.
This is the most famous one of all of these.
Here's the forward version of the very famous song.
(Music ends) Couldn't you just listen to that all day?
All right, here it is backwards, and see if you can hear the hidden messages that are supposedly in there.
(Unintelligible lyrics continue) What did you get? Audience: Satan!
Satan. OK, at least we got "Satan".
Now, I'll prime the auditory part of your brain to tell you what you're supposed to hear, and then hear it again.
(Music with lyrics) (Music ends) (Laughter) (Applause) You can't miss it when I tell you what's there.
(Laughter) I'm going to just end with a positive, nice little story.
The Skeptics is a nonprofit educational organization.
We're always looking for little good things that people do.
And in England, there's a pop singer.
One of the top popular singers in England today, Katie Melua.
