And she wrote a beautiful song.
It was in the top five in 2005, called, "Nine Million Bicycles in Beijing."
It's a love story -- she's sort of the Norah Jones of the UK -- about how she much loves her guy, and compared to nine million bicycles, and so forth.
And she has this one passage here.
(Music) (Lyrics) We are 12 billion light-years from the edge That's a guess, No one can ever say it's true, But I know that I will always be with you.
Michael Shermer: Well, that's nice. At least she got it close.
In America it'd be, "We're 6,000 light years from the edge."
(Laughter) But my friend, Simon Singh, the particle physicist now turned science educator, who wrote the book "The Big Bang," and so on, uses every chance he gets to promote good science.
And so he wrote an op-ed piece in "The Guardian" about Katie's song, in which he said, well, we know exactly how far from the edge.
You know, it's 13.7 billion light years, and it's not a guess.
We know within precise error bars how close it is.
So we can say, although not absolutely true, it's pretty close to being true.
And, to his credit, Katie called him up after this op-ed piece came out, and said, "I'm so embarrassed. I was in the astronomy club.
I should've known better."
So I will end with the new version.
(Music with lyrics) We are 13.7 billion light years from the edge of the observable universe.
That's a good estimate with well-defined error bars.
And with the available information, I predict that I will always be with you.
(Laughter) How cool is that?
My name is Joseph, a Member of Parliament in Kenya.
Picture a Maasai village, and one evening, government soldiers come, surround the village and ask each elder to bring one boy to school.
That's how I went to school -- pretty much a government guy pointing a gun and told my father, "You have to make a choice."
I walked very comfortably to this missionary school, that was run by an American missionary.
The first thing the American missionary gave me was a candy.
I had never in my life ever tasted candy.
So I said to myself, with all these hundred other boys, this is where I belong.
(Laughter) I stayed.
When everybody else was dropping out.
My family moved; we're nomads.
It was a boarding school, I was seven -- Every time it closed you had to travel to find them.
40-50 miles, it doesn't matter.
You slept in the bush, but you kept going.
And I stayed. I don't know why, but I did.
All of a sudden I passed the national examination, found myself in a very beautiful high school in Kenya.
And I finished high school.
And just walking, I found a man who gave me a full scholarship to the United States.
My mother still lived in a cow-dung hut, none of my brothers were going to school, and this man told me, "Here, go."
I got a scholarship to St. Lawrence University, Upstate New York; finished that.
And after that I went to Harvard Graduate School; finished that.
Then I worked in DC a little bit: I wrote a book for National Geographic and taught U.S. history.
And every time, I kept going back home, listening to their problems -- sick people, people with no water, all this stuff -- every time I go back to America, I kept thinking about them.
Then one day, an elder gave me a story that went like this: long time ago, there was a big war between tribes.
This specific tribe was really afraid of this other Luhya tribe.
Every time, they sent scouts to make sure no one attacked them.
So one day, the scouts came running and told the villagers, "The enemies are coming. Only half an hour away, they'll be here."
So people scrambled, took their things and ready to go, move out.
But there were two men: one man was blind, one man had no legs -- he was born like that.
The leader of the chiefs said, "No, sorry. We can't take you. You'll slow us down.
We have to flee our women and children, we have to run."
And they were left behind, waiting to die.
But these two people worked something out.
The blind man said, "Look, I'm a very strong man but I can't see."
The man with no legs says, "I can see as far as the end of the world, but I can't save myself from a cat, or whatever animals."
The blind man went down on his knees like this, and told the man with no legs to go over his back, and stood up.
The man on top can see, the blind man can walk.
These guys took off, followed the footsteps of the villagers until they found and passed them.
So, this was told to me in a setup of elders.
And it's a really poor area.
I represent Northern Kenya: the most nomadic, remote areas you can even find.
And that man told me, "So, here you are.
You've got a good education from America, you have a good life in America; what are you going to do for us?
We want you to be our eyes, we'll give you the legs.
We'll walk you, you lead us."
The opportunity came. I was always thinking about that: "What can I do to help my people?
Every time you go to an area where for 43 years of independence, we still don't have basic health facilities.
A man has to be transported in a wheelbarrow 30 km for a hospital.
No clean drinking water.
I'm leaving America.
Last June, I moved from America, ran in July election and won.
And I came for them, and that's my goal.
Right now I have in place, for the last nine months, a plan that in five years, every nomad will have clean drinking water.
We're building dispensaries across that constituency.
I'm asking my friends from America to help with bringing nurses or doctors to help us out.
I'm trying to improve infrastructure.
I'm using the knowledge I received from the United States and from my community to move them forward.
I'm trying to develop homegrown solutions to our issues because people from outside can come and help us, but if we don't help ourselves, there's nothing to do.
My plan right now as I continue with introducing students to different fields -- some become doctors, some lawyers -- we want to produce a comprehensive group of people, students who can come back and help us see a community grow that is in the middle of a huge economic recession.
As I continue to be a Member of Parliament and as I continue listening to all of you talking about botany, health, democracy, new inventions, I'm hoping that one day in my own little community -- which is 26,000 square km, maybe five times Rhode Island -- with no roads, we'll be able to become a model to help others develop.
Thank you very much.
I dedicated the past two years to understanding how people achieve their dreams.
When we think about the dreams we have, and the dent we want to leave in the universe, it is striking to see how big of an overlap there is between the dreams that we have, and projects that never happen.
(Laughter) So I'm here to talk to you today about five ways how not to follow your dreams.
One: Believe in overnight success.
You know the story, right?
The tech guy built a mobile app and sold it very fast for a lot of money.
You know, the story may seem real, but I bet it's incomplete.
If you go investigate further, the guy has done 30 apps before and he has done a master's on the topic, a PhD.
He has been working on the topic for 20 years.
This is really interesting.
I myself have a story in Brazil that people think is an overnight success.
I come from a humble family, and two weeks before the deadline to apply for MIT, I started the application process.
And, voilà! I got in.
People may think it's an overnight success, but that only worked because for the 17 years prior to that, I took life and education seriously.
Your overnight success story is always a result of everything you've done in your life through that moment.
Two: Believe someone else has the answers for you.
Constantly, people want to help out, right?
All sorts of people: your family, your friends, your business partners, they all have opinions on which path you should take: "And let me tell you, go through this pipe."
But whenever you go inside, there are other ways you have to pick as well.
And you need to make those decisions yourself.
No one else has the perfect answers for your life.
And you need to keep picking those decisions, right?
The pipes are infinite and you're going to bump your head, and it's a part of the process.
Three, and it's very subtle but very important: Decide to settle when growth is guaranteed.
So when your life is going great, you have put together a great team, and you have growing revenue, and everything is set -- time to settle.
When I launched my first book, I worked really, really hard to distribute it everywhere in Brazil.
With that, over three million people downloaded it, over 50,000 people bought physical copies.
When I wrote a sequel, some impact was guaranteed.
Even if I did little, sales would be OK.
But OK is never OK.
When you're growing towards a peak, you need to work harder than ever and find yourself another peak.
Maybe if I did little, a couple hundred thousand people would read it, and that's great already.
But if I work harder than ever, I can bring this number up to millions.
That's why I decided, with my new book, to go to every single state of Brazil.
And I can already see a higher peak.
There's no time to settle down.
Fourth tip, and that's really important: Believe the fault is someone else's.
I constantly see people saying, "Yes, I had this great idea, but no investor had the vision to invest."
"Oh, I created this great product, but the market is so bad, the sales didn't go well."
Or, "I can't find good talent; my team is so below expectations."
If you have dreams, it's your responsibility to make them happen.
Yes, it may be hard to find talent.
Yes, the market may be bad.
But if no one invested in your idea, if no one bought your product, for sure, there is something there that is your fault.
(Laughter) Definitely.
You need to get your dreams and make them happen.
And no one achieved their goals alone.
But if you didn't make them happen, it's your fault and no one else's.
Be responsible for your dreams.
And one last tip, and this one is really important as well: Believe that the only things that matter are the dreams themselves.
Once I saw an ad, and it was a lot of friends, they were going up a mountain, it was a very high mountain, and it was a lot of work.
You could see that they were sweating and this was tough.
And they were going up, and they finally made it to the peak.
Of course, they decided to celebrate, right?
I'm going to celebrate, so, "Yes! We made it, we're at the top!"
Two seconds later, one looks at the other and says, "OK, let's go down."
(Laughter) Life is never about the goals themselves.
Life is about the journey.
Yes, you should enjoy the goals themselves, but people think that you have dreams, and whenever you get to reaching one of those dreams, it's a magical place where happiness will be all around.
But achieving a dream is a momentary sensation, and your life is not.
The only way to really achieve all of your dreams is to fully enjoy every step of your journey.
That's the best way.
And your journey is simple -- it's made of steps.
Some steps will be right on.
Sometimes you will trip.
If it's right on, celebrate, because some people wait a lot to celebrate.
And if you tripped, turn that into something to learn.
If every step becomes something to learn or something to celebrate, you will for sure enjoy the journey.
So, five tips: Believe in overnight success, believe someone else has the answers for you, believe that when growth is guaranteed, you should settle down, believe the fault is someone else's, and believe that only the goals themselves matter.
Believe me, you do that, and you will destroy your dreams.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
We humans have always been very concerned about the health of our bodies, but we haven't always been that good at figuring out what's important.
Take the ancient Egyptians, for example: very concerned about the body parts they thought they'd need in the afterlife, but they left some parts out.
This part, for example.
Although they very carefully preserved the stomach, the lungs, the liver, and so forth, they just mushed up the brain, drained it out through the nose, and threw it away, which makes sense, really, because what does a brain do for us anyway?
But imagine if there were a kind of neglected organ in our bodies that weighed just as much as the brain and in some ways was just as important to who we are, but we knew so little about and treated with such disregard.
And imagine if, through new scientific advances, we were just beginning to understand its importance to how we think of ourselves.
Wouldn't you want to know more about it?
Well, it turns out that we do have something just like that: our gut, or rather, its microbes.
But it's not just the microbes in our gut that are important.
Microbes all over our body turn out to be really critical to a whole range of differences that make different people who we are.
So for example, have you ever noticed how some people get bitten by mosquitos way more often than others?
It turns out that everyone's anecdotal experience out camping is actually true.
For example, I seldom get bitten by mosquitos, but my partner Amanda attracts them in droves, and the reason why is that we have different microbes on our skin that produce different chemicals that the mosquitos detect.
Now, microbes are also really important in the field of medicine.
So, for example, what microbes you have in your gut determine whether particular painkillers are toxic to your liver.
They also determine whether or not other drugs will work for your heart condition.
And, if you're a fruit fly, at least, your microbes determine who you want to have sex with.
We haven't demonstrated this in humans yet but maybe it's just a matter of time before we find out. (Laughter) So microbes are performing a huge range of functions.
They help us digest our food.
They help educate our immune system.
They help us resist disease, and they may even be affecting our behavior.
So what would a map of all these microbial communities look like?
Well, it wouldn't look exactly like this, but it's a helpful guide for understanding biodiversity.
Different parts of the world have different landscapes of organisms that are immediately characteristic of one place or another or another.
With microbiology, it's kind of the same, although I've got to be honest with you: All the microbes essentially look the same under a microscope.
So instead of trying to identify them visually, what we do is we look at their DNA sequences, and in a project called the Human Microbiome Project, NIH funded this $173 million project where hundreds of researchers came together to map out all the A's, T's, G's, and C's, and all of these microbes in the human body.
So when we take them together, they look like this.
It's a bit more difficult to tell who lives where now, isn't it?
What my lab does is develop computational techniques that allow us to take all these terabytes of sequence data and turn them into something that's a bit more useful as a map, and so when we do that with the human microbiome data from 250 healthy volunteers, it looks like this.
Each point here represents all the complex microbes in an entire microbial community.
See, I told you they basically all look the same.
So what we're looking at is each point represents one microbial community from one body site of one healthy volunteer.
And so you can see that there's different parts of the map in different colors, almost like separate continents.
And what it turns out to be is that those, as the different regions of the body, have very different microbes in them.
So what we have is we have the oral community up there in green.
Over on the other side, we have the skin community in blue, the vaginal community in purple, and then right down at the bottom, we have the fecal community in brown.
And we've just over the last few years found out that the microbes in different parts of the body are amazingly different from one another.
So if I look at just one person's microbes in the mouth and in the gut, it turns out that the difference between those two microbial communities is enormous.
It's bigger than the difference between the microbes in this reef and the microbes in this prairie.
So this is incredible when you think about it.
What it means is that a few feet of difference in the human body makes more of a difference to your microbial ecology than hundreds of miles on Earth.
And this is not to say that two people look basically the same in the same body habitat, either.
So you probably heard that we're pretty much all the same in terms of our human DNA.
You're 99.99 percent identical in terms of your human DNA to the person sitting next to you.
But that's not true of your gut microbes: you might only share 10 percent similarity with the person sitting next to you in terms of your gut microbes.
So that's as different as the bacteria on this prairie and the bacteria in this forest.
So these different microbes have all these different kinds of functions that I told you about, everything from digesting food to involvement in different kinds of diseases, metabolizing drugs, and so forth.
So how do they do all this stuff?
Well, in part it's because although there's just three pounds of those microbes in our gut, they really outnumber us.
And so how much do they outnumber us?
Well, it depends on what you think of as our bodies.
Is it our cells?
Well, each of us consists of about 10 trillion human cells, but we harbor as many as 100 trillion microbial cells.
So they outnumber us 10 to one.
Now, you might think, well, we're human because of our DNA, but it turns out that each of us has about 20,000 human genes, depending on what you count exactly, but as many as two million to 20 million microbial genes.
So whichever way we look at it, we're vastly outnumbered by our microbial symbionts.
And it turns out that in addition to traces of our human DNA, we also leave traces of our microbial DNA on everything we touch.
We showed in a study a few years ago that you can actually match the palm of someone's hand up to the computer mouse that they use routinely with up to 95 percent accuracy.
So this came out in a scientific journal a few years ago, but more importantly, it was featured on "CSI: Miami," so you really know it's true.
(Laughter) So where do our microbes come from in the first place?
Well if, as I do, you have dogs or kids, you probably have some dark suspicions about that, all of which are true, by the way.
So just like we can match you to your computer equipment by the microbes you share, we can also match you up to your dog.
But it turns out that in adults, microbial communities are relatively stable, so even if you live together with someone, you'll maintain your separate microbial identity over a period of weeks, months, even years.
It turns out that our first microbial communities depend a lot on how we're born.
So babies that come out the regular way, all of their microbes are basically like the vaginal community, whereas babies that are delivered by C-section, all of their microbes instead look like skin.
And this might be associated with some of the differences in health associated with Cesarean birth, such as more asthma, more allergies, even more obesity, all of which have been linked to microbes now, and when you think about it, until recently, every surviving mammal had been delivered by the birth canal, and so the lack of those protective microbes that we've co-evolved with might be really important for a lot of these different conditions that we now know involve the microbiome.
When my own daughter was born a couple of years ago by emergency C-section, we took matters into our own hands and made sure she was coated with those vaginal microbes that she would have gotten naturally.
Now, it's really difficult to tell whether this has had an effect on her health specifically, right?
With a sample size of just one child, no matter how much we love her, you don't really have enough of a sample size to figure out what happens on average, but at two years old, she hasn't had an ear infection yet, so we're keeping our fingers crossed on that one.
And what's more, we're starting to do clinical trials with more children to figure out whether this has a protective effect generally.
So how we're born has a tremendous effect on what microbes we have initially, but where do we go after that?
What I'm showing you again here is this map of the Human Microbiome Project Data, so each point represents a sample from one body site from one of 250 healthy adults.
And you've seen children develop physically.
You've seen them develop mentally.
Now, for the first time, you're going to see one of my colleague's children develop microbially.
So what we are going to look at is we're going to look at this one baby's stool, the fecal community, which represents the gut, sampled every week for almost two and a half years.
And so we're starting on day one.
What's going to happen is that the infant is going to start off as this yellow dot, and you can see that he's starting off basically in the vaginal community, as we would expect from his delivery mode.
And what's going to happen over these two and a half years is that he's going to travel all the way down to resemble the adult fecal community from healthy volunteers down at the bottom.
So I'm just going to start this going and we'll see how that happens.
What you can see, and remember each step in this is just one week, what you can see is that week to week, the change in the microbial community of the feces of this one child, the differences week to week are much greater than the differences between individual healthy adults in the Human Microbiome Project cohort, which are those brown dots down at the bottom.
And you can see he's starting to approach the adult fecal community.
This is up to about two years.
But something amazing is about to happen here.
So he's getting antibiotics for an ear infection.
What you can see is this huge change in the community, followed by a relatively rapid recovery.
I'll just rewind that for you.
And what we can see is that just over these few weeks, we have a much more radical change, a setback of many months of normal development, followed by a relatively rapid recovery, and by the time he reaches day 838, which is the end of this video, you can see that he has essentially reached the healthy adult stool community, despite that antibiotic intervention.
So this is really interesting because it raises fundamental questions about what happens when we intervene at different ages in a child's life.
So does what we do early on, where the microbiome is changing so rapidly, actually matter, or is it like throwing a stone into a stormy sea, where the ripples will just be lost?
Well, fascinatingly, it turns out that if you give children antibiotics in the first six months of life, they're more likely to become obese later on than if they don't get antibiotics then or only get them later, and so what we do early on may have profound impacts on the gut microbial community and on later health that we're only beginning to understand.
So this is fascinating, because one day, in addition to the effects that antibiotics have on antibiotic-resistant bacteria, which are very important, they may also be degrading our gut microbial ecosystems, and so one day we may come to regard antibiotics with the same horror that we currently reserve for those metal tools that the Egyptians used to use to mush up the brains before they drained them out for embalming.
So I mentioned that microbes have all these important functions, and they've also now, just over the past few years, been connected to a whole range of different diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease, heart disease, colon cancer, and even obesity.
Obesity has a really large effect, as it turns out, and today, we can tell whether you're lean or obese with 90 percent accuracy by looking at the microbes in your gut.
Now, although that might sound impressive, in some ways it's a little bit problematic as a medical test, because you can probably tell which of these people is obese without knowing anything about their gut microbes, but it turns out that even if we sequence their complete genomes and had all their human DNA, we could only predict which one was obese with about 60 percent accuracy.
So that's amazing, right?
What it means that the three pounds of microbes that you carry around with you may be more important for some health conditions than every single gene in your genome.
And then in mice, we can do a lot more.
So in mice, microbes have been linked to all kinds of additional conditions, including things like multiple sclerosis, depression, autism, and again, obesity.
But how can we tell whether these microbial differences that correlate with disease are cause or effect?
Well, one thing we can do is we can raise some mice without any microbes of their own in a germ-free bubble.
Then we can add in some microbes that we think are important, and see what happens.
When we take the microbes from an obese mouse and transplant them into a genetically normal mouse that's been raised in a bubble with no microbes of its own, it becomes fatter than if it got them from a regular mouse.
Why this happens is absolutely amazing, though.
Sometimes what's going on is that the microbes are helping them digest food more efficiently from the same diet, so they're taking more energy from their food, but other times, the microbes are actually affecting their behavior.
What they're doing is they're eating more than the normal mouse, so they only get fat if we let them eat as much as they want.
So this is really remarkable, right?
The implication is that microbes can affect mammalian behavior.
So you might be wondering whether we can also do this sort of thing across species, and it turns out that if you take microbes from an obese person and transplant them into mice you've raised germ-free, those mice will also become fatter than if they received the microbes from a lean person, but we can design a microbial community that we inoculate them with that prevents them from gaining this weight.
We can also do this for malnutrition.
So in a project funded by the Gates Foundation, what we're looking at is children in Malawi who have kwashiorkor, a profound form of malnutrition, and mice that get the kwashiorkor community transplanted into them lose 30 percent of their body mass in just three weeks, but we can restore their health by using the same peanut butter-based supplement that is used for the children in the clinic, and the mice that receive the community from the healthy identical twins of the kwashiorkor children do fine.
This is truly amazing because it suggests that we can pilot therapies by trying them out in a whole bunch of different mice with individual people's gut communities and perhaps tailor those therapies all the way down to the individual level.
So I think it's really important that everyone has a chance to participate in this discovery.
So, a couple of years ago, we started this project called American Gut, which allows you to claim a place for yourself on this microbial map.
This is now the largest crowd-funded science project that we know of -- over 8,000 people have signed up at this point.
What happens is, they send in their samples, we sequence the DNA of their microbes and then release the results back to them.
We also release them, de-identified, to scientists, to educators, to interested members of the general public, and so forth, so anyone can have access to the data.
On the other hand, when we do tours of our lab at the BioFrontiers Institute, and we explain that we use robots and lasers to look at poop, it turns out that not everyone wants to know.
(Laughter) But I'm guessing that many of you do, and so I brought some kits here if you're interested in trying this out for yourself.
So why might we want to do this?
Well, it turns out that microbes are not just important for finding out where we are in terms of our health, but they can actually cure disease.
This is one of the newest things we've been able to visualize with colleagues at the University of Minnesota.
So here's that map of the human microbiome again.
What we're looking at now -- I'm going to add in the community of some people with C. diff.
So, this is a terrible form of diarrhea where you have to go up to 20 times a day, and these people have failed antibiotic therapy for two years before they're eligible for this trial.
So what would happen if we transplanted some of the stool from a healthy donor, that star down at the bottom, into these patients.
Would the good microbes do battle with the bad microbes and help to restore their health?
So let's watch exactly what happens there.
Four of those patients are about to get a transplant from that healthy donor at the bottom, and what you can see is that immediately, you have this radical change in the gut community.
So one day after you do that transplant, all those symptoms clear up, the diarrhea vanishes, and they're essentially healthy again, coming to resemble the donor's community, and they stay there.
(Applause) So we're just at the beginning of this discovery.
We're just finding out that microbes have implications for all these different kinds of diseases, ranging from inflammatory bowel disease to obesity, and perhaps even autism and depression.
What we need to do, though, is we need to develop a kind of microbial GPS, where we don't just know where we are currently but also where we want to go and what we need to do in order to get there, and we need to be able to make this simple enough that even a child can use it. (Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
As a software developer and technologist, I've worked on a number of civic technology projects over the years.
Civic tech is sometimes referred to as tech for good, using technology to solve humanitarian problems.
This is in 2010 in Uganda, working on a solution that allowed local populations to avoid government surveillance on their mobile phones for expressing dissent.
That same technology was deployed later in North Africa for similar purposes to help activists stay connected when governments were deliberately shutting off connectivity as a means of population control.
But over the years, as I have thought about these technologies and the things that I work on, a question kind of nags in the back of my mind, which is, what if we're wrong about the virtues of technology, and if it sometimes actively hurts the communities that we're intending to help?
The tech industry around the world tends to operate under similar assumptions that if we build great things, it will positively affect everyone.
Eventually, these innovations will get out and find everyone.
But that's not always the case.
I like to call this blind championing of technology "trickle-down techonomics," to borrow a phrase. (Laughter) We tend to think that if we design things for the select few, eventually those technologies will reach everyone, and that's not always the case.
Technology and innovation behaves a lot like wealth and capital.
They tend to consolidate in the hands of the few, and sometimes they find their way out into the hands of the many.
And so most of you aren't tackling oppressive regimes on the weekends, so I wanted to think of a few examples that might be a little bit more relatable.
In the world of wearables and smartphones and apps, there's a big movement to track people's personal health with applications that track the number of calories that you burn or whether you're sitting too much or walking enough.
These technologies make patient intake in medical facilities much more efficient, and in turn, these medical facilities are starting to expect these types of efficiencies.
As these digital tools find their way into medical rooms, and they become digitally ready, what happens to the digitally invisible?
What does the medical experience look like for someone who doesn't have the $400 phone or watch tracking their every movement?
Do they now become a burden on the medical system?
Is their experience changed?
In the world of finance, Bitcoin and crypto-currencies are revolutionizing the way we move money around the world, but the challenge with these technologies is the barrier to entry is incredibly high, right?
You need access to the same phones, devices, connectivity, and even where you don't, where you can find a proxy agent, usually they require a certain amount of capital to participate.
And so the question that I ask myself is, what happens to the last community using paper notes when the rest of the world moves to digital currency?
Another example from my hometown in Philadelphia: I recently went to the public library there, and they are facing an existential crisis.
Public funding is dwindling, they have to reduce their footprint to stay open and stay relevant, and so one of the ways they're going about this is digitizing a number of the books and moving them to the cloud.
This is great for most kids. Right?
You can check out books from home, you can research on the way to school or from school, but these are really two big assumptions, that one, you have access at home, and two, that you have access to a mobile phone, and in Philadelphia, many kids do not.
So what does their education experience look like in the wake of a completely cloud-based library, what used to be considered such a basic part of education?
How do they stay competitive?
A final example from across the world in East Africa: there's been a huge movement to digitize land ownership rights, for a number of reasons.
Migrant communities, older generations dying off, and ultimately poor record-keeping have led to conflicts over who owns what.
And so there was a big movement to put all this information online, to track all the ownership of these plots of land, put them in the cloud, and give them to the communities.
But actually, the unintended consequence of this has been that venture capitalists, investors, real estate developers, have swooped in and they've begun buying up these plots of land right out from under these communities, because they have access to the technologies and the connectivity that makes that possible.
So that's the common thread that connects these examples, the unintended consequences of the tools and the technologies that we make.
As engineers, as technologists, we sometimes prefer efficiency over efficacy.
We think more about doing things than the outcomes of what we are doing.
This needs to change.
We have a responsibility to think about the outcomes of the technologies we build, especially as they increasingly control the world in which we live.
In the late '90s, there was a big push for ethics in the world of investment and banking.
I think in 2014, we're long overdue for a similar movement in the area of tech and technology.
So, I just encourage you, as you are all thinking about the next big thing, as entrepreneurs, as CEOs, as engineers, as makers, that you think about the unintended consequences of the things that you're building, because the real innovation is in finding ways to include everyone.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Rainforest noises) In the summer of 2011, as a tourist, I visited the rainforests of Borneo for the very first time, and as you might imagine, it was the overwhelming sounds of the forest that struck me the most.
There's this constant cacophony of noise.
Some things actually do stick out.
For example, this here is a big bird, a rhinoceros hornbill.
This buzzing is a cicada.
This is a family of gibbons.
It's actually singing to each other over a great distance.
The place where this was recorded was in fact a gibbon reserve, which is why you can hear so many of them, but in fact the most important noise that was coming out of the forest that time was one that I didn't notice, and in fact nobody there had actually noticed it.
So, as I said, this was a gibbon reserve.
They spend most of their time rehabilitating gibbons, but they also have to spend a lot of their time protecting their area from illegal logging that takes place on the side.
And so if we take the sound of the forest and we actually turn down the gibbons, the insects, and the rest, in the background, the entire time, in recordings you heard, was the sound of a chainsaw at great distance.
They had three full-time guards who were posted around this sanctuary whose job was in fact to guard against illegal logging, and one day, we went walking, again as tourists, out into the forest, and within five minutes' walk, we stumbled upon somebody who was just sawing a tree down, five minutes' walk, a few hundred meters from the ranger station.
They hadn't been able to hear the chainsaws, because as you heard, the forest is very, very loud.
It struck me as quite unacceptable that in this modern time, just a few hundred meters away from a ranger station in a sanctuary, that in fact nobody could hear it when someone who has a chainsaw gets fired up.
It sounds impossible, but in fact, it was quite true.
So how do we stop illegal logging?
It's really tempting, as an engineer, always to come up with a high-tech, super-crazy high-tech solution, but in fact, you're in the rainforest.
It has to be simple, it has to be scalable, and so what we also noticed while were there was that everything we needed was already there.
We could build a system that would allow us to stop this using what's already there.
Who was there? What was already in the forest?
Well, we had people.
We had this group there that was dedicated, three full-time guards, that was dedicated to go and stop it, but they just needed to know what was happening out in the forest.
The real surprise, this is the big one, was that there was connectivity out in the forest.
There was cell phone service way out in the middle of nowhere.
We're talking hundreds of kilometers from the nearest road, there's certainly no electricity, but they had very good cell phone service, these people in the towns were on Facebook all the time, they're surfing the web on their phones, and this sort of got me thinking that in fact it would be possible to use the sounds of the forest, pick up the sounds of chainsaws programmatically, because people can't hear them, and send an alert.
But you have to have a device to go up in the trees.
So if we can use some device to listen to the sounds of the forest, connect to the cell phone network that's there, and send an alert to people on the ground, perhaps we could have a solution to this issue for them.
But let's take a moment to talk about saving the rainforest, because it's something that we've definitely all heard about forever.
People in my generation have heard about saving the rainforest since we were kids, and it seems that the message has never changed: We've got to save the rainforest, it's super urgent, this many football fields have been destroyed yesterday.
and yet here we are today, about half of the rainforest remains, and we have potentially more urgent problems like climate change.
But in fact, this is the little-known fact that I didn't realize at the time: Deforestation accounts for more greenhouse gas than all of the world's planes, trains, cars, trucks and ships combined.
It's the second highest contributor to climate change.
Also, according to Interpol, as much as 90 percent of the logging that takes place in the rainforest is illegal logging, like the illegal logging that we saw.
So if we can help people in the forest enforce the rules that are there, then in fact we could eat heavily into this 17 percent and potentially have a major impact in the short term.
It might just be the cheapest, fastest way to fight climate change.
And so here's the system that we imagine.
It looks super high tech.
The moment a sound of a chainsaw is heard in the forest, the device picks up the sound of the chainsaw, it sends an alert through the standard GSM network that's already there to a ranger in the field who can in fact show up in real time and stop the logging.
It's no more about going out and finding a tree that's been cut.
It's not about seeing a tree from a satellite in an area that's been clear cut, it's about real-time intervention.
So I said it was the cheapest and fastest way to do it, but in fact, actually, as you saw, they weren't able to do it, so it may not be so cheap and fast.
But if the devices in the trees were actually cell phones, it could be pretty cheap.
Cell phones are thrown away by the hundreds of millions every year, hundreds of millions in the U.S. alone, not counting the rest of the world, which of course we should do, but in fact, cell phones are great.
They're full of sensors.
They can listen to the sounds of the forest.
We do have to protect them.
We have to put them in this box that you see here, and we do have to power them.
Powering them is one of the greater engineering challenges that we had to deal with, because powering a cell phone under a tree canopy, any sort of solar power under a tree canopy, was an as-yet-unsolved problem, and that's this unique solar panel design that you see here, which in fact is built also from recycled byproducts of an industrial process.
These are strips that are cut down.
So this is me putting it all together in my parents' garage, actually.
Thanks very much to them for allowing me to do that.
As you can see, this is a device up in a tree.
What you can see from here, perhaps, is that they are pretty well obscured up in the tree canopy at a distance.
That's important, because although they are able to hear chainsaw noises up to a kilometer in the distance, allowing them to cover about three square kilometers, if someone were to take them, it would make the area unprotected.
So does it actually work?
Well, to test it, we took it back to Indonesia, not the same place, but another place, to another gibbon reserve that was threatened daily by illegal logging.
On the very second day, it picked up illegal chainsaw noises.
We were able to get a real-time alert.
I got an email on my phone.
Actually, we had just climbed the tree. Everyone had just gotten back down.
All these guys are smoking cigarettes, and then I get an email, and they all quiet down, and in fact you can hear the chainsaw really, really faint in the background, but no one had noticed it until that moment.
And so then we took off to actually stop these loggers.
I was pretty nervous.
This is the moment where we've actually arrived close to where the loggers are.
This is the moment where you can see where I'm actually regretting perhaps the entire endeavor.
I'm not really sure what's on the other side of this hill.
That guy's much braver than I am.
But he went, so I had to go, walking up, and in fact, he made it over the hill, and interrupted the loggers in the act.
For them, it was such a surprise -- they had never, ever been interrupted before -- that it was such an impressive event for them, that we've heard from our partners they have not been back since.
They were, in fact, great guys.
They showed us how the entire operation works, and what they really convinced us on the spot was that if you can show up in real time and stop people, it's enough of a deterrent they won't come back.
So -- Thank you. (Applause) Word of this spread, possibly because we told a lot of people, and in fact, then some really amazing stuff started to happen.
People from around the world started to send us emails, phone calls.
What we saw was that people throughout Asia, people throughout Africa, people throughout South America, they told us that they could use it too, and what's most important, what we'd found that we thought might be exceptional, in the forest there was pretty good cell phone service.
That was not exceptional, we were told, and that particularly is on the periphery of the forests that are most under threat.
And then something really amazing happened, which was that people started sending us their own old cell phones.
So in fact what we have now is a system where we can use people on the ground, people who are already there, who can both improve and use the existing connectivity, and we're using old cell phones that are being sent to us by people from around the world that want their phones to be doing something else in their afterlife, so to speak.
And if the rest of the device can be completely recycled, then we believe it's an entirely upcycled device.
So again, this didn't come because of any sort of high-tech solution.
It just came from using what's already there, and I'm thoroughly convinced that if it's not phones, that there's always going to be enough there that you can build similar solutions that can be very effective in new contexts.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Twenty-five years ago, scientists at CERN created the World Wide Web.
Since then, the Internet has transformed the way we communicate, the way we do business, and even the way we live.
In many ways, the ideas that gave birth to Google, Facebook, Twitter, and so many others, have now really transformed our lives, and this has brought us many real benefits such as a more connected society.
However, there are also some downsides to this.
Today, the average person has an astounding amount of personal information online, and we add to this online information every single time we post on Facebook, each time we search on Google, and each time we send an email.
Now, many of us probably think, well, one email, there's nothing in there, right?
But if you consider a year's worth of emails, or maybe even a lifetime of email, collectively, this tells a lot.
It tells where we have been, who we have met, and in many ways, even what we're thinking about.
And the more scary part about this is our data now lasts forever, so your data can and will outlive you.
What has happened is that we've largely lost control over our data and also our privacy.
So this year, as the web turns 25, it's very important for us to take a moment and think about the implications of this.
We have to really think.
We've lost privacy, yes, but actually what we've also lost is the idea of privacy itself.
If you think about it, most of us here today probably remember what life was like before the Internet, but today, there's a new generation that is being taught from a very young age to share everything online, and this is a generation that is not going to remember when data was private.
So we keep going down this road, 20 years from now, the word 'privacy' is going to have a completely different meaning from what it means to you and I.
So, it's time for us to take a moment and think, is there anything we can do about this?
And I believe there is.
Let's take a look at one of the most widely used forms of communication in the world today: email.
Before the invention of email, we largely communicated using letters, and the process was quite simple.
You would first start by writing your message on a piece of paper, then you would place it into a sealed envelope, and from there, you would go ahead and send it after you put a stamp and address on it.
Unfortunately, today, when we actually send an email, we're not sending a letter.
What you are sending, in many ways, is actually a postcard, and it's a postcard in the sense that everybody that sees it from the time it leaves your computer to when it gets to the recipient can actually read the entire contents.
So, the solution to this has been known for some time, and there's many attempts to do it.
The most basic solution is to use encryption, and the idea is quite simple.
First, you encrypt the connection between your computer and the email server.
Then, you also encrypt the data as it sits on the server itself.
But there's a problem with this, and that is, the email servers also hold the encryption keys, so now you have a really big lock with a key placed right next to it.
But not only that, any government could lawfully ask for and get the key to your data, and this is all without you being aware of it.
So the way we fix this problem is actually relatively easy, in principle: You give everybody their own keys, and then you make sure the server doesn't actually have the keys.
This seems like common sense, right?
So the question that comes up is, why hasn't this been done yet?
Well, if we really think about it, we see that the business model of the Internet today really isn't compatible with privacy.
Just take a look at some of the biggest names on the web, and you see that advertising plays a huge role.
In fact, this year alone, advertising is 137 billion dollars, and to optimize the ads that are shown to us, companies have to know everything about us.
They need to know where we live, how old we are, what we like, what we don't like, and anything else they can get their hands on.
And if you think about it, the best way to get this information is really just to invade our privacy.
So these companies aren't going to give us our privacy.
If we want to have privacy online, what we have to do is we've got to go out and get it ourselves.
For many years, when it came to email, the only solution was something known as PGP, which was quite complicated and only accessible to the tech-savvy.
Here's a diagram that basically shows the process for encrypting and decrypting messages.
So needless to say, this is not a solution for everybody, and this actually is part of the problem, because if you think about communication, by definition, it involves having someone to communicate with.
So while PGP does a great job of what it's designed to do, for the people out there who can't understand how to use it, the option to communicate privately simply does not exist.
And this is a problem that we need to solve.
So if we want to have privacy online, the only way we can succeed is if we get the whole world on board, and this is only possible if we bring down the barrier to entry.
I think this is actually the key challenge that lies in the tech community.
What we really have to do is work and make privacy more accessible.
So last summer, when the Edward Snowden story came out, several colleagues and I decided to see if we could make this happen.
At that time, we were working at the European Organization for Nuclear Research at the world's largest particle collider, which collides protons, by the way.
We were all scientists, so we used our scientific creativity and came up with a very creative name for our project: ProtonMail. (Laughter) Many startups these days actually begin in people's garages or people's basements.
We were a bit different.
We started out at the CERN cafeteria, which actually is great, because look, you have all the food and water you could ever want.
But even better than this is that every day between 12 p.m. and 2 p.m., free of charge, the CERN cafeteria comes with several thousand scientists and engineers, and these guys basically know the answers to everything.
So it was in this environment that we began working.
What we actually want to do is we want to take your email and turn it into something that looks more like this, but more importantly, we want to do it in a way that you can't even tell that it's happened.
So to do this, we actually need a combination of technology and also design.
So how do we go about doing something like this?
Well, it's probably a good idea not to put the keys on the server.
So what we do is we generate encryption keys on your computer, and we don't generate a single key, but actually a pair of keys, so there's an RSA private key and an RSA public key, and these keys are mathematically connected.
So let's have a look and see how this works when multiple people communicate.
So here we have Bob and Alice, who want to communicate privately.
So the key challenge is to take Bob's message and to get it to Alice in such a way that the server cannot read that message.
So what we have to do is we have to encrypt it before it even leaves Bob's computer, and one of the tricks is, we encrypt it using the public key from Alice.
Now this encrypted data is sent through the server to Alice, and because the message was encrypted using Alice's public key, the only key that can now decrypt it is a private key that belongs to Alice, and it turns out Alice is the only person that actually has this key.
So we've now accomplished the objective, which is to get the message from Bob to Alice without the server being able to read what's going on.
Actually, what I've shown here is a highly simplified picture.
The reality is much more complex and it requires a lot of software that looks a bit like this.
And that's actually the key design challenge: How do we take all this complexity, all this software, and implement it in a way that the user cannot see it.
I think with ProtonMail, we have gotten pretty close to doing this.
So let's see how it works in practice.
Here, we've got Bob and Alice again, who also want to communicate securely.
They simply create accounts on ProtonMail, which is quite simple and takes a few moments, and all the key encryption and generation is happening automatically in the background as Bob is creating his account.
Once his account is created, he just clicks "compose," and now he can write his email like he does today.
So he fills in his information, and then after that, all he has to do is click "send," and just like that, without understanding cryptography, and without doing anything different from how he writes email today, Bob has just sent an encrypted message.
What we have here is really just the first step, but it shows that with improving technology, privacy doesn't have to be difficult, it doesn't have to be disruptive.
If we change the goal from maximizing ad revenue to protecting data, we can actually make it accessible.
Now, I know a question on everybody's minds is, okay, protecting privacy, this is a great goal, but can you actually do this without the tons of money that advertisements give you?
And I think the answer is actually yes, because today, we've reached a point where people around the world really understand how important privacy is, and when you have that, anything is possible.
Earlier this year, ProtonMail actually had so many users that we ran out of resources, and when this happened, our community of users got together and donated half a million dollars.
So this is just an example of what can happen when you bring the community together towards a common goal.
We can also leverage the world.
Right now, we have a quarter of a million people that have signed up for ProtonMail, and these people come from everywhere, and this really shows that privacy is not just an American or a European issue, it's a global issue that impacts all of us.
It's something that we really have to pay attention to going forward.
So what do we have to do to solve this problem?
Well, first of all, we need to support a different business model for the Internet, one that does not rely entirely on advertisements for revenue and for growth.
We actually need to build a new Internet where our privacy and our ability to control our data is first and foremost.
But even more importantly, we have to build an Internet where privacy is no longer just an option but is also the default.
We have done the first step with ProtonMail, but this is really just the first step in a very, very long journey.
The good news I can share with you guys today, the exciting news, is that we're not traveling alone.
The movement to protect people's privacy and freedom online is really gaining momentum, and today, there are dozens of projects from all around the world who are working together to improve our privacy.
These projects protect things from our chat to voice communications, also our file storage, our online search, our online browsing, and many other things.
And these projects are not backed by billions of dollars in advertising, but they've found support really from the people, from private individuals like you and I from all over the world.
This really matters, because ultimately, privacy depends on each and every one of us, and we have to protect it now because our online data is more than just a collection of ones and zeros.
It's actually a lot more than that.
It's our lives, our personal stories, our friends, our families, and in many ways, also our hopes and our aspirations.
We need to spend time now to really protect our right to share this only with people that we want to share this with, because without this, we simply can't have a free society.
So now's the time for us to collectively stand up and say, yes, we do want to live in a world with online privacy, and yes, we can work together to turn this vision into a reality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to start my performance by saying 90 percent of everything is crap.
(Laughter) It's called Sturgeon's law, and what that means is that the majority of anything is always bad.
I have a giraffe here.
I'm going to throw the giraffe behind my back and whoever catches it is going to help me on this next thing.
Sir, you caught the giraffe.
I have a playing card in my hand.
Freely name any card in the deck.
Audience member: 10 of hearts.
Helder Guimarães: 10 of hearts.
You could have named any card in the deck, but you said the 10 of hearts.
Ninety percent of everything is crap, so there's this to prove that Sturgeon was correct.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) Sir, this is not your show.
(Laughter) Keep the giraffe for a moment, okay?
Jesus.
(Laughter) Crazy people.
Well, the truth is, why is the majority of everything bad?
And my answer is: I think we stop thinking too soon.
I'll give you a clear little example, something that people used to do around the turn of the century -- not this century, the other one.
The idea was to take a piece of paper and fold it inside out using only your weaker hand, in my case, the left hand.
Something that would look like this.
By the way you reacted, I can see your lack of interest.
(Laughter) But that's okay, I understand why.
We stop thinking too soon.
But if we give it a little bit more thought, like a paper clip.
A paper clip makes this a little bit more interesting.
Not only that, if instead of using my hand with the fingers, I use my hand closed into a fist, that makes this even a little bit more interesting.
Not only that, but I will impose myself a time limit of one second, something that would look like this.
Now -- no, no, no.
Sturgeon may be correct.
But he doesn't have to be correct forever.
Things can always change.
Sir, what was the card?
The 10 of hearts?
There's this to prove that things can always change -- the 10 of hearts.
(Applause) Secrets are important.
And secrets are valuable.
And this is the best secret I've ever experienced.
It starts with a deck of cards onto the table, an old man and a claim, "I will not touch the deck till the end."
It doesn't matter who the man was, all that matters was that sentence ringing in my head: "I will not touch the deck till the end."
Now, during all this time, he was holding a small notebook that sometimes he would open and flip through the pages and look at something.
But I was not really paying attention to the book because I was paying attention the deck and the claim he had made before, "I will not touch the deck till the end."
Now sir, you have the giraffe.
Go ahead, throw it in any direction so that you can find someone else at random.
Perfect. Sir, you're going to play my role in this story.
The old man turned to me and he said, "You could pick a red card or a black card."
My answer was ...
Audience member 2: The black card.
HG: Indeed!
It was a black card.
He said, "It could be a club or a spade," and my answer was ...
Audience member 2: Spade.
HG: Indeed! It was a spade.
He said, "It could be a high spade or a low spade."
And my answer was ...
Audience member 2: A high spade.
HG: Indeed! It was a high spade.
Since it's a high spade, it could be a nine, a 10, a jack, king, queen or the ace of spades.
And my answer was ...
Audience member 2: The king.
HG: The king of spades, indeed.
Now sir, let's be fair.
You selected black, you selected spade, you selected the high spade, and you selected -- sorry?
Audience member 2: King. HG: King of spades.
Did you feel I influenced you in any decision?
Audience member 2: No, I just felt your energy.
HG: But it was a free choice, correct?
Because if not, we could start all over again.
But it was really fair? Audience member 2: Absolutely.
HG: Now, the old man turned to me and he asked me one more question, a number between one and 52.
And the first number I thought of was ...
Audience member 2: 17.
HG: Indeed! It was the 17.
The old man only said one more thing: "This is the end."
And I knew exactly what that meant.
I knew that he was going to touch the deck.
Everything that you're about to see is exactly as it looked.
He took the deck out of the box.
Nothing in the box.
He counted, "One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, 10."
The tension was building.
(Laughter) "11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17."
And on the 17, instead of the king of spades, something appeared in the middle of the deck, that later, I would realize was actually a secret.
The old man stood up, he left.
I never saw him again.
But he left his notebook that was there from the beginning.
And when I picked it up, that was the best secret I've ever experienced.
We are defined by the secrets we keep and by the secrets we share.
And this was his way of sharing a secret with me.
(Applause) Crazy shit! Now -- (Laughter) I believe that amazing things happen all the time.
I really do.
And the reason why we don't see them as often, it's because we don't place ourselves in a position to search for those amazing things.
But what if we decided to search for those amazing things, for those small coincidences in life that are truly amazing?
So you have the giraffe, go ahead, throw it in any direction so you find one last person at random.
Sir, I'm going to ask you, do you have, with you, a United States $1 bill?
Audience member 3: I think so.
HG: Yes? You see, a coincidence!
(Laughter) Let's make sure you have it.
Do you have it?
Audience member 3: Yes. HG: Yes! Perfect.
Now, I want you to do exactly the same thing I am about to do.
I have a dollar bill here to explain.
I want you to take the dollar bill, and fold the Washington part inside, like this.
So you get this kind of big square, okay?
Now, I want you to take the bill and fold it like this, lengthwise, so it becomes like a rectangle, and then again -- really fold it, really crease it -- and when you have it, please fold the bill again into a little square like this and let me know when you have it.
Do you have it? Perfect.
Now, I'm going to approach, and before we start, I want to make sure that we do this in very, very serious conditions.
First of all, I want to ensure that we have a marker and we have a paper clip.
First of all, take the marker and go ahead and sign the bill.
And this is the reason why: later, I'm going to be doing a bunch of stuff on stage and I don't want you to think, oh, while I was distracted by Helder, someone came onstage and swapped the bill.
So I want to make sure it's exactly the same bill.
Now not only that, I want you to take the paper clip and put it around the bill.
So even if nobody comes onstage and switches the bill, I don't have enough time to go open the bill and close it and see what I don't want to see.
Is that fair?
Now you can give me the marker back.
And just like that, very clearly, I want to make sure that we place this in full view from the beginning of this experience and to make sure that everyone is going to see it, we're going to actually have a camera man onstage.
Yes, perfect, so that you can see.
That's your signature? Yes? Perfect.
Now, we're going to use also the deck and a glass for this.
And we're going to put ourselves in a position to search for an amazing coincidence.
Do you mind, can you help me with this?
Go ahead and take some cards and shuffle.
And do you mind, can you take some cards and shuffle?
You can take some cards and shuffle.
You can shuffle cards in a variety of ways.
You can shuffle cards like this.
You can shuffle cards in a more messed up way, something like this.
You can shuffle cards in the American way.
As a Portuguese, I don't feel entitled to teach you guys how to do it.
But the important part is after shuffling the cards, always remember to cut and complete the cards.
Do you mind doing that for me, sir?
Please cut and complete.
And when you have it, place the cards up in the air.
And you too, cut and complete and up in the air.
Up in the air.
A deck of cards cut and shuffled by one, two, three, four and five people.
Now, very clearly, I'm going to gather the deck together.
And just like that.
I'm going to search for a coincidence in front of everyone.
I'm going to try.
I have some cards that maybe, maybe they don't mean anything.
But maybe that's because we are not paying close attention.
Because maybe, maybe they mean a lot.
Before we start, sir, you gave me a dollar bill.
Is that your signature?
Audience member 3: Yes it is.
HG: I want you to see very clearly that I'm going to open your bill and reveal a small secret that we created.
And the secret of this dollar bill is the serial number.
Madam, can you take the dollar bill?
In the serial number, there is a letter.
What is the first number after the letter?
Audience member 4: Seven.
HG: Seven.
Seven.
But, that's maybe just one coincidence.
What is the second number? Audience member 4: Nine.
So after the seven, we have a nine.
And after the nine?
Audience member 4: Two.
HG: The two. And after the two?
Audience member 4: Three.
HG: Three, and after?
Audience member 4: Three. HG: Three.
Audience member 4: Seven. HG: Seven.
Audience member 4: Four. HG: Four.
Audience member 4: Two. HG: Two, and?
Audience member 4: Q.
HG: Q like in queen?
(Applause) The queen of clubs!
All the cards in order, just for you.
And that's my show.
Thank you very much and have a nice night.
(Applause)
We need to change the culture in our jails and prisons, especially for young inmates.
New York state is one of only two in the U.S.
that automatically arrests and tries 16- to 17-year-olds as adults.
This culture of violence takes these young people and puts them in a hostile environment, and the correctional officers pretty much allow any and everything to go on.
There's not really much for these young people to do to actually enhance their talent and actually rehabilitate them.
Until we can raise the age of criminal responsibility to 18, we need to focus on changing the daily lives of these young people.
I know firsthand.
Before I ever turned 18, I spent approximately 400 days on Rikers Island, and to add to that I spent almost 300 days in solitary confinement, and let me tell you this: Screaming at the top of your lungs all day on your cell door or screaming at the top of your lungs out the window, it gets tiring.
Since there's not much for you to do while you're in there, you start pacing back and forth in your cell, you start talking to yourself, your thoughts start running wild, and then your thoughts become your own worst enemy.
Jails are actually supposed to rehabilitate a person, not cause him or her to become more angry, frustrated, and feel more hopeless.
Since there's not a discharge plan put in place for these young people, they pretty much reenter society with nothing.
And there's not really much for them to do to keep them from recidivating.
But it all starts with the C.O.s.
It's very easy for some people to look at these correctional officers as the good guys and the inmates as the bad guys, or vice versa for some, but it's a little more than that.
See, these C.O.s are normal, everyday people.
They come from the same neighborhoods as the population they "serve."
They're just normal people.
They're not robots, and there's nothing special about them.
They do pretty much everything anybody else in society does.
The male C.O.s want to talk and flirt with the female C.O.s.
They play the little high school kid games with each other.
They politic with one another.
And the female C.O.s gossip to each other.
So I spent numerous amounts of time with numerous amounts of C.O.s, and let me tell you about this one in particular named Monroe.
One day he pulled me in between the A and B doors which separate the north and south sides of our housing unit.
He pulled me there because I had a physical altercation with another young man in my housing unit, and he felt, since there was a female officer working on the floor, that I violated his shift.
So he punched me in my chest.
He kind of knocked the wind out of me.
I wasn't impulsive, I didn't react right away, because I know this is their house.
I have no wins.
All he has to do is pull his pin and backup will come immediately.
So I just gave him a look in his eyes and I guess he saw the anger and frustration just burning, and he said to me, "Your eyes are going to get you in a lot of trouble, because you're looking like you want to fight."
So he commenced to taking off his utility belt, he took off his shirt and his badge, and he said, "We could fight."
So I asked him, "You gonna hold it down?"
Now, that's a term that's commonly used on Rikers Island meaning that you're not going to say anything to anybody, and you're not going to report it.
He said, "Yeah, I'm gonna hold it down. You gonna hold it down?"
I didn't even respond.
I just punched him right in his face, and we began fighting right then and there.
Towards the end of the fight, he slammed me up against the wall, so while we were tussled up, he said to me, "You good?"
as if he got the best of me, but in my mind, I know I got the best of him, so I replied very cocky, "Oh, I'm good, you good?"
He said, "Yeah, I'm good, I'm good."
We let go, he shook my hand, said he gave me my respect, gave me a cigarette and sent me on my way.
Believe it or not, you come across some C.O.s on Rikers Island that'll fight you one-on-one.
They feel that they understand how it is, and they feel that I'm going to meet you where you're at.
Since this is how you commonly handle your disputes, we can handle it in that manner.
I walk away from it like a man, you walk away from it like a man, and that's it.
Some C.O.s feel that they're jailing with you.
This is why they have that mentality and that attitude and they go by that concept.
In some instances, we're in it together with the C.O.s.
However, institutions need to give these correctional officers proper trainings on how to properly deal with the adolescent population, and they also need to give them proper trainings on how to deal with the mental health population as well.
These C.O.s play a big factor in these young people's lives for x amount of time until a disposition is reached on their case.
So why not try to mentor these young people while they're there?
Why not try to give them some type of insight to make a change, so once they reenter back into society, they're doing something positive?
A second big thing to help our teens in jails is better programming.
When I was on Rikers Island, the huge thing was solitary confinement.
Solitary confinement was originally designed to break a person mentally, physically and emotionally.
That's what it was designed for.
The U.S. Attorney General recently released a report stating that they're going to ban solitary confinement in New York state for teens.
One thing that kept me sane while I was in solitary confinement was reading.
I tried to educate myself as much as possible.
I read any and everything I could get my hands on.
And aside from that, I wrote music and short stories.
Some programs that I feel would benefit our young people are art therapy programs for the kids that like to draw and have that talent, and what about the young individuals that are musically inclined?
How about a music program for them that actually teaches them how to write and make music?
Just a thought.
When adolescents come to Rikers Island, C74, RNDC is the building that they're housed in.
That's nicknamed "gladiator school," because you have a young individual coming in from the street thinking that they're tough, being surrounded by a bunch of other young individuals from all of the five boroughs, and everybody feels that they're tough.
So now you have a bunch of young gentlemen poking their chests out feeling that I have to prove I'm equally as tough as you or I'm tougher than you, you and you.
But let's be honest: That culture is very dangerous and damaging to our young people.
We need to help institutions and these teens realize that they don't have to lead the previous lifestyle that they led when they were on the street, that they can actually make a change.
It's sad to report that while I was in prison, I used to hear dudes talking about when they get released from prison, what type of crimes they're going to commit when they get back in the street.
The conversations used to sound something like this: "Oh, when I hit the street, my brother got this connection for this, that and the third," or, "My man over here got this connection for the low price.
Let's exchange information," and, "When we hit the town, we're going to do it real big."
I used to hear these conversations and think to myself, "Wow, these dudes are really talking about going back in the street and committing future crimes."
So I came up with a name for that: I called it a go-back-to-jail-quick scheme because really, how long is that going to last?
You get a retirement plan with that?
Nice little pension? 401(k)? 403(b)?
You get health insurance? Dental?
(Laughter) But I will tell you this: Being in jail and being in prison, I came across some of the most intelligent, brilliant, and talented people that I would ever meet.
I've seen individuals take a potato chip bag and turn it into the most beautiful picture frame.
I've seen individuals take the state soap that's provided for free and turn them into the most beautiful sculptures that would make Michelangelo look like a kindergartner made it.
At the age of 21, I was in a maximum-security prison called Elmira Correctional Facility.
I just came out of the weight shack from working out, and I saw an older gentleman that I knew standing in the middle of the yard just looking up at the sky.
Mind you, this older gentlemen was serving a 33-and-a-third-to-life sentence in which he already had served 20 years of that sentence.
So I walk up to him and I said, "O.G., what's going on, man, you good?"
He looked at me, and he said, "Yeah, I'm good, young blood."
I'm like, "So what are you looking up at the sky for, man?
What's so fascinating up there?"
He said, "You look up and you tell me what you see."
"Clouds." (Laughter) He said, "All right. What else do you see?"
At that time, it was a plane passing by.
I said, "All right, I see an airplane."
He said, "Exactly, and what's on that airplane?" "People."
"Exactly. Now where's that plane and those people going?"
"I don't know. You know?
Please let me know if you do. Then let me get some lottery numbers."
He said, "You're missing the big picture, young blood.
That plane with those people is going somewhere, while we're here stuck.
The big picture is this: That plane with those people going somewhere, that's life passing us by while we behind these walls, stuck."
Ever since that day, that sparked something in my mind and made me know I had to make a change.
Growing up, I was always a good, smart kid.
Some people would say I was a little too smart for my own good.
I had dreams of becoming an architect or an archaeologist.
Currently, I'm working at the Fortune Society, which is a reentry program, and I work with people as a case manager that are at high risk for recidivism.
So I connect them with the services that they need once they're released from jail and prison so they can make a positive transition back into society.
If I was to see my 15-year-old self today, I would sit down and talk to him and try to educate him and I would let him know, "Listen, this is me. I'm you.
This is us. We are one.
Everything that you're about to do, I know what you're gonna do before you do it because I already did it, and I would encourage him not to hang out with x, y and z people.
I would tell him not to be in such-and-such place.
I would tell him, keep your behind in school, man, because that's where you need to be, because that's what's going to get you somewhere in life.
This is the message that we should be sharing with our young men and young women.
We shouldn't be treating them as adults and putting them in cultures of violence that are nearly impossible for them to escape.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello.
I'm a toy developer.
With a dream of creating new toys that have never been seen before, I began working at a toy company nine years ago.
When I first started working there, I proposed many new ideas to my boss every day.
However, my boss always asked if I had the data to prove it would sell, and asked me to think of product development after analyzing market data.
Data, data, data.
So I analyzed the market data before thinking of a product.
However, I was unable to think of anything new at that moment.
(Laughter) My ideas were unoriginal.
I wasn't getting any new ideas and I grew tired of thinking.
It was so hard that I became this skinny.
(Laughter) It's true. (Applause) You've all probably had similar experiences and felt this way too.
Your boss was being difficult. The data was difficult.
Now, I throw out the data.
It's my dream to create new toys.
And now, instead of data, I'm using a game called Shiritori to come up with new ideas.
I would like to introduce this method today.
What is Shiritori?
Take apple, elephant and trumpet, for example.
It's a game where you take turns saying words that start with the last letter of the previous word.
It's the same in Japanese and English.
You can play Shiritori as you like: "neko, kora, raibu, burashi," etc, etc. [Cat, cola, concert, brush] Many random words will come out.
You force those words to connect to what you want to think of and form ideas.
In my case, for example, since I want to think of toys, what could a toy cat be?
A cat that lands after doing a somersault from a high place?
How about a toy with cola?
A toy gun where you shoot cola and get someone soaking wet?
(Laughter) Ridiculous ideas are okay. The key is to keep them flowing.
The more ideas you produce, you're sure to come up with some good ones, too.
A brush, for example. Can we make a toothbrush into a toy?
We could combine a toothbrush with a guitar and -- (Music noises) -- you've got a toy you can play with while brushing your teeth.
(Laughter) (Applause) Kids who don't like to brush their teeth might begin to like it.
Can we make a hat into a toy?
How about something like a roulette game, where you try the hat on one by one, and then, when someone puts it on, a scary alien breaks through the top screaming, "Ahh!"
I wonder if there would be a demand for this at parties?
Ideas that didn't come out while you stare at the data will start to come out.
Actually, this bubble wrap, which is used to pack fragile objects, combined with a toy, made Mugen Pop Pop, a toy where you can pop the bubbles as much as you like.
It was a big hit when it reached stores.
Data had nothing to do with its success.
Although it's only popping bubbles, it's a great way to kill time, so please pass this around amongst yourselves today and play with it.
(Applause) Anyway, you continue to come up with useless ideas.
Think up many trivial ideas, everyone.
If you base your ideas on data analysis and know what you're aiming for, you'll end up trying too hard, and you can't produce new ideas.
Even if you know what your aim is, think of ideas as freely as if you were throwing darts with your eyes closed.
If you do this, you surely will hit somewhere near the center.
At least one will.
That's the one you should choose.
If you do so, that idea will be in demand and, moreover, it will be brand new.
That is how I think of new ideas.
It doesn't have to be Shiritori; there are many different methods.
You just have to choose words at random.
You can flip through a dictionary and choose words at random.
For example, you could look up two random letters and gather the results or go to the store and connect product names with what you want to think of.
The point is to gather random words, not information from the category you're thinking for.
If you do this, the ingredients for the association of ideas are collected and form connections that will produce many ideas.
The greatest advantage to this method is the continuous flow of images.
Because you're thinking of one word after another, the image of the previous word is still with you.
That image will automatically be related with future words.
Unconsciously, a concert will be connected to a brush and a roulette game will be connected to a hat.
You wouldn't even realize it.
This method is, of course, not just for toys.
You can collect ideas for books, apps, events, and many other projects.
I hope you all try this method.
There are futures that are born from data.
However, using this silly game called Shiritori, I look forward to the exciting future you will create, a future you couldn't even imagine.
Thank you very much.
My name is Harry Baker. Harry Baker is my name.
If your name was Harry Baker, then our names would be the same.
(Laughter) It's a short introductory part.
Yeah, I'm Harry.
I study maths. I write poetry.
So I thought I'd start with a love poem about prime numbers.
(Laughter) This is called "59."
I was going to call it "Prime Time Loving."
That reaction is why I didn't.
(Laughter) So, "59."
59 wakes up on the wrong side of the bed.
Realizes all his hair is on one side of his head.
Takes just under a minute to work out that it’s because of the way that he slept.
He finds some clothes and gets dressed.
He can’t help but look in the mirror and be subtly impressed How he looks rough around the edges and yet casually messed.
And as he glances out the window, he sees the sight that he gets blessed with of 60 from across the street.
Now 60 was beautiful.
With perfectly trimmed cuticles, dressed in something suitable.
Never rude or crude at all.
Unimprovable, right on time as usual, more on cue than a snooker ball but liked to play it super cool.
59 wanted to tell her that he knew her favorite flower.
He thought of her every second, every minute, every hour.
But he knew it wouldn’t work, he’d never get the girl.
Because although she lived across the street they came from different worlds.
While 59 admired 60’s perfectly round figure, 60 thought 59 was odd. (Laughter) One of his favorite films was "101 Dalmatians."
She preferred the sequel.
He romanticized the idea they were star-crossed lovers.
They could overcome the odds and evens because they had each other.
While she maintained the strict views imposed on her by her mother That separate could not be equal.
And though at the time he felt stupid and dumb For trying to love a girl controlled by her stupid mum, He should have been comforted by the simple sum.
Take 59 away from 60, and you’re left with the one.
Sure enough after two months of moping around, 61 days later, 61 was who he found, He had lost his keys and his parents were out.
So one day after school he went into a house As he noticed the slightly wonky numbers on the door, He wondered why he’d never introduced himself before, As she let him in, his jaw dropped in awe.
61 was like 60, but a little bit more. (Laughter) She had prettier eyes, and an approachable smile, And like him, rough around the edges, casual style, And like him, everything was in disorganized piles, And like him, her mum didn’t mind if friends stayed a while.
Because she was like him, and he liked her.
He reckoned she would like him if she knew he was like her, And it was different this time. I mean, this girl was wicked, So he plucked up the courage and asked for her digits.
She said, "I'm 61." He grinned, said, "I'm 59."
Today I’ve had a really nice time, So tomorrow if you wanted you could come over to mine?
She said, "Sure."
She loved talking to someone just as quirky, She agreed to this unofficial first date.
In the end he was only ready one minute early, But it didn’t matter because she arrived one minute late.
And from that moment on there was nonstop chatter, How they loved "X Factor," how they had two factors, How that did not matter, distinctiveness made them better, By the end of the night they knew they were meant together.
And one day she was talking about stuck-up 60, She noticed that 59 looked a bit shifty.
He blushed, told her of his crush: “The best thing that never happened because it led to us.” 61 was clever, see, not prone to jealousy, She looked him in the eyes and told him quite tenderly, "You’re 59, I’m 61, together we combine to become twice what 60 could ever be."
(Laughter) At this point 59 had tears in his eyes, Was so glad to have this one-of-a-kind girl in his life.
He told her the very definition of being prime Was that with only one and himself could his heart divide, And she was the one he wanted to give his heart to, She said she felt the same and now she knew the films were half true.
Because that wasn't real love, that love was just a sample, When it came to real love, they were a prime example.
Cheers.
(Applause) That was the first poem that I wrote and it was for a prime number-themed poetry night -- (Laughter) -- which turned out to be a prime number-themed poetry competition.
And I became a prime number-themed poetry competition winner, or as I like to call it, a prime minister. (Laughter) And this is how I discovered these things called poetry slams, and if you don't know what a poetry slam is, it was a format come up with in America 30 years ago as a way of tricking people into going to poetry events by putting an exciting word like "slam" on the end.
(Laughter) And each performer got three minutes to perform and then random audience members would hold up scorecards, and they would end up with a numerical score, and what this meant is, it kind of broke down the barrier between performer and audience and encouraged the kind of connection with the listener.
And what it also means is you can win.
And if you win a poetry slam, you can call yourself a slam champion and pretend you're a wrestler, and if you lose a poetry slam you can say, "Oh, what? Poetry's a subjective art form, you can't put numbers on such things."
(Laughter) But I loved it, and I got involved in these slams, and I became the U.K. slam champion and got invited to the Poetry World Cup in Paris, which was unbelievable.
It was people from all around the world speaking in their native languages to be judged by five French strangers.
(Laughter) And somehow, I won, which was great, and I've been able to travel the world since doing it, but it also means that this next piece is technically the best poem in the world.
(Laughter) So...
(Applause) According to five French strangers.
So this is "Paper People."
I like people.
I'd like some paper people.
They’d be purple paper people. Maybe pop-up purple paper people.
Proper pop-up purple paper people.
"How do you prop up pop-up purple paper people?"
I hear you cry. Well I ...
I’d probably prop up proper pop-up purple paper people with a proper pop-up purple people paperclip, but I’d pre-prepare appropriate adhesives as alternatives, a cheeky pack of Blu Tack just in case the paper slipped.
Because I could build a pop-up metropolis.
but I wouldn’t wanna deal with all the paper people politics.
paper politicians with their paper-thin policies, broken promises without appropriate apologies.
There’d be a little paper me. And a little paper you.
And we could watch paper TV and it would all be pay-per-view.
(Laughter) We’d see the poppy paper rappers rap about their paper package or watch paper people carriers get stuck in paper traffic on the A4.
(Laughter) Paper.
There’d be a paper princess Kate but we’d all stare at paper Pippa, and then we’d all live in fear of killer Jack the Paper-Ripper, because the paper propaganda propagates the people's prejudices, papers printing pictures of the photogenic terrorists.
A little paper me. And a little paper you.
And in a pop-up population people’s problems pop up too.
There’d be a pompous paper parliament who remained out of touch, and who ignored the people's protests about all the paper cuts, then the peaceful paper protests would get blown to paper pieces, by the confetti cannons manned by pre-emptive police.
And yes there’d still be paper money, so there’d still be paper greed, and the paper piggy bankers pocketing more than they need, purchasing the potpourri to pepper their paper properties, others live in poverty and ain’t acknowledged properly.
A proper poor economy where so many are proper poor, but while their needs are ignored the money goes to big wars.
Origami armies unfold plans for paper planes and we remain imprisoned in our own paper chains, but the greater shame is that it always seems to stay the same, what changes is who’s in power choosing how to lay the blame, they’re naming names, forgetting these are names of people, because in the end it all comes down to people.
I like people.
'Cause even when the situation’s dire, it is only ever people who are able to inspire, and on paper, it’s hard to see how we all cope.
But in the bottom of Pandora’s box there’s still hope, and I still hope 'cause I believe in people.
People like my grandparents.
Who every single day since I was born, have taken time out of their morning to pray for me.
That’s 7892 days straight of someone checking I’m okay, and that’s amazing.
People like my aunt who puts on plays with prisoners.
People who are capable of genuine forgiveness.
People like the persecuted Palestinians.
People who go out of their way to make your life better, and expect nothing in return.
You see, people have potential to be powerful.
Just because the people in power tend to pretend to be victims we don’t need to succumb to that system.
And a paper population is no different.
There’s a little paper me. And a little paper you.
And in a pop-up population people's problems pop up too, but even if the whole world fell apart then we’d still make it through.
Because we’re people.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much. I've just got time for one more.
For me, poetry has been the ultimate way of ideas without frontiers.
When I first started, the people who inspired me were the ones with the amazing stories, and I thought, as an 18-year-old with a happy life, it was too normal, but I could create these worlds where I could talk about my experiences and dreams and beliefs.
So it's amazing to be here in front of you today.
Thank you for being here.
If you weren't here, it would be pretty much like the sound check yesterday.
(Laughter) And this is more fun.
So this last one is called "The Sunshine Kid."
Thank you very much for listening.
Old man sunshine was proud of his sun, And it brightened his day to see his little boy run, Not because of what he’d done, nor the problems overcome, But that despite that his disposition remained a sunny one.
It hadn’t always been like this.
There’d been times when he’d tried to hide his brightness, You see, every star hits periods of hardship, It takes a brighter light to inspire them through the darkness.
If we go back to when he was born in a nebula, We know that he never was thought of as regular, Because he had a flair about him, To say the Midas touch is wrong But all he went near seemed to turn a little bronze, Yes this sun was loved by some more than others, It was a case of Joseph and his dreamcoat and his brothers Because standing out from the crowd had its pros and its cons, And jealousy created enemies in those he outshone Such as the Shadow People.
Now the Shadow People didn’t like the Sunshine Kid, Because he showed up the dark things the Shadow People did, And when he shone he showed the places where the Shadow People hid, So the Shadow People had an evil plan to get rid of him, First up -- they made fun of his sunspots, Shooting his dreams from the sky, their words were gunshots, Designed to remind him he wasn’t very cool And he didn’t fit in with any popular kids at school.
They said his head was up in space and they would bring him down to Earth, Essentially he came from nothing and that is what he was worth, He’d never get to go to university to learn, Only degrees he’d ever show would be the first degree burns From those that came too close, they told him he was too bright, That’s why no one ever looked him in the eyes, His judgment became clouded So did the sky, With evaporated tears as the sun started to cry.
Because the sunshine kid was bright, with a warm personality, And inside he burned savagely Hurt by the words and curses of the shadowy folk who spoke holes in his soul and left cavities, And as his heart hardened, his spark darkened, Every time they called him names it cooled his flames, He thought they might like him if he kept his light dim But they were busy telling lightning she had terrible aim, He couldn’t quite get to grips with what they said, So he let his light be eclipsed by what they said, He fell into a Lone Star State like Texas, And felt like he’d been punched in his solar plexus.
But that’s when Little Miss Sunshine came along Singing her favorite song about how we’re made to be strong, And you don’t have to be wrong to belong, Just be true to who you are, because we are all stars at heart.
Little Miss Sunshine was hot stuff, The kind of girl when you looked at her you forgot stuff, But for him, there was no forgetting her, The minute he saw her her image burned in his retina, She was out of this world, and she accepted him, Something about this girl meant he knew whenever she was next to him, Things weren’t as dark as they seemed, and he dared to dream, Shadows were nowhere to be seen; when she was there he beamed, His eyes would light up in ways that can’t be faked, When she grinned her rays erased the razor-tipped words of hate, They gave each other nicknames, they were "cool star" and "fun sun," And gradually the shadowy damage became undone, She was one in a septillion, and she was brilliant, Could turn the coldest blooded reptilians vermillion, Loved by billions, from Chileans to Brazilians, And taught the Sunshine Kid the meaning of resilience.
She said: “All the darkness in the world cannot put out the light from a single candle So how the hell can they handle your light?
Only you can choose to dim it, and the sky is the limit, so silence the critics by burning.” And if eyes are windows to the soul then she drew back the curtains And let the sun shine through the hurting.
In a universe of adversity these stars stuck together, And though days became nights the memories would last forever, Whether the weatherman said it or not, it would be fine, 'Cause even behind the clouds the kid could still shine.
Yes, the Sunshine Kid was bright, with a warm personality, And inside he burned savagely, Fueled by the fire inspired across galaxies By the girl who showed him belief.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm a historian.
Steve told us about the future of little technology; I'm going to show you some of the past of big technology.
This was a project to build a 4,000-ton nuclear bomb-propelled spaceship and go to Saturn and Jupiter.
This took place in my childhood, 1957-65.
It was deeply classified.
I'm going to show you some stuff that not only has not been declassified, but has now been reclassified.
(Laughter) If all goes well, next year I'll be back, and I'll have a lot more to show you, and if all doesn't go well, I'll be in jail, like Wen Ho Lee.
(Laughter) So, this ship was basically the size of the Marriott Hotel, a little taller and a little bigger.
And one of the people who worked on it at the beginning was my father, Freeman, there in the middle.
That's me and my sister, Esther, who's a frequent TEDster.
I didn't like nuclear bomb-propelled spaceships.
I mean, I thought it was a great idea, but I started building kayaks.
So we had a few kayaks.
Just so you know that I am not Dr. Strangelove.
But all the time I was out there doing these strange kayak voyages in odd, beautiful parts of this planet, I always thought in the back of my mind about Project Orion, and how my father and his friends were going to build these big ships.
They were actually going to go -- Ted Taylor, who led the project, was going to take his children.
My father was not going to take his children, that was one of the reasons we sort of had a falling out for a few years.
(Laughter) The project began in '57 at General Atomics there, that's right on the coast at La Jolla.
Look at that central building right in the middle of the picture.
That's the 130-foot diameter library.
That is exactly the size of the base of the spaceship.
So put that library at the bottom of that ship -- that's how big the thing was going to be.
It would take two or three thousand bombs.
The people who worked on it were a lot of the Los Alamos people who had done the hydrogen bomb work.
It was the first project funded by ARPA.
That's the contract where ARPA gave the first million dollars to get this thing started.
"Spaceship project officially begun. Job waiting for you. Dyson."
That's July '58.
Two days later, the space traveler's manifesto explaining why -- just like we heard yesterday -- why we need to go into space: "... trips to satellites of the outer planets.
These are the statistics of what would be the good places to go and stop.
Some of the sizes of the ships, ranging all the way up to ship mass of 8 million tons.
So that was the outer extreme.
Here was version two: 2,000 bombs.
These are five-kiloton yield bombs, about the size of small Volkswagens; it would take 800 to get into orbit.
Here we see a 10,000-ton ship will deliver 1,300 tons to Saturn and back -- essentially, a five-year trip.
Possible departure dates: October 1960 to February 1967.
These are trajectories going to Mars.
All this was done by hand, with slide rules.
The little Orion ship, and what it would take to do what Orion does with chemicals: you have a ship the size of the Empire State Building.
NASA had no interest; they tried to kill the project.
The people who supported it were the Air Force, which meant that it was all secret.
And that's why when you get something declassified, that's what it looks like.
Military weapon versions that carried hydrogen bombs that could destroy half the planet.
This is the really secret stuff: how to get directed energy explosions.
So you're sending the energy of a nuclear explosion -- not like just a stick of dynamite, but you're directing it at the ship.
And this is still a very active subject.
It's quite dangerous, but I believe it's better to have dangerous things in the open than think you're going to keep them secret.
This is what happened at 600 microseconds.
The Air Force started to build smaller models and actually started doing this.
The guys in La Jolla said, "We've got to get started now."
They built a high-explosive propelled model.
These are stills from film footage that was saved by someone who was supposed to destroy it but didn't, and kept it in their basement for the last 40 years.
So, these are three-pound charges of C4; that's about 10 times what the guy had in his shoes.
(Laughter) This is Ed Day putting -- So each of these coffee cans has three pounds of C4 in it.
They're building a system that ejects these at quarter-second intervals.
That's my dad in the sport coat there, holding the briefcase.
So, they had a lot of fun doing this.
But no children were allowed; my dad could tell me he was building a spaceship and going to go to Saturn, but he could not say anything more about it.
So all my life I have wanted to find this stuff out, and spent the last four years tracking these old guys down.
These are stills from the video.
Jeff Bezos kindly, yesterday, said he'll put this video up on the Amazon site -- some little clip of it.
(Applause) So, thanks to him.
They got quite serious about the engineering of this.
The size of that mass, for us, is really large technology in a way we're never going to go back to.
If you saw the 1959 -- this is what it would feel like in the passenger compartment; that's acceleration profile.
(Laughter) And pulse-system yield: we're looking at 20-kiloton yield for an effective thrust of 10 million newtons.
Well, here we have a little problem, the radiation doses at the crew station: 700 rads per shot.
(Laughter) Fission yields during development: they were hoping to get clean bombs; they didn't.
Eyeburn: this is what happens to the people in Miami who are looking up.
(Laughter) Personnel compartment noise: that's not too bad; it's very low frequencies, it's basically like these sub-woofers.
And now we have ground-hazard assessments when you have a blow-up on the pad.
Finally, at the very end in 1964, NASA steps in and says, "OK, we'll support a feasibility study for a small version that could be launched with Saturn Vs in sections and pieced together."
So this is what NASA did, getting an eight-man version that would go to Mars.
They liked it because the guys could kind of live there and be like, "It's like living in a submarine."
It switches, so what's upside down is right side up when you go to artificial gravity mode.
The scientists were still going to go along; they would take seven astronauts and seven scientists.
This is a 20-man version for going to Jupiter: bunks, storm cellars, exercise room.
You know, it was going to be a nice, long trip.
The Air Force version: here we have a military version.
This is the kind of stuff that's not been declassified, just that people managed to sneak home and after, you know, on their deathbed, basically, gave me that.
These are basically PowerPoint presentations given to the Air Force 40 years ago.
Look at the little guys there outside the vehicle.
And one part of NASA was interested in it, but the headquarters in NASA, they killed the project.
So finally, at the end, we can see the thing followed its sort of design path right up to 1965, and then all those paths came to a halt.
Results: none.
This project is hereby terminated.
So that's the end.
All I can say in closing is: we heard yesterday that one of the 10 bad things that could happen to us is an asteroid with our name on it.
And one of the bad things that could happen to NASA is if that asteroid shows up with our name on it nine months out, and everybody says, "Well, what are we going to do?"
And Orion is really one of the only, if not the only, off-the-shelf technologies that could do something.
(Laughter) So I'm going to tell you the good news and the bad news.
The good news is that NASA has a small, secret contingency-plan division that is looking at this, trying to keep knowledge of Orion preserved in the event of such a misfortune.
Maybe keep a few little bombs of plutonium on the side.
That's the good news.
The bad news is, when I got in contact with these people to try and get some documents from them, they went crazy because I had all this stuff that they don't have, and NASA purchased 1,759 pages of this stuff from me.
So that's the state we're at; it's not very good.
(Laughter) (Applause)
I have a confession to make.
I'm a business professor whose ambition has been to help people learn to lead.
But recently, I've discovered that what many of us think of as great leadership does not work when it comes to leading innovation.
I'm an ethnographer.
I use the methods of anthropology to understand the questions in which I'm interested.
So along with three co-conspirators, I spent nearly a decade observing up close and personal exceptional leaders of innovation.
We studied 16 men and women, located in seven countries across the globe, working in 12 different industries.
In total, we spent hundreds of hours on the ground, on-site, watching these leaders in action.
We ended up with pages and pages and pages of field notes that we analyzed and looked for patterns in what our leaders did.
The bottom line?
If we want to build organizations that can innovate time and again, we must unlearn our conventional notions of leadership.
Leading innovation is not about creating a vision, and inspiring others to execute it.
But what do we mean by innovation?
An innovation is anything that is both new and useful.
It can be a product or service.
It can be a process or a way of organizing.
It can be incremental, or it can be breakthrough.
We have a pretty inclusive definition.
How many of you recognize this man?
Put your hands up.
Keep your hands up, if you know who this is.
How about these familiar faces?
(Laughter) From your show of hands, it looks like many of you have seen a Pixar movie, but very few of you recognized Ed Catmull, the founder and CEO of Pixar -- one of the companies I had the privilege of studying.
My first visit to Pixar was in 2005, when they were working on "Ratatouille," that provocative movie about a rat becoming a master chef.
Computer-generated movies are really mainstream today, but it took Ed and his colleagues nearly 20 years to create the first full-length C.G. movie.
In the 20 years hence, they've produced 14 movies.
I was recently at Pixar, and I'm here to tell you that number 15 is sure to be a winner.
When many of us think about innovation, though, we think about an Einstein having an 'Aha!' moment.
But we all know that's a myth.
Innovation is not about solo genius, it's about collective genius.
Let's think for a minute about what it takes to make a Pixar movie: No solo genius, no flash of inspiration produces one of those movies.
On the contrary, it takes about 250 people four to five years, to make one of those movies.
To help us understand the process, an individual in the studio drew a version of this picture.
He did so reluctantly, because it suggested that the process was a neat series of steps done by discrete groups.
Even with all those arrows, he thought it failed to really tell you just how iterative, interrelated and, frankly, messy their process was.
Throughout the making of a movie at Pixar, the story evolves.
So think about it.
Some shots go through quickly.
They don't all go through in order.
It depends on how vexing the challenges are that they come up with when they are working on a particular scene.
So if you think about that scene in "Up" where the boy hands the piece of chocolate to the bird, that 10 seconds took one animator almost six months to perfect.
The other thing about a Pixar movie is that no part of the movie is considered finished until the entire movie wraps.
Partway through one production, an animator drew a character with an arched eyebrow that suggested a mischievous side.
When the director saw that drawing, he thought it was great.
It was beautiful, but he said, "You've got to lose it; it doesn't fit the character."
Two weeks later, the director came back and said, "Let's put in those few seconds of film."
Because that animator was allowed to share what we referred to as his slice of genius, he was able to help that director reconceive the character in a subtle but important way that really improved the story.
What we know is, at the heart of innovation is a paradox.
You have to unleash the talents and passions of many people and you have to harness them into a work that is actually useful.
Innovation is a journey.
It's a type of collaborative problem solving, usually among people who have different expertise and different points of view.
Innovations rarely get created full-blown.
As many of you know, they're the result, usually, of trial and error.
Lots of false starts, missteps and mistakes.
Innovative work can be very exhilarating, but it also can be really downright scary.
So when we look at why it is that Pixar is able to do what it does, we have to ask ourselves, what's going on here?
For sure, history and certainly Hollywood, is full of star-studded teams that have failed.
Most of those failures are attributed to too many stars or too many cooks, if you will, in the kitchen.
So why is it that Pixar, with all of its cooks, is able to be so successful time and time again?
When we studied an Islamic Bank in Dubai, or a luxury brand in Korea, or a social enterprise in Africa, we found that innovative organizations are communities that have three capabilities: creative abrasion, creative agility and creative resolution.
Creative abrasion is about being able to create a marketplace of ideas through debate and discourse.
In innovative organizations, they amplify differences, they don't minimize them.
Creative abrasion is not about brainstorming, where people suspend their judgment.
No, they know how to have very heated but constructive arguments to create a portfolio of alternatives.
Individuals in innovative organizations learn how to inquire, they learn how to actively listen, but guess what?
They also learn how to advocate for their point of view.
They understand that innovation rarely happens unless you have both diversity and conflict.
Creative agility is about being able to test and refine that portfolio of ideas through quick pursuit, reflection and adjustment.
It's about discovery-driven learning where you act, as opposed to plan, your way to the future.
It's about design thinking where you have that interesting combination of the scientific method and the artistic process.
It's about running a series of experiments, and not a series of pilots.
Experiments are usually about learning.
When you get a negative outcome, you're still really learning something that you need to know.
Pilots are often about being right.
When they don't work, someone or something is to blame.
The final capability is creative resolution.
This is about doing decision making in a way that you can actually combine even opposing ideas to reconfigure them in new combinations to produce a solution that is new and useful.
When you look at innovative organizations, they never go along to get along.
They don't compromise.
They don't let one group or one individual dominate, even if it's the boss, even if it's the expert.
Instead, they have developed a rather patient and more inclusive decision making process that allows for both/and solutions to arise and not simply either/or solutions.
These three capabilities are why we see that Pixar is able to do what it does.
Let me give you another example, and that example is the infrastructure group of Google.
The infrastructure group of Google is the group that has to keep the website up and running 24/7.
So when Google was about to introduce Gmail and YouTube, they knew that their data storage system wasn't adequate.
The head of the engineering group and the infrastructure group at that time was a man named Bill Coughran.
Bill and his leadership team, who he referred to as his brain trust, had to figure out what to do about this situation.
They thought about it for a while.
Instead of creating a group to tackle this task, they decided to allow groups to emerge spontaneously around different alternatives.
Two groups coalesced.
One became known as Big Table, the other became known as Build It From Scratch.
Big Table proposed that they build on the current system.
Build It From Scratch proposed that it was time for a whole new system.
Separately, these two teams were allowed to work full-time on their particular approach.
In engineering reviews, Bill described his role as, "Injecting honesty into the process by driving debate."
Early on, the teams were encouraged to build prototypes so that they could "bump them up against reality and discover for themselves the strengths and weaknesses of their particular approach."
When Build It From Scratch shared their prototype with the group whose beepers would have to go off in the middle of the night if something went wrong with the website, they heard loud and clear about the limitations of their particular design.
As the need for a solution became more urgent and as the data, or the evidence, began to come in, it became pretty clear that the Big Table solution was the right one for the moment.
So they selected that one.
But to make sure that they did not lose the learning of the Build it From Scratch team, Bill asked two members of that team to join a new team that was emerging to work on the next-generation system.
This whole process took nearly two years, but I was told that they were all working at breakneck speed.
Early in that process, one of the engineers had gone to Bill and said, "We're all too busy for this inefficient system of running parallel experiments."
But as the process unfolded, he began to understand the wisdom of allowing talented people to play out their passions.
He admitted, "If you had forced us to all be on one team, we might have focused on proving who was right, and winning, and not on learning and discovering what was the best answer for Google."
Why is it that Pixar and Google are able to innovate time and again?
It's because they've mastered the capabilities required for that.
They know how to do collaborative problem solving, they know how to do discovery-driven learning and they know how to do integrated decision making.
Some of you may be sitting there and saying to yourselves right now, "We don't know how to do those things in my organization.
So why do they know how to do those things at Pixar, and why do they know how to do those things at Google?"
When many of the people that worked for Bill told us, in their opinion, that Bill was one of the finest leaders in Silicon Valley, we completely agreed; the man is a genius.
Leadership is the secret sauce.
But it's a different kind of leadership, not the kind many of us think about when we think about great leadership.
One of the leaders I met with early on said to me, "Linda, I don't read books on leadership.
All they do is make me feel bad." (Laughter) "In the first chapter they say I'm supposed to create a vision.
But if I'm trying to do something that's truly new, I have no answers.
I don't know what direction we're going in and I'm not even sure I know how to figure out how to get there."
For sure, there are times when visionary leadership is exactly what is needed.
But if we want to build organizations that can innovate time and again, we must recast our understanding of what leadership is about.
Leading innovation is about creating the space where people are willing and able to do the hard work of innovative problem solving.
At this point, some of you may be wondering, "What does that leadership really look like?"
At Pixar, they understand that innovation takes a village.
The leaders focus on building a sense of community and building those three capabilities.
How do they define leadership?
They say leadership is about creating a world to which people want to belong.
What kind of world do people want to belong in at Pixar?
A world where you're living at the frontier.
What do they focus their time on?
Not on creating a vision.
Instead they spend their time thinking about, "How do we design a studio that has the sensibility of a public square so that people will interact?
Let's put in a policy that anyone, no matter what their level or role, is allowed to give notes to the director about how they feel about a particular film.
What can we do to make sure that all the disruptors, all the minority voices in this organization, speak up and are heard?
And, finally, let's bestow credit in a very generous way."
I don't know if you've ever looked at the credits of a Pixar movie, but the babies born during a production are listed there.
(Laughter) How did Bill think about what his role was?
Bill said, "I lead a volunteer organization.
Talented people don't want to follow me anywhere.
They want to cocreate with me the future.
My job is to nurture the bottom-up and not let it degenerate into chaos."
How did he see his role?
"I'm a role model, I'm a human glue, I'm a connector, I'm an aggregator of viewpoints.
I'm never a dictator of viewpoints."
Advice about how you exercise the role?
Hire people who argue with you.
And, guess what?
Sometimes it's best to be deliberately fuzzy and vague.
Some of you may be wondering now, what are these people thinking?
They're thinking, "I'm not the visionary, I'm the social architect.
I'm creating the space where people are willing and able to share and combine their talents and passions."
If some of you are worrying now that you don't work at a Pixar, or you don't work at a Google, I want to tell you there's still hope.
We've studied many organizations that were really not organizations you'd think of as ones where a lot of innovation happens.
We studied a general counsel in a pharmaceutical company who had to figure out how to get the outside lawyers, 19 competitors, to collaborate and innovate.
We studied the head of marketing at a German automaker where, fundamentally, they believed that it was the design engineers, not the marketeers, who were allowed to be innovative.
We also studied Vineet Nayar at HCL Technologies, an Indian outsourcing company.
When we met Vineet, his company was about, in his words, to become irrelevant.
We watched as he turned that company into a global dynamo of I.T. innovation.
At HCL technologies, like at many companies, the leaders had learned to see their role as setting direction and making sure that no one deviated from it.
What he did is tell them it was time for them to think about rethinking what they were supposed to do.
Because what was happening is that everybody was looking up and you weren't seeing the kind of bottom-up innovation we saw at Pixar or Google.
So they began to work on that.
They stopped giving answers, they stopped trying to provide solutions.
Instead, what they did is they began to see the people at the bottom of the pyramid, the young sparks, the people who were closest to the customers, as the source of innovation.
They began to transfer the organization's growth to that level.
In Vineet's language, this was about inverting the pyramid so that you could unleash the power of the many by loosening the stranglehold of the few, and increase the quality and the speed of innovation that was happening every day.
For sure, Vineet and all the other leaders that we studied were in fact visionaries.
For sure, they understood that that was not their role.
So I don't think it is accidental that many of you did not recognize Ed.
Because Ed, like Vineet, understands that our role as leaders is to set the stage, not perform on it.
If we want to invent a better future, and I suspect that's why many of us are here, then we need to reimagine our task.
Our task is to create the space where everybody's slices of genius can be unleashed and harnessed, and turned into works of collective genius.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I cannot forget them.
Their names were Aslan, Alik, Andrei, Fernanda, Fred, Galina, Gunnhild, Hans, Ingeborg, Matti, Natalya, Nancy, Sheryl, Usman, Zarema, and the list is longer.
For many, their existence, their humanity, has been reduced to statistics, coldly recorded as "security incidents."
For me, they were colleagues belonging to that community of humanitarian aid workers that tried to bring a bit of comfort to the victims of the wars in Chechnya in the '90s.
They were nurses, logisticians, shelter experts, paralegals, interpreters.
And for this service, they were murdered, their families torn apart, and their story largely forgotten.
No one was ever sentenced for these crimes.
I cannot forget them.
They live in me somehow, their memories giving me meaning every day.
But they are also haunting the dark street of my mind.
As humanitarian aid workers, they made the choice to be at the side of the victim, to provide some assistance, some comfort, some protection, but when they needed protection themselves, it wasn't there.
When you see the headlines of your newspaper these days with the war in Iraq or in Syria -- aid worker abducted, hostage executed -- but who were they?
Why were they there?
What motivated them?
How did we become so indifferent to these crimes?
This is why I am here today with you.
We need to find better ways to remember them.
We also need to explain the key values to which they dedicated their lives.
We also need to demand justice.
When in '96 I was sent by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the North Caucasus, I knew some of the risks.
Five colleagues had been killed, three had been seriously injured, seven had already been taken hostage.
So we were careful.
We were using armored vehicles, decoy cars, changing patterns of travel, changing homes, all sorts of security measures.
Yet on a cold winter night of January '98, it was my turn.
When I entered my flat in Vladikavkaz with a guard, we were surrounded by armed men.
They took the guard, they put him on the floor, they beat him up in front of me, tied him, dragged him away.
I was handcuffed, blindfolded, and forced to kneel, as the silencer of a gun pressed against my neck.
When it happens to you, there is no time for thinking, no time for praying.
My brain went on automatic, rewinding quickly the life I'd just left behind.
It took me long minutes to figure out that those masked men there were not there to kill me, but that someone, somewhere, had ordered my kidnapping.
Then a process of dehumanization started that day.
I was no more than just a commodity.
I normally don't talk about this, but I'd like to share a bit with you some of those 317 days of captivity.
I was kept in an underground cellar, total darkness, for 23 hours and 45 minutes every day, and then the guards would come, normally two.
They would bring a big piece of bread, a bowl of soup, and a candle.
That candle would burn for 15 minutes, 15 minutes of precious light, and then they would take it away, and I returned to darkness.
I was chained by a metal cable to my bed.
I could do only four small steps.
I always dreamt of the fifth one.
And no TV, no radio, no newspaper, no one to talk to.
I had no towel, no soap, no toilet paper, just two metal buckets open, one for water, for one waste.
Can you imagine that mock execution can be a pastime for guards when they are sadistic or when they are just bored or drunk?
We are breaking my nerves very slowly.
Isolation and darkness are particularly difficult to describe.
How do you describe nothing?
There are no words for the depths of loneliness I reached in that very thin border between sanity and madness.
In the darkness, sometimes I played imaginary games of checkers.
I would start with the black, play with the white, back to the black trying to trick the other side.
I don't play checkers anymore.
I was tormented by the thoughts of my family and my colleague, the guard, Edik.
I didn't know what had happened to him.
I was trying not to think, I tried to fill up my time by doing all sorts of physical exercise on the spot.
I tried to pray, I tried all sorts of memorization games.
But darkness also creates images and thoughts that are not normal.
One part of your brain wants you to resist, to shout, to cry, and the other part of the brain orders you to shut up and just go through it.
It's a constant internal debate; there is no one to arbitrate.
Once a guard came to me, very aggressively, and he told me, "Today you're going to kneel and beg for your food."
I wasn't in a good mood, so I insulted him.
I insulted his mother, I insulted his ancestors.
The consequence was moderate: he threw the food into my waste.
The day after he came back with the same demand.
He got the same answer, which had the same consequence.
Four days later, the body was full of pain.
I didn't know hunger hurt so much when you have so little.
So when the guards came down, I knelt.
I begged for my food.
Submission was the only way for me to make it to another candle.
After my kidnapping, I was transferred from North Ossetia to Chechnya, three days of slow travel in the trunks of different cars, and upon arrival, I was interrogated for 11 days by a guy called Ruslan.
The routine was always the same: a bit more light, 45 minutes.
He would come down to the cellar, he would ask the guards to tie me on the chair, and he would turn on the music loud.
And then he would yell questions.
He would scream. He would beat me.
I'll spare you the details.
There are many questions I could not understand, and there are some questions I did not want to understand.
The length of the interrogation was the duration of the tape: 15 songs, 45 minutes.
I would always long for the last song.
On one day, one night in that cellar, I don't know what it was, I heard a child crying above my head, a boy, maybe two or three years old.
Footsteps, confusion, people running.
So when Ruslan came the day after, before he put the first question to me, I asked him, "How is your son today? Is he feeling better?"
Ruslan was taken by surprise.
He was furious that the guards may have leaked some details about his private life.
I kept talking about NGOs supplying medicines to local clinics that may help his son to get better.
And we talked about education, we talked about families.
He talked to me about his children.
I talked to him about my daughters.
And then he'd talk about guns, about cars, about women, and I had to talk about guns, about cars, about women.
And we talked until the last song on the tape.
Ruslan was the most brutal man I ever met.
He did not touch me anymore.
He did not ask any other questions.
I was no longer just a commodity.
Two days after, I was transferred to another place.
There, a guard came to me, very close -- it was quite unusual -- and he said with a very soft voice, he said, "I'd like to thank you for the assistance your organization provided my family when we were displaced in nearby Dagestan."
What could I possibly reply?
It was so painful. It was like a blade in the belly.
It took me weeks of internal thinking to try to reconcile the good reasons we had to assist that family and the soldier of fortune he became.
He was young, he was shy.
I never saw his face.
He probably meant well.
But in those 15 seconds, he made me question everything we did, all the sacrifices.
He made me think also how they see us.
Until then, I had assumed that they know why we are there and what we are doing.
One cannot assume this.
Well, explaining why we do this is not that easy, even to our closest relatives.
We are not perfect, we are not superior, we are not the world's fire brigade, we are not superheroes, we don't stop wars, we know that humanitarian response is not a substitute for political solution.
Yet we do this because one life matters.
Sometimes that's the only difference you make -- one individual, one family, a small group of individuals -- and it matters.
When you have a tsunami, an earthquake or a typhoon, you see teams of rescuers coming from all over the world, searching for survivors for weeks.
Why? Nobody questions this.
Every life matters, or every life should matter.
This is the same for us when we help refugees, people displaced within their country by conflict, or stateless persons, I know many people, when they are confronted by overwhelming suffering, they feel powerless and they stop there.
It's a pity, because there are so many ways people can help.
We don't stop with that feeling.
We try to do whatever we can to provide some assistance, some protection, some comfort.
We have to.
We can't do otherwise.
It's what makes us feel, I don't know, simply human.
That's a picture of me the day of my release.
Months after my release, I met the then-French prime minister.
The second thing he told me: "You were totally irresponsible to go to the North Caucasus.
You don't know how many problems you've created for us."
It was a short meeting.
(Laughter) I think helping people in danger is responsible.
In that war, that nobody seriously wanted to stop, and we have many of these today, bringing some assistance to people in need and a bit of protection was not just an act of humanity, it was making a real difference for the people.
Why could he not understand this?
We have a responsibility to try.
You've heard about that concept: Responsibility to Protect.
Outcomes may depend on various parameters.
We may even fail, but there is worse than failing -- it's not even trying when we can.
Well, if you are met this way, if you sign up for this sort of job, your life is going to be full of joy and sadness, because there are a lot of people we cannot help, a lot of people we cannot protect, a lot of people we did not save.
I call them my ghost, and by having witnessed their suffering from close, you take a bit of that suffering on yourself.
Many young humanitarian workers go through their first experience with a lot of bitterness.
They are thrown into situations where they are witness, but they are powerless to bring any change.
They have to learn to accept it and gradually turn this into positive energy.
It's difficult.
Many don't succeed, but for those who do, there is no other job like this.
You can see the difference you make every day.
Humanitarian aid workers know the risk they are taking in conflict areas or in post-conflict environments, yet our life, our job, is becoming increasingly life-threatening, and the sanctity of our life is fading.
Do you know that since the millennium, the number of attacks on humanitarian aid workers has tripled?
2013 broke new records: 155 colleagues killed, 171 seriously wounded, 134 abducted.
So many broken lives.
Until the beginning of the civil war in Somalia in the late '80s, humanitarian aid workers were sometimes victims of what we call collateral damages, but by and large we were not the target of these attacks.
This has changed.
Look at this picture.
Baghdad, August 2003: 24 colleagues were killed.
Gone are the days when a U.N. blue flag or a Red Cross would automatically protect us.
Criminal groups and some political groups have cross-fertilized over the last 20 years, and they've created these sort of hybrids with whom we have no way of communicating.
Humanitarian principles are tested, questioned, and often ignored, but perhaps more importantly, we have abandoned the search for justice.
There seems to be no consequence whatsoever for attacks against humanitarian aid workers.
After my release, I was told not to seek any form of justice.
It won't do you any good, that's what I was told.
Plus, you're going to put in danger the life of other colleagues.
It took me years to see the sentencing of three people associated with my kidnapping, but this was the exception.
There was no justice for any of the humanitarian aid workers killed or abducted in Chechnya between '95 and '99, and it's the same all over the world.
This is unacceptable.
This is inexcusable.
Attacks on humanitarian aid workers are war crimes in international law.
Those crimes should not go unpunished.
We must end this cycle of impunity.
We must consider that those attacks against humanitarian aid workers are attacks against humanity itself.
That makes me furious.
I know I'm very lucky compared to the refugees I work for.
I don't know what it is to have seen my whole town destroyed.
I don't know what it is to have seen my relatives shot in front of me.
I don't know what it is to lose the protection of my country.
I also know that I'm very lucky compared to other hostages.
Four days before my eventful release, four hostages were beheaded a few miles away from where I was kept in captivity.
Why them?
Why am I here today?
No easy answer.
I was received with a lot of support that I got from my relatives, from colleagues, from friends, from people I didn't know.
They have helped me over the years to come out of the darkness.
Not everyone was treated with the same attention.
How many of my colleagues, after a traumatic incident, took their own life?
I can count nine that I knew personally.
How many of my colleagues went through a difficult divorce after a traumatic experience because they could not explain anything anymore to their spouse?
I've lost that count.
There is a price for this type of life.
In Russia, all war monuments have this beautiful inscription at the top.
It says, (In Russian) "No one is forgotten, nothing is forgotten."
I do not forget my lost colleagues.
I cannot forget anything.
I call on you to remember their dedication and demand that humanitarian aid workers around the world be better protected.
We should not let that light of hope they have brought to be switched off.
After my ordeal, a lot of colleagues asked me, "But why do you continue?
Why do you do this sort of job?
Why do you have to go back to it?"
My answer was very simple: If I had quit, that would have meant my kidnapper had won.
They would have taken my soul and my humanity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like to tell you a story about death and architecture.
A hundred years ago, we tended to die of infectious diseases like pneumonia, that, if they took hold, would take us away quite quickly.
We tended to die at home, in our own beds, looked after by family, although that was the default option because a lot of people lacked access to medical care.
And then in the 20th century a lot of things changed.
We developed new medicines like penicillin so we could treat those infectious diseases.
New medical technologies like x-ray machines were invented.
And because they were so big and expensive, we needed large, centralized buildings to keep them in, and they became our modern hospitals.
After the Second World War, a lot of countries set up universal healthcare systems so that everyone who needed treatment could get it.
The result was that lifespans extended from about 45 at the start of the century to almost double that today.
The 20th century was this time of huge optimism about what science could offer, but with all of the focus on life, death was forgotten, even as our approach to death changed dramatically.
Now, I'm an architect, and for the past year and a half I've been looking at these changes and at what they mean for architecture related to death and dying.
We now tend to die of cancer and heart disease, and what that means is that many of us will have a long period of chronic illness at the end of our lives.
During that period, we'll likely spend a lot of time in hospitals and hospices and care homes.
Now, we've all been in a modern hospital.
You know those fluorescent lights and the endless corridors and those rows of uncomfortable chairs.
Hospital architecture has earned its bad reputation.
But the surprising thing is, it wasn't always like this.
This is L'Ospedale degli Innocenti, built in 1419 by Brunelleschi, who was one of the most famous and influential architects of his time.
And when I look at this building and then think about hospitals today, what amazes me is this building's ambition.
It's just a really great building.
It has these courtyards in the middle so that all of the rooms have daylight and fresh air, and the rooms are big and they have high ceilings, so they just feel more comfortable to be in.
And it's also beautiful.
Somehow, we've forgotten that that's even possible for a hospital.
Now, if we want better buildings for dying, then we have to talk about it, but because we find the subject of death uncomfortable, we don't talk about it, and we don't question how we as a society approach death.
One of the things that surprised me most in my research, though, is how changeable attitudes actually are.
This is the first crematorium in the U.K., which was built in Woking in the 1870s.
And when this was first built, there were protests in the local village.
Cremation wasn't socially acceptable, and 99.8 percent of people got buried.
And yet, only a hundred years later, three quarters of us get cremated.
People are actually really open to changing things if they're given the chance to talk about them.
So this conversation about death and architecture was what I wanted to start when I did my first exhibition on it in Venice in June, which was called "Death in Venice."
It was designed to be quite playful so that people would literally engage with it.
This is one of our exhibits, which is an interactive map of London that shows just how much of the real estate in the city is given over to death and dying, and as you wave your hand across the map, the name of that piece of real estate, the building or cemetery, is revealed.
Another of our exhibits was a series of postcards that people could take away with them.
And they showed people's homes and hospitals and cemeteries and mortuaries, and they tell the story of the different spaces that we pass through on either side of death.
We wanted to show that where we die is a key part of how we die.
Now, the strangest thing was the way that visitors reacted to the exhibition, especially the audio-visual works.
We had people dancing and running and jumping as they tried to activate the exhibits in different ways, and at a certain point they would kind of stop and remember that they were in an exhibition about death, and that maybe that's not how you're supposed to act.
But actually, I would question whether there is one way that you're supposed to act around death, and if there's not, I'd ask you to think about what you think a good death is, and what you think that architecture that supports a good death might be like, and mightn't it be a little less like this and a little more like this?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Traditional prescriptions for growth in Africa are not working very well.
After one trillion dollars in African development-related aid in the last 60 years, real per capita income today is lower than it was in the 1970s.
Aid is not doing too well.
In response, the Bretton Woods institutions -- the IMF and the World Bank -- pushed for free trade not aid, yet the historical record shows little empirical evidence that free trade leads to economic growth.
The newly prescribed silver bullet is microcredit.
We seem to be fixated on this romanticized idea that every poor peasant in Africa is an entrepreneur.
(Laughter) Yet my work and travel in 40-plus countries across Africa have taught me that most people want jobs instead.
My solution: Forget micro-entrepreneurs.
Let's invest in building pan-African titans like Sudanese businessman Mo Ibrahim.
Mo took a contrarian bet on Africa when he founded Celtel International in '98 and built it into a mobile cellular provider with 24 million subscribers across 14 African countries by 2004.
The Mo model might be better than the everyman entrepreneur model, which prevents an effective means of diffusion and knowledge-sharing.
Perhaps we are not at a stage in Africa where many actors and small enterprises leads to growth through competition.
Consider these two alternative scenarios.
One: You loan 200 dollars to each of 500 banana farmers allowing them to dry their surplus bananas and fetch 15 percent more revenue at the local market.
Or two: You give 100,000 dollars to one savvy entrepreneur and help her set up a factory that yields 40 percent additional income to all 500 banana farmers and creates 50 additional jobs.
We invested in the second scenario, and backed 26-year-old Kenyan entrepreneur Eric Muthomi to set up an agro-processing factory called Stawi to produce gluten-free banana-based flour and baby food.
Stawi is leveraging economies of scale and using modern manufacturing processes to create value for not only its owners but its workers, who have an ownership in the business.
Our dream is to take an Eric Muthomi and try to help him become a Mo Ibrahim, which requires skill, financing, local and global partnerships, and extraordinary perseverance.
But why pan-African?
The scramble for Africa during the Berlin Conference of 1884 -- where, quite frankly, we Africans were not exactly consulted -- (Laughter) (Applause) -- resulted in massive fragmentation and many sovereign states with small populations: Liberia, four million; Cape Verde, 500,000.
Pan-Africa gives you one billion people, granted across 55 countries with trade barriers and other impediments, but our ancestors traded across the continent before Europeans drew lines around us.
The pan-African opportunities outweigh the challenges, and that's why we're expanding Stawi's markets from just Kenya to Algeria, Nigeria, Ghana, and anywhere else that will buy our food.
We hope to help solve food security, empower farmers, create jobs, develop the local economy, and we hope to become rich in the process.
While it's not the sexiest approach, and maybe it doesn't achieve the same feel-good as giving a woman 100 dollars to buy a goat on kiva.org, perhaps supporting fewer, higher-impact entrepreneurs to build massive businesses that scale pan-Africa can help change this.
The political freedom for which our forebearers fought is meaningless without economic freedom.
We hope to aid this fight for economic freedom by building world-class businesses, creating indigenous wealth, providing jobs that we so desperately need, and hopefully helping achieve this.
Africa shall rise.
Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: So Sangu, of course, this is strong rhetoric.
You're making 100 percent contrast between microcredit and regular investment and growing regular investment.
Do you think there is a role for microcredit at all?
Sangu Delle: I think there is a role.
Microcredit has been a great, innovative way to expand financial access to the bottom of the pyramid.
But for the problems we face in Africa, when we are looking at the Marshall Plan to revitalize war-torn Europe, it was not full of donations of sheep.
We need more than just microcredit.
We need more than just give 200 dollars.
We need to build big businesses, and we need jobs.
TR: Very good. Thank you so much.
(Applause)
How many people here have heard of PMS?
Everybody, right?
Everyone knows that women go a little crazy right before they get their period, that the menstrual cycle throws them onto an inevitable hormonal roller coaster of irrationality and irritability.
There's a general assumption that fluctuations in reproductive hormones cause extreme emotions and that the great majority of women are affected by this.
Well, I am here to tell you that scientific evidence says neither of those assumptions is true.
I'm here to give you the good news about PMS.
But first, let's take a look at how firmly the idea of PMS is entrenched in American culture.
If you examine newspaper or magazine articles, you'll see how widely assumed it is that everyone gets PMS.
In an article in the magazine Redbook titled "You: PMS Free," readers were informed that between 80 to 90 percent of women suffer from PMS.
L.A. Muscle magazine warned its readers that 40 to 50 percent of women suffer from PMS, and that it plays a major role in women's mental and physical health, and a couple of years ago, even the Wall Street Journal ran an article on calcium as a treatment for PMS, asking its female readers, "Do you turn into a witch every month?"
From all these articles, you would think there must be a mountain of research verifying the widespread nature of PMS.
However, after five decades of research, there's no strong consensus on the definition, the cause, the treatment, or even the existence of PMS.
As most commonly defined by psychologists, PMS involves negative behavioral, cognitive and physical symptoms from the time of ovulation to menstruation.
But here's where it gets tricky.
Over 150 different symptoms have been used to diagnose PMS, and here are just a few of those.
Now, I want to be clear here.
I'm not saying women don't get some of these symptoms.
What I'm saying is that getting some of these symptoms doesn't amount to a mental disorder, and when psychologists come up with a disorder that's so vaguely defined, the label eventually becomes meaningless.
With a list of symptoms this long and wide, I could have PMS, you could have PMS, the guy in the third row here could have PMS, my dog could have PMS. (Laughter) Some researchers said you had to have five symptoms.
Some said three.
Other researchers said that symptoms were only meaningful if they were highly disturbing to you, but others said minor symptoms were just as important.
For many years, because there was no standardization in the definition of PMS, when psychologists tried to report prevalence rates, their estimates ranged from five percent of women to 97 percent of women, so at the same time almost no one and almost everyone had PMS.
Overall, the weaknesses in the methods of research on PMS have been considerable.
First, many studies asked women to report their symptoms retrospectively, looking to the past and relying on memory, which is known to inflate reporting of PMS compared to what's called prospective reporting, which involves keeping a daily log of symptoms for at least two months in a row.
Many studies also exclusively focused on white, middle-class women, which makes it problematic to apply study findings to all women.
We know there's a strong cultural component to the belief in PMS because it's nearly unheard of outside of Western nations.
Third, many studies failed to use control groups.
If we want to understand the specific characteristics of women who have PMS, we need to be able to compare them to women who don't have PMS.
And finally, many different types of questionnaires were used to diagnose PMS, focusing on different symptoms, symptom duration and severity.
To do reliable research on any condition, scientists must agree on the specific characteristics that make up that condition so they're all talking about the same thing, and with PMS, this has not been the case.
However, in 1994, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, known as the DSM, thankfully -- it's also the manual for mental health professionals -- they redefined PMS as PMDD, Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder.
And dysphoria refers to a feeling of agitation or unease.
And according to these new DSM guidelines, in most menstrual cycles in the last year, at least five of 11 possible symptoms must appear in the week before menstruation starts; the symptoms must improve once menstruation has begun; and the symptoms must be absent the week after menstruation has ended.
One of these symptoms must come from this list of four: marked mood swings, irritability, anxiety, or depression.
The other symptoms could come from the first slide or from those on the second slide, including symptoms like feeling out of control and changes in sleep or appetite.
The DSM also required now that the symptoms should be associated with clinically significant distress -- there should be some kind of disturbance in work or school or social relationships -- and that symptoms and symptom severity should now be documented by keeping a daily log for at least two cycles in a row.
And finally, the DSM required that the emotional disturbance should be more than simply an exacerbation of an already existing disorder.
So scientifically speaking, this is an improvement.
We now have a limited number of symptoms, and a high impact on functioning that's required, and the reporting and timing of symptoms have both become very specific.
Well, using this criteria and looking at most recent studies, we see that on average, three to eight percent of women suffer from PMDD.
Not all women, not most women, not the majority of women, not even a lot of women: three to eight percent.
For everyone else, variables like stressful events or happy occasions or even day of the week are more powerful predictors of mood than time of the month, and this is the information the scientific community has had since the 1990s.
In 2002, my colleagues and I published an article describing the PMS and PMDD research, and several similar articles have appeared in psychology journals.
The questions is, why hasn't this information trickled down to the public?
Why do these myths persist?
Well, certainly the onslaught of messages that women receive from books, TV, movies, the Internet, that everyone gets PMS go a long way in convincing them it must be true.
Research tells us that the more a woman believes that everyone gets PMS, the more likely she is to erroneously report that she has it.
Let me tell you what I mean by "erroneously."
You might ask her, "Do you have PMS?"
and she says yes, but then, when you have her keep a daily log of psychological symptoms for two months, no correlation is found between her symptoms and time of the month.
Another reason for the persistence of the PMS myth has to do with the narrow boundaries of the feminine role.
Feminist psychologists like Joan Chrisler have suggested that taking on the label of PMS allows women to express emotions that would otherwise be considered unladylike.
The near universal definition of a good woman is one who is happy, loving, caring for others, and taking great satisfaction from that role.
Well, PMS has become a permission slip to be angry, complain, be irritated, without losing the title of good woman.
We know that the variables in a woman's environment are much more likely to cause her to be angry than her hormones, but when she attributes anger to hormones, she's absolved of responsibility or criticism.
"Oh, that's not who she is. It's out of her control."
And while this can be a useful tool, it serves to invalidate women's emotions.
When people respond to a woman's anger with the thought, "Oh, it's just that time of the month," her ability to be taken seriously or effect change is severely limited.
So who else benefits from the myth of PMS?
Well, I can tell you that treating PMS has become a profitable, thriving industry.
Amazon.com currently offers over 1,900 books on PMS treatment.
A quick Google search will bring up a cornucopia of clinics, workshops and seminars.
Reputable Internet sources of medical information like WebMD or the Mayo Clinic list PMS as a known disorder.
It's not a known disorder, but they list it.
And they also list the medications that physicians have prescribed to treat it, like anti-depressants or hormones.
Interestingly, though, both websites say that the success of medication in treating PMS symptoms vary from woman to woman.
Well, that doesn't make sense.
If you've got a distinct disorder with a distinct cause, which PMS is supposed to be, then the treatment should bring improvement for a great number of women.
This has not been the case with these treatments, and FDA regulations say that for a drug to be deemed effective, a large portion of the target population should see clinically significant improvement.
So we have not had that at all with these so-called treatments.
However, the financial gain of perpetuating the myth that PMS is a common mental disorder and is treatable is quite substantial.
When women are prescribed drugs like anti-depressants or hormones, medical protocol requires that they have physician follow-up every three months.
That's a lot of doctor visits.
Pharmaceutical companies reap untold profits when women are convinced they should take a prescribed medication for all of their child-bearing lives.
Over-the-counter drugs like Midol even claim to treat PMS symptoms like tension and irritability, even though they only contain a diuretic, a pain reliever and caffeine.
Now, far be it from me to argue with the magical powers of caffeine, but I don't think reducing tension is one of them.
Since 2002, Midol has marketed a Teen Midol to adolescents.
They are aiming at young girls early, to convince them that everyone gets PMS and that it will make you a monster, but wait, there's something you can do about it: Take Midol and you will be a human being again.
In 2013, Midol took in 48 million dollars in sales revenue.
So while perpetuating the myth of PMS has been lucrative for some, it comes with some serious adverse consequences for women.
First, it contributes to the medicalization of women's reproductive health.
The medical field has a long history of conceptualizing women's reproductive processes as illnesses that require treatment, and this has come at many costs, including excessive Cesarean deliveries, hysterectomies and prescribed hormone treatments that have harmed rather than enhanced women's health.
Second, the PMS myth also contributes to the stereotype of women as irrational and overemotional.
When the menstrual cycle is described as a hormonal roller coaster that turns women into angry beasts, it becomes easy to question the competence of all women.
Women have made tremendous strides in the workforce, but still there's a minuscule number of women at the highest echelons of fields like government or business, and when we think about who makes for a good CEO or senator, someone who has qualities like rationality, steadiness, competence come to mind, and in our culture, that sounds more like a man than a woman, and the PMS myth contributes to that.
Psychologists know that the moods of men and women are more similar than different.
One study followed men and women for four to six months and found that the number of mood swings they experienced and the severity of those mood swings were no different.
And finally, the PMS myth keeps women from dealing with the actual issues causing them emotional upset.
Individual issues like quality of relationship or work conditions or societal issues like racism or sexism or the daily grind of poverty are all strongly related to daily mood.
Sweeping emotions under the rug of PMS keeps women from understanding the source of their negative emotions, but it also takes away the opportunity to take any action to change them.
So the good news about PMS is that while some women get some symptoms because of the menstrual cycle, the great majority don't get a mental disorder.
They go to work or school, take care of their families, and function at a normal level.
We know the emotions and moods of men and women are more similar than different, so let's walk away from the tired old PMS myth of women as witches and embrace the reality of high emotional and professional functioning the great majority of women live every day.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We are built out of very small stuff, and we are embedded in a very large cosmos, and the fact is that we are not very good at understanding reality at either of those scales, and that's because our brains haven't evolved to understand the world at that scale.
Instead, we're trapped on this very thin slice of perception right in the middle.
But it gets strange, because even at that slice of reality that we call home, we're not seeing most of the action that's going on.
So take the colors of our world.
This is light waves, electromagnetic radiation that bounces off objects and it hits specialized receptors in the back of our eyes.
But we're not seeing all the waves out there.
In fact, what we see is less than a 10 trillionth of what's out there.
So you have radio waves and microwaves and X-rays and gamma rays passing through your body right now and you're completely unaware of it, because you don't come with the proper biological receptors for picking it up.
There are thousands of cell phone conversations passing through you right now, and you're utterly blind to it.
Now, it's not that these things are inherently unseeable.
Snakes include some infrared in their reality, and honeybees include ultraviolet in their view of the world, and of course we build machines in the dashboards of our cars to pick up on signals in the radio frequency range, and we built machines in hospitals to pick up on the X-ray range.
But you can't sense any of those by yourself, at least not yet, because you don't come equipped with the proper sensors.
Now, what this means is that our experience of reality is constrained by our biology, and that goes against the common sense notion that our eyes and our ears and our fingertips are just picking up the objective reality that's out there.
Instead, our brains are sampling just a little bit of the world.
Now, across the animal kingdom, different animals pick up on different parts of reality.
So in the blind and deaf world of the tick, the important signals are temperature and butyric acid; in the world of the black ghost knifefish, its sensory world is lavishly colored by electrical fields; and for the echolocating bat, its reality is constructed out of air compression waves.
That's the slice of their ecosystem that they can pick up on, and we have a word for this in science.
It's called the umwelt, which is the German word for the surrounding world.
Now, presumably, every animal assumes that its umwelt is the entire objective reality out there, because why would you ever stop to imagine that there's something beyond what we can sense.
Instead, what we all do is we accept reality as it's presented to us.
Let's do a consciousness-raiser on this.
Imagine that you are a bloodhound dog.
Your whole world is about smelling.
You've got a long snout that has 200 million scent receptors in it, and you have wet nostrils that attract and trap scent molecules, and your nostrils even have slits so you can take big nosefuls of air.
Everything is about smell for you.
So one day, you stop in your tracks with a revelation.
You look at your human owner and you think, "What is it like to have the pitiful, impoverished nose of a human?
(Laughter) What is it like when you take a feeble little noseful of air?
How can you not know that there's a cat 100 yards away, or that your neighbor was on this very spot six hours ago?"
(Laughter) So because we're humans, we've never experienced that world of smell, so we don't miss it, because we are firmly settled into our umwelt.
But the question is, do we have to be stuck there?
So as a neuroscientist, I'm interested in the way that technology might expand our umwelt, and how that's going to change the experience of being human.
So we already know that we can marry our technology to our biology, because there are hundreds of thousands of people walking around with artificial hearing and artificial vision.
So the way this works is, you take a microphone and you digitize the signal, and you put an electrode strip directly into the inner ear.
Or, with the retinal implant, you take a camera and you digitize the signal, and then you plug an electrode grid directly into the optic nerve.
And as recently as 15 years ago, there were a lot of scientists who thought these technologies wouldn't work.
Why? It's because these technologies speak the language of Silicon Valley, and it's not exactly the same dialect as our natural biological sense organs.
But the fact is that it works; the brain figures out how to use the signals just fine.
Now, how do we understand that?
Well, here's the big secret: Your brain is not hearing or seeing any of this.
Your brain is locked in a vault of silence and darkness inside your skull.
All it ever sees are electrochemical signals that come in along different data cables, and this is all it has to work with, and nothing more.
Now, amazingly, the brain is really good at taking in these signals and extracting patterns and assigning meaning, so that it takes this inner cosmos and puts together a story of this, your subjective world.
But here's the key point: Your brain doesn't know, and it doesn't care, where it gets the data from.
Whatever information comes in, it just figures out what to do with it.
And this is a very efficient kind of machine.
It's essentially a general purpose computing device, and it just takes in everything and figures out what it's going to do with it, and that, I think, frees up Mother Nature to tinker around with different sorts of input channels.
So I call this the P.H. model of evolution, and I don't want to get too technical here, but P.H. stands for Potato Head, and I use this name to emphasize that all these sensors that we know and love, like our eyes and our ears and our fingertips, these are merely peripheral plug-and-play devices: You stick them in, and you're good to go.
The brain figures out what to do with the data that comes in.
And when you look across the animal kingdom, you find lots of peripheral devices.
So snakes have heat pits with which to detect infrared, and the ghost knifefish has electroreceptors, and the star-nosed mole has this appendage with 22 fingers on it with which it feels around and constructs a 3D model of the world, and many birds have magnetite so they can orient to the magnetic field of the planet.
So what this means is that nature doesn't have to continually redesign the brain.
Instead, with the principles of brain operation established, all nature has to worry about is designing new peripherals.
Okay. So what this means is this: The lesson that surfaces is that there's nothing really special or fundamental about the biology that we come to the table with.
It's just what we have inherited from a complex road of evolution.
But it's not what we have to stick with, and our best proof of principle of this comes from what's called sensory substitution.
And that refers to feeding information into the brain via unusual sensory channels, and the brain just figures out what to do with it.
Now, that might sound speculative, but the first paper demonstrating this was published in the journal Nature in 1969.
So a scientist named Paul Bach-y-Rita put blind people in a modified dental chair, and he set up a video feed, and he put something in front of the camera, and then you would feel that poked into your back with a grid of solenoids.
So if you wiggle a coffee cup in front of the camera, you're feeling that in your back, and amazingly, blind people got pretty good at being able to determine what was in front of the camera just by feeling it in the small of their back.
Now, there have been many modern incarnations of this.
The sonic glasses take a video feed right in front of you and turn that into a sonic landscape, so as things move around, and get closer and farther, it sounds like "Bzz, bzz, bzz."
It sounds like a cacophony, but after several weeks, blind people start getting pretty good at understanding what's in front of them just based on what they're hearing.
And it doesn't have to be through the ears: this system uses an electrotactile grid on the forehead, so whatever's in front of the video feed, you're feeling it on your forehead.
Why the forehead? Because you're not using it for much else.
The most modern incarnation is called the brainport, and this is a little electrogrid that sits on your tongue, and the video feed gets turned into these little electrotactile signals, and blind people get so good at using this that they can throw a ball into a basket, or they can navigate complex obstacle courses.
They can come to see through their tongue.
Now, that sounds completely insane, right?
But remember, all vision ever is is electrochemical signals coursing around in your brain.
Your brain doesn't know where the signals come from.
It just figures out what to do with them.
So my interest in my lab is sensory substitution for the deaf, and this is a project I've undertaken with a graduate student in my lab, Scott Novich, who is spearheading this for his thesis.
And here is what we wanted to do: we wanted to make it so that sound from the world gets converted in some way so that a deaf person can understand what is being said.
And we wanted to do this, given the power and ubiquity of portable computing, we wanted to make sure that this would run on cell phones and tablets, and also we wanted to make this a wearable, something that you could wear under your clothing.
So here's the concept.
So as I'm speaking, my sound is getting captured by the tablet, and then it's getting mapped onto a vest that's covered in vibratory motors, just like the motors in your cell phone.
So as I'm speaking, the sound is getting translated to a pattern of vibration on the vest.
Now, this is not just conceptual: this tablet is transmitting Bluetooth, and I'm wearing the vest right now.
So as I'm speaking -- (Applause) -- the sound is getting translated into dynamic patterns of vibration.
I'm feeling the sonic world around me.
So, we've been testing this with deaf people now, and it turns out that after just a little bit of time, people can start feeling, they can start understanding the language of the vest.
So this is Jonathan. He's 37 years old. He has a master's degree.
He was born profoundly deaf, which means that there's a part of his umwelt that's unavailable to him.
So we had Jonathan train with the vest for four days, two hours a day, and here he is on the fifth day.
Scott Novich: You.
David Eagleman: So Scott says a word, Jonathan feels it on the vest, and he writes it on the board.
SN: Where. Where.
DE: Jonathan is able to translate this complicated pattern of vibrations into an understanding of what's being said.
SN: Touch. Touch.
DE: Now, he's not doing this -- (Applause) -- Jonathan is not doing this consciously, because the patterns are too complicated, but his brain is starting to unlock the pattern that allows it to figure out what the data mean, and our expectation is that, after wearing this for about three months, he will have a direct perceptual experience of hearing in the same way that when a blind person passes a finger over braille, the meaning comes directly off the page without any conscious intervention at all.
Now, this technology has the potential to be a game-changer, because the only other solution for deafness is a cochlear implant, and that requires an invasive surgery.
And this can be built for 40 times cheaper than a cochlear implant, which opens up this technology globally, even for the poorest countries.
Now, we've been very encouraged by our results with sensory substitution, but what we've been thinking a lot about is sensory addition.
How could we use a technology like this to add a completely new kind of sense, to expand the human umvelt?
For example, could we feed real-time data from the Internet directly into somebody's brain, and can they develop a direct perceptual experience?
So here's an experiment we're doing in the lab.
A subject is feeling a real-time streaming feed from the Net of data for five seconds.
Then, two buttons appear, and he has to make a choice.
He doesn't know what's going on.
He makes a choice, and he gets feedback after one second.
Now, here's the thing: The subject has no idea what all the patterns mean, but we're seeing if he gets better at figuring out which button to press.
He doesn't know that what we're feeding is real-time data from the stock market, and he's making buy and sell decisions.
(Laughter) And the feedback is telling him whether he did the right thing or not.
And what we're seeing is, can we expand the human umvelt so that he comes to have, after several weeks, a direct perceptual experience of the economic movements of the planet.
So we'll report on that later to see how well this goes.
(Laughter) Here's another thing we're doing: During the talks this morning, we've been automatically scraping Twitter for the TED2015 hashtag, and we've been doing an automated sentiment analysis, which means, are people using positive words or negative words or neutral?
And while this has been going on, I have been feeling this, and so I am plugged in to the aggregate emotion of thousands of people in real time, and that's a new kind of human experience, because now I can know how everyone's doing and how much you're loving this.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's a bigger experience than a human can normally have.
We're also expanding the umvelt of pilots.
So in this case, the vest is streaming nine different measures from this quadcopter, so pitch and yaw and roll and orientation and heading, and that improves this pilot's ability to fly it.
It's essentially like he's extending his skin up there, far away.
And that's just the beginning.
What we're envisioning is taking a modern cockpit full of gauges and instead of trying to read the whole thing, you feel it.
We live in a world of information now, and there is a difference between accessing big data and experiencing it.
So I think there's really no end to the possibilities on the horizon for human expansion.
Just imagine an astronaut being able to feel the overall health of the International Space Station, or, for that matter, having you feel the invisible states of your own health, like your blood sugar and the state of your microbiome, or having 360-degree vision or seeing in infrared or ultraviolet.
So the key is this: As we move into the future, we're going to increasingly be able to choose our own peripheral devices.
We no longer have to wait for Mother Nature's sensory gifts on her timescales, but instead, like any good parent, she's given us the tools that we need to go out and define our own trajectory.
So the question now is, how do you want to go out and experience your universe?
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Can you feel it? DE: Yeah.
Actually, this was the first time I felt applause on the vest.
It's nice. It's like a massage. (Laughter) CA: Twitter's going crazy. Twitter's going mad.
So that stock market experiment.
This could be the first experiment that secures its funding forevermore, right, if successful?
DE: Well, that's right, I wouldn't have to write to NIH anymore.
CA: Well look, just to be skeptical for a minute, I mean, this is amazing, but isn't most of the evidence so far that sensory substitution works, not necessarily that sensory addition works?
I mean, isn't it possible that the blind person can see through their tongue because the visual cortex is still there, ready to process, and that that is needed as part of it?
DE: That's a great question. We actually have no idea what the theoretical limits are of what kind of data the brain can take in.
The general story, though, is that it's extraordinarily flexible.
So when a person goes blind, what we used to call their visual cortex gets taken over by other things, by touch, by hearing, by vocabulary.
So what that tells us is that the cortex is kind of a one-trick pony.
It just runs certain kinds of computations on things.
And when we look around at things like braille, for example, people are getting information through bumps on their fingers.
So I don't think we have any reason to think there's a theoretical limit that we know the edge of.
CA: If this checks out, you're going to be deluged.
There are so many possible applications for this.
Are you ready for this? What are you most excited about, the direction it might go?
DE: I mean, I think there's a lot of applications here.
In terms of beyond sensory substitution, the things I started mentioning about astronauts on the space station, they spend a lot of their time monitoring things, and they could instead just get what's going on, because what this is really good for is multidimensional data.
The key is this: Our visual systems are good at detecting blobs and edges, but they're really bad at what our world has become, which is screens with lots and lots of data.
We have to crawl that with our attentional systems.
So this is a way of just feeling the state of something, just like the way you know the state of your body as you're standing around.
So I think heavy machinery, safety, feeling the state of a factory, of your equipment, that's one place it'll go right away.
CA: David Eagleman, that was one mind-blowing talk. Thank you very much.
DE: Thank you, Chris. (Applause)
I'm thrilled to be here tonight to share with you something we've been working on for over two years, and it's in the area of additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing.
You see this object here.
It looks fairly simple, but it's quite complex at the same time.
It's a set of concentric geodesic structures with linkages between each one.
In its context, it is not manufacturable by traditional manufacturing techniques.
It has a symmetry such that you can't injection mold it.
You can't even manufacture it through milling.
This is a job for a 3D printer, but most 3D printers would take between three and 10 hours to fabricate it, and we're going to take the risk tonight to try to fabricate it onstage during this 10-minute talk.
Wish us luck.
Now, 3D printing is actually a misnomer.
It's actually 2D printing over and over again, and it in fact uses the technologies associated with 2D printing.
Think about inkjet printing where you lay down ink on a page to make letters, and then do that over and over again to build up a three-dimensional object.
In microelectronics, they use something called lithography to do the same sort of thing, to make the transistors and integrated circuits and build up a structure several times.
These are all 2D printing technologies.
Now, I'm a chemist, a material scientist too, and my co-inventors are also material scientists, one a chemist, one a physicist, and we began to be interested in 3D printing.
And very often, as you know, new ideas are often simple connections between people with different experiences in different communities, and that's our story.
Now, we were inspired by the "Terminator 2" scene for T-1000, and we thought, why couldn't a 3D printer operate in this fashion, where you have an object arise out of a puddle in essentially real time with essentially no waste to make a great object?
Okay, just like the movies.
And could we be inspired by Hollywood and come up with ways to actually try to get this to work?
And that was our challenge.
And our approach would be, if we could do this, then we could fundamentally address the three issues holding back 3D printing from being a manufacturing process.
One, 3D printing takes forever.
There are mushrooms that grow faster than 3D printed parts. (Laughter) The layer by layer process leads to defects in mechanical properties, and if we could grow continuously, we could eliminate those defects.
And in fact, if we could grow really fast, we could also start using materials that are self-curing, and we could have amazing properties.
So if we could pull this off, imitate Hollywood, we could in fact address 3D manufacturing.
Our approach is to use some standard knowledge in polymer chemistry to harness light and oxygen to grow parts continuously.
Light and oxygen work in different ways.
Light can take a resin and convert it to a solid, can convert a liquid to a solid.
Oxygen inhibits that process.
So light and oxygen are polar opposites from one another from a chemical point of view, and if we can control spatially the light and oxygen, we could control this process.
And we refer to this as CLIP. [Continuous Liquid Interface Production.] It has three functional components.
One, it has a reservoir that holds the puddle, just like the T-1000.
At the bottom of the reservoir is a special window.
I'll come back to that.
In addition, it has a stage that will lower into the puddle and pull the object out of the liquid.
The third component is a digital light projection system underneath the reservoir, illuminating with light in the ultraviolet region.
Now, the key is that this window in the bottom of this reservoir, it's a composite, it's a very special window.
It's not only transparent to light but it's permeable to oxygen.
It's got characteristics like a contact lens.
So we can see how the process works.
You can start to see that as you lower a stage in there, in a traditional process, with an oxygen-impermeable window, you make a two-dimensional pattern and you end up gluing that onto the window with a traditional window, and so in order to introduce the next layer, you have to separate it, introduce new resin, reposition it, and do this process over and over again.
But with our very special window, what we're able to do is, with oxygen coming through the bottom as light hits it, that oxygen inhibits the reaction, and we form a dead zone.
This dead zone is on the order of tens of microns thick, so that's two or three diameters of a red blood cell, right at the window interface that remains a liquid, and we pull this object up, and as we talked about in a Science paper, as we change the oxygen content, we can change the dead zone thickness.
And so we have a number of key variables that we control: oxygen content, the light, the light intensity, the dose to cure, the viscosity, the geometry, and we use very sophisticated software to control this process.
The result is pretty staggering.
It's 25 to 100 times faster than traditional 3D printers, which is game-changing.
In addition, as our ability to deliver liquid to that interface, we can go 1,000 times faster I believe, and that in fact opens up the opportunity for generating a lot of heat, and as a chemical engineer, I get very excited at heat transfer and the idea that we might one day have water-cooled 3D printers, because they're going so fast.
In addition, because we're growing things, we eliminate the layers, and the parts are monolithic.
You don't see the surface structure.
You have molecularly smooth surfaces.
And the mechanical properties of most parts made in a 3D printer are notorious for having properties that depend on the orientation with which how you printed it, because of the layer-like structure.
But when you grow objects like this, the properties are invariant with the print direction.
These look like injection-molded parts, which is very different than traditional 3D manufacturing.
In addition, we're able to throw the entire polymer chemistry textbook at this, and we're able to design chemistries that can give rise to the properties you really want in a 3D-printed object.
(Applause) There it is. That's great.
You always take the risk that something like this won't work onstage, right?
But we can have materials with great mechanical properties.
For the first time, we can have elastomers that are high elasticity or high dampening.
Think about vibration control or great sneakers, for example.
We can make materials that have incredible strength, high strength-to-weight ratio, really strong materials, really great elastomers, so throw that in the audience there.
So great material properties.
And so the opportunity now, if you actually make a part that has the properties to be a final part, and you do it in game-changing speeds, you can actually transform manufacturing.
Right now, in manufacturing, what happens is, the so-called digital thread in digital manufacturing.
We go from a CAD drawing, a design, to a prototype to manufacturing.
Often, the digital thread is broken right at prototype, because you can't go all the way to manufacturing because most parts don't have the properties to be a final part.
We now can connect the digital thread all the way from design to prototyping to manufacturing, and that opportunity really opens up all sorts of things, from better fuel-efficient cars dealing with great lattice properties with high strength-to-weight ratio, new turbine blades, all sorts of wonderful things.
Think about if you need a stent in an emergency situation, instead of the doctor pulling off a stent out of the shelf that was just standard sizes, having a stent that's designed for you, for your own anatomy with your own tributaries, printed in an emergency situation in real time out of the properties such that the stent could go away after 18 months: really-game changing.
Or digital dentistry, and making these kinds of structures even while you're in the dentist chair.
And look at the structures that my students are making at the University of North Carolina.
These are amazing microscale structures.
You know, the world is really good at nano-fabrication.
Moore's Law has driven things from 10 microns and below.
We're really good at that, but it's actually very hard to make things from 10 microns to 1,000 microns, the mesoscale.
And subtractive techniques from the silicon industry can't do that very well.
They can't etch wafers that well.
But this process is so gentle, we can grow these objects up from the bottom using additive manufacturing and make amazing things in tens of seconds, opening up new sensor technologies, new drug delivery techniques, new lab-on-a-chip applications, really game-changing stuff.
So the opportunity of making a part in real time that has the properties to be a final part really opens up 3D manufacturing, and for us, this is very exciting, because this really is owning the intersection between hardware, software and molecular science, and I can't wait to see what designers and engineers around the world are going to be able to do with this great tool.
Thanks for listening.
(Applause)
You're looking at a woman who was publicly silent for a decade.
Obviously, that's changed, but only recently.
It was several months ago that I gave my very first major public talk, at the Forbes "30 Under 30 Summit" -- 1,500 brilliant people, all under the age of 30.
That meant that in 1998, the oldest among the group were only 14, and the youngest, just four.
I joked with them that some might only have heard of me from rap songs.
Yes, I'm in rap songs.
(Laughter) Almost 40 rap songs.
(Laughter) But the night of my speech, a surprising thing happened.
At the age of 41, I was hit on by a 27-year-old guy.
(Laughter) I know, right?
He was charming, and I was flattered, and I declined.
You know what his unsuccessful pickup line was?
He could make me feel 22 again.
(Laughter) (Applause) I realized, later that night, I'm probably the only person over 40 who does not want to be 22 again.
(Laughter) (Applause) At the age of 22, I fell in love with my boss.
And at the age of 24, I learned the devastating consequences.
Can I see a show of hands of anyone here who didn't make a mistake or do something they regretted at 22?
Yep. That's what I thought.
So like me, at 22, a few of you may have also taken wrong turns and fallen in love with the wrong person, maybe even your boss.
Unlike me, though, your boss probably wasn't the president of the United States of America.
(Laughter) Of course, life is full of surprises.
Not a day goes by that I'm not reminded of my mistake, and I regret that mistake deeply.
In 1998, after having been swept up into an improbable romance, I was then swept up into the eye of a political, legal and media maelstrom like we had never seen before.
Remember, just a few years earlier, news was consumed from just three places: reading a newspaper or magazine, listening to the radio or watching television.
That was it.
But that wasn't my fate.
Instead, this scandal was brought to you by the digital revolution.
That meant we could access all the information we wanted, when we wanted it, anytime, anywhere.
And when the story broke in January 1998, it broke online.
It was the first time the traditional news was usurped by the internet for a major news story -- a click that reverberated around the world.
What that meant for me personally was that overnight, I went from being a completely private figure to a publicly humiliated one, worldwide.
I was patient zero of losing a personal reputation on a global scale almost instantaneously.
This rush to judgment, enabled by technology, led to mobs of virtual stone-throwers.
Granted, it was before social media, but people could still comment online, e-mail stories, and, of course, e-mail cruel jokes.
News sources plastered photos of me all over to sell newspapers, banner ads online, and to keep people tuned to the TV.
Do you recall a particular image of me, say, wearing a beret?
Now, I admit I made mistakes -- especially wearing that beret.
(Laughter) But the attention and judgment that I received -- not the story, but that I personally received -- was unprecedented.
I was branded as a tramp, tart, slut, whore, bimbo, and, of course, "that woman."
I was seen by many, but actually known by few.
And I get it: it was easy to forget that that woman was dimensional, had a soul and was once unbroken.
When this happened to me 17 years ago, there was no name for it.
Now we call it "cyberbullying" and "online harassment."
Today, I want to share some of my experience with you, talk about how that experience has helped shape my cultural observations, and how I hope my past experience can lead to a change that results in less suffering for others.
In 1998, I lost my reputation and my dignity.
I lost almost everything.
And I almost lost my life.
Let me paint a picture for you.
It is September of 1998.
I'm sitting in a windowless office room inside the Office of the Independent Counsel, underneath humming fluorescent lights.
I'm listening to the sound of my voice, my voice on surreptitiously taped phone calls that a supposed friend had made the year before.
I'm here because I've been legally required to personally authenticate all 20 hours of taped conversation.
For the past eight months, the mysterious content of these tapes has hung like the sword of Damocles over my head.
I mean, who can remember what they said a year ago?
Scared and mortified, I listen, listen as I prattle on about the flotsam and jetsam of the day; listen as I confess my love for the president, and, of course, my heartbreak; listen to my sometimes catty, sometimes churlish, sometimes silly self being cruel, unforgiving, uncouth; listen, deeply, deeply ashamed, to the worst version of myself, a self I don't even recognize.
A few days later, the Starr Report is released to Congress, and all of those tapes and transcripts, those stolen words, form a part of it.
That people can read the transcripts is horrific enough.
But a few weeks later, the audiotapes are aired on TV, and significant portions made available online.
The public humiliation was excruciating.
Life was almost unbearable.
This was not something that happened with regularity back then in 1998, and by "this," I mean the stealing of people's private words, actions, conversations or photos, and then making them public -- public without consent, public without context and public without compassion.
Fast-forward 12 years, to 2010, and now social media has been born.
The landscape has sadly become much more populated with instances like mine, whether or not someone actually made a mistake, and now, it's for both public and private people.
The consequences for some have become dire, very dire.
I was on the phone with my mom in September of 2010, and we were talking about the news of a young college freshman from Rutgers University, named Tyler Clementi.
Sweet, sensitive, creative Tyler was secretly webcammed by his roommate while being intimate with another man.
When the online world learned of this incident, the ridicule and cyberbullying ignited.
A few days later, Tyler jumped from the George Washington Bridge to his death.
He was 18.
My mom was beside herself about what happened to Tyler and his family, and she was gutted with pain in a way that I just couldn't quite understand.
And then eventually, I realized she was reliving 1998, reliving a time when she sat by my bed every night, reliving -- (Chokes up) sorry -- reliving a time when she made me shower with the bathroom door open, and reliving a time when both of my parents feared that I would be humiliated to death, literally.
Today, too many parents haven't had the chance to step in and rescue their loved ones.
Too many have learned of their child's suffering and humiliation after it was too late.
Tyler's tragic, senseless death was a turning point for me.
It served to recontextualize my experiences, and I then began to look at the world of humiliation and bullying around me and see something different.
In 1998, we had no way of knowing where this brave new technology called the internet would take us.
Since then, it has connected people in unimaginable ways -- joining lost siblings, saving lives, launching revolutions ...
But the darkness, cyberbullying, and slut-shaming that I experienced had mushroomed.
Every day online, people -- especially young people, who are not developmentally equipped to handle this -- are so abused and humiliated that they can't imagine living to the next day.
And some, tragically, don't.
And there's nothing virtual about that.
Childline, a UK nonprofit that's focused on helping young people on various issues, released a staggering statistic late last year: from 2012 to 2013, there was an 87 percent increase in calls and e-mails related to cyberbullying.
A meta-analysis done out of the Netherlands showed that for the first time, cyberbullying was leading to suicidal ideations more significantly than offline bullying.
And you know, what shocked me -- although it shouldn't have -- was other research last year that determined humiliation was a more intensely felt emotion than either happiness or even anger.
Cruelty to others is nothing new.
But online, technologically enhanced shaming is amplified, uncontained and permanently accessible.
The echo of embarrassment used to extend only as far as your family, village, school or community.
But now, it's the online community too.
Millions of people, often anonymously, can stab you with their words, and that's a lot of pain.
And there are no perimeters around how many people can publicly observe you and put you in a public stockade.
There is a very personal price to public humiliation, and the growth of the internet has jacked up that price.
For nearly two decades now, we have slowly been sowing the seeds of shame and public humiliation in our cultural soil, both on- and offline.
Gossip websites, paparazzi, reality programming, politics, news outlets and sometimes hackers all traffic in shame.
It's led to desensitization and a permissive environment online, which lends itself to trolling, invasion of privacy and cyberbullying.
This shift has created what Professor Nicolaus Mills calls "a culture of humiliation."
Consider a few prominent examples just from the past six months alone.
Snapchat, the service which is used mainly by younger generations and claims that its messages only have the life span of a few seconds.
You can imagine the range of content that that gets.
A third-party app which Snapchatters use to preserve the life span of the messages was hacked, and 100,000 personal conversations, photos and videos were leaked online, to now have a life span of forever.
Jennifer Lawrence and several other actors had their iCloud accounts hacked, and private, intimate, nude photos were plastered across the internet without their permission.
One gossip website had over five million hits for this one story.
And what about the Sony Pictures cyberhacking?
The documents which received the most attention were private e-mails that had maximum public embarrassment value.
But in this culture of humiliation, there is another kind of price tag attached to public shaming.
The price does not measure the cost to the victim, which Tyler and too many others -- notably, women, minorities and members of the LGBTQ community -- have paid, but the price measures the profit of those who prey on them.
This invasion of others is a raw material, efficiently and ruthlessly mined, packaged and sold at a profit.
A marketplace has emerged where public humiliation is a commodity, and shame is an industry.
How is the money made?
Clicks.
The more shame, the more clicks.
The more clicks, the more advertising dollars.
We're in a dangerous cycle.
The more we click on this kind of gossip, the more numb we get to the human lives behind it.
And the more numb we get, the more we click.
All the while, someone is making money off of the back of someone else's suffering.
With every click, we make a choice.
The more we saturate our culture with public shaming, the more accepted it is, the more we will see behavior like cyberbullying, trolling, some forms of hacking and online harassment.
Why? Because they all have humiliation at their cores.
This behavior is a symptom of the culture we've created.
Just think about it.
Changing behavior begins with evolving beliefs.
We've seen that to be true with racism, homophobia and plenty of other biases, today and in the past.
As we've changed beliefs about same-sex marriage, more people have been offered equal freedoms.
When we began valuing sustainability, more people began to recycle.
So as far as our culture of humiliation goes, what we need is a cultural revolution.
Public shaming as a blood sport has to stop, and it's time for an intervention on the internet and in our culture.
The shift begins with something simple, but it's not easy.
We need to return to a long-held value of compassion, compassion and empathy.
Online, we've got a compassion deficit, an empathy crisis.
Researcher Brené Brown said, and I quote, "Shame can't survive empathy."
Shame cannot survive empathy.
I've seen some very dark days in my life.
It was the compassion and empathy from my family, friends, professionals and sometimes even strangers that saved me.
Even empathy from one person can make a difference.
The theory of minority influence, proposed by social psychologist Serge Moscovici, says that even in small numbers, when there's consistency over time, change can happen.
In the online world, we can foster minority influence by becoming upstanders.
To become an upstander means instead of bystander apathy, we can post a positive comment for someone or report a bullying situation.
Trust me, compassionate comments help abate the negativity.
We can also counteract the culture by supporting organizations that deal with these kinds of issues, like the Tyler Clementi Foundation in the US; in the UK, there's Anti-Bullying Pro; and in Australia, there's PROJECT ROCKIT.
We talk a lot about our right to freedom of expression.
But we need to talk more about our responsibility to freedom of expression.
We all want to be heard, but let's acknowledge the difference between speaking up with intention and speaking up for attention.
The internet is the superhighway for the id.
But online, showing empathy to others benefits us all and helps create a safer and better world.
We need to communicate online with compassion, consume news with compassion and click with compassion.
Just imagine walking a mile in someone else's headline.
I'd like to end on a personal note.
In the past nine months, the question I've been asked the most is "Why?"
Why now?
You can read between the lines in those questions, and the answer has nothing to do with politics.
The top-note answer was and is "Because it's time."
Time to stop tiptoeing around my past, time to stop living a life of opprobrium and time to take back my narrative.
It's also not just about saving myself.
Anyone who is suffering from shame and public humiliation needs to know one thing: You can survive it.
I know it's hard.
It may not be painless, quick or easy, but you can insist on a different ending to your story.
Have compassion for yourself.
We all deserve compassion and to live both online and off in a more compassionate world.
Thank you for listening.
(Applause and cheers)
Let me show you something.
(Video) Girl: Okay, that's a cat sitting in a bed.
The boy is petting the elephant.
Those are people that are going on an airplane.
That's a big airplane.
Fei-Fei Li: This is a three-year-old child describing what she sees in a series of photos.
She might still have a lot to learn about this world, but she's already an expert at one very important task: to make sense of what she sees.
Our society is more technologically advanced than ever.
We send people to the moon, we make phones that talk to us or customize radio stations that can play only music we like.
Yet, our most advanced machines and computers still struggle at this task.
So I'm here today to give you a progress report on the latest advances in our research in computer vision, one of the most frontier and potentially revolutionary technologies in computer science.
Yes, we have prototyped cars that can drive by themselves, but without smart vision, they cannot really tell the difference between a crumpled paper bag on the road, which can be run over, and a rock that size, which should be avoided.
We have made fabulous megapixel cameras, but we have not delivered sight to the blind.
Drones can fly over massive land, but don't have enough vision technology to help us to track the changes of the rainforests.
Security cameras are everywhere, but they do not alert us when a child is drowning in a swimming pool.
Photos and videos are becoming an integral part of global life.
They're being generated at a pace that's far beyond what any human, or teams of humans, could hope to view, and you and I are contributing to that at this TED.
Yet our most advanced software is still struggling at understanding and managing this enormous content.
So in other words, collectively as a society, we're very much blind, because our smartest machines are still blind.
"Why is this so hard?" you may ask.
Cameras can take pictures like this one by converting lights into a two-dimensional array of numbers known as pixels, but these are just lifeless numbers.
They do not carry meaning in themselves.
Just like to hear is not the same as to listen, to take pictures is not the same as to see, and by seeing, we really mean understanding.
In fact, it took Mother Nature 540 million years of hard work to do this task, and much of that effort went into developing the visual processing apparatus of our brains, not the eyes themselves.
So vision begins with the eyes, but it truly takes place in the brain.
So for 15 years now, starting from my Ph.D. at Caltech and then leading Stanford's Vision Lab, I've been working with my mentors, collaborators and students to teach computers to see.
Our research field is called computer vision and machine learning.
It's part of the general field of artificial intelligence.
So ultimately, we want to teach the machines to see just like we do: naming objects, identifying people, inferring 3D geometry of things, understanding relations, emotions, actions and intentions.
You and I weave together entire stories of people, places and things the moment we lay our gaze on them.
The first step towards this goal is to teach a computer to see objects, the building block of the visual world.
In its simplest terms, imagine this teaching process as showing the computers some training images of a particular object, let's say cats, and designing a model that learns from these training images.
How hard can this be?
After all, a cat is just a collection of shapes and colors, and this is what we did in the early days of object modeling.
We'd tell the computer algorithm in a mathematical language that a cat has a round face, a chubby body, two pointy ears, and a long tail, and that looked all fine.
But what about this cat?
(Laughter) It's all curled up.
Now you have to add another shape and viewpoint to the object model.
But what if cats are hidden?
What about these silly cats?
Now you get my point.
Even something as simple as a household pet can present an infinite number of variations to the object model, and that's just one object.
So about eight years ago, a very simple and profound observation changed my thinking.
No one tells a child how to see, especially in the early years.
They learn this through real-world experiences and examples.
If you consider a child's eyes as a pair of biological cameras, they take one picture about every 200 milliseconds, the average time an eye movement is made.
So by age three, a child would have seen hundreds of millions of pictures of the real world.
That's a lot of training examples.
So instead of focusing solely on better and better algorithms, my insight was to give the algorithms the kind of training data that a child was given through experiences in both quantity and quality.
Once we know this, we knew we needed to collect a data set that has far more images than we have ever had before, perhaps thousands of times more, and together with Professor Kai Li at Princeton University, we launched the ImageNet project in 2007.
Luckily, we didn't have to mount a camera on our head and wait for many years.
We went to the Internet, the biggest treasure trove of pictures that humans have ever created.
We downloaded nearly a billion images and used crowdsourcing technology like the Amazon Mechanical Turk platform to help us to label these images.
At its peak, ImageNet was one of the biggest employers of the Amazon Mechanical Turk workers: together, almost 50,000 workers from 167 countries around the world helped us to clean, sort and label nearly a billion candidate images.
That was how much effort it took to capture even a fraction of the imagery a child's mind takes in in the early developmental years.
In hindsight, this idea of using big data to train computer algorithms may seem obvious now, but back in 2007, it was not so obvious.
We were fairly alone on this journey for quite a while.
Some very friendly colleagues advised me to do something more useful for my tenure, and we were constantly struggling for research funding.
Once, I even joked to my graduate students that I would just reopen my dry cleaner's shop to fund ImageNet.
After all, that's how I funded my college years.
So we carried on.
In 2009, the ImageNet project delivered a database of 15 million images across 22,000 classes of objects and things organized by everyday English words.
In both quantity and quality, this was an unprecedented scale.
As an example, in the case of cats, we have more than 62,000 cats of all kinds of looks and poses and across all species of domestic and wild cats.
We were thrilled to have put together ImageNet, and we wanted the whole research world to benefit from it, so in the TED fashion, we opened up the entire data set to the worldwide research community for free.
(Applause) Now that we have the data to nourish our computer brain, we're ready to come back to the algorithms themselves.
As it turned out, the wealth of information provided by ImageNet was a perfect match to a particular class of machine learning algorithms called convolutional neural network, pioneered by Kunihiko Fukushima, Geoff Hinton, and Yann LeCun back in the 1970s and '80s.
Just like the brain consists of billions of highly connected neurons, a basic operating unit in a neural network is a neuron-like node.
It takes input from other nodes and sends output to others.
Moreover, these hundreds of thousands or even millions of nodes are organized in hierarchical layers, also similar to the brain.
In a typical neural network we use to train our object recognition model, it has 24 million nodes, 140 million parameters, and 15 billion connections.
That's an enormous model.
Powered by the massive data from ImageNet and the modern CPUs and GPUs to train such a humongous model, the convolutional neural network blossomed in a way that no one expected.
It became the winning architecture to generate exciting new results in object recognition.
This is a computer telling us this picture contains a cat and where the cat is.
Of course there are more things than cats, so here's a computer algorithm telling us the picture contains a boy and a teddy bear; a dog, a person, and a small kite in the background; or a picture of very busy things like a man, a skateboard, railings, a lampost, and so on.
Sometimes, when the computer is not so confident about what it sees, we have taught it to be smart enough to give us a safe answer instead of committing too much, just like we would do, but other times our computer algorithm is remarkable at telling us what exactly the objects are, like the make, model, year of the cars.
We applied this algorithm to millions of Google Street View images across hundreds of American cities, and we have learned something really interesting: first, it confirmed our common wisdom that car prices correlate very well with household incomes.
But surprisingly, car prices also correlate well with crime rates in cities, or voting patterns by zip codes.
So wait a minute. Is that it?
Has the computer already matched or even surpassed human capabilities?
Not so fast.
So far, we have just taught the computer to see objects.
This is like a small child learning to utter a few nouns.
It's an incredible accomplishment, but it's only the first step.
Soon, another developmental milestone will be hit, and children begin to communicate in sentences.
So instead of saying this is a cat in the picture, you already heard the little girl telling us this is a cat lying on a bed.
So to teach a computer to see a picture and generate sentences, the marriage between big data and machine learning algorithm has to take another step.
Now, the computer has to learn from both pictures as well as natural language sentences generated by humans.
Just like the brain integrates vision and language, we developed a model that connects parts of visual things like visual snippets with words and phrases in sentences.
About four months ago, we finally tied all this together and produced one of the first computer vision models that is capable of generating a human-like sentence when it sees a picture for the first time.
Now, I'm ready to show you what the computer says when it sees the picture that the little girl saw at the beginning of this talk.
(Video) Computer: A man is standing next to an elephant.
A large airplane sitting on top of an airport runway.
FFL: Of course, we're still working hard to improve our algorithms, and it still has a lot to learn.
(Applause) And the computer still makes mistakes.
(Video) Computer: A cat lying on a bed in a blanket.
FFL: So of course, when it sees too many cats, it thinks everything might look like a cat.
(Video) Computer: A young boy is holding a baseball bat.
(Laughter) FFL: Or, if it hasn't seen a toothbrush, it confuses it with a baseball bat.
(Video) Computer: A man riding a horse down a street next to a building.
(Laughter) FFL: We haven't taught Art 101 to the computers.
(Video) Computer: A zebra standing in a field of grass.
FFL: And it hasn't learned to appreciate the stunning beauty of nature like you and I do.
So it has been a long journey.
To get from age zero to three was hard.
The real challenge is to go from three to 13 and far beyond.
Let me remind you with this picture of the boy and the cake again.
So far, we have taught the computer to see objects or even tell us a simple story when seeing a picture.
(Video) Computer: A person sitting at a table with a cake.
FFL: But there's so much more to this picture than just a person and a cake.
What the computer doesn't see is that this is a special Italian cake that's only served during Easter time.
The boy is wearing his favorite t-shirt given to him as a gift by his father after a trip to Sydney, and you and I can all tell how happy he is and what's exactly on his mind at that moment.
This is my son Leo.
On my quest for visual intelligence, I think of Leo constantly and the future world he will live in.
When machines can see, doctors and nurses will have extra pairs of tireless eyes to help them to diagnose and take care of patients.
Cars will run smarter and safer on the road.
Robots, not just humans, will help us to brave the disaster zones to save the trapped and wounded.
We will discover new species, better materials, and explore unseen frontiers with the help of the machines.
Little by little, we're giving sight to the machines.
First, we teach them to see.
Then, they help us to see better.
For the first time, human eyes won't be the only ones pondering and exploring our world.
We will not only use the machines for their intelligence, we will also collaborate with them in ways that we cannot even imagine.
This is my quest: to give computers visual intelligence and to create a better future for Leo and for the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"Where are you from?" said the pale, tattooed man.
"Where are you from?"
It's September 21, 2001, 10 days after the worst attack on America since World War II.
Everyone wonders about the next plane.
People are looking for scapegoats.
The president, the night before, pledges to "bring our enemies to justice or bring justice to our enemies."
And in the Dallas mini-mart, a Dallas mini-part surrounded by tire shops and strip joints a Bangladeshi immigrant works the register.
Back home, Raisuddin Bhuiyan was a big man, an Air Force officer.
But he dreamed of a fresh start in America.
If he had to work briefly in a mini-mart to save up for I.T. classes and his wedding in two months, so be it.
Then, on September 21, that tattooed man enters the mart.
He holds a shotgun.
Raisuddin knows the drill: puts cash on the counter.
This time, the man doesn't touch the money.
"Where are you from?" he asks.
"Excuse me?" Raisuddin answers.
His accent betrays him.
The tattooed man, a self-styled true American vigilante, shoots Raisuddin in revenge for 9/11.
Raisuddin feels millions of bees stinging his face.
In fact, dozens of scalding, birdshot pellets puncture his head.
Behind the counter, he lays in blood.
He cups a hand over his forehead to keep in the brains on which he'd gambled everything.
He recites verses from the Koran, begging his God to live.
He senses he is dying.
He didn't die.
His right eye left him.
His fiancée left him.
His landlord, the mini-mart owner, kicked him out.
Soon he was homeless and 60,000 dollars in medical debt, including a fee for dialing for an ambulance.
But Raisuddin lived.
And years later, he would ask what he could do to repay his God and become worthy of this second chance.
He would come to believe, in fact, that this chance called for him to give a second chance to a man we might think deserved no chance at all.
Twelve years ago, I was a fresh graduate seeking my way in the world.
Born in Ohio to Indian immigrants, I settled on the ultimate rebellion against my parents, moving to the country they had worked so damn hard to get out of.
What I thought might be a six-month stint in Mumbai stretched to six years.
I became a writer and found myself amid a magical story: the awakening of hope across much of the so-called Third World.
Six years ago, I returned to America and realized something: The American Dream was thriving, but only in India.
In America, not so much.
In fact, I observed that America was fracturing into two distinct societies: a republic of dreams and a republic of fears.
And then, I stumbled onto this incredible tale of two lives and of these two Americas that brutally collided in that Dallas mini-mart.
I knew at once I wanted to learn more, and eventually that I would write a book about them, for their story was the story of America's fracturing and of how it might be put back together.
After he was shot, Raisuddin's life grew no easier.
The day after admitting him, the hospital discharged him.
His right eye couldn't see.
He couldn't speak.
Metal peppered his face.
But he had no insurance, so they bounced him.
His family in Bangladesh begged him, "Come home."
But he told them he had a dream to see about.
He found telemarketing work, then he became an Olive Garden waiter, because where better to get over his fear of white people than the Olive Garden?
(Laughter) Now, as a devout Muslim, he refused alcohol, didn't touch the stuff.
Then he learned that not selling it would slash his pay.
So he reasoned, like a budding American pragmatist, "Well, God wouldn't want me to starve, would he?"
And before long, in some months, Raisuddin was that Olive Garden's highest grossing alcohol pusher.
He found a man who taught him database administration.
He got part-time I.T. gigs.
Eventually, he landed a six-figure job at a blue chip tech company in Dallas.
But as America began to work for Raisuddin, he avoided the classic error of the fortunate: assuming you're the rule, not the exception.
In fact, he observed that many with the fortune of being born American were nonetheless trapped in lives that made second chances like his impossible.
He saw it at the Olive Garden itself, where so many of his colleagues had childhood horror stories of family dysfunction, chaos, addiction, crime.
He'd heard a similar tale about the man who shot him back when he attended his trial.
The closer Raisuddin got to the America he had coveted from afar, the more he realized there was another, equally real, America that was stingier with second chances.
The man who shot Raisuddin grew up in that stingier America.
From a distance, Mark Stroman was always the spark of parties, always making girls feel pretty.
Always working, no matter what drugs or fights he'd had the night before.
But he'd always wrestled with demons.
He entered the world through the three gateways that doom so many young American men: bad parents, bad schools, bad prisons.
His mother told him, regretfully, as a boy that she'd been just 50 dollars short of aborting him.
Sometimes, that little boy would be at school, he'd suddenly pull a knife on his fellow classmates.
Sometimes that same little boy would be at his grandparents', tenderly feeding horses.
He was getting arrested before he shaved, first juvenile, then prison.
He became a casual white supremacist and, like so many around him, a drug-addled and absent father.
And then, before long, he found himself on death row, for in his 2001 counter-jihad, he had shot not one mini-mart clerk, but three.
Only Raisuddin survived.
Strangely, death row was the first institution that left Stroman better.
His old influences quit him.
The people entering his life were virtuous and caring: pastors, journalists, European pen-pals.
They listened to him, prayed with him, helped him question himself.
And sent him on a journey of introspection and betterment.
He finally faced the hatred that had defined his life.
He read Viktor Frankl, the Holocaust survivor and regretted his swastika tattoos.
He found God.
Then one day in 2011, 10 years after his crimes, Stroman received news.
One of the men he'd shot, the survivor, was fighting to save his life.
You see, late in 2009, eight years after that shooting, Raisuddin had gone on his own journey, a pilgrimage to Mecca.
Amid its crowds, he felt immense gratitude, but also duty.
He recalled promising God, as he lay dying in 2001, that if he lived, he would serve humanity all his days.
Then, he'd gotten busy relaying the bricks of a life.
Now it was time to pay his debts.
And he decided, upon reflection, that his method of payment would be an intervention in the cycle of vengeance between the Muslim and Western worlds.
And how would he intervene?
By forgiving Stroman publicly in the name of Islam and its doctrine of mercy.
And then suing the state of Texas and its governor Rick Perry to prevent them from executing Stroman, exactly like most people shot in the face do.
(Laughter) Yet Raisuddin's mercy was inspired not only by faith.
A newly minted American citizen, he had come to believe that Stroman was the product of a hurting America that couldn't just be lethally injected away.
That insight is what moved me to write my book "The True American."
This immigrant begging America to be as merciful to a native son as it had been to an adopted one.
In the mini-mart, all those years earlier, not just two men, but two Americas collided.
An America that still dreams, still strives, still imagines that tomorrow can build on today, and an America that has resigned to fate, buckled under stress and chaos, lowered expectations, an ducked into the oldest of refuges: the tribal fellowship of one's own narrow kind.
And it was Raisuddin, despite being a newcomer, despite being attacked, despite being homeless and traumatized, who belonged to that republic of dreams and Stroman who belonged to that other wounded country, despite being born with the privilege of a native white man.
I realized these men's stories formed an urgent parable about America.
The country I am so proud to call my own wasn't living through a generalized decline as seen in Spain or Greece, where prospects were dimming for everyone.
America is simultaneously the most and the least successful country in the industrialized world.
Launching the world's best companies, even as record numbers of children go hungry.
Seeing life-expectancy drop for large groups, even as it polishes the world's best hospitals.
America today is a sprightly young body, hit by one of those strokes that sucks the life from one side, while leaving the other worryingly perfect.
On July 20, 2011, right after a sobbing Raisuddin testified in defense of Stroman's life, Stroman was killed by lethal injection by the state he so loved.
Hours earlier, when Raisuddin still thought he could still save Stroman, the two men got to speak for the second time ever.
Here is an excerpt from their phone call.
Raisuddin: "Mark, you should know that I am praying for God, the most compassionate and gracious.
I forgive you and I do not hate you.
I never hated you."
Stroman: "You are a remarkable person.
Thank you from my heart.
I love you, bro."
Even more amazingly, after the execution, Raisuddin reached out to Stroman's eldest daughter, Amber, an ex-convinct and an addict.
and offered his help.
"You may have lost a father," he told her, "but you've gained an uncle."
He wanted her, too, to have a second chance.
If human history were a parade, America's float would be a neon shrine to second chances.
But America, generous with second chances to the children of other lands, today grows miserly with first chances to the children of its own.
America still dazzles at allowing anybody to become an American.
But it is losing its luster at allowing every American to become a somebody.
Over the last decade, seven million foreigners gained American citizenship.
Remarkable.
In the meanwhile, how many Americans gained a place in the middle class?
Actually, the net influx was negative.
Go back further, and it's even more striking: Since the 60s, the middle class has shrunk by 20 percent, mainly because of the people tumbling out of it.
And my reporting around the country tells me the problem is grimmer than simple inequality.
What I observe is a pair of secessions from the unifying center of American life.
An affluent secession of up, up and away, into elite enclaves of the educated and into a global matrix of work, money and connections, and an impoverished secession of down and out into disconnected, dead-end lives that the fortunate scarcely see.
And don't console yourself that you are the 99 percent.
If you live near a Whole Foods, if no one in your family serves in the military, if you're paid by the year, not the hour, if most people you know finished college, if no one you know uses meth, if you married once and remain married, if you're not one of 65 million Americans with a criminal record -- if any or all of these things describe you, then accept the possibility that actually, you may not know what's going on and you may be part of the problem.
Other generations had to build a fresh society after slavery, pull through a depression, defeat fascism, freedom-ride in Mississippi.
The moral challenge of my generation, I believe, is to reacquaint these two Americas, to choose union over secession once again.
This ins't a problem we can tax or tax-cut away.
It won't be solved by tweeting harder, building slicker apps, or starting one more artisanal coffee roasting service.
It is a moral challenge that begs each of us in the flourishing America to take on the wilting America as our own, as Raisuddin tried to do.
Like him, we can make pilgrimages.
And there, in Baltimore and Oregon and Appalachia, find new purpose, as he did.
We can immerse ourselves in that other country, bear witness to its hopes and sorrows, and, like Raisuddin, ask what we can do.
What can you do?
What can you do?
What can we do?
How might we build a more merciful country?
We, the greatest inventors in the world, can invent solutions to the problems of that America, not only our own.
We, the writers and the journalists, can cover that America's stories, instead of shutting down bureaus in its midst.
We can finance that America's ideas, instead of ideas from New York and San Francisco.
We can put our stethoscopes to its backs, teach there, go to court there, make there, live there, pray there.
This, I believe, is the calling of a generation.
An America whose two halves learn again to stride, to plow, to forge, to dare together.
A republic of chances, rewoven, renewed, begins with us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
♫ Jill Sobule: At a conference in Monterey by the big, big jellyfish tank, ♫ ♫ I first saw you and I got so shy. ♫ ♫ You see, I was a little paranoid 'cause I might have been high. ♫ ♫ And I hadn't done that in ages and I won't do that again. ♫ ♫ But that's another story. ♫ ♫ Loved you forever and I've been a big fan, ♫ ♫ the one-woman shows, I even rented "Pat." ♫ ♫ I got enough nerve to come up to you, ♫ ♫ but little did I know one year later we'd be doing this show. ♫ ♫ I sing. Julia Sweeney: I tell stories. Together: The Jill and Julia Show. ♫ ♫ Sobule: Sometimes it works. Sweeney: Sometimes it doesn't. ♫ ♫ Together: The Jill and Julia Show. ♫ ♫ Sweeney: At a conference in Monterey next to the big, big jellyfish tank, ♫ ♫ I first saw you and I wasn't so shy. ♫ I made a beeline for you and told you what a huge fan I was ever since I was writing that pilot for Fox, and Wendy and I wanted you to do the theme song.
And then the pilot didn't go and I was so sad, but I kept remaining a fan of yours.
And then when I went through that big, horrible breakup with Carl and I couldn't get off the couch, I listened to your song, ♫ "Now That I Don't Have You," ♫ over and over and over and over again.
And I can't believe you're here and that I'm meeting you here at TED.
And also, I can't believe that we're eating sushi in front of the fish tank, which, personally, I think is really inappropriate.
(Laughter) (Applause) And little did I know that one year later ... ♫ we'd be doing this show. ♫ ♫ Sobule: I sing. Sweeney: I tell stories. Together: The Jill and Julia Show. ♫ Sobule: Hey, they asked us back! Sweeney: Can you stand it?!
♫ Together: The Jill and Julia, the Jill and Julia, the Jill and Julia Show. ♫ ♫ Sobule: Why are all our heroes so imperfect? ♫ ♫ Why do they always bring me down? ♫ ♫ Why are all our heroes so imperfect? ♫ ♫ Statue in the park has lost his crown. ♫ ♫ William Faulkner, drunk and depressed. ♫ Sweeney: Mmm.
♫ Dorothy Parker, mean, drunk and depressed. ♫ Sweeney: I know.
♫ And that guy, "Seven Years in Tibet," turned out to be a Nazi. ♫ Sweeney: Yeah.
♫ Founding fathers all had slaves. ♫ Sweeney: I know.
♫ The explorers slaughtered the braves. ♫ Sweeney: Horribly.
♫ Sobule: The Old Testament God can be so petty. ♫ Sweeney: Don't get me started on that. (Laughter) ♫ Sobule: Paul McCartney, jealous of John, even more so now that he's gone. ♫ ♫ Dylan was so mean to Donovan in that movie. ♫ ♫ Pablo Picasso, cruel to his wives. ♫ Sweeney: Horrible.
♫ Sobule: My favorite poets took their own lives. ♫ ♫ Orson Welles peaked at twenty-five, below before our eyes. ♫ ♫ And he sold bad wine. ♫ ♫ Together: Why are all our heroes so imperfect? Yeah ♫ ♫ Why do they always bring me down? ♫ ♫ Sobule: Heard Babe Ruth was full of malice. ♫ Sweeney: Oh.
♫ Lewis Carroll I'm sure did Alice. ♫ Sweeney: What?!
♫ Plato in the cave with those very young boys. ♫ Sweeney: Ooh...
♫ Sobule: Hillary supported the war. ♫ ♫ Sweeney: Even Thomas Friedman supported the war. ♫ (Laughter) ♫ Sobule: Colin Powell turned out to be ... Together: ... such a pussy. ♫ (Laughter) (Applause) ♫ Sobule: William Faulkner, drunk and depressed, ♫ ♫ Tennessee Williams, drunk and depressed. ♫ Sweeney: Yeah.
♫ Sobule: Take it, Julia. ♫ Sweeney: Okay. Oprah was never necessarily a big hero of mine.
I mean, I watch Oprah mostly when I'm home in Spokane visiting my mother. And to my mother, Oprah is a greater moral authority than the Pope, which is actually saying something because she's a devout Catholic.
Anyway, I like Oprah -- I like her girlfriendy-ness, I like her weight issues, I like how she's transformed talk television, I like how she's brought reading back to America -- but there was something that happened the last two weeks that was ... I call it the Soon-Yi moment: it is the moment when I cannot continue supporting someone.
And that was that she did two entire shows promoting that movie "The Secret."
Do you guys know about that movie "The Secret"?
It makes "What the Bleep Do We Know" seem like a doctoral dissertation from Harvard on quantum mechanics -- that's how bad it is.
It makes "The DaVinci Code" seem like "War and Peace."
That movie is so horrible. It promotes such awful pseudoscience.
And the basic idea is that there's this law of attraction, and your thoughts have this vibrating energy that goes out into the universe and then you attract good things to happen to you.
On a scientific basis, it's more than just "Power of Positive Thinking" -- it has a horrible, horrible dark side. Like if you get ill, it's because you've just been thinking negative thoughts.
Yeah, stuff like that was in the movie and she's promoting it.
And all I'm saying is that I really wish that Murray Gell-Mann would go on Oprah and just explain to her that the law of attraction is, in fact, not a law.
So that's what I have to say.
(Laughter) (Applause) ♫ Sobule: I sing. Sweeney: I tell stories. Together: The Jill and Julia Show. ♫ ♫ Sobule: Sometimes it works. Sweeney: Sometimes it doesn't. ♫ ♫ Together: The Jill and Julia, the Jill and Julia, the Jill and Julia Show. ♫ (Applause)
I'm a potter, which seems like a fairly humble vocation.
I know a lot about pots.
I've spent about 15 years making them.
One of the things that really excites me in my artistic practice and being trained as a potter is that you very quickly learn how to make great things out of nothing; that I spent a lot of time at my wheel with mounds of clay trying stuff; and that the limitations of my capacity, my ability, was based on my hands and my imagination; that if I wanted to make a really nice bowl and I didn't know how to make a foot yet, I would have to learn how to make a foot; that that process of learning has been very, very helpful to my life.
I feel like, as a potter, you also start to learn how to shape the world.
There have been times in my artistic capacity that I wanted to reflect on other really important moments in the history of the U.S., the history of the world where tough things happened, but how do you talk about tough ideas without separating people from that content?
Could I use art like these old, discontinued firehoses from Alabama, to talk about the complexities of a moment of civil rights in the '60s?
Is it possible to talk about my father and I doing labor projects?
My dad was a roofer, construction guy, he owned small businesses, and at 80, he was ready to retire and his tar kettle was my inheritance.
Now, a tar kettle doesn't sound like much of an inheritance. It wasn't.
It was stinky and it took up a lot of space in my studio, but I asked my dad if he would be willing to make some art with me, if we could reimagine this kind of nothing material as something very special.
And by elevating the material and my dad's skill, could we start to think about tar just like clay, in a new way, shaping it differently, helping us to imagine what was possible?
After clay, I was then kind of turned on to lots of different kinds of materials, and my studio grew a lot because I thought, well, it's not really about the material, it's about our capacity to shape things.
I became more and more interested in ideas and more and more things that were happening just outside my studio.
Just to give you a little bit of context, I live in Chicago.
I live on the South Side now. I'm a West Sider.
For those of you who are not Chicagoans, that won't mean anything, but if I didn't mention that I was a West Sider, there would be a lot of people in the city that would be very upset.
The neighborhood that I live in is Grand Crossing.
It's a neighborhood that has seen better days.
It is not a gated community by far.
There is lots of abandonment in my neighborhood, and while I was kind of busy making pots and busy making art and having a good art career, there was all of this stuff that was happening just outside my studio.
All of us know about failing housing markets and the challenges of blight, and I feel like we talk about it with some of our cities more than others, but I think a lot of our U.S. cities and beyond have the challenge of blight, abandoned buildings that people no longer know what to do anything with.
And so I thought, is there a way that I could start to think about these buildings as an extension or an expansion of my artistic practice?
And that if I was thinking along with other creatives -- architects, engineers, real estate finance people -- that us together might be able to kind of think in more complicated ways about the reshaping of cities.
And so I bought a building.
The building was really affordable.
We tricked it out.
We made it as beautiful as we could to try to just get some activity happening on my block.
Once I bought the building for about 18,000 dollars, I didn't have any money left.
So I started sweeping the building as a kind of performance.
This is performance art, and people would come over, and I would start sweeping.
Because the broom was free and sweeping was free.
It worked out.
(Laughter) But we would use the building, then, to stage exhibitions, small dinners, and we found that that building on my block, Dorchester -- we now referred to the block as Dorchester projects -- that in a way that building became a kind of gathering site for lots of different kinds of activity.
We turned the building into what we called now the Archive House.
The Archive House would do all of these amazing things.
Very significant people in the city and beyond would find themselves in the middle of the hood.
And that's when I felt like maybe there was a relationship between my history with clay and this new thing that was starting to develop, that we were slowly starting to reshape how people imagined the South Side of the city.
One house turned into a few houses, and we always tried to suggest that not only is creating a beautiful vessel important, but the contents of what happens in those buildings is also very important.
So we were not only thinking about development, but we were thinking about the program, thinking about the kind of connections that could happen between one house and another, between one neighbor and another.
This building became what we call the Listening House, and it has a collection of discarded books from the Johnson Publishing Corporation, and other books from an old bookstore that was going out of business.
I was actually just wanting to activate these buildings as much as I could with whatever and whoever would join me.
In Chicago, there's amazing building stock.
This building, which had been the former crack house on the block, and when the building became abandoned, it became a great opportunity to really imagine what else could happen there.
So this space we converted into what we call Black Cinema House.
Black Cinema House was an opportunity in the hood to screen films that were important and relevant to the folk who lived around me, that if we wanted to show an old Melvin Van Peebles film, we could.
If we wanted to show "Car Wash," we could.
That would be awesome.
The building we soon outgrew, and we had to move to a larger space.
Black Cinema House, which was made from just a small piece of clay, had to grow into a much larger piece of clay, which is now my studio.
What I realized was that for those of you who are zoning junkies, that some of the things that I was doing in these buildings that had been left behind, they were not the uses by which the buildings were built, and that there are city policies that say, "Hey, a house that is residential needs to stay residential."
But what do you do in neighborhoods when ain't nobody interested in living there?
That the people who have the means to leave have already left?
What do we do with these abandoned buildings?
And so I was trying to wake them up using culture.
We found that that was so exciting for folk, and people were so responsive to the work, that we had to then find bigger buildings.
By the time we found bigger buildings, there was, in part, the resources necessary to think about those things.
In this bank that we called the Arts Bank, it was in pretty bad shape.
There was about six feet of standing water.
It was a difficult project to finance, because banks weren't interested in the neighborhood because people weren't interested in the neighborhood because nothing had happened there.
It was dirt. It was nothing. It was nowhere.
And so we just started imagining, what else could happen in this building?
(Applause) And so now that the rumor of my block has spread, and lots of people are starting to visit, we've found that the bank can now be a center for exhibition, archives, music performance, and that there are people who are now interested in being adjacent to those buildings because we brought some heat, that we kind of made a fire.
One of the archives that we'll have there is this Johnson Publishing Corporation.
We've also started to collect memorabilia from American history, from people who live or have lived in that neighborhood.
Some of these images are degraded images of black people, kind of histories of very challenging content, and where better than a neighborhood with young people who are constantly asking themselves about their identity to talk about some of the complexities of race and class?
In some ways, the bank represents a hub, that we're trying to create a pretty hardcore node of cultural activity, and that if we could start to make multiple hubs and connect some cool green stuff around there, that the buildings that we've purchased and rehabbed, which is now around 60 or 70 units, that if we could land miniature Versailles on top of that, and connect these buildings by a beautiful greenbelt -- (Applause) -- that this place where people never wanted to be would become an important destination for folk from all over the country and world.
In some ways, it feels very much like I'm a potter, that we tackle the things that are at our wheel, we try with the skill that we have to think about this next bowl that I want to make.
And it went from a bowl to a singular house to a block to a neighborhood to a cultural district to thinking about the city, and at every point, there were things that I didn't know that I had to learn.
I've never learned so much about zoning law in my life.
I never thought I'd have to.
But as a result of that, I'm finding that there's not just room for my own artistic practice, there's room for a lot of other artistic practices.
So people started asking us, "Well, Theaster, how are you going to go to scale?"
and, "What's your sustainability plan?"
(Laughter) (Applause) And what I found was that I couldn't export myself, that what seems necessary in cities like Akron, Ohio, and Detroit, Michigan, and Gary, Indiana, is that there are people in those places who already believe in those places, that are already dying to make those places beautiful, and that often, those people who are passionate about a place are disconnected from the resources necessary to make cool things happen, or disconnected from a contingency of people that could help make things happen.
So now, we're starting to give advice around the country on how to start with what you got, how to start with the things that are in front of you, how to make something out of nothing, how to reshape your world at a wheel or at your block or at the scale of the city.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) June Cohen: Thank you. So I think many people watching this will be asking themselves the question you just raised at the end: How can they do this in their own city?
You can't export yourself.
Give us a few pages out of your playbook about what someone who is inspired about their city can do to take on projects like yours?
Theaster Gates: One of the things I've found that's really important is giving thought to not just the kind of individual project, like an old house, but what's the relationship between an old house, a local school, a small bodega, and is there some kind of synergy between those things?
Can you get those folk talking?
I've found that in cases where neighborhoods have failed, they still often have a pulse.
How do you identify the pulse in that place, the passionate people, and then how do you get folk who have been fighting, slogging for 20 years, reenergized about the place that they live?
And so someone has to do that work.
If I were a traditional developer, I would be talking about buildings alone, and then putting a "For Lease" sign in the window.
I think that you actually have to curate more than that, that there's a way in which you have to be mindful about, what are the businesses that I want to grow here?
And then, are there people who live in this place who want to grow those businesses with me?
Because I think it's not just a cultural space or housing; there has to be the recreation of an economic core.
So thinking about those things together feels right.
JC: It's hard to get people to create the spark again when people have been slogging for 20 years.
Are there any methods you've found that have helped break through?
TG: Yeah, I think that now there are lots of examples of folk who are doing amazing work, but those methods are sometimes like, when the media is constantly saying that only violent things happen in a place, then based on your skill set and the particular context, what are the things that you can do in your neighborhood to kind of fight some of that?
So I've found that if you're a theater person, you have outdoor street theater festivals.
In some cases, we don't have the resources in certain neighborhoods to do things that are a certain kind of splashy, but if we can then find ways of making sure that people who are local to a place, plus people who could be supportive of the things that are happening locally, when those people get together, I think really amazing things can happen.
JC: So interesting.
And how can you make sure that the projects you're creating are actually for the disadvantaged and not just for the sort of vegetarian indie movie crowd that might move in to take advantage of them.
TG: Right on. So I think this is where it starts to get into the thick weeds.
JC: Let's go there. TG: Right now, Grand Crossing is 99 percent black, or at least living, and we know that maybe who owns property in a place is different from who walks the streets every day.
So it's reasonable to say that Grand Crossing is already in the process of being something different than it is today.
But are there ways to think about housing trusts or land trusts or a mission-based development that starts to protect some of the space that happens, because when you have 7,500 empty lots in a city, you want something to happen there, but you need entities that are not just interested in the development piece, but entities that are interested in the stabilization piece, and I feel like often the developer piece is really motivated, but the other work of a kind of neighborhood consciousness, that part doesn't live anymore.
So how do you start to grow up important watchdogs that ensure that the resources that are made available to new folk that are coming in are also distributed to folk who have lived in a place for a long time.
JC: That makes so much sense. One more question: You make such a compelling case for beauty and the importance of beauty and the arts.
There would be others who would argue that funds would be better spent on basic services for the disadvantaged.
How do you combat that viewpoint, or come against it?
TG: I believe that beauty is a basic service.
(Applause) Often what I have found is that when there are resources that have not been made available to certain under-resourced cities or neighborhoods or communities, that sometimes culture is the thing that helps to ignite, and that I can't do everything, but I think that there's a way in which if you can start with culture and get people kind of reinvested in their place, other kinds of adjacent amenities start to grow, and then people can make a demand that's a poetic demand, and the political demands that are necessary to wake up our cities, they also become very poetic.
JC: It makes perfect sense to me.
Theaster, thank you so much for being here with us today.
Thank you. Theaster Gates.
(Applause)
People back home call me a heckler, a troublemaker, an irritant, a rebel, an activist, the voice of the people.
But that wasn't always me.
Growing up, I had a nickname.
They used to call me Softy, meaning the soft, harmless boy.
Like every other human being, I avoided trouble.
In my childhood, they taught me silence.
Don't argue, do as you're told.
In Sunday school, they taught me don't confront, don't argue, even if you're right, turn the other cheek.
This was reinforced by the political climate of the time.
(Laughter) Kenya is a country where you are guilty until proven rich.
(Laughter) Kenya's poor are five times more likely to be shot dead by the police who are meant to protect them than by criminals.
This was reinforced by the political climate of the day.
We had a president, Moi, who was a dictator.
He ruled the country with an iron fist, and anyone who dared question his authority was arrested, tortured, jailed or even killed.
That meant that people were taught to be smart cowards, stay out of trouble.
Being a coward was not an insult.
Being a coward was a compliment.
We used to be told that a coward goes home to his mother.
What that meant: that if you stayed out of trouble you're going to stay alive.
I used to question this advice, and eight years ago we had an election in Kenya, and the results were violently disputed.
What followed that election was terrible violence, rape, and the killing of over 1,000 people.
My work was to document the violence.
As a photographer, I took thousands of images, and after two months, the two politicians came together, had a cup of tea, signed a peace agreement, and the country moved on.
I was a very disturbed man because I saw the violence firsthand.
I saw the killings. I saw the displacement.
I met women who had been raped, and it disturbed me, but the country never spoke about it.
We pretended. We all became smart cowards.
We decided to stay out of trouble and not talk about it.
Ten months later, I quit my job. I said I could not stand it anymore.
After quitting my job, I decided to organize my friends to speak about the violence in the country, to speak about the state of the nation, and June 1, 2009 was the day that we were meant to go to the stadium and try and get the president's attention.
It's a national holiday, it's broadcast across the country, and I showed up at the stadium.
My friends did not show up.
I found myself alone, and I didn't know what to do.
I was scared, but I knew very well that that particular day, I had to make a decision.
Was I able to live as a coward, like everyone else, or was I going to make a stand?
And when the president stood up to speak, I found myself on my feet shouting at the president, telling him to remember the post-election violence victims, to stop the corruption.
And suddenly, out of nowhere, the police pounced on me like hungry lions.
They held my mouth and dragged me out of the stadium, where they thoroughly beat me up and locked me up in jail.
I spent that night in a cold cement floor in the jail, and that got me thinking.
What was making me feel this way?
My friends and family thought I was crazy because of what I did, and the images that I took were disturbing my life.
The images that I took were just a number to many Kenyans.
Most Kenyans did not see the violence.
It was a story to them.
And so I decided to actually start a street exhibition to show the images of the violence across the country and get people talking about it.
We traveled the country and showed the images, and this was a journey that has started me to the activist path, where I decided to become silent no more, to talk about those things.
We traveled, and our general site from our street exhibit became for political graffiti about the situation in the country, talking about corruption, bad leadership.
We have even done symbolic burials.
We have delivered live pigs to Kenya's parliament as a symbol of our politicians' greed.
It has been done in Uganda and other countries, and what is most powerful is that the images have been picked by the media and amplified across the country, across the continent.
Where I used to stand up alone seven years ago, now I belong to a community of many people who stand up with me.
I am no longer alone when I stand up to speak about these things.
I belong to a group of young people who are passionate about the country, who want to bring about change, and they're no longer afraid, and they're no longer smart cowards.
So that was my story.
That day in the stadium, I stood up as a smart coward.
By that one action, I said goodbye to the 24 years living as a coward.
There are two most powerful days in your life: the day you're born, and the day you discover why.
That day standing up in that stadium shouting at the President, I discovered why I was truly born, that I would no longer be silent in the face of injustice.
Do you know why you were born?
Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: It's an amazing story.
I just want to ask you a couple quick questions.
So PAWA254: you've created a studio, a place where young people can go and harness the power of digital media to do some of this action.
What's happening now with PAWA?
Boniface Mwangi: So we have this community of filmmakers, graffiti artists, musicians, and when there's an issue in the country, we come together, we brainstorm, and take up on that issue.
So our most powerful tool is art, because we live in a very busy world where people are so busy in their life, and they don't have time to read.
So we package our activism and we package our message in art.
So from the music, the graffiti, the art, that's what we do.
Can I say one more thing?
TR: Yeah, of course. (Applause) BM: In spite of being arrested, beaten up, threatened, the moment I discovered my voice, that I could actually stand up for what I really believed in, I'm no longer afraid.
I used to be called softy, but I'm no longer softy, because I discovered who I really am, as in, that's what I want to do, and there's such beauty in doing that.
There's nothing as powerful as that, knowing that I'm meant to do this, because you don't get scared, you just continue living your life.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Tonight, I'm going to try to make the case that inviting a loved one, a friend or even a stranger to record a meaningful interview with you just might turn out to be one of the most important moments in that person's life, and in yours.
When I was 22 years old, I was lucky enough to find my calling when I fell into making radio stories.
At almost the exact same time, I found out that my dad, who I was very, very close to, was gay.
I was taken completely by surprise.
We were a very tight-knit family, and I was crushed.
At some point, in one of our strained conversations, my dad mentioned the Stonewall riots.
He told me that one night in 1969, a group of young black and Latino drag queens fought back against the police at a gay bar in Manhattan called the Stonewall Inn, and how this sparked the modern gay rights movement.
It was an amazing story, and it piqued my interest.
So I decided to pick up my tape recorder and find out more.
With the help of a young archivist named Michael Shirker, we tracked down all of the people we could find who had been at the Stonewall Inn that night.
Recording these interviews, I saw how the microphone gave me the license to go places I otherwise never would have gone and talk to people I might not otherwise ever have spoken to.
I had the privilege of getting to know some of the most amazing, fierce and courageous human beings I had ever met.
It was the first time the story of Stonewall had been told to a national audience.
I dedicated the program to my dad, it changed my relationship with him, and it changed my life.
Over the next 15 years, I made many more radio documentaries, working to shine a light on people who are rarely heard from in the media.
Over and over again, I'd see how this simple act of being interviewed could mean so much to people, particularly those who had been told that their stories didn't matter.
I could literally see people's back straighten as they started to speak into the microphone.
In 1998, I made a documentary about the last flophouse hotels on the Bowery in Manhattan.
Guys stayed up in these cheap hotels for decades.
They lived in cubicles the size of prison cells covered with chicken wire so you couldn't jump from one room into the next.
Later, I wrote a book on the men with the photographer Harvey Wang.
I remember walking into a flophouse with an early version of the book and showing one of the guys his page.
He stood there staring at it in silence, then he grabbed the book out of my hand and started running down the long, narrow hallway holding it over his head shouting, "I exist! I exist."
(Applause) In many ways, "I exist" became the clarion call for StoryCorps, this crazy idea that I had a dozen years ago.
The thought was to take documentary work and turn it on its head.
Traditionally, broadcast documentary has been about recording interviews to create a work of art or entertainment or education that is seen or heard by a whole lot of people, but I wanted to try something where the interview itself was the purpose of this work, and see if we could give many, many, many people the chance to be listened to in this way.
So in Grand Central Terminal 11 years ago, we built a booth where anyone can come to honor someone else by interviewing them about their life.
You come to this booth and you're met by a facilitator who brings you inside.
You sit across from, say, your grandfather for close to an hour and you listen and you talk.
Many people think of it as, if this was to be our last conversation, what would I want to ask of and say to this person who means so much to me?
At the end of the session, you walk away with a copy of the interview and another copy goes to the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress so that your great-great-great-grandkids can someday get to know your grandfather through his voice and story.
So we open this booth in one of the busiest places in the world and invite people to have this incredibly intimate conversation with another human being.
I had no idea if it would work, but from the very beginning, it did.
People treated the experience with incredible respect, and amazing conversations happened inside.
I want to play just one animated excerpt from an interview recorded at that original Grand Central Booth.
This is 12-year-old Joshua Littman interviewing his mother, Sarah.
Josh has Asperger's syndrome.
As you may know, kids with Asperger's are incredibly smart but have a tough time socially.
They usually have obsessions.
In Josh's case, it's with animals, so this is Josh talking with his mom Sarah at Grand Central nine years ago.
(Video) Josh Littman: From a scale of one to 10, do you think your life would be different without animals?
Sarah Littman: I think it would be an eight without animals, because they add so much pleasure to life.
JL: How else do you think your life would be different without them?
SL: I could do without things like cockroaches and snakes.
JL: Well, I'm okay with snakes as long as they're not venomous or constrict you or anything.
SL: Yeah, I'm not a big snake person -- JL: But cockroach is just the insect we love to hate.
SL: Yeah, it really is.
JL: Have you ever thought you couldn't cope with having a child?
SL: I remember when you were a baby, you had really bad colic, so you would just cry and cry.
JL: What's colic? SL: It's when you get this stomach ache and all you do is scream for, like, four hours.
JL: Even louder than Amy does?
SL: You were pretty loud, but Amy's was more high-pitched.
JL: I think it feels like everyone seems to like Amy more, like she's the perfect little angel.
SL: Well, I can understand why you think that people like Amy more, and I'm not saying it's because of your Asperger's syndrome, but being friendly comes easily to Amy, whereas I think for you it's more difficult, but the people who take the time to get to know you love you so much.
JL: Like Ben or Eric or Carlos? SL: Yeah -- JL: Like I have better quality friends but less quantity? (Laughter) SL: I wouldn't judge the quality, but I think -- JL: I mean, first it was like, Amy loved Claudia, then she hated Claudia, she loved Claudia, then she hated Claudia.
SL: Part of that's a girl thing, honey.
The important thing for you is that you have a few very good friends, and really that's what you need in life.
JL: Did I turn out to be the son you wanted when I was born?
Did I meet your expectations?
SL: You've exceeded my expectations, sweetie, because, sure, you have these fantasies of what your child's going to be like, but you have made me grow so much as a parent, because you think -- JL: Well, I was the one who made you a parent.
SL: You were the one who made me a parent. That's a good point. (Laughter) But also because you think differently from what they tell you in the parenting books, I really had to learn to think outside of the box with you, and it's made me much more creative as a parent and as a person, and I'll always thank you for that.
JL: And that helped when Amy was born?
SL: And that helped when Amy was born, but you are so incredibly special to me and I'm so lucky to have you as my son.
(Applause) David Isay: After this story ran on public radio, Josh received hundreds of letters telling him what an amazing kid he was.
His mom, Sarah, bound them together in a book, and when Josh got picked on at school, they would read the letters together.
I just want to acknowledge that two of my heroes are here with us tonight.
Sarah Littman and her son Josh, who is now an honors student in college.
(Applause) You know, a lot of people talk about crying when they hear StoryCorps stories, and it's not because they're sad.
Most of them aren't.
I think it's because you're hearing something authentic and pure at this moment, when sometimes it's hard to tell what's real and what's an advertisement.
It's kind of the anti-reality TV.
Nobody comes to StoryCorps to get rich.
Nobody comes to get famous.
It's simply an act of generosity and love.
So many of these are just everyday people talking about lives lived with kindness, courage, decency and dignity, and when you hear that kind of story, it can sometimes feel like you're walking on holy ground.
So this experiment in Grand Central worked, and we expanded across the country.
Today, more than 100,000 people in all 50 states in thousands of cities and towns across America have recorded StoryCorps interviews.
It's now the largest single collection of human voices ever gathered.
(Applause) We've hired and trained hundreds of facilitators to help guide people through the experience.
Most serve a year or two with StoryCorps traveling the country, gathering the wisdom of humanity.
They call it bearing witness, and if you ask them, all of the facilitators will tell you that the most important thing they've learned from being present during these interviews is that people are basically good.
And I think for the first years of StoryCorps, you could argue that there was some kind of a selection bias happening, but after tens of thousands of interviews with every kind of person in every part of the country -- rich, poor, five years old to 105, 80 different languages, across the political spectrum -- you have to think that maybe these guys are actually onto something.
I've also learned so much from these interviews.
I've learned about the poetry and the wisdom and the grace that can be found in the words of people all around us when we simply take the time to listen, like this interview between a betting clerk in Brooklyn named Danny Perasa who brought his wife Annie to StoryCorps to talk about his love for her.
(Audio) Danny Perasa: You see, the thing of it is, I always feel guilty when I say "I love you" to you.
And I say it so often. I say it to remind you that as dumpy as I am, it's coming from me.
It's like hearing a beautiful song from a busted old radio, and it's nice of you to keep the radio around the house.
Annie Perasa: If I don't have a note on the kitchen table, I think there's something wrong.
You write a love letter to me every morning.
DP: Well, the only thing that could possibly be wrong is I couldn't find a silly pen.
AP: To my princess: The weather outside today is extremely rainy.
I'll call you at 11:20 in the morning.
DP: It's a romantic weather report.
AP: And I love you. I love you. I love you.
DP: When a guy is happily married, no matter what happens at work, no matter what happens in the rest of the day, there's a shelter when you get home, there's a knowledge knowing that you can hug somebody without them throwing you downstairs and saying, "Get your hands off me."
Being married is like having a color television set.
You never want to go back to black and white.
(Laughter) DI: Danny was about five feet tall with crossed eyes and one single snaggletooth, but Danny Perasa had more romance in his little pinky than all of Hollywood's leading men put together.
What else have I learned?
I've learned about the almost unimaginable capacity for the human spirit to forgive.
I've learned about resilience and I've learned about strength.
Like an interview with Oshea Israel and Mary Johnson.
When Oshea was a teenager, he murdered Mary's only son, Laramiun Byrd, in a gang fight.
A dozen years later, Mary went to prison to meet Oshea and find out who this person was who had taken her son's life.
Slowly and remarkably, they became friends, and when he was finally released from the penitentiary, Oshea actually moved in next door to Mary.
This is just a short excerpt of a conversation they had soon after Oshea was freed.
(Video) Mary Johnson: My natural son is no longer here.
I didn't see him graduate, and now you're going to college.
I'll have the opportunity to see you graduate.
I didn't see him get married.
Hopefully one day, I'll be able to experience that with you.
Oshea Israel: Just to hear you say those things and to be in my life in the manner in which you are is my motivation.
It motivates me to make sure that I stay on the right path.
You still believe in me, and the fact that you can do it despite how much pain I caused you, it's amazing.
MJ: I know it's not an easy thing to be able to share our story together, even with us sitting here looking at each other right now.
I know it's not an easy thing, so I admire that you can do this.
OI: I love you, lady. MJ: I love you too, son.
(Applause) DI: And I've been reminded countless times of the courage and goodness of people, and how the arc of history truly does bend towards justice.
Like the story of Alexis Martinez, who was born Arthur Martinez in the Harold Ickes projects in Chicago.
In the interview, she talks with her daughter Lesley about joining a gang as a young man, and later in life transitioning into the woman she was always meant to be.
This is Alexis and her daughter Lesley.
(Audio) Alexis Martinez: One of the most difficult things for me was I was always afraid that I wouldn't be allowed to be in my granddaughters' lives, and you blew that completely out of the water, you and your husband.
One of the fruits of that is, in my relationship with my granddaughters, they fight with each other sometimes over whether I'm he or she.
Lesley Martinez: But they're free to talk about it.
AM: They're free to talk about it, but that, to me, is a miracle.
LM: You don't have to apologize. You don't have to tiptoe.
We're not going to cut you off, and that's something I've always wanted you to just know, that you're loved.
AM: You know, I live this every day now.
I walk down the streets as a woman, and I really am at peace with who I am.
I mean, I wish I had a softer voice maybe, but now I walk in love and I try to live that way every day.
DI: Now I walk in love.
I'm going to tell you a secret about StoryCorps.
It takes some courage to have these conversations.
StoryCorps speaks to our mortality.
Participants know this recording will be heard long after they're gone.
There's a hospice doctor named Ira Byock who has worked closely with us on recording interviews with people who are dying.
He wrote a book called "The Four Things That Matter Most" about the four things you want to say to the most important people in your life before they or you die: thank you, I love you, forgive me, I forgive you.
They're just about the most powerful words we can say to one another, and often that's what happens in a StoryCorps booth.
It's a chance to have a sense of closure with someone you care about -- no regrets, nothing left unsaid.
And it's hard and it takes courage, but that's why we're alive, right?
So, the TED Prize.
When I first heard from TED and Chris a few months ago about the possibility of the Prize, I was completely floored.
They asked me to come up with a very brief wish for humanity, no more than 50 words.
So I thought about it, I wrote my 50 words, and a few weeks later, Chris called and said, "Go for it."
So here is my wish: that you will help us take everything we've learned through StoryCorps and bring it to the world so that anyone anywhere can easily record a meaningful interview with another human being which will then be archived for history.
How are we going to do that? With this.
We're fast moving into a future where everyone in the world will have access to one of these, and it has powers I never could have imagined 11 years ago when I started StoryCorps.
It has a microphone, it can tell you how to do things, and it can send audio files.
Those are the key ingredients.
So the first part of the wish is already underway.
Over the past couple of months, the team at StoryCorps has been working furiously to create an app that will bring StoryCorps out of our booths so that it can be experienced by anyone, anywhere, anytime.
Remember, StoryCorps has always been two people and a facilitator helping them record their conversation, which is preserved forever, but at this very moment, we're releasing a public beta version of the StoryCorps app.
The app is a digital facilitator that walks you through the StoryCorps interview process, helps you pick questions, and gives you all the tips you need to record a meaningful StoryCorps interview, and then with one tap upload it to our archive at the Library of Congress.
That's the easy part, the technology.
The real challenge is up to you: to take this tool and figure out how we can use it all across America and around the world, so that instead of recording thousands of StoryCorps interviews a year, we could potentially record tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands or maybe even more.
Imagine, for example, a national homework assignment where every high school student studying U.S. history across the country records an interview with an elder over Thanksgiving, so that in one single weekend an entire generation of American lives and experiences are captured.
(Applause) Or imagine mothers on opposite sides of a conflict somewhere in the world sitting down not to talk about that conflict but to find out who they are as people, and in doing so, begin to build bonds of trust; or that someday it becomes a tradition all over the world that people are honored with a StoryCorps interview on their 75th birthday; or that people in your community go into retirement homes or hospitals or homeless shelters or even prisons armed with this app to honor the people least heard in our society and ask them who they are, what they've learned in life, and how they want to be remembered.
(Applause) Ten years ago, I recorded a StoryCorps interview with my dad who was a psychiatrist, and became a well-known gay activist.
This is the picture of us at that interview.
I never thought about that recording until a couple of years ago, when my dad, who seemed to be in perfect health and was still seeing patients 40 hours a week, was diagnosed with cancer.
He passed away very suddenly a few days later.
It was June 28, 2012, the anniversary of the Stonewall riots.
I listened to that interview for the first time at three in the morning on the day that he died.
I have a couple of young kids at home, and I knew that the only way they were going to get to know this person who was such a towering figure in my life would be through that session.
I thought I couldn't believe in StoryCorps any more deeply than I did, but it was at that moment that I fully and viscerally grasped the importance of making these recordings.
Every day, people come up to me and say, "I wish I had interviewed my father or my grandmother or my brother, but I waited too long."
Now, no one has to wait anymore.
At this moment, when so much of how we communicate is fleeting and inconsequential, join us in creating this digital archive of conversations that are enduring and important.
Help us create this gift to our children, this testament to who we are as human beings.
I hope you'll help us make this wish come true.
Interview a family member, a friend or even a stranger.
Together, we can create an archive of the wisdom of humanity, and maybe in doing so, we'll learn to listen a little more and shout a little less.
Maybe these conversations will remind us what's really important.
And maybe, just maybe, it will help us recognize that simple truth that every life, every single life, matters equally and infinitely.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
When I wrote my memoir, the publishers were really confused.
Was it about me as a child refugee, or as a woman who set up a high-tech software company back in the 1960s, one that went public and eventually employed over 8,500 people?
Or was it as a mother of an autistic child?
Or as a philanthropist that's now given away serious money?
Well, it turns out, I'm all of these.
So let me tell you my story.
All that I am stems from when I got onto a train in Vienna, part of the Kindertransport that saved nearly 10,000 Jewish children from Nazi Europe.
I was five years old, clutching the hand of my nine-year-old sister and had very little idea as to what was going on.
"What is England and why am I going there?"
I'm only alive because so long ago, I was helped by generous strangers.
I was lucky, and doubly lucky to be later reunited with my birth parents.
But, sadly, I never bonded with them again.
But I've done more in the seven decades since that miserable day when my mother put me on the train than I would ever have dreamed possible.
And I love England, my adopted country, with a passion that perhaps only someone who has lost their human rights can feel.
I decided to make mine a life that was worth saving.
And then, I just got on with it.
(Laughter) Let me take you back to the early 1960s.
To get past the gender issues of the time, I set up my own software house at one of the first such startups in Britain.
But it was also a company of women, a company for women, an early social business.
And people laughed at the very idea because software, at that time, was given away free with hardware.
Nobody would buy software, certainly not from a woman.
Although women were then coming out of the universities with decent degrees, there was a glass ceiling to our progress.
And I'd hit that glass ceiling too often, and I wanted opportunities for women.
I recruited professionally qualified women who'd left the industry on marriage, or when their first child was expected and structured them into a home-working organization.
We pioneered the concept of women going back into the workforce after a career break.
We pioneered all sorts of new, flexible work methods: job shares, profit-sharing, and eventually, co-ownership when I took a quarter of the company into the hands of the staff at no cost to anyone but me.
For years, I was the first woman this, or the only woman that.
And in those days, I couldn't work on the stock exchange, I couldn't drive a bus or fly an airplane.
Indeed, I couldn't open a bank account without my husband's permission.
My generation of women fought the battles for the right to work and the right for equal pay.
Nobody really expected much from people at work or in society because all the expectations then were about home and family responsibilities.
And I couldn't really face that, so I started to challenge the conventions of the time, even to the extent of changing my name from "Stephanie" to "Steve" in my business development letters, so as to get through the door before anyone realized that he was a she.
(Laughter) My company, called Freelance Programmers, and that's precisely what it was, couldn't have started smaller: on the dining room table, and financed by the equivalent of 100 dollars in today's terms, and financed by my labor and by borrowing against the house.
My interests were scientific, the market was commercial -- things such as payroll, which I found rather boring.
So I had to compromise with operational research work, which had the intellectual challenge that interested me and the commercial value that was valued by the clients: things like scheduling freight trains, time-tabling buses, stock control, lots and lots of stock control.
And eventually, the work came in.
We disguised the domestic and part-time nature of the staff by offering fixed prices, one of the very first to do so.
And who would have guessed that the programming of the black box flight recorder of Supersonic Concord would have been done by a bunch of women working in their own homes.
(Applause) All we used was a simple "trust the staff" approach and a simple telephone.
We even used to ask job applicants, "Do you have access to a telephone?"
An early project was to develop software standards on management control protocols.
And software was and still is a maddeningly hard-to-control activity, so that was enormously valuable.
We used the standards ourselves, we were even paid to update them over the years, and eventually, they were adopted by NATO.
Our programmers -- remember, only women, including gay and transgender -- worked with pencil and paper to develop flowcharts defining each task to be done.
And they then wrote code, usually machine code, sometimes binary code, which was then sent by mail to a data center to be punched onto paper tape or card and then re-punched, in order to verify it.
All this, before it ever got near a computer.
That was programming in the early 1960s.
In 1975, 13 years from startup, equal opportunity legislation came in in Britain and that made it illegal to have our pro-female policies.
And as an example of unintended consequences, my female company had to let the men in.
(Laughter) When I started my company of women, the men said, "How interesting, because it only works because it's small."
And later, as it became sizable, they accepted, "Yes, it is sizable now, but of no strategic interest."
And later, when it was a company valued at over three billion dollars, and I'd made 70 of the staff into millionaires, they sort of said, "Well done, Steve!"
(Laughter) (Applause) You can always tell ambitious women by the shape of our heads: They're flat on top for being patted patronizingly.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we have larger feet to stand away from the kitchen sink.
(Laughter) Let me share with you two secrets of success: Surround yourself with first-class people and people that you like; and choose your partner very, very carefully.
Because the other day when I said, "My husband's an angel," a woman complained -- "You're lucky," she said, "mine's still alive."
(Laughter) If success were easy, we'd all be millionaires.
But in my case, it came in the midst of family trauma and indeed, crisis.
Our late son, Giles, was an only child, a beautiful, contented baby.
And then, at two and a half, like a changeling in a fairy story, he lost the little speech that he had and turned into a wild, unmanageable toddler.
Not the terrible twos; he was profoundly autistic and he never spoke again.
Giles was the first resident in the first house of the first charity that I set up to pioneer services for autism.
And then there's been a groundbreaking Prior's Court school for pupils with autism and a medical research charity, again, all for autism.
Because whenever I found a gap in services, I tried to help.
I like doing new things and making new things happen.
And I've just started a three-year think tank for autism.
And so that some of my wealth does go back to the industry from which it stems, I've also founded the Oxford Internet Institute and other IT ventures.
The Oxford Internet Institute focuses not on the technology, but on the social, economic, legal and ethical issues of the Internet.
Giles died unexpectedly 17 years ago now.
And I have learned to live without him, and I have learned to live without his need of me.
Philanthropy is all that I do now.
I need never worry about getting lost because several charities would quickly come and find me.
(Laughter) It's one thing to have an idea for an enterprise, but as many people in this room will know, making it happen is a very difficult thing and it demands extraordinary energy, self-belief and determination, the courage to risk family and home, and a 24/7 commitment that borders on the obsessive.
So it's just as well that I'm a workaholic.
I believe in the beauty of work when we do it properly and in humility.
Work is not just something I do when I'd rather be doing something else.
We live our lives forward.
So what has all that taught me?
I learned that tomorrow's never going to be like today, and certainly nothing like yesterday.
And that made me able to cope with change, indeed, eventually to welcome change, though I'm told I'm still very difficult.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
(Clicking) I was born with bilateral retinoblastoma, retinal cancer.
My right eye was removed at seven months of age.
I was 13 months when they removed my left eye.
The first thing I did upon awakening from that last surgery was to climb out of my crib and begin wandering around the intensive care nursery, probably looking for the one who did this to me.
(Laughter) Evidently, wandering around the nursery was not a problem for me without eyes.
The problem was getting caught.
It's impressions about blindness that are far more threatening to blind people than the blindness itself.
Think for a moment about your own impressions of blindness.
Think about your reactions when I first came onto the stage, or the prospect of your own blindness, or a loved one going blind.
The terror is incomprehensible to most of us, because blindness is thought to epitomize ignorance and unawareness, hapless exposure to the ravages of the dark unknown.
How poetic.
Fortunately for me, my parents were not poetic.
They were pragmatic.
They understood that ignorance and fear were but matters of the mind, and the mind is adaptable.
They believed that I should grow up to enjoy the same freedoms and responsibilities as everyone else.
In their own words, I would move out -- which I did when I was 18 -- I will pay taxes -- thanks -- (Laughter) -- and they knew the difference between love and fear.
Fear immobilizes us in the face of challenge.
They knew that blindness would pose a significant challenge.
I was not raised with fear.
They put my freedom first before all else, because that is what love does.
Now, moving forward, how do I manage today?
The world is a much larger nursery.
Fortunately, I have my trusty long cane, longer than the canes used by most blind people.
I call it my freedom staff.
It will keep me, for example, from making an undignified departure from the stage. (Laughter) I do see that cliff edge.
They warned us earlier that every imaginable mishap has occurred to speakers up here on the stage.
I don't care to set a new precedent.
But beyond that, many of you may have heard me clicking as I came onto the stage -- (Clicking) -- with my tongue.
Those are flashes of sound that go out and reflect from surfaces all around me, just like a bat's sonar, and return to me with patterns, with pieces of information, much as light does for you.
And my brain, thanks to my parents, has been activated to form images in my visual cortex, which we now call the imaging system, from those patterns of information, much as your brain does.
I call this process flash sonar.
It is how I have learned to see through my blindness, to navigate my journey through the dark unknowns of my own challenges, which has earned me the moniker "the remarkable Batman."
Now, Batman I will accept.
Bats are cool. Batman is cool.
But I was not raised to think of myself as in any way remarkable.
I have always regarded myself much like anyone else who navigates the dark unknowns of their own challenges.
Is that so remarkable?
I do not use my eyes, I use my brain.
Now, someone, somewhere, must think that's remarkable, or I wouldn't be up here, but let's consider this for a moment.
Everyone out there who faces or who has ever faced a challenge, raise your hands.
Whoosh. Okay.
Lots of hands going up, a moment, let me do a head count.
(Clicking) This will take a while. (Clicking) (Laughter) Okay, lots of hands in the air.
Keep them up. I have an idea.
Those of you who use your brains to navigate these challenges, put your hands down.
Okay, anyone with your hands still up has challenges of your own. (Laughter) So we all face challenges, and we all face the dark unknown, which is endemic to most challenges, which is what most of us fear, okay?
But we all have brains that allow us, that activate to allow us to navigate the journey through these challenges. Okay?
Case in point: I came up here and -- (Clicking) -- they wouldn't tell me where the lectern was.
So you can't trust those TED folks.
"Find it yourself," they said.
So -- (Laughter) And the feedback for the P.A. system is no help at all.
So now I present to you a challenge.
So if you'd all close your eyes for just a moment, okay?
And you're going to learn a bit of flash sonar.
I'm going to make a sound.
I'm going to hold this panel in front of me, but I'm not going to move it.
Just listen to the sound for a moment.
Shhhhhhhhhh.
Okay, nothing very interesting.
Now, listen to what happens to that same exact sound when I move the panel.
Shhhhhhhhhhh. (Pitch getting higher and lower) You do not know the power of the dark side.
(Laughter) I couldn't resist.
Okay, now keep your eyes closed because, did you hear the difference?
Okay. Now, let's be sure.
For your challenge, you tell me, just say "now" when you hear the panel start to move.
Okay? We'll relax into this.
Shhhhhhh.
Audience: Now. Daniel Kish: Good. Excellent.
Open your eyes.
All right. So just a few centimeters, you would notice the difference.
You've experienced sonar.
You'd all make great blind people. (Laughter) Let's have a look at what can happen when this activation process is given some time and attention.
(Video) Juan Ruiz: It's like you guys can see with your eyes and we can see with our ears.
Brian Bushway: It's not a matter of enjoying it more or less, it's about enjoying it differently.
Shawn Marsolais: It goes across. DK: Yeah.
SM: And then it's gradually coming back down again.
DK: Yes! SM: That's amazing.
I can, like, see the car. Holy mother!
J. Louchart: I love being blind.
If I had the opportunity, honestly, I wouldn't go back to being sighted.
JR: The bigger the goal, the more obstacles you'll face, and on the other side of that goal is victory.
[In Italian] (Applause) DK: Now, do these people look terrified?
Not so much.
We have delivered activation training to tens of thousands of blind and sighted people from all backgrounds in nearly 40 countries.
When blind people learn to see, sighted people seem inspired to want to learn to see their way better, more clearly, with less fear, because this exemplifies the immense capacity within us all to navigate any type of challenge, through any form of darkness, to discoveries unimagined when we are activated.
I wish you all a most activating journey.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Daniel, my friend.
As I know you can see, it's a spectacular standing ovation at TED.
Thank you for an extraordinary talk.
Just one more question about your world, your inner world that you construct.
We think that we have things in our world that you as a blind person don't have, but what's your world like?
What do you have that we don't have?
DK: Three hundred and sixty-degree view, so my sonar works about as well behind me as it does in front of me.
It works around corners.
It works through surfaces.
Generally, it's kind of a fuzzy three-dimensional geometry.
One of my students, who has now become an instructor, when he lost his vision, after a few months he was sitting in his three story house and he realized that he could hear everything going on throughout the house: conversations, people in the kitchen, people in the bathroom, several floors away, several walls away.
He said it was something like having x-ray vision.
CA: What do you picture that you're in right now?
How do you picture this theater?
DK: Lots of loudspeakers, quite frankly.
It's interesting. When people make a sound, when they laugh, when they fidget, when they take a drink or blow their nose or whatever, I hear everything.
I hear every little movement that every single person makes.
None of it really escapes my attention, and then, from a sonar perspective, the size of the room, the curvature of the audience around the stage, it's the height of the room.
Like I say, it's all that kind of three-dimensional surface geometry all around me.
CA: Well, Daniel, you have done a spectacular job of helping us all see the world in a different way.
Thanks so much for that, truly. DK: Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a kid, the disaster we worried about most was a nuclear war.
That's why we had a barrel like this down in our basement, filled with cans of food and water.
When the nuclear attack came, we were supposed to go downstairs, hunker down, and eat out of that barrel.
Today the greatest risk of global catastrophe doesn't look like this.
Instead, it looks like this.
If anything kills over 10 million people in the next few decades, it's most likely to be a highly infectious virus rather than a war.
Not missiles, but microbes.
Now, part of the reason for this is that we've invested a huge amount in nuclear deterrents.
But we've actually invested very little in a system to stop an epidemic.
We're not ready for the next epidemic.
Let's look at Ebola.
I'm sure all of you read about it in the newspaper, lots of tough challenges.
I followed it carefully through the case analysis tools we use to track polio eradication.
And as you look at what went on, the problem wasn't that there was a system that didn't work well enough, the problem was that we didn't have a system at all.
In fact, there's some pretty obvious key missing pieces.
We didn't have a group of epidemiologists ready to go, who would have gone, seen what the disease was, seen how far it had spread.
The case reports came in on paper.
It was very delayed before they were put online and they were extremely inaccurate.
We didn't have a medical team ready to go.
We didn't have a way of preparing people.
Now, Médecins Sans Frontières did a great job orchestrating volunteers.
But even so, we were far slower than we should have been getting the thousands of workers into these countries.
And a large epidemic would require us to have hundreds of thousands of workers.
There was no one there to look at treatment approaches.
No one to look at the diagnostics.
No one to figure out what tools should be used.
As an example, we could have taken the blood of survivors, processed it, and put that plasma back in people to protect them.
But that was never tried.
So there was a lot that was missing.
And these things are really a global failure.
The WHO is funded to monitor epidemics, but not to do these things I talked about.
Now, in the movies it's quite different.
There's a group of handsome epidemiologists ready to go, they move in, they save the day, but that's just pure Hollywood.
The failure to prepare could allow the next epidemic to be dramatically more devastating than Ebola Let's look at the progression of Ebola over this year.
About 10,000 people died, and nearly all were in the three West African countries.
There's three reasons why it didn't spread more.
The first is that there was a lot of heroic work by the health workers.
They found the people and they prevented more infections.
The second is the nature of the virus.
Ebola does not spread through the air.
And by the time you're contagious, most people are so sick that they're bedridden.
Third, it didn't get into many urban areas.
And that was just luck.
If it had gotten into a lot more urban areas, the case numbers would have been much larger.
So next time, we might not be so lucky.
You can have a virus where people feel well enough while they're infectious that they get on a plane or they go to a market.
The source of the virus could be a natural epidemic like Ebola, or it could be bioterrorism.
So there are things that would literally make things a thousand times worse.
In fact, let's look at a model of a virus spread through the air, like the Spanish Flu back in 1918.
So here's what would happen: It would spread throughout the world very, very quickly.
And you can see over 30 million people died from that epidemic.
So this is a serious problem.
We should be concerned.
But in fact, we can build a really good response system.
We have the benefits of all the science and technology that we talk about here.
We've got cell phones to get information from the public and get information out to them.
We have satellite maps where we can see where people are and where they're moving.
We have advances in biology that should dramatically change the turnaround time to look at a pathogen and be able to make drugs and vaccines that fit for that pathogen.
So we can have tools, but those tools need to be put into an overall global health system.
And we need preparedness.
The best lessons, I think, on how to get prepared are again, what we do for war.
For soldiers, we have full-time, waiting to go.
We have reserves that can scale us up to large numbers.
NATO has a mobile unit that can deploy very rapidly.
NATO does a lot of war games to check, are people well trained?
Do they understand about fuel and logistics and the same radio frequencies?
So they are absolutely ready to go.
So those are the kinds of things we need to deal with an epidemic.
What are the key pieces?
First, we need strong health systems in poor countries.
That's where mothers can give birth safely, kids can get all their vaccines.
But, also where we'll see the outbreak very early on.
We need a medical reserve corps: lots of people who've got the training and background who are ready to go, with the expertise.
And then we need to pair those medical people with the military.
taking advantage of the military's ability to move fast, do logistics and secure areas.
We need to do simulations, germ games, not war games, so that we see where the holes are.
The last time a germ game was done in the United States was back in 2001, and it didn't go so well.
So far the score is germs: 1, people: 0.
Finally, we need lots of advanced R&amp;D in areas of vaccines and diagnostics.
There are some big breakthroughs, like the Adeno-associated virus, that could work very, very quickly.
Now I don't have an exact budget for what this would cost, but I'm quite sure it's very modest compared to the potential harm.
The World Bank estimates that if we have a worldwide flu epidemic, global wealth will go down by over three trillion dollars and we'd have millions and millions of deaths.
These investments offer significant benefits beyond just being ready for the epidemic.
The primary healthcare, the R&amp;D, those things would reduce global health equity and make the world more just as well as more safe.
So I think this should absolutely be a priority.
There's no need to panic.
We don't have to hoard cans of spaghetti or go down into the basement.
But we need to get going, because time is not on our side.
In fact, if there's one positive thing that can come out of the Ebola epidemic, it's that it can serve as an early warning, a wake-up call, to get ready.
If we start now, we can be ready for the next epidemic.
Thank you.
(Applause)
G'day, my name's Kevin.
I'm from Australia. I'm here to help.
(Laughter) Tonight, I want to talk about a tale of two cities.
One of those cities is called Washington, and the other is called Beijing.
Because how these two capitals shape their future and the future of the United States and the future of China doesn't just affect those two countries, it affects all of us in ways, perhaps, we've never thought of: the air we breathe, the water we drink, the fish we eat, the quality of our oceans, the languages we speak in the future, the jobs we have, the political systems we choose, and, of course, the great questions of war and peace.
You see that bloke? He's French.
His name is Napoleon.
A couple of hundred years ago, he made this extraordinary projection: "China is a sleeping lion, and when she awakes, the world will shake."
Napoleon got a few things wrong; he got this one absolutely right.
Because China is today not just woken up, China has stood up and China is on the march, and the question for us all is where will China go and how do we engage this giant of the 21st century?
You start looking at the numbers, they start to confront you in a big way.
It's projected that China will become, by whichever measure -- PPP, market exchange rates -- the largest economy in the world over the course of the decade ahead.
They're already the largest trading nation, already the largest exporting nation, already the largest manufacturing nation, and they're also the biggest emitters of carbon in the world.
America comes second.
So if China does become the world's largest economy, think about this: It'll be the first time since this guy was on the throne of England -- George III, not a good friend of Napoleon's -- that in the world we will have as the largest economy a non-English speaking country, a non-Western country, a non-liberal democratic country.
And if you don't think that's going to affect the way in which the world happens in the future, then personally, I think you've been smoking something, and it doesn't mean you're from Colorado.
So in short, the question we have tonight is, how do we understand this mega-change, which I believe to be the biggest change for the first half of the 21st century?
It'll affect so many things.
It will go to the absolute core.
It's happening quietly. It's happening persistently.
It's happening in some senses under the radar, as we are all preoccupied with what's going in Ukraine, what's going on in the Middle East, what's going on with ISIS, what's going on with ISIL, what's happening with the future of our economies.
This is a slow and quiet revolution.
And with a mega-change comes also a mega-challenge, and the mega-challenge is this: Can these two great countries, China and the United States -- China, the Middle Kingdom, and the United States, Měiguó -- which in Chinese, by the way, means "the beautiful country."
Think about that -- that's the name that China has given this country for more than a hundred years.
Whether these two great civilizations, these two great countries, can in fact carve out a common future for themselves and for the world?
In short, can we carve out a future which is peaceful and mutually prosperous, or are we looking at a great challenge of war or peace?
And I have 15 minutes to work through war or peace, which is a little less time than they gave this guy to write a book called "War and Peace."
People ask me, why is it that a kid growing up in rural Australia got interested in learning Chinese?
Well, there are two reasons for that.
Here's the first of them.
That's Betsy the cow.
Now, Betsy the cow was one of a herd of dairy cattle that I grew up with on a farm in rural Australia.
See those hands there? These are not built for farming.
So very early on, I discovered that in fact, working in a farm was not designed for me, and China was a very safe remove from any career in Australian farm life.
Here's the second reason.
That's my mom.
Anyone here ever listen to what their mom told them to do?
Everyone ever do what their mom told them to do?
I rarely did, but what my mom said to me was, one day, she handed me a newspaper, a headline which said, here we have a huge change.
And that change is China entering the United Nations.
1971, I had just turned 14 years of age, and she handed me this headline.
And she said, "Understand this, learn this, because it's going to affect your future."
So being a very good student of history, I decided that the best thing for me to do was, in fact, to go off and learn Chinese.
The great thing about learning Chinese is that your Chinese teacher gives you a new name.
And so they gave me this name: Kè, which means to overcome or to conquer, and Wén, and that's the character for literature or the arts.
Kè Wén, Conqueror of the Classics.
Any of you guys called "Kevin"?
It's a major lift from being called Kevin to be called Conqueror of the Classics.
(Laughter) I've been called Kevin all my life.
Have you been called Kevin all your life?
Would you prefer to be called Conqueror of the Classics?
And so I went off after that and joined the Australian Foreign Service, but here is where pride -- before pride, there always comes a fall.
So there I am in the embassy in Beijing, off to the Great Hall of the People with our ambassador, who had asked me to interpret for his first meeting in the Great Hall of the People.
And so there was I.
If you've been to a Chinese meeting, it's a giant horseshoe.
At the head of the horsehoe are the really serious pooh-bahs, and down the end of the horseshoe are the not-so-serious pooh-bahs, the junior woodchucks like me.
And so the ambassador began with this inelegant phrase.
He said, "China and Australia are currently enjoying a relationship of unprecedented closeness."
And I thought to myself, "That sounds clumsy. That sounds odd.
I will improve it."
Note to file: Never do that.
It needed to be a little more elegant, a little more classical, so I rendered it as follows.
[In Chinese] There was a big pause on the other side of the room.
You could see the giant pooh-bahs at the head of the horseshoe, the blood visibly draining from their faces, and the junior woodchucks at the other end of the horseshoe engaged in peals of unrestrained laughter.
Because when I rendered his sentence, "Australia and China are enjoying a relationship of unprecedented closeness," in fact, what I said was that Australia and China were now experiencing fantastic orgasm.
(Laughter) That was the last time I was asked to interpret.
But in that little story, there's a wisdom, which is, as soon as you think you know something about this extraordinary civilization of 5,000 years of continuing history, there's always something new to learn.
History is against us when it comes to the U.S. and China forging a common future together.
This guy up here?
He's not Chinese and he's not American.
He's Greek. His name's Thucydides.
He wrote the history of the Peloponnesian Wars.
And he made this extraordinary observation about Athens and Sparta.
"It was the rise of Athens and the fear that this inspired in Sparta that made war inevitable."
And hence, a whole literature about something called the Thucydides Trap.
This guy here? He's not American and he's not Greek. He's Chinese.
His name is Sun Tzu. He wrote "The Art of War," and if you see his statement underneath, it's along these lines: "Attack him where he is unprepared, appear where you are not expected."
Not looking good so far for China and the United States.
This guy is an American. His name's Graham Allison.
In fact, he's a teacher at the Kennedy School over there in Boston.
He's working on a single project at the moment, which is, does the Thucydides Trap about the inevitably of war between rising powers and established great powers apply to the future of China-U.S. relations?
It's a core question.
And what Graham has done is explore 15 cases in history since the 1500s to establish what the precedents are.
And in 11 out of 15 of them, let me tell you, they've ended in catastrophic war.
You may say, "But Kevin -- or Conqueror of the Classics -- that was the past.
We live now in a world of interdependence and globalization.
It could never happen again."
Guess what?
The economic historians tell us that in fact, the time which we reached the greatest point of economic integration and globalization was in 1914, just before that happened, World War I, a sobering reflection from history.
So if we are engaged in this great question of how China thinks, feels, and positions itself towards the United States, and the reverse, how do we get to the baseline of how these two countries and civilizations can possibly work together?
Let me first go to, in fact, China's views of the U.S. and the rest of the West.
Number one: China feels as if it's been humiliated at the hands of the West through a hundred years of history, beginning with the Opium Wars.
When after that, the Western powers carved China up into little pieces, so that by the time it got to the '20s and '30s, signs like this one appeared on the streets of Shanghai.
["No dogs and Chinese allowed"] How would you feel if you were Chinese, in your own country, if you saw that sign appear?
China also believes and feels as if, in the events of 1919, at the Peace Conference in Paris, when Germany's colonies were given back to all sorts of countries around in the world, what about German colonies in China?
They were, in fact, given to Japan.
When Japan then invaded China in the 1930s the world looked away and was indifferent to what would happen to China.
And then, on top of that, the Chinese to this day believe that the United States and the West do not accept the legitimacy of their political system because it's so radically different from those of us who come from liberal democracies, and believe that the United States to this day is seeking to undermine their political system.
China also believes that it is being contained by U.S. allies and by those with strategic partnerships with the U.S.
right around its periphery.
And beyond all that, the Chinese have this feeling in their heart of hearts and in their gut of guts that those of us in the collective West are just too damned arrogant.
That is, we don't recognize the problems in our own system, in our politics and our economics, and are very quick to point the finger elsewhere, and believe that, in fact, we in the collective West are guilty of a great bunch of hypocrisy.
Of course, in international relations, it's not just the sound of one hand clapping.
There's another country too, and that's called the U.S.
So how does the U.S. respond to all of the above?
The U.S. has a response to each of those.
On the question of is the U.S. containing China, they say, "No, look at the history of the Soviet Union. That was containment."
Instead, what we have done in the U.S. and the West is welcome China into the global economy, and on top of that, welcome them into the World Trade Organization.
The U.S. and the West say China cheats on the question of intellectual property rights, and through cyberattacks on U.S. and global firms.
Furthermore, the United States says that the Chinese political system is fundamentally wrong because it's at such fundamental variance to the human rights, democracy, and rule of law that we enjoy in the U.S. and the collective West.
And on top of all the above, what does the United States say?
That they fear that China will, when it has sufficient power, establish a sphere of influence in Southeast Asia and wider East Asia, boot the United States out, and in time, when it's powerful enough, unilaterally seek to change the rules of the global order.
So apart from all of that, it's just fine and dandy, the U.S.-China relationship.
No real problems there.
The challenge, though, is given those deep-rooted feelings, those deep-rooted emotions and thought patterns, what the Chinese call "Sīwéi," ways of thinking, how can we craft a basis for a common future between these two?
I argue simply this: We can do it on the basis on a framework of constructive realism for a common purpose.
What do I mean by that?
Be realistic about the things that we disagree on, and a management approach that doesn't enable any one of those differences to break into war or conflict until we've acquired the diplomatic skills to solve them.
Be constructive in areas of the bilateral, regional and global engagement between the two, which will make a difference for all of humankind.
Build a regional institution capable of cooperation in Asia, an Asia-Pacific community.
And worldwide, act further, like you've begun to do at the end of last year by striking out against climate change with hands joined together rather than fists apart.
Of course, all that happens if you've got a common mechanism and political will to achieve the above.
These things are deliverable.
But the question is, are they deliverable alone?
This is what our head tells us we need to do, but what about our heart?
I have a little experience in the question back home of how you try to bring together two peoples who, frankly, haven't had a whole lot in common in the past.
And that's when I apologized to Australia's indigenous peoples.
This was a day of reckoning in the Australian government, the Australian parliament, and for the Australian people.
After 200 years of unbridled abuse towards the first Australians, it was high time that we white folks said we were sorry.
The important thing -- (Applause) The important thing that I remember is staring in the faces of all those from Aboriginal Australia as they came to listen to this apology.
It was extraordinary to see, for example, old women telling me the stories of when they were five years old and literally ripped away from their parents, like this lady here.
It was extraordinary for me to then be able to embrace and to kiss Aboriginal elders as they came into the parliament building, and one woman said to me, it's the first time a white fella had ever kissed her in her life, and she was over 70.
That's a terrible story.
And then I remember this family saying to me, "You know, we drove all the way from the far North down to Canberra to come to this thing, drove our way through redneck country.
On the way back, stopped at a cafe after the apology for a milkshake."
And they walked into this cafe quietly, tentatively, gingerly, a little anxious.
I think you know what I'm talking about.
But the day after the apology, what happened?
Everyone in that cafe, every one of the white folks, stood up and applauded.
Something had happened in the hearts of these people in Australia.
The white folks, our Aboriginal brothers and sisters, and we haven't solved all these problems together, but let me tell you, there was a new beginning because we had gone not just to the head, we'd gone also to the heart.
So where does that conclude in terms of the great question that we've been asked to address this evening, which is the future of U.S.-China relations?
The head says there's a way forward.
The head says there is a policy framework, there's a common narrative, there's a mechanism through regular summitry to do these things and to make them better.
But the heart must also find a way to reimagine the possibilities of the America-China relationship, and the possibilities of China's future engagement in the world.
Sometimes, folks, we just need to take a leap of faith not quite knowing where we might land.
In China, they now talk about the Chinese Dream.
In America, we're all familiar with the term "the American Dream."
I think it's time, across the world, that we're able to think also of something we might also call a dream for all humankind.
Because if we do that, we might just change the way that we think about each other.
[In Chinese] That's my challenge to America. That's my challenge to China.
That's my challenge to all of us, but I think where there's a will and where there is imagination we can turn this into a future driven by peace and prosperity and not once again repeat the tragedies of war.
I thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thanks so much for that. Thanks so much for that.
It feels like you yourself have a role to play in this bridging.
You, in a way, are uniquely placed to speak to both sides.
Kevin Rudd: Well, what we Australians do best is organize the drinks, so you get them together in one room, and we suggest this and suggest that, then we go and get the drinks.
But no, look, for all of us who are friends of these two great countries, America and China, you can do something.
You can make a practical contribution, and for all you good folks here, next time you meet someone from China, sit down and have a conversation.
See what you can find out about where they come from and what they think, and my challenge for all the Chinese folks who are going to watch this TED Talk at some time is do the same.
Two of us seeking to change the world can actually make a huge difference.
Those of us up the middle, we can make a small contribution.
CA: Kevin, all power to you, my friend. Thank you.
KR: Thank you. Thank you, folks.
(Applause)
We're at a tipping point in human history, a species poised between gaining the stars and losing the planet we call home.
Even in just the past few years, we've greatly expanded our knowledge of how Earth fits within the context of our universe.
NASA's Kepler mission has discovered thousands of potential planets around other stars, indicating that Earth is but one of billions of planets in our galaxy.
Kepler is a space telescope that measures the subtle dimming of stars as planets pass in front of them, blocking just a little bit of that light from reaching us.
Kepler's data reveals planets' sizes as well as their distance from their parent star.
Together, this helps us understand whether these planets are small and rocky, like the terrestrial planets in our own Solar System, and also how much light they receive from their parent sun.
In turn, this provides clues as to whether these planets that we discover might be habitable or not.
Unfortunately, at the same time as we're discovering this treasure trove of potentially habitable worlds, our own planet is sagging under the weight of humanity.
2014 was the hottest year on record.
Glaciers and sea ice that have been with us for millennia are now disappearing in a matter of decades.
These planetary-scale environmental changes that we have set in motion are rapidly outpacing our ability to alter their course.
But I'm not a climate scientist, I'm an astronomer.
I study planetary habitability as influenced by stars with the hopes of finding the places in the universe where we might discover life beyond our own planet.
You could say that I look for choice alien real estate.
Now, as somebody who is deeply embedded in the search for life in the universe, I can tell you that the more you look for planets like Earth, the more you appreciate our own planet itself.
Each one of these new worlds invites a comparison between the newly discovered planet and the planets we know best: those of our own Solar System.
Consider our neighbor, Mars.
Mars is small and rocky, and though it's a bit far from the Sun, it might be considered a potentially habitable world if found by a mission like Kepler.
Indeed, it's possible that Mars was habitable in the past, and in part, this is why we study Mars so much.
Our rovers, like Curiosity, crawl across its surface, scratching for clues as to the origins of life as we know it.
Orbiters like the MAVEN mission sample the Martian atmosphere, trying to understand how Mars might have lost its past habitability.
Private spaceflight companies now offer not just a short trip to near space but the tantalizing possibility of living our lives on Mars.
But though these Martian vistas resemble the deserts of our own home world, places that are tied in our imagination to ideas about pioneering and frontiers, compared to Earth Mars is a pretty terrible place to live.
Consider the extent to which we have not colonized the deserts of our own planet, places that are lush by comparison with Mars.
Even in the driest, highest places on Earth, the air is sweet and thick with oxygen exhaled from thousands of miles away by our rainforests.
I worry -- I worry that this excitement about colonizing Mars and other planets carries with it a long, dark shadow: the implication and belief by some that Mars will be there to save us from the self-inflicted destruction of the only truly habitable planet we know of, the Earth.
As much as I love interplanetary exploration, I deeply disagree with this idea.
There are many excellent reasons to go to Mars, but for anyone to tell you that Mars will be there to back up humanity is like the captain of the Titanic telling you that the real party is happening later on the lifeboats.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
But the goals of interplanetary exploration and planetary preservation are not opposed to one another.
No, they're in fact two sides of the same goal: to understand, preserve and improve life into the future.
The extreme environments of our own world are alien vistas.
They're just closer to home.
If we can understand how to create and maintain habitable spaces out of hostile, inhospitable spaces here on Earth, perhaps we can meet the needs of both preserving our own environment and moving beyond it.
I leave you with a final thought experiment: Fermi's paradox.
Many years ago, the physicist Enrico Fermi asked that, given the fact that our universe has been around for a very long time and we expect that there are many planets within it, we should have found evidence for alien life by now.
So where are they?
Well, one possible solution to Fermi's paradox is that, as civilizations become technologically advanced enough to consider living amongst the stars, they lose sight of how important it is to safeguard the home worlds that fostered that advancement to begin with.
It is hubris to believe that interplanetary colonization alone will save us from ourselves, but planetary preservation and interplanetary exploration can work together.
If we truly believe in our ability to bend the hostile environments of Mars for human habitation, then we should be able to surmount the far easier task of preserving the habitability of the Earth.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Virtual reality started for me in sort of an unusual place.
It was the 1970s.
I got into the field very young: I was seven years old.
And the tool that I used to access virtual reality was the Evel Knievel stunt cycle.
This is a commercial for that particular item: (Video) Voice-over: What a jump!
Evel's riding the amazing stunt cycle.
That gyro-power sends him over 100 feet at top speed.
Chris Milk: So this was my joy back then.
I rode this motorcycle everywhere.
And I was there with Evel Knievel; we jumped the Snake River Canyon together.
I wanted the rocket.
I never got the rocket, I only got the motorcycle.
I felt so connected to this world.
I didn't want to be a storyteller when I grew up, I wanted to be stuntman.
I was there. Evel Knievel was my friend.
I had so much empathy for him.
But it didn't work out. (Laughter) I went to art school.
I started making music videos.
And this is one of the early music videos that I made: (Music: "Touch the Sky" by Kanye West) CM: You may notice some slight similarities here.
(Laughter) And I got that rocket.
(Laughter) So, now I'm a filmmaker, or, the beginning of a filmmaker, and I started using the tools that are available to me as a filmmaker to try to tell the most compelling stories that I can to an audience.
And film is this incredible medium that allows us to feel empathy for people that are very different than us and worlds completely foreign from our own.
Unfortunately, Evel Knievel did not feel the same empathy for us that we felt for him, and he sued us for this video -- (Laughter) -- shortly thereafter.
On the upside, the man that I worshipped as a child, the man that I wanted to become as an adult, I was finally able to get his autograph.
(Applause) Let's talk about film now.
Film, it's an incredible medium, but essentially, it's the same now as it was then.
It's a group of rectangles that are played in a sequence.
And we've done incredible things with those rectangles.
But I started thinking about, is there a way that I can use modern and developing technologies to tell stories in different ways and tell different kinds of stories that maybe I couldn't tell using the traditional tools of filmmaking that we've been using for 100 years?
So I started experimenting, and what I was trying to do was to build the ultimate empathy machine.
And here's one of the early experiments: (Music) So this is called "The Wilderness Downtown."
It was a collaboration with Arcade Fire.
It asked you to put in the address where you grew up at the beginning of it.
It's a website.
And out of it starts growing these little boxes with different browser windows.
And you see this teenager running down a street, and then you see Google Street View and Google Maps imagery and you realize the street he's running down is yours.
And when he stops in front of a house, he stops in front of your house.
And this was great, and I saw people having an even deeper emotional reaction to this than the things that I had made in rectangles.
And I'm essentially taking a piece of your history and putting it inside the framing of the story.
But then I started thinking, okay, well that's a part of you, but how do I put all of you inside of the frame?
So to do that, I started making art installations.
And this is one called "The Treachery of Sanctuary."
It's a triptych. I'm going to show you the third panel.
(Music) So now I've got you inside of the frame, and I saw people having even more visceral emotional reactions to this work than the previous one.
But then I started thinking about frames, and what do they represent?
And a frame is just a window.
I mean, all the media that we watch -- television, cinema -- they're these windows into these other worlds.
And I thought, well, great. I got you in a frame.
But I don't want you in the frame, I don't want you in the window, I want you through the window, I want you on the other side, in the world, inhabiting the world.
So that leads me back to virtual reality.
Let's talk about virtual reality.
Unfortunately, talking about virtual reality is like dancing about architecture.
And this is actually someone dancing about architecture in virtual reality.
(Laughter) So, it's difficult to explain. Why is it difficult to explain?
It's difficult because it's a very experiential medium.
You feel your way inside of it.
It's a machine, but inside of it, it feels like real life, it feels like truth.
And you feel present in the world that you're inside and you feel present with the people that you're inside of it with.
So, I'm going to show you a demo of a virtual reality film: a full-screen version of all the information that we capture when we shoot virtual reality.
So we're shooting in every direction.
This is a camera system that we built that has 3D cameras that look in every direction and binaural microphones that face in every direction.
We take this and we build, basically, a sphere of a world that you inhabit.
So what I'm going to show you is not a view into the world, it's basically the whole world stretched into a rectangle.
So this film is called "Clouds Over Sidra," and it was made in conjunction with our virtual reality company called VRSE and the United Nations, and a co-collaborator named Gabo Arora.
And we went to a Syrian refugee camp in Jordan in December and shot the story of a 12-year-old girl there named Sidra.
And she and her family fled Syria through the desert into Jordan and she's been living in this camp for the last year and a half.
(Video) Sidra: My name is Sidra.
I am 12 years old.
I am in the fifth grade.
I am from Syria, in the Daraa Province, Inkhil City.
I have lived here in the Zaatari camp in Jordan for the last year and a half.
I have a big family: three brothers, one is a baby.
He cries a lot.
I asked my father if I cried when I was a baby and he says I did not.
I think I was a stronger baby than my brother.
CM: So, when you're inside of the headset.
you're not seeing it like this.
You're looking around through this world.
You'll notice you see full 360 degrees, in all directions.
And when you're sitting there in her room, watching her, you're not watching it through a television screen, you're not watching it through a window, you're sitting there with her.
When you look down, you're sitting on the same ground that she's sitting on.
And because of that, you feel her humanity in a deeper way.
You empathize with her in a deeper way.
And I think that we can change minds with this machine.
And we've already started to try to change a few.
So we took this film to the World Economic Forum in Davos in January.
And we showed it to a group of people whose decisions affect the lives of millions of people.
And these are people who might not otherwise be sitting in a tent in a refugee camp in Jordan.
But in January, one afternoon in Switzerland, they suddenly all found themselves there.
(Applause) And they were affected by it.
So we're going to make more of them.
We're working with the United Nations right now to shoot a whole series of these films.
We just finished shooting a story in Liberia.
And now, we're going to shoot a story in India.
And we're taking these films, and we're showing them at the United Nations to people that work there and people that are visiting there.
And we're showing them to the people that can actually change the lives of the people inside of the films.
And that's where I think we just start to scratch the surface of the true power of virtual reality.
It's not a video game peripheral.
It connects humans to other humans in a profound way that I've never seen before in any other form of media.
And it can change people's perception of each other.
And that's how I think virtual reality has the potential to actually change the world.
So, it's a machine, but through this machine we become more compassionate, we become more empathetic, and we become more connected.
And ultimately, we become more human.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It would be nice to be objective in life, in many ways.
The problem is that we have these color-tinted glasses as we look at all kinds of situations.
For example, think about something as simple as beer.
If I gave you a few beers to taste and I asked you to rate them on intensity and bitterness, different beers would occupy different space.
But what if we tried to be objective about it?
In the case of beer, it would be very simple.
What if we did a blind taste?
Well, if we did the same thing, you tasted the same beer, now in the blind taste, things would look slightly different.
Most of the beers will go into one place.
You will basically not be able to distinguish them, and the exception, of course, will be Guinness.
(Laughter) Similarly, we can think about physiology.
What happens when people expect something from their physiology?
For example, we sold people pain medications.
Some people, we told them the medications were expensive.
Some people, we told them it was cheap.
And the expensive pain medication worked better.
It relieved more pain from people, because expectations do change our physiology.
And of course, we all know that in sports, if you are a fan of a particular team, you can't help but see the game develop from the perspective of your team.
So all of those are cases in which our preconceived notions and our expectations color our world.
But what happened in more important questions?
What happened with questions that had to do with social justice?
So we wanted to think about what is the blind tasting version for thinking about inequality?
So we started looking at inequality, and we did some large-scale surveys around the U.S. and other countries.
So we asked two questions: Do people know what kind of level of inequality we have?
And then, what level of inequality do we want to have?
So let's think about the first question.
Imagine I took all the people in the U.S.
and I sorted them from the poorest on the right to the richest on the left, and then I divided them into five buckets: the poorest 20 percent, the next 20 percent, the next, the next, and the richest 20 percent.
And then I asked you to tell me how much wealth do you think is concentrated in each of those buckets.
So to make it simpler, imagine I ask you to tell me, how much wealth do you think is concentrated in the bottom two buckets, the bottom 40 percent?
Take a second. Think about it and have a number.
Usually we don't think.
Think for a second, have a real number in your mind.
You have it?
Okay, here's what lots of Americans tell us.
They think that the bottom 20 percent has about 2.9 percent of the wealth, the next group has 6.4, so together it's slightly more than nine.
The next group, they say, has 12 percent, 20 percent, and the richest 20 percent, people think has 58 percent of the wealth.
You can see how this relates to what you thought.
Now, what's reality?
Reality is slightly different.
The bottom 20 percent has 0.1 percent of the wealth.
The next 20 percent has 0.2 percent of the wealth.
Together, it's 0.3.
The next group has 3.9, 11.3, and the richest group has 84-85 percent of the wealth.
So what we actually have and what we think we have are very different.
What about what we want?
How do we even figure this out?
So to look at this, to look at what we really want, we thought about the philosopher John Rawls.
If you remember John Rawls, he had this notion of what's a just society.
He said a just society is a society that if you knew everything about it, you would be willing to enter it in a random place.
And it's a beautiful definition, because if you're wealthy, you might want the wealthy to have more money, the poor to have less.
If you're poor, you might want more equality.
But if you're going to go into that society in every possible situation, and you don't know, you have to consider all the aspects.
It's a little bit like blind tasting in which you don't know what the outcome will be when you make a decision, and Rawls called this the "veil of ignorance."
So, we took another group, a large group of Americans, and we asked them the question in the veil of ignorance.
What are the characteristics of a country that would make you want to join it, knowing that you could end randomly at any place?
And here is what we got.
What did people want to give to the first group, the bottom 20 percent?
They wanted to give them about 10 percent of the wealth.
The next group, 14 percent of the wealth, 21, 22 and 32.
Now, nobody in our sample wanted full equality.
Nobody thought that socialism is a fantastic idea in our sample.
But what does it mean?
It means that we have this knowledge gap between what we have and what we think we have, but we have at least as big a gap between what we think is right to what we think we have.
Now, we can ask these questions, by the way, not just about wealth.
We can ask it about other things as well.
So for example, we asked people from different parts of the world about this question, people who are liberals and conservatives, and they gave us basically the same answer.
We asked rich and poor, they gave us the same answer, men and women, NPR listeners and Forbes readers.
We asked people in England, Australia, the U.S. -- very similar answers.
We even asked different departments of a university.
We went to Harvard and we checked almost every department, and in fact, from Harvard Business School, where a few people wanted the wealthy to have more and the [poor] to have less, the similarity was astonishing.
I know some of you went to Harvard Business School.
We also asked this question about something else.
We asked, what about the ratio of CEO pay to unskilled workers?
So you can see what people think is the ratio, and then we can ask the question, what do they think should be the ratio?
And then we can ask, what is reality?
What is reality? And you could say, well, it's not that bad, right?
The red and the yellow are not that different.
But the fact is, it's because I didn't draw them on the same scale.
It's hard to see, there's yellow and blue in there.
So what about other outcomes of wealth?
Wealth is not just about wealth.
We asked, what about things like health?
What about availability of prescription medication?
What about life expectancy?
What about life expectancy of infants?
How do we want this to be distributed?
What about education for young people?
And for older people?
And across all of those things, what we learned was that people don't like inequality of wealth, but there's other things where inequality, which is an outcome of wealth, is even more aversive to them: for example, inequality in health or education.
We also learned that people are particularly open to changes in equality when it comes to people who have less agency -- basically, young kids and babies, because we don't think of them as responsible for their situation.
So what are some lessons from this?
We have two gaps: We have a knowledge gap and we have a desirability gap And the knowledge gap is something that we think about, how do we educate people?
How do we get people to think differently about inequality and the consequences of inequality in terms of health, education, jealousy, crime rate, and so on?
Then we have the desirability gap.
How do we get people to think differently about what we really want?
You see, the Rawls definition, the Rawls way of looking at the world, the blind tasting approach, takes our selfish motivation out of the picture.
How do we implement that to a higher degree on a more extensive scale?
And finally, we also have an action gap.
How do we take these things and actually do something about it?
I think part of the answer is to think about people like young kids and babies that don't have much agency, because people seem to be more willing to do this.
To summarize, I would say, next time you go to drink beer or wine, first of all, think about, what is it in your experience that is real, and what is it in your experience that is a placebo effect coming from expectations?
And then think about what it also means for other decisions in your life, and hopefully also for policy questions that affect all of us.
Thanks a lot.
(Applause)
Dan Holzman: Please throw out the beanbag chairs. Here we go.
Barry Friedman: There are all kinds of high-tech chairs here today, but this is really, I think, when it reached its peak as far as ergonomics, comfort, design, flexibility ...
DH: Now obviously, this is not something we do on our regular show; it's something we just kind of learned for this, so we're going to try. But can we have some inspirational music for the beanbag chairs?
BF: Nice show, Daniel, nice show. You are the man!
Nice show. Man, that was good!
DH: Thank you.
BF: You know, sometimes when people do those, they go all the way down.
You actually just did that. (Laughter) That's the kind of extra effort that's gotten us where we are today ...
DH: All right, let's show them something special.
BF: ... without a MacArthur grant.
Yeah, look at this. You know, all kinds of different ...
TED is about invention, let's be honest. Right? DH: Yeah, it is.
BF: Last night, Michael Moschen showed some juggling props he has invented and working on.
Right now, Dan's going to show something he actually invented.
DH: A type of juggling I actually invented, right after I saw another juggler do it.
BF: Shut up. (Laughter) DH: And this is a small excerpt from a longer piece.
(Laughter) (Applause) Folks, this is shaker cup juggling. It's not a showstopper but it certainly slows it down.
BF: Oh yeah, it does. (Drum roll) BF: Oh, Daniel.
(Applause) DH: One more? (Drum roll) Perfect. (Drum roll) Perfect. (Drum roll) BF: OK. DH: Oh! All right.
(Applause) I'm now pushing my luck: I'm skipping right to six cups.
In order to do six cups, I must have perfect control over three with my right hand. (Drum roll) BF: Also three with his left.
DH: Perfect.
(Laughter) And now, all six cups. Should I do it on the first try or should I miss once on purpose? (Laughter) BF: First try? Once on purpose?
(Audience: Once on purpose!) DH: How about if I try first and then decide?
BF: Good idea. (Laughter) Let's leave that. We'll leave that door open.
(Laughter) (Applause) DH: He's looking at me.
BF: That's all right, he does that. All right.
DH: Oh! It's time for Richard's help. (Laughter) Oh, good. All right.
BF: You know, over the years, every year at the conference, it's kind of become a tradition for us to do something dangerous with Richard. And we've always done something with the bullwhips in our act. It's funny, for years I did it with Daniel holding balloons.
And then we thought, "How stupid."
DH: Excuse me, could we work on the design of the microphone?
BF: I think that's the next session.
DH: Next session?
BF: Yeah. And so we've actually found a way to incorporate Richard in this.
He actually assumes more of the danger in this.
DH: Please stand up, Richard. (Whip cracks) Oh, sorry. (Laughter) DH: Now Richard, please ... (Whip cracks) BF: OK, sorry.
DH: Jesus Christ. Richard, please stand in front of me.
Richard Wurman: Can I say something?
BF: Sure.
RW: In all past years I've rehearsed with them, the things that have happened to me -- I have no idea what's going to happen and that's the truth.
DH: All right, please stand here in front ...
God, I hate that. Put your hands out like this, please.
(Laughter) BF: No, come stay up with him.
Dan used to actually hold them but now he's got you for protection.
It's kind of neat. OK.
(Laughter) DH: Wow, you've been working out.
BF: No, shut up!
(Laughter) Having a little bit of Richard time. That's nice, that's good.
OK, here we go.
Have him hold your wrist so I can ...
DH: Please hold my wrist, will you. BF: Yeah, hold this a minute.
There you go.
(Laughter) OK.
OK, hold on.
RW: Hmmm.
(Laughter) DH: First one.
BF: All those mid-year phone calls are coming back to me now, Richard.
(Laughter) DH: So Richard, what were we on the list? Like 1,020?
(Laughter) What happened there?
BF: I think we were just outside.
DH: I don't get it. (Applause) (Laughter) DH: Sorry. BF: Having some bad flashbacks.
RW: Do you want me to hold you or not? DH: Don't hold me that hard.
BF: Here we go, I'm taking it. (Balloon pops) (Applause) DH: One more, one more.
BF: We've got one more we're going to do.
RW: Do I get to hold them?
BF: You don't want to hold these, trust me.
DH: Could you spread your legs a little bit?
(Laughter) BF: Gloria, you want to do it? It's very cool.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) One more try. Man, I don't want to get too close.
(Laughter) Could you just push that?
(Applause) DH: Wow! Boy!
BF: That's cool. I always wanted to try that.
(Laughter) DH: Let's jump this way, though.
Now, we risked Richard's life, it's only fair we risk our own lives.
So to do that, I will juggle these three razor-sharp sickles.
And if that wasn't enough, and judging by your response, it's not ...
(Laughter) DH: Wow! BF: Hoping for a little more build.
DH: True. Barry ...
BF: I'm going to run up behind him.
DH: Leap over my shoulder.
BF: Up and over his shoulders.
DH: Grab the blades in mid-air, land right there in a pool of blood ...
(Laughter) Still juggling. (Laughter) Impossible, you say?
BF: Incredible, you say?
DH: Why bother, you say?
BF: Here we go.
DH: Just do it juggler boys, you say?
BF: This guy, this guy invented air.
DH: I think so, that's right.
Even the pencil.
BF: He invented the pencil.
DH: All right, we'll do this trick, but please remember it took us over 10 years to perfect.
BF: Ten years to perfect, which you're about to see.
DH: It's not that difficult, we just don't like to practice that much.
BF: No, it's a hassle. Traveling too much.
Actually, we will take a second to prove -- this could be fake -- that the blades are indeed razor-sharp.
DH: Will someone please throw a small farm animal up onto the stage?
(Laughter) Or a virgin for a sacrifice?
BF: Anything?
DH: Where's Gloria? (Laughter) BF: No, she's got ... farm animal.
DH: Do you have a small farm animal?
Just trying to play the odds. All right, here we go.
BF: Over the top, over the top.
DH: How you feeling, Barry? You feeling all right?
BF: Yeah, it's all right.
DH: Do you feel everything's OK? The atmosphere, the ...
BF: Yeah, a little sketchy.
DH: Everything up here's OK?
BF: Yeah.
DH: Then here we go.
BF: This one's a little ... Who's doing the lights? Could you point that a little more directly into my eyeballs? Is that possible? (Laughter) I can still see a little.
DH: And turn up the intensity; we're still pink in the middle.
We went too far. (Laughter) BF: Yeah, it's too far. It's too much of a visual.
The design of the body is a whole different thing.
DH: Ready, Barry? BF: Over the top.
DH: May we have our jumping music please? (Silence) May we have it a bit louder?
(Laughter) BF: They're a good crew! Whoa!
DH: Whoa, sorry. All right.
BF: We're going on.
DH: All right, we'll try again.
BF: All right? Oh my gosh. Oh.
DH: All right, here we go. Sorry about that.
BF: I thought I had the hard part. OK.
DH: Whenever you're ready.
BF: There we go!
(Applause) All right, get up! Come on and dance! DH: Dance, come on. BF: Come on and dance!
Somebody dance! Come on!
(Applause) Wow, wow, OK, stop.
Weird, no one dances. We're two guys doing this. (Laughter) I think that's uncomfortable for everyone.
DH: The French judge ...
BF: One more quick thing.
DH: The French judge gives it a 5.2.
(Laughter) BF: Well, you know ...
DH: There you go ... BF: Oh, yeah. Another one coming in.
DH: Tell them about our bio and stuff.
BF: Yeah. In our bio, some of you may have read that we've won two world juggling championships.
And believe it or not, you don't win juggling champions for doing things with bullwhips or shaker cups.
We're going to show you right now an excerpt from a routine that we used to wipe out the other juggling team competition.
DH: That's right.
BF: Good.
DH: I know what you're thinking: other juggling teams must really suck.
(Laughter) BF: Juggling's got a bad rap.
DH: But wait, Barry, there's still one more club lying there by my foot.
And look, it has a twin!
BF: Shut up. (Laughter) DH: There's still one more by my foot.
What do you want me to do with it?
BF: Richard you tell him, it's your last year. (Laughter) DH: That's a pretty good setup, Richard.
BF: Yeah, it's a good setup. That's a big setup.
DH: You can't get any better than that. All right. What I will do: I will use my panther-like reflexes.
BF: Nice.
DH: I got that -- to reach down and grab that club in my grip of steel.
BF: Nice.
DH: I touched it, Barry. That should be enough.
BF: It's progress, that's the thing.
(Laughter) DH: How about that? I'll do it again.
Oh wait, it's on your side, Barry.
And it's awfully windy over there.
BF: It is, it's weird. You wouldn't think it would affect half the stage, but it is. It's weird.
Watch this: what I'm going to do is slide the seventh one onto my foot.
DH: Wow! What a great trick, Barry!
Oh, look how it lies there.
Oh, Barry, is there nothing you can't do?
(Laughter) You are my hero. You're my Jim Shea, Jr.
Too much Olympics.
BF: From my foot, I'll attempt to kick the seventh club. Here we go.
DH: Where, Barry? Where? Tell us, Barry.
[Unclear] eagerly awaits your next syllable. What will it be?
What gem of knowledge?
What pearl of wisdom?
Do you want to buy a vowel, Barry?
Is that your final answer?
BF: All right! You have to turn off the TV from time to time.
DH: I do, I do.
BF: From my foot, the kick up in the seven.
DH: We will juggle seven.
BF: From six to seven. DH: That's a world's record. BF: Really? DH: For us.
BF: Yes.
DH: Whenever you're ready there, big guy.
Put your tongue away, Barry.
BF: Oh, oh, whoa.
(Applause) DH: Please, please stay seated. Stay seated. Thank you.
Because now, to make this twice as difficult, we'll juggle the seven clubs back ...
BF: Seven-club juggling.
DH: ... to back.
BF: Thank you, that's it.
BF: Thank you guys!
DH: Thank you very much!
I'd like to take you on the epic quest of the Rosetta spacecraft.
To escort and land the probe on a comet, this has been my passion for the past two years.
In order to do that, I need to explain to you something about the origin of the solar system.
When we go back four and a half billion years, there was a cloud of gas and dust.
In the center of this cloud, our sun formed and ignited.
Along with that, what we now know as planets, comets and asteroids formed.
What then happened, according to theory, is that when the Earth had cooled down a bit after its formation, comets massively impacted the Earth and delivered water to Earth.
They probably also delivered complex organic material to Earth, and that may have bootstrapped the emergence of life.
You can compare this to having to solve a 250-piece puzzle and not a 2,000-piece puzzle.
Afterwards, the big planets like Jupiter and Saturn, they were not in their place where they are now, and they interacted gravitationally, and they swept the whole interior of the solar system clean, and what we now know as comets ended up in something called the Kuiper Belt, which is a belt of objects beyond the orbit of Neptune.
And sometimes these objects run into each other, and they gravitationally deflect, and then the gravity of Jupiter pulls them back into the solar system.
And they then become the comets as we see them in the sky.
The important thing here to note is that in the meantime, the four and a half billion years, these comets have been sitting on the outside of the solar system, and haven't changed -- deep, frozen versions of our solar system.
In the sky, they look like this.
We know them for their tails.
There are actually two tails.
One is a dust tail, which is blown away by the solar wind.
The other one is an ion tail, which is charged particles, and they follow the magnetic field in the solar system.
There's the coma, and then there is the nucleus, which here is too small to see, and you have to remember that in the case of Rosetta, the spacecraft is in that center pixel.
We are only 20, 30, 40 kilometers away from the comet.
So what's important to remember?
Comets contain the original material from which our solar system was formed, so they're ideal to study the components that were present at the time when Earth, and life, started.
Comets are also suspected of having brought the elements which may have bootstrapped life.
In 1983, ESA set up its long-term Horizon 2000 program, which contained one cornerstone, which would be a mission to a comet.
In parallel, a small mission to a comet, what you see here, Giotto, was launched, and in 1986, flew by the comet of Halley with an armada of other spacecraft.
From the results of that mission, it became immediately clear that comets were ideal bodies to study to understand our solar system.
And thus, the Rosetta mission was approved in 1993, and originally it was supposed to be launched in 2003, but a problem arose with an Ariane rocket.
However, our P.R. department, in its enthusiasm, had already made 1,000 Delft Blue plates with the name of the wrong comets.
So I've never had to buy any china since. That's the positive part.
(Laughter) Once the whole problem was solved, we left Earth in 2004 to the newly selected comet, Churyumov-Gerasimenko.
This comet had to be specially selected because A, you have to be able to get to it, and B, it shouldn't have been in the solar system too long.
This particular comet has been in the solar system since 1959.
That's the first time when it was deflected by Jupiter, and it got close enough to the sun to start changing.
So it's a very fresh comet.
Rosetta made a few historic firsts.
It's the first satellite to orbit a comet, and to escort it throughout its whole tour through the solar system -- closest approach to the sun, as we will see in August, and then away again to the exterior.
It's the first ever landing on a comet.
We actually orbit the comet using something which is not normally done with spacecraft.
Normally, you look at the sky and you know where you point and where you are.
In this case, that's not enough.
We navigated by looking at landmarks on the comet.
We recognized features -- boulders, craters -- and that's how we know where we are respective to the comet.
And, of course, it's the first satellite to go beyond the orbit of Jupiter on solar cells.
Now, this sounds more heroic than it actually is, because the technology to use radio isotope thermal generators wasn't available in Europe at that time, so there was no choice.
But these solar arrays are big.
This is one wing, and these are not specially selected small people.
They're just like you and me.
(Laughter) We have two of these wings, 65 square meters.
Now later on, of course, when we got to the comet, you find out that 65 square meters of sail close to a body which is outgassing is not always a very handy choice.
Now, how did we get to the comet?
Because we had to go there for the Rosetta scientific objectives very far away -- four times the distance of the Earth to the sun -- and also at a much higher velocity than we could achieve with fuel, because we'd have to take six times as much fuel as the whole spacecraft weighed.
So what do you do?
You use gravitational flybys, slingshots, where you pass by a planet at very low altitude, a few thousand kilometers, and then you get the velocity of that planet around the sun for free.
We did that a few times.
We did Earth, we did Mars, we did twice Earth again, and we also flew by two asteroids, Lutetia and Steins.
Then in 2011, we got so far from the sun that if the spacecraft got into trouble, we couldn't actually save the spacecraft anymore, so we went into hibernation.
Everything was switched off except for one clock.
Here you see in white the trajectory, and the way this works.
You see that from the circle where we started, the white line, actually you get more and more and more elliptical, and then finally we approached the comet in May 2014, and we had to start doing the rendezvous maneuvers.
On the way there, we flew by Earth and we took a few pictures to test our cameras.
This is the moon rising over Earth, and this is what we now call a selfie, which at that time, by the way, that word didn't exist. (Laughter) It's at Mars. It was taken by the CIVA camera.
That's one of the cameras on the lander, and it just looks under the solar arrays, and you see the planet Mars and the solar array in the distance.
Now, when we got out of hibernation in January 2014, we started arriving at a distance of two million kilometers from the comet in May.
However, the velocity the spacecraft had was much too fast.
We were going 2,800 kilometers an hour faster than the comet, so we had to brake.
We had to do eight maneuvers, and you see here, some of them were really big.
We had to brake the first one by a few hundred kilometers per hour, and actually, the duration of that was seven hours, and it used 218 kilos of fuel, and those were seven nerve-wracking hours, because in 2007, there was a leak in the system of the propulsion of Rosetta, and we had to close off a branch, so the system was actually operating at a pressure which it was never designed or qualified for.
Then we got in the vicinity of the comet, and these were the first pictures we saw.
The true comet rotation period is 12 and a half hours, so this is accelerated, but you will understand that our flight dynamics engineers thought, this is not going to be an easy thing to land on.
We had hoped for some kind of spud-like thing where you could easily land.
But we had one hope: maybe it was smooth.
No. That didn't work either. (Laughter) So at that point in time, it was clearly unavoidable: we had to map this body in all the detail you could get, because we had to find an area which is 500 meters in diameter and flat.
Why 500 meters? That's the error we have on landing the probe.
So we went through this process, and we mapped the comet.
We used a technique called photoclinometry.
You use shadows thrown by the sun.
What you see here is a rock sitting on the surface of the comet, and the sun shines from above.
From the shadow, we, with our brain, can immediately determine roughly what the shape of that rock is.
You can program that in a computer, you then cover the whole comet, and you can map the comet.
For that, we flew special trajectories starting in August.
First, a triangle of 100 kilometers on a side at 100 kilometers' distance, and we repeated the whole thing at 50 kilometers.
At that time, we had seen the comet at all kinds of angles, and we could use this technique to map the whole thing.
Now, this led to a selection of landing sites.
This whole process we had to do, to go from the mapping of the comet to actually finding the final landing site, was 60 days.
We didn't have more.
To give you an idea, the average Mars mission takes hundreds of scientists for years to meet about where shall we go?
We had 60 days, and that was it.
We finally selected the final landing site and the commands were prepared for Rosetta to launch Philae.
The way this works is that Rosetta has to be at the right point in space, and aiming towards the comet, because the lander is passive.
The lander is then pushed out and moves towards the comet.
Rosetta had to turn around to get its cameras to actually look at Philae while it was departing and to be able to communicate with it.
Now, the landing duration of the whole trajectory was seven hours.
Now do a simple calculation: if the velocity of Rosetta is off by one centimeter per second, seven hours is 25,000 seconds.
That means 252 meters wrong on the comet.
So we had to know the velocity of Rosetta much better than one centimeter per second, and its location in space better than 100 meters at 500 million kilometers from Earth.
That's no mean feat.
Let me quickly take you through some of the science and the instruments.
I won't bore you with all the details of all the instruments, but it's got everything.
We can sniff gas, we can measure dust particles, the shape of them, the composition, there are magnetometers, everything.
This is one of the results from an instrument which measures gas density at the position of Rosetta, so it's gas which has left the comet.
The bottom graph is September of last year.
There is a long-term variation, which in itself is not surprising, but you see the sharp peaks.
This is a comet day.
You can see the effect of the sun on the evaporation of gas and the fact that the comet is rotating.
So there is one spot, apparently, where there is a lot of stuff coming from, it gets heated in the Sun, and then cools down on the back side.
And we can see the density variations of this.
These are the gases and the organic compounds that we already have measured.
You will see it's an impressive list, and there is much, much, much more to come, because there are more measurements.
Actually, there is a conference going on in Houston at the moment where many of these results are presented.
Also, we measured dust particles.
Now, for you, this will not look very impressive, but the scientists were thrilled when they saw this.
Two dust particles: the right one they call Boris, and they shot it with tantalum in order to be able to analyze it.
Now, we found sodium and magnesium.
What this tells you is this is the concentration of these two materials at the time the solar system was formed, so we learned things about which materials were there when the planet was made.
Of course, one of the important elements is the imaging.
This is one of the cameras of Rosetta, the OSIRIS camera, and this actually was the cover of Science magazine on January 23 of this year.
Nobody had expected this body to look like this.
Boulders, rocks -- if anything, it looks more like the Half Dome in Yosemite than anything else.
We also saw things like this: dunes, and what look to be, on the righthand side, wind-blown shadows.
Now we know these from Mars, but this comet doesn't have an atmosphere, so it's a bit difficult to create a wind-blown shadow.
It may be local outgassing, stuff which goes up and comes back.
We don't know, so there is a lot to investigate.
Here, you see the same image twice.
On the left-hand side, you see in the middle a pit.
On the right-hand side, if you carefully look, there are three jets coming out of the bottom of that pit.
So this is the activity of the comet.
Apparently, at the bottom of these pits is where the active regions are, and where the material evaporates into space.
There is a very intriguing crack in the neck of the comet.
You see it on the right-hand side.
It's a kilometer long, and it's two and a half meters wide.
Some people suggest that actually, when we get close to the sun, the comet may split in two, and then we'll have to choose, which comet do we go for?
The lander -- again, lots of instruments, mostly comparable except for the things which hammer in the ground and drill, etc.
But much the same as Rosetta, and that is because you want to compare what you find in space with what you find on the comet.
These are called ground truth measurements.
These are the landing descent images that were taken by the OSIRIS camera.
You see the lander getting further and further away from Rosetta.
On the top right, you see an image taken at 60 meters by the lander, 60 meters above the surface of the comet.
The boulder there is some 10 meters.
So this is one of the last images we took before we landed on the comet.
Here, you see the whole sequence again, but from a different perspective, and you see three blown-ups from the bottom-left to the middle of the lander traveling over the surface of the comet.
Then, at the top, there is a before and an after image of the landing.
The only problem with the after image is, there is no lander.
But if you carefully look at the right-hand side of this image, we saw the lander still there, but it had bounced.
It had departed again.
Now, on a bit of a comical note here is that originally Rosetta was designed to have a lander which would bounce.
That was discarded because it was way too expensive.
Now, we forgot, but the lander knew.
(Laughter) During the first bounce, in the magnetometers, you see here the data from them, from the three axes, x, y and z.
Halfway through, you see a red line.
At that red line, there is a change.
What happened, apparently, is during the first bounce, somewhere, we hit the edge of a crater with one of the legs of the lander, and the rotation velocity of the lander changed.
So we've been rather lucky that we are where we are.
This is one of the iconic images of Rosetta.
It's a man-made object, a leg of the lander, standing on a comet.
This, for me, is one of the very best images of space science I have ever seen.
(Applause) One of the things we still have to do is to actually find the lander.
The blue area here is where we know it must be.
We haven't been able to find it yet, but the search is continuing, as are our efforts to start getting the lander to work again.
We listen every day, and we hope that between now and somewhere in April, the lander will wake up again.
The findings of what we found on the comet: This thing would float in water.
It's half the density of water.
So it looks like a very big rock, but it's not.
The activity increase we saw in June, July, August last year was a four-fold activity increase.
By the time we will be at the sun, there will be 100 kilos a second leaving this comet: gas, dust, whatever.
That's 100 million kilos a day.
Then, finally, the landing day.
I will never forget -- absolute madness, 250 TV crews in Germany.
The BBC was interviewing me, and another TV crew who was following me all day were filming me being interviewed, and it went on like that for the whole day.
The Discovery Channel crew actually caught me when leaving the control room, and they asked the right question, and man, I got into tears, and I still feel this.
For a month and a half, I couldn't think about landing day without crying, and I still have the emotion in me.
With this image of the comet, I would like to leave you.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a Hazara, and the homeland of my people is Afghanistan.
Like hundreds of thousands of other Hazara kids, I was born in exile.
The ongoing persecution and operation against the Hazaras forced my parents to leave Afghanistan.
This persecution has had a long history going back to the late 1800s, and the rule of King Abdur Rahman.
He killed 63 percent of the Hazara population.
He built minarets with their heads.
Many Hazaras were sold into slavery, and many others fled the country for neighboring Iran and Pakistan.
My parents also fled to Pakistan, and settled in Quetta, where I was born.
After the September 11 attack on the Twin Towers, I got a chance to go to Afghanistan for the first time, with foreign journalists.
I was only 18, and I got a job working as an interpreter.
After four years, I felt it was safe enough to move to Afghanistan permanently, and I was working there as a documentary photographer, and I worked on many stories.
One of the most important stories that I did was the dancing boys of Afghanistan.
It is a tragic story about an appalling tradition.
It involves young kids dancing for warlords and powerful men in the society.
These boys are often abducted or bought from their poor parents, and they are put to work as sex slaves.
This is Shukur.
He was kidnapped from Kabul by a warlord.
He was taken to another province, where he was forced to work as a sex slave for the warlord and his friends.
When this story was published in the Washington Post, I started receiving death threats, and I was forced to leave Afghanistan, as my parents were.
Along with my family, I returned back to Quetta.
The situation in Quetta had changed dramatically since I left in 2005.
Once a peaceful haven for the Hazaras, it had now turned into the most dangerous city in Pakistan.
Hazaras are confined into two small areas, and they are marginalized socially, educationally, and financially.
This is Nadir.
I had known him since my childhood.
He was injured when his van was ambushed by terrorists in Quetta.
He later died of his injuries.
Around 1,600 Hazara members had been killed in various attacks, and around 3,000 of them were injured, and many of them permanently disabled.
The attacks on the Hazara community would only get worse, so it was not surprising that many wanted to flee.
After Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan, Australia is home to the fourth largest population of Hazaras in the world.
When it came time to leave Pakistan, Australia seemed the obvious choice.
Financially, only one of us could leave, and it was decided that I would go, in the hope that if I arrived at my destination safely, I could work to get the rest of my family to join me later.
We all knew about the risks, and how terrifying the journey is, and I met many people who lost loved ones at sea.
It was a desperate decision to take, to leave everything behind, and no one makes this decision easily.
If I had been able to simply fly to Australia, it would have taken me less than 24 hours.
But getting a visa was impossible.
My journey was much longer, much more complicated, and certainly more dangerous, traveling to Thailand by air, and then by road and boat to Malaysia and into Indonesia, paying people and smugglers all the way and spending a lot of time hiding and a lot of time in fear of being caught.
In Indonesia, I joined a group of seven asylum seekers.
We all shared a bedroom in a town outside of Jakarta called Bogor.
After spending a week in Bogor, three of my roommates left for the perilous journey, and we got the news two days later that a distressed boat sank in the sea en route to Christmas Island.
We found out that our three roommates -- Nawroz, Jaffar and Shabbir -- were also among those.
Only Jaffar was rescued.
Shabbir and Nawroz were never seen again.
It made me think, am I doing the right thing?
I concluded I really had no other choice but to go on.
A few weeks later, we got the call from the people smuggler to alert us that the boat is ready for us to commence our sea journey.
Taken in the night towards the main vessel on a motorboat, we boarded an old fishing boat that was already overloaded.
There were 93 of us, and we were all below deck.
No one was allowed up on the top.
We all paid 6,000 dollars each for this part of the trip.
The first night and day went smoothly, but by the second night, the weather turned.
Waves tossed the boat around, and the timbers groaned.
People below deck were crying, praying, recalling their loved ones.
They were screaming.
It was a terrible moment.
It was like a scene from doomsday, or maybe like one of those scenes from those Hollywood movies that shows that everything is breaking apart and the world is just ending.
It was happening to us for real.
We didn't have any hope.
Our boat was floating like a matchbox on the water without any control.
The waves were much higher than our boat, and the water poured in faster than the motor pumps could take it out.
We all lost hope.
We thought, this is the end.
We were watching our deaths, and I was documenting it.
The captain told us that we are not going to make it, we have to turn back the boat.
We went on the deck and turned our torches on and off to attract the attention of any passing boat.
We kept trying to attract their attention by waving our life jackets and whistling.
Eventually, we made it to a small island.
Our boat crashing onto the rocks, I slipped into the water and destroyed my camera, whatever I had documented.
But luckily, the memory card survived.
It was a thick forest.
We all split up into many groups as we argued over what to do next.
We were all scared and confused.
Then, after spending the night on the beach, we found a jetty and coconuts.
We hailed a boat from a nearby resort, and then were quickly handed over to Indonesian water police.
At Serang Detention Center, an immigration officer came and furtively strip-searched us.
He took our mobile, my $300 cash, our shoes that we should not be able to escape, but we kept watching the guards, checking their movements, and around 4 a.m. when they sat around a fire, we removed two glass layers from an outside facing window and slipped through.
We climbed a tree next to an outer wall that was topped with the shards of glass.
We put the pillow on that and wrapped our forearms with bedsheets and climbed the wall, and we ran away with bare feet.
I was free, with an uncertain future, no money.
The only thing I had was the memory card with the pictures and footage.
When my documentary was aired on SBS Dateline, many of my friends came to know about my situation, and they tried to help me.
They did not allow me to take any other boat to risk my life.
I also decided to stay in Indonesia and process my case through UNHCR, but I was really afraid that I would end up in Indonesia for many years doing nothing and unable to work, like every other asylum seeker.
But it had happened to be a little bit different with me.
I was lucky.
My contacts worked to expedite my case through UNHCR, and I got resettled in Australia in May 2013.
Not every asylum seeker is lucky like me.
It is really difficult to live a life with an uncertain fate, in limbo.
The issue of asylum seekers in Australia has been so extremely politicized that it has lost its human face.
The asylum seekers have been demonized and then presented to the people.
I hope my story and the story of other Hazaras could shed some light to show the people how these people are suffering in their countries of origin, and how they suffer, why they risk their lives to seek asylum.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a kindergarten we designed in 2007.
We made this kindergarten to be a circle.
It's a kind of endless circulation on top of the roof.
If you are a parent, you know that kids love to keep making circles.
This is how the rooftop looks.
And why did we design this?
The principal of this kindergarten said, "No, I don't want a handrail."
I said, "It's impossible."
But he insisted: "How about having a net sticking out from the edge of the roof?
So that it can catch the children falling off?"
(Laughter) I said, "It's impossible."
And of course, the government official said, "Of course you have to have a handrail."
But we could keep that idea around the trees.
There are three trees popping through.
And we were allowed to call this rope as a handrail.
But of course, rope has nothing to do with them.
They fall into the net.
And you get more, and more, more.
(Laughter) Sometimes 40 children are around a tree.
The boy on the branch, he loves the tree so he is eating the tree.
(Laughter) And at the time of an event, they sit on the edge.
It looks so nice from underneath.
Monkeys in the zoo.
(Laughter) Feeding time.
(Laughter) (Applause) And we made the roof as low as possible, because we wanted to see children on top of the roof, not only underneath the roof.
And if the roof is too high, you see only the ceiling.
And the leg washing place -- there are many kinds of water taps.
You see with the flexible tubes, you want to spray water to your friends, and the shower, and the one in front is quite normal.
But if you look at this, the boy is not washing his boots, he's putting water into his boots.
(Laughter) This kindergarten is completely open, most of the year.
And there is no boundary between inside and outside.
So it means basically this architecture is a roof.
And also there is no boundary between classrooms.
So there is no acoustic barrier at all.
When you put many children in a quiet box, some of them get really nervous.
But in this kindergarten, there is no reason they get nervous.
Because there is no boundary.
And the principal says if the boy in the corner doesn't want to stay in the room, we let him go.
He will come back eventually, because it's a circle, it comes back.
(Laughter) But the point is, in that kind of occasion, usually children try to hide somewhere.
But here, just they leave and come back.
It's a natural process.
And secondly, we consider noise very important.
You know that children sleep better in noise.
They don't sleep in a quiet space.
And in this kindergarten, these children show amazing concentration in class.
And you know, our kind grew up in the jungle with noise.
They need noise.
And you know, you can talk to your friends in a noisy bar.
You are not supposed to be in silence.
And you know, these days we are trying to make everything under control.
You know, it's completely open.
And you should know that we can go skiing in -20 degrees in winter.
In summer you go swimming.
The sand is 50 degrees.
And also, you should know that you are waterproof.
You never melt in rain.
So, children are supposed to be outside.
So that is how we should treat them.
This is how they divide classrooms.
They are supposed to help teachers.
They don't.
(Laughter) I didn't put him in.
A classroom.
And a washbasin.
They talk to each other around the well.
And there are always some trees in the classroom.
A monkey trying to fish another monkey from above.
(Laughter) Monkeys.
(Laughter) And each classroom has at least one skylight.
And this is where Santa Claus comes down at the time of Christmas.
This is the annex building, right next to that oval-shaped kindergarten.
The building is only five meters tall with seven floors.
And of course, the ceiling height is very low.
So you have to consider safety.
So, we put our children, a daughter and a son.
They tried to go in.
He hit his head.
He's okay. His skull is quite strong.
He is resilient. It's my son.
(Laughter) And he is trying to see if it is safe to jump off.
And then we put other children.
The traffic jam is awful in Tokyo, as you know.
(Laughter) The driver in front, she needs to learn how to drive.
Now these days, kids need a small dosage of danger.
And in this kind of occasion, they learn to help each other.
This is society. This is the kind of opportunity we are losing these days.
Now, this drawing is showing the movement of a boy between 9:10 and 9:30.
And the circumference of this building is 183 meters.
So it's not exactly small at all.
And this boy did 6,000 meters in the morning.
But the surprise is yet to come.
The children in this kindergarten do 4,000 meters on average.
And these children have the highest athletic abilities among many kindergartens.
The principal says, "I don't train them. We leave them on top of the roof.
Just like sheep."
(Laughter) They keep running.
(Laughter) My point is don't control them, don't protect them too much, and they need to tumble sometimes.
They need to get some injury.
And that makes them learn how to live in this world.
I think architecture is capable of changing this world, and people's lives.
And this is one of the attempts to change the lives of children.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Today, I am going to talk about anger.
When I was 11, seeing some of my friends leaving the school because their parents could not afford textbooks made me angry.
When I was 27, hearing the plight of a desperate slave father whose daughter was about to be sold to a brothel made me angry.
At the age of 50, lying on the street, in a pool of blood, along with my own son, made me angry.
Dear friends, for centuries we were taught anger is bad.
Our parents, teachers, priests -- everyone taught us how to control and suppress our anger.
But I ask why?
Why can't we convert our anger for the larger good of society?
Why can't we use our anger to challenge and change the evils of the world?
That I tried to do.
Friends, most of the brightest ideas came to my mind out of anger.
Like when I was 35 and sat in a locked-up, tiny prison.
The whole night, I was angry.
But it has given birth to a new idea.
But I will come to that later on.
Let me begin with the story of how I got a name for myself.
I had been a big admirer of Mahatma Gandhi since my childhood.
Gandhi fought and lead India's freedom movement.
But more importantly, he taught us how to treat the most vulnerable sections, the most deprived people, with dignity and respect.
And so, when India was celebrating Mahatma Gandhi's birth centenary in 1969 -- at that time I was 15 -- an idea came to my mind.
Why can't we celebrate it differently?
I knew, as perhaps many of you might know, that in India, a large number of people are born in the lowest segment of caste.
And they are treated as untouchables.
These are the people -- forget about allowing them to go to the temples, they cannot even go into the houses and shops of high-caste people.
So I was very impressed with the leaders of my town who were speaking very highly against the caste system and untouchability and talking of Gandhian ideals.
So inspired by that, I thought, let us set an example by inviting these people to eat food cooked and served by the untouchable community.
I went to some low-caste, so-called untouchable, people, tried to convince them, but it was unthinkable for them.
They told me, "No, no. It's not possible. It never happened."
I said, "Look at these leaders, they are so great, they are against untouchability.
They will come. If nobody comes, we can set an example."
These people thought that I was too naive.
Finally, they were convinced.
My friends and I took our bicycles and invited political leaders.
And I was so thrilled, rather, empowered to see that each one of them agreed to come.
I thought, "Great idea. We can set an example.
We can bring about change in the society."
The day has come.
All these untouchables, three women and two men, they agreed to come.
I could recall that they had used the best of their clothes.
They brought new utensils.
They had taken baths hundreds of times because it was unthinkable for them to do.
It was the moment of change.
They gathered. Food was cooked.
It was 7 o'clock.
By 8 o'clock, we kept on waiting, because it's not very uncommon that the leaders become late, for an hour or so.
So after 8 o'clock, we took our bicycles and went to these leaders' homes, just to remind them.
One of the leader's wives told me, "Sorry, he is having some headache, perhaps he cannot come."
I went to another leader and his wife told me, "Okay, you go, he will definitely join."
So I thought that the dinner will take place, though not at that large a scale.
I went back to the venue, which was a newly built Mahatma Gandhi Park.
It was 10 o'clock.
None of the leaders showed up.
That made me angry.
I was standing, leaning against Mahatma Gandhi's statue.
I was emotionally drained, rather exhausted.
Then I sat down where the food was lying.
I kept my emotions on hold.
But then, when I took the first bite, I broke down in tears.
And suddenly I felt a hand on my shoulder.
And it was the healing, motherly touch of an untouchable woman.
And she told me, "Kailash, why are you crying?
You have done your bit.
You have eaten the food cooked by untouchables, which has never happened in our memory."
She said, "You won today."
And my friends, she was right.
I came back home, a little after midnight, shocked to see that several high-caste elderly people were sitting in my courtyard.
I saw my mother and elderly women were crying and they were pleading to these elderly people because they had threatened to outcaste my whole family.
And you know, outcasting the family is the biggest social punishment one can think of.
Somehow they agreed to punish only me, and the punishment was purification.
That means I had to go 600 miles away from my hometown to the River Ganges to take a holy dip.
And after that, I should organize a feast for priests, 101 priests, wash their feet and drink that water.
It was total nonsense, and I refused to accept that punishment.
How did they punish me?
I was barred from entering into my own kitchen and my own dining room, my utensils were separated.
But the night when I was angry, they wanted to outcaste me.
But I decided to outcaste the entire caste system.
(Applause) And that was possible because the beginning would have been to change the family name, or surname, because in India, most of the family names are caste names.
So I decided to drop my name.
And then, later on, I gave a new name to myself: Satyarthi, that means, "seeker of truth."
(Applause) And that was the beginning of my transformative anger.
Friends, maybe one of you can tell me, what was I doing before becoming a children's rights activist?
Does anybody know?
No.
I was an engineer, an electrical engineer.
And then I learned how the energy of burning fire, coal, the nuclear blast inside the chambers, raging river currents, fierce winds, could be converted into the light and lives of millions.
I also learned how the most uncontrollable form of energy could be harnessed for good and making society better.
So I'll come back to the story of when I was caught in the prison: I was very happy freeing a dozen children from slavery, handing them over to their parents.
I cannot explain my joy when I free a child.
I was so happy.
But when I was waiting for my train to come back to my hometown, Delhi, I saw that dozens of children were arriving; they were being trafficked by someone.
I stopped them, those people.
I complained to the police.
So the policemen, instead of helping me, they threw me in this small, tiny shell, like an animal.
And that was the night of anger when one of the brightest and biggest ideas was born.
I thought that if I keep on freeing 10 children, and 50 more will join, that's not done.
And I believed in the power of consumers, and let me tell you that this was the first time when a campaign was launched by me or anywhere in the world, to educate and sensitize the consumers to create a demand for child-labor-free rugs.
In Europe and America, we have been successful.
And it has resulted in a fall in child labor in South Asian countries by 80 percent.
(Applause) Not only that, but this first-ever consumer's power, or consumer's campaign has grown in other countries and other industries, maybe chocolate, maybe apparel, maybe shoes -- it has gone beyond.
My anger at the age of 11, when I realized how important education is for every child, I got an idea to collect used books and help the poorest children.
I created a book bank at the age of 11.
But I did not stop.
Later on, I cofounded the world's single largest civil society campaign for education that is the Global Campaign for Education.
That has helped in changing the whole thinking towards education from the charity mode to the human rights mode, and that has concretely helped the reduction of out-of-school children by half in the last 15 years.
(Applause) My anger at the age of 27, to free that girl who was about to be sold to a brothel, has given me an idea to go for a new strategy of raid and rescue, freeing children from slavery.
And I am so lucky and proud to say that it is not one or 10 or 20, but my colleagues and I have been able to physically liberate 83,000 child slaves and hand them over back to their families and mothers.
(Applause) I knew that we needed global policies.
We organized the worldwide marches against child labor and that has also resulted in a new international convention to protect the children who are in the worst forms.
And the concrete result was that the number of child laborers globally has gone down by one third in the last 15 years.
(Applause) So, in each case, it began from anger, turned into an idea, and action.
So anger, what next?
Idea, and -- Audience: Action Kailash Satyarthi: Anger, idea, action. Which I tried to do.
Anger is a power, anger is an energy, and the law of nature is that energy can never be created and never be vanished, can never be destroyed.
So why can't the energy of anger be translated and harnessed to create a better and beautiful world, a more just and equitable world?
Anger is within each one of you, and I will share a secret for a few seconds: that if we are confined in the narrow shells of egos, and the circles of selfishness, then the anger will turn out to be hatred, violence, revenge, destruction.
But if we are able to break the circles, then the same anger could turn into a great power.
We can break the circles by using our inherent compassion and connect with the world through compassion to make this world better.
That same anger could be transformed into it.
So dear friends, sisters and brothers, again, as a Nobel Laureate, I am urging you to become angry.
I am urging you to become angry.
And the angriest among us is the one who can transform his anger into idea and action.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: For many years, you've been an inspiration to others.
Who or what inspires you and why?
KS: Good question.
Chris, let me tell you, and that is the truth, each time when I free a child, the child who has lost all his hope that he will ever come back to his mother, the first smile of freedom, and the mother who has lost all hope that the son or daughter can ever come back and sit in her lap, they become so emotional and the first tear of joy rolls down on her cheek, I see the glimpse of God in it -- this is my biggest inspiration.
And I am so lucky that not once, as I said before, but thousands of times, I have been able to witness my God in the faces of those children and they are my biggest inspirations.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a story about capitalism.
It's a system I love because of the successes and opportunities it's afforded me and millions of others.
I started in my 20s trading commodities, cotton in particular, in the pits, and if there was ever a free market free-for-all, this was it, where men wearing ties but acting like gladiators fought literally and physically for a profit.
Fortunately, I was good enough that by the time I was 30, I was able to move into the upstairs world of money management, where I spent the next three decades as a global macro trader.
And over that time, I've seen a lot of crazy things in the markets, and I've traded a lot of crazy manias.
And unfortunately, I'm sad to report that right now we might be in the grips of one of the most disastrous, certainly of my career, and one consistent takeaway is manias never end well.
Now, over the past 50 years, we as a society have come to view our companies and corporations in a very narrow, almost monomaniacal fashion with regard to how we value them, and we have put so much emphasis on profits, on short-term quarterly earnings and share prices, at the exclusion of all else.
It's like we've ripped the humanity out of our companies.
Now, we don't do that -- conveniently reduce something to a set of numbers that you can play with like Lego toys -- we don't do that in our individual life.
We don't treat somebody or value them based on their monthly income or their credit score, but we have this double standard when it comes to the way that we value our businesses, and you know what?
It's threatening the very underpinnings of our society.
And here's how you'll see.
This chart is corporate profit margins going back 40 years as a percentage of revenues, and you can see that we're at a 40-year high of 12.5 percent.
Now, hooray if you're a shareholder, but if you're the other side of that, and you're the average American worker, then you can see it's not such a good thing.
["U.S. Share of Income Going to Labor vs. CEO-to-Worker Compensation Ratio"] Now, higher profit margins do not increase societal wealth.
What they actually do is they exacerbate income inequality, and that's not a good thing.
But intuitively, that makes sense, right?
Because if the top 10 percent of American families own 90 percent of the stocks, as they take a greater share of corporate profits, then there's less wealth left for the rest of society.
Again, income inequality is not a good thing.
This next chart, made by The Equality Trust, shows 21 countries from Austria to Japan to New Zealand.
On the horizontal axis is income inequality.
The further to the right you go, the greater the income inequality.
On the vertical axis are nine social and health metrics.
The more you go up that, the worse the problems are, and those metrics include life expectancy, teenage pregnancy, literacy, social mobility, just to name a few.
Now, those of you in the audience who are Americans may wonder, well, where does the United States rank?
Where does it lie on that chart?
And guess what?
We're literally off the chart.
Yes, that's us, with the greatest income inequality and the greatest social problems, according to those metrics.
Now, here's a macro forecast that's easy to make, and that's, that gap between the wealthiest and the poorest, it will get closed.
History always does it.
It typically happens in one of three ways: either through revolution, higher taxes, or wars.
None of those are on my bucket list.
(Laughter) Now, there's another way to do it, and that's by increasing justness in corporate behavior, but the way that we're operating right now, that would require a tremendous change in behavior, and like an addict trying to kick a habit, the first step is to acknowledge that you have a problem.
And let me just say, this profits mania that we're on is so deeply entrenched that we don't even realize how we're harming society.
Here's a small but startling example of exactly how we're doing that: this chart shows corporate giving as a percentage of profits, not revenues, over the last 30 years.
Juxtapose that to the earlier chart of corporate profit margins, and I ask you, does that feel right?
In all fairness, when I started writing this, I thought, "Oh wow, what does my company, what does Tudor do?"
And I realized we give one percent of corporate profits to charity every year.
And I'm supposed to be a philanthropist.
When I realized that, I literally wanted to throw up.
But the point is, this mania is so deeply entrenched that well-intentioned people like myself don't even realize that we're part of it.
Now, we're not going to change corporate behavior by simply increasing corporate philanthropy or charitable contributions.
And oh, by the way, we've since quadrupled that, but -- (Applause) -- Please.
But we can do it by driving more just behavior.
And one way to do it is actually trusting the system that got us here in the first place, and that's the free market system.
About a year ago, some friends of mine and I started a not-for-profit called Just Capital.
Its mission is very simple: to help companies and corporations learn how to operate in a more just fashion by using the public's input to define exactly what the criteria are for just corporate behavior.
Now, right now, there's no widely accepted standard that a company or corporation can follow, and that's where Just Capital comes in, because beginning this year and every year we'll be conducting a nationwide survey of a representative sample of 20,000 Americans to find out exactly what they think are the criteria for justness in corporate behavior.
Now, this is a model that's going to start in the United States but can be expanded anywhere around the globe, and maybe we'll find out that the most important thing for the public is that we create living wage jobs, or make healthy products, or help, not harm, the environment.
At Just Capital, we don't know, and it's not for us to decide.
We're but messengers, but we have 100 percent confidence and faith in the American public to get it right.
So we'll release the findings this September for the first time, and then next year, we'll poll again, and we'll take the additive step this time of ranking the 1,000 largest U.S. companies from number one to number 1,000 and everything in between.
We're calling it the Just Index, and remember, we're an independent not-for-profit with no bias, and we will be giving the American public a voice.
And maybe over time, we'll find out that as people come to know which companies are the most just, human and economic resources will be driven towards them, and they'll become the most prosperous and help our country be the most prosperous.
Now, capitalism has been responsible for every major innovation that's made this world a more inspiring and wonderful place to live in.
Capitalism has to be based on justice.
It has to be, and now more than ever, with economic divisions growing wider every day.
It's estimated that 47 percent of American workers can be displaced in the next 20 years.
I'm not against progress.
I want the driverless car and the jet pack just like everyone else.
But I'm pleading for recognition that with increased wealth and profits has to come greater corporate social responsibility.
"If justice is removed," said Adam Smith, the father of capitalism, "the great, the immense fabric of human society must in a moment crumble into atoms."
Now, when I was young, and there was a problem, my mama used to always sigh and shake her head and say, "Have mercy, have mercy."
Now's not the time for us, for the rest of us to show them mercy.
The time is now for us to show them fairness, and we can do that, you and I, by starting where we work, in the businesses that we operate in.
And when we put justness on par with profits, we'll get the most wonderful thing in all the world.
We'll take back our humanity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Well, you know, sometimes the most important things come in the smallest packages.
I am going to try to convince you, in the 15 minutes I have, that microbes have a lot to say about questions such as, "Are we alone?"
and they can tell us more about not only life in our solar system but also maybe beyond, and this is why I am tracking them down in the most impossible places on Earth, in extreme environments where conditions are really pushing them to the brink of survival.
Actually, sometimes me too, when I'm trying to follow them too close.
But here's the thing: We are the only advanced civilization in the solar system, but that doesn't mean that there is no microbial life nearby.
In fact, the planets and moons you see here could host life -- all of them -- and we know that, and it's a strong possibility.
And if we were going to find life on those moons and planets, then we would answer questions such as, are we alone in the solar system?
Where are we coming from?
Do we have family in the neighborhood?
Is there life beyond our solar system?
And we can ask all those questions because there has been a revolution in our understanding of what a habitable planet is, and today, a habitable planet is a planet that has a zone where water can stay stable, but to me this is a horizontal definition of habitability, because it involves a distance to a star, but there is another dimension to habitability, and this is a vertical dimension.
Think of it as conditions in the subsurface of a planet where you are very far away from a sun, but you still have water, energy, nutrients, which for some of them means food, and a protection.
And when you look at the Earth, very far away from any sunlight, deep in the ocean, you have life thriving and it uses only chemistry for life processes.
So when you think of it at that point, all walls collapse.
You have no limitations, basically.
And if you have been looking at the headlines lately, then you will see that we have discovered a subsurface ocean on Europa, on Ganymede, on Enceladus, on Titan, and now we are finding a geyser and hot springs on Enceladus, Our solar system is turning into a giant spa.
For anybody who has gone to a spa knows how much microbes like that, right?
(Laughter) So at that point, think also about Mars.
There is no life possible at the surface of Mars today, but it might still be hiding underground.
So, we have been making progress in our understanding of habitability, but we also have been making progress in our understanding of what the signatures of life are on Earth.
And you can have what we call organic molecules, and these are the bricks of life, and you can have fossils, and you can minerals, biominerals, which is due to the reaction between bacteria and rocks, and of course you can have gases in the atmosphere.
And when you look at those tiny green algae on the right of the slide here, they are the direct descendants of those who have been pumping oxygen a billion years ago in the atmosphere of the Earth.
When they did that, they poisoned 90 percent of the life at the surface of the Earth, but they are the reason why you are breathing this air today.
But as much as our understanding grows of all of these things, there is one question we still cannot answer, and this is, where are we coming from?
And you know, it's getting worse, because we won't be able to find the physical evidence of where we are coming from on this planet, and the reason being is that anything that is older than four billion years is gone.
All record is gone, erased by plate tectonics and erosion.
This is what I call the Earth's biological horizon.
Beyond this horizon we don't know where we are coming from.
So is everything lost? Well, maybe not.
And we might be able to find evidence of our own origin in the most unlikely place, and this place in Mars.
How is this possible?
Well clearly at the beginning of the solar system, Mars and the Earth were bombarded by giant asteroids and comets, and there were ejecta from these impacts all over the place.
Earth and Mars kept throwing rocks at each other for a very long time.
Pieces of rocks landed on the Earth.
Pieces of the Earth landed on Mars.
So clearly, those two planets may have been seeded by the same material.
So yeah, maybe Granddady is sitting there on the surface and waiting for us.
But that also means that we can go to Mars and try to find traces of our own origin.
Mars may hold that secret for us.
This is why Mars is so special to us.
But for that to happen, Mars needed to be habitable at the time when conditions were right.
So was Mars habitable?
We have a number of missions telling us exactly the same thing today.
At the time when life appeared on the Earth, Mars did have an ocean, it had volcanoes, it had lakes, and it had deltas like the beautiful picture you see here.
This picture was sent by the Curiosity rover only a few weeks ago.
It shows the remnants of a delta, and this picture tells us something: water was abundant and stayed founting at the surface for a very long time.
This is good news for life.
Life chemistry takes a long time to actually happen.
So this is extremely good news, but does that mean that if we go there, life will be easy to find on Mars?
Not necessarily.
Here's what happened: At the time when life exploded at the surface of the Earth, then everything went south for Mars, literally.
The atmosphere was stripped away by solar winds, Mars lost its magnetosphere, and then cosmic rays and U.V. bombarded the surface and water escaped to space and went underground.
So if we want to be able to understand, if we want to be able to find those traces of the signatures of life at the surface of Mars, if they are there, we need to understand what was the impact of each of these events on the preservation of its record.
Only then will we be able to know where those signatures are hiding, and only then will we be able to send our rover to the right places where we can sample those rocks that may be telling us something really important about who we are, or, if not, maybe telling us that somewhere, independently, life has appeared on another planet.
So to do that, it's easy.
You only need to go back 3.5 billion years ago in the past of a planet.
We just need a time machine.
Easy, right?
Well, actually, it is.
Look around you -- that's planet Earth.
This is our time machine.
Geologists are using it to go back in the past of our own planet.
I am using it a little bit differently.
I use planet Earth to go in very extreme environments where conditions were similar to those of Mars at the time when the climate changed, and there I'm trying to understand what happened.
What are the signatures of life?
What is left? How are we going to find it?
So for one moment now I'm going to take you with me on a trip into that time machine.
And now, what you see here, we are at 4,500 meters in the Andes, but in fact we are less than a billion years after the Earth and Mars formed.
The Earth and Mars will have looked pretty much exactly like that -- volcanoes everywhere, evaporating lakes everywhere, minerals, hot springs, and then you see those mounds on the shore of those lakes?
Those are built by the descendants of the first organisms that gave us the first fossil on Earth.
But if we want to understand what's going on, we need to go a little further.
And the other thing about those sites is that exactly like on Mars three and a half billion years ago, the climate is changing very fast, and water and ice are disappearing.
But we need to go back to that time when everything changed on Mars, and to do that, we need to go higher.
Why is that?
Because when you go higher, the atmosphere is getting thinner, it's getting more unstable, the temperature is getting cooler, and you have a lot more U.V. radiation.
Basically, you are getting to those conditions on Mars when everything changed.
So I was not promising anything about a leisurely trip on the time machine.
You are not going to be sitting in that time machine.
You have to haul 1,000 pounds of equipment to the summit of this 20,000-foot volcano in the Andes here.
That's about 6,000 meters.
And you also have to sleep on 42-degree slopes and really hope that there won't be any earthquake that night.
But when we get to the summit, we actually find the lake we came for.
At this altitude, this lake is experiencing exactly the same conditions as those on Mars three and a half billion years ago.
And now we have to change our voyage into an inner voyage inside that lake, and to do that, we have to remove our mountain gear and actually don suits and go for it.
But at the time we enter that lake, at the very moment we enter that lake, we are stepping back three and a half billion years in the past of another planet, and then we are going to get the answer came for.
Life is everywhere, absolutely everywhere.
Everything you see in this picture is a living organism.
Maybe not so the diver, but everything else.
But this picture is very deceiving.
Life is abundant in those lakes, but like in many places on Earth right now and due to climate change, there is a huge loss in biodiversity.
In the samples that we took back home, 36 percent of the bacteria in those lakes were composed of three species, and those three species are the ones that have survived so far.
Here's another lake, right next to the first one.
The red color you see here is not due to minerals.
It's actually due to the presence of a tiny algae.
In this region, the U.V. radiation is really nasty.
Anywhere on Earth, 11 is considered to be extreme.
During U.V. storms there, the U.V. Index reaches 43.
SPF 30 is not going to do anything to you over there, and the water is so transparent in those lakes that the algae has nowhere to hide, really, and so they are developing their own sunscreen, and this is the red color you see.
But they can adapt only so far, and then when all the water is gone from the surface, microbes have only one solution left: They go underground.
And those microbes, the rocks you see in that slide here, well, they are actually living inside rocks and they are using the protection of the translucence of the rocks to get the good part of the U.V.
and discard the part that could actually damage their DNA.
And this is why we are taking our rover to train them to search for life on Mars in these areas, because if there was life on Mars three and a half billion years ago, it had to use the same strategy to actually protect itself.
Now, it is pretty obvious that going to extreme environments is helping us very much for the exploration of Mars and to prepare missions.
So far, it has helped us to understand the geology of Mars.
It has helped to understand the past climate of Mars and its evolution, but also its habitability potential.
Our most recent rover on Mars has discovered traces of organics.
Yeah, there are organics at the surface of Mars.
And it also discovered traces of methane.
And we don't know yet if the methane in question is really from geology or biology.
Regardless, what we know is that because of the discovery, the hypothesis that there is still life present on Mars today remains a viable one.
So by now, I think I have convinced you that Mars is very special to us, but it would be a mistake to think that Mars is the only place in the solar system that is interesting to find potential microbial life.
And the reason is because Mars and the Earth could have a common root to their tree of life, but when you go beyond Mars, it's not that easy.
Celestial mechanics is not making it so easy for an exchange of material between planets, and so if we were to discover life on those planets, it would be different from us.
It would be a different type of life.
But in the end, it might be just us, it might be us and Mars, or it can be many trees of life in the solar system.
I don't know the answer yet, but I can tell you something: No matter what the result is, no matter what that magic number is, it is going to give us a standard by which we are going to be able to measure the life potential, abundance and diversity beyond our own solar system.
And this can be achieved by our generation.
This can be our legacy, but only if we dare to explore.
Now, finally, if somebody tells you that looking for alien microbes is not cool because you cannot have a philosophical conversation with them, let me show you why and how you can tell them they're wrong.
Well, organic material is going to tell you about environment, about complexity and about diversity.
DNA, or any information carrier, is going to tell you about adaptation, about evolution, about survival, about planetary changes and about the transfer of information.
All together, they are telling us what started as a microbial pathway, and why what started as a microbial pathway sometimes ends up as a civilization or sometimes ends up as a dead end.
Look at the solar system, and look at the Earth.
On Earth, there are many intelligent species, but only one has achieved technology.
Right here in the journey of our own solar system, there is a very, very powerful message that says here's how we should look for alien life, small and big.
So yeah, microbes are talking and we are listening, and they are taking us, one planet at a time and one moon at a time, towards their big brothers out there.
And they are telling us about diversity, they are telling us about abundance of life, and they are telling us how this life has survived thus far to reach civilization, intelligence, technology and, indeed, philosophy.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi. I'm going to talk to you today about laughter, and I just want to start by thinking about the first time I can ever remember noticing laughter.
This is when I was a little girl. I would've been about six.
And I came across my parents doing something unusual, where they were laughing.
They were laughing very, very hard.
They were lying on the floor laughing.
They were screaming with laughter.
I did not know what they were laughing at, but I wanted in.
I wanted to be part of that, and I kind of sat around at the edge going, "Hoo hoo!" (Laughter) Now, incidentally, what they were laughing at was a song which people used to sing, which was based around signs in toilets on trains telling you what you could and could not do in toilets on trains.
And the thing you have to remember about the English is, of course, we do have an immensely sophisticated sense of humor.
(Laughter) At the time, though, I didn't understand anything of that.
I just cared about the laughter, and actually, as a neuroscientist, I've come to care about it again.
And it is a really weird thing to do.
What I'm going to do now is just play some examples of real human beings laughing, and I want you think about the sound people make and how odd that can be, and in fact how primitive laughter is as a sound.
It's much more like an animal call than it is like speech.
So here we've got some laughter for you. The first one is pretty joyful.
(Audio: Laughing) Now this next guy, I need him to breathe.
There's a point in there where I'm just, like, you've got to get some air in there, mate, because he just sounds like he's breathing out.
(Audio: Laughing) This hasn't been edited; this is him.
(Audio: Laughing) (Laughter) And finally we have -- this is a human female laughing.
And laughter can take us to some pretty odd places in terms of making noises.
(Audio: Laughing) She actually says, "Oh my God, what is that?" in French.
We're all kind of with her. I have no idea.
Now, to understand laughter, you have to look at a part of the body that psychologists and neuroscientists don't normally spend much time looking at, which is the ribcage, and it doesn't seem terribly exciting, but actually you're all using your ribcage all the time.
What you're all doing at the moment with your ribcage, and don't stop doing it, is breathing.
So you use the intercostal muscles, the muscles between your ribs, to bring air in and out of your lungs just by expanding and contracting your ribcage, and if I was to put a strap around the outside of your chest called a breath belt, and just look at that movement, you see a rather gentle sinusoidal movement, so that's breathing.
As soon as you start talking, you start using your breathing completely differently.
So what I'm doing now is you see something much more like this.
In talking, you use very fine movements of the ribcage to squeeze the air out -- and in fact, we're the only animals that can do this.
It's why we can talk at all.
Now, both talking and breathing has a mortal enemy, and that enemy is laughter, because what happens when you laugh is those same muscles start to contract very regularly, and you get this very marked sort of zig-zagging, and that's just squeezing the air out of you.
It literally is that basic a way of making a sound.
You could be stamping on somebody, it's having the same effect.
You're just squeezing air out, and each of those contractions -- Ha! -- gives you a sound.
And as the contractions run together, you can get these spasms, and that's when you start getting these -- (Wheezing) -- things happening.
I'm brilliant at this. (Laughter) Now, in terms of the science of laughter, there isn't very much, but it does turn out that pretty much everything we think we know about laughter is wrong.
So it's not at all unusual, for example, to hear people to say humans are the only animals that laugh.
Nietzsche thought that humans are the only animals that laugh.
In fact, you find laughter throughout the mammals.
It's been well-described and well-observed in primates, but you also see it in rats, and wherever you find it -- humans, primates, rats -- you find it associated with things like tickling.
That's the same for humans.
You find it associated with play, and all mammals play.
And wherever you find it, it's associated with interactions.
So Robert Provine, who has done a lot of work on this, has pointed out that you are 30 times more likely to laugh if you are with somebody else than if you're on your own, and where you find most laughter is in social interactions like conversation.
So if you ask human beings, "When do you laugh?"
they'll talk about comedy and they'll talk about humor and they'll talk about jokes.
If you look at when they laugh, they're laughing with their friends.
And when we laugh with people, we're hardly ever actually laughing at jokes.
You are laughing to show people that you understand them, that you agree with them, that you're part of the same group as them.
You're laughing to show that you like them.
You might even love them.
You're doing all that at the same time as talking to them, and the laughter is doing a lot of that emotional work for you.
Something that Robert Provine has pointed out, as you can see here, and the reason why we were laughing when we heard those funny laughs at the start, and why I was laughing when I found my parents laughing, is that it's an enormously behaviorally contagious effect.
You can catch laughter from somebody else, and you are more likely to catch laughter off somebody else if you know them.
So it's still modulated by this social context.
You have to put humor to one side and think about the social meaning of laughter because that's where its origins lie.
Now, something I've got very interested in is different kinds of laughter, and we have some neurobiological evidence about how human beings vocalize that suggests there might be two kinds of laughs that we have.
So it seems possible that the neurobiology for helpless, involuntary laughter, like my parents lying on the floor screaming about a silly song, might have a different basis to it than some of that more polite social laughter that you encounter, which isn't horrible laughter, but it's behavior somebody is doing as part of their communicative act to you, part of their interaction with you; they are choosing to do this.
In our evolution, we have developed two different ways of vocalizing.
Involuntary vocalizations are part of an older system than the more voluntary vocalizations like the speech I'm doing now.
So we might imagine that laughter might actually have two different roots.
So I've been looking at this in more detail.
To do this, we've had to make recordings of people laughing, and we've had to do whatever it takes to make people laugh, and we got those same people to produce more posed, social laughter.
So imagine your friend told a joke, and you're laughing because you like your friend, but not really because the joke's all that.
So I'm going to play you a couple of those.
I want you to tell me if you think this laughter is real laughter, or if you think it's posed.
So is this involuntary laughter or more voluntary laughter?
(Audio: Laughing) What does that sound like to you?
Audience: Posed. Sophie Scott: Posed? Posed.
How about this one?
(Audio: Laughing) (Laughter) I'm the best.
(Laughter) (Applause) Not really.
No, that was helpless laughter, and in fact, to record that, all they had to do was record me watching one of my friends listening to something I knew she wanted to laugh at, and I just started doing this.
What you find is that people are good at telling the difference between real and posed laughter.
Interestingly, you see something quite similar with chimpanzees.
Chimpanzees laugh differently if they're being tickled than if they're playing with each other, and we might be seeing something like that here, involuntary laughter, tickling laughter, being different from social laughter.
They're acoustically very different.
The real laughs are longer. They're higher in pitch.
When you start laughing hard, you start squeezing air out from your lungs under much higher pressures than you could ever produce voluntarily.
For example, I could never pitch my voice that high to sing.
Also, you start to get these sort of contractions and weird whistling sounds, all of which mean that real laughter is extremely easy, or feels extremely easy to spot.
In contrast, posed laughter, we might think it sounds a bit fake.
Actually, it's not, it's actually an important social cue.
We use it a lot, we're choosing to laugh in a lot of situations, and it seems to be its own thing.
So, for example, you find nasality in posed laughter, that kind of "ha ha ha ha ha" sound that you never get, you could not do, if you were laughing involuntarily.
So they do seem to be genuinely these two different sorts of things.
We took it into the scanner to see how brains respond when you hear laughter.
And when you do this, this is a really boring experiment.
We just played people real and posed laughs.
We didn't tell them it was a study on laughter.
We put other sounds in there to distract them, and all they're doing is lying listening to sounds.
We don't tell them to do anything.
Nonetheless, when you hear real laughter and when you hear posed laughter, the brains are responding completely differently, significantly differently.
What you see in the regions in blue, which lies in auditory cortex, are the brain areas that respond more to the real laughs, and what seems to be the case, when you hear somebody laughing involuntarily, you hear sounds you would never hear in any other context.
It's very unambiguous, and it seems to be associated with greater auditory processing of these novel sounds.
In contrast, when you hear somebody laughing in a posed way, what you see are these regions in pink, which are occupying brain areas associated with mentalizing, thinking about what somebody else is thinking.
And I think what that means is, even if you're having your brain scanned, which is completely boring and not very interesting, when you hear somebody going, "A ha ha ha ha ha," you're trying to work out why they're laughing.
Laughter is always meaningful.
You are always trying to understand it in context, even if, as far as you are concerned, at that point in time, it has not necessarily anything to do with you, you still want to know why those people are laughing.
Now, we've had the opportunity to look at how people hear real and posed laughter across the age range.
So this is an online experiment we ran with the Royal Society, and here we just asked people two questions.
First of all, they heard some laughs, and they had to say, how real or posed do these laughs sound?
What you see is there is a rapid onset.
As you get older, you get better and better at spotting real laughter.
So six-year-olds are at chance, they can't really hear the difference.
By the time you are older, you get better, but interestingly, you do not hit peak performance in this dataset until you are in your late 30s and early 40s.
You don't understand laughter fully by the time you hit puberty.
You don't understand laughter fully by the time your brain has matured at the end of your teens.
You're learning about laughter throughout your entire early adult life.
If we turn the question around and now say not, what does the laughter sound like in terms of being real or posed, but we say, how much does this laughter make you want to laugh, how contagious is this laughter to you, we see a different profile.
And here, the younger you are, the more you want to join in when you hear laughter.
Remember me laughing with my parents when I had no idea what was going on.
You really can see this.
Now everybody, young and old, finds the real laughs more contagious than the posed laughs, but as you get older, it all becomes less contagious to you.
Now, either we're all just becoming really grumpy as we get older, or it may mean that as you understand laughter better, and you are getting better at doing that, you need more than just hearing people laugh to want to laugh.
You need the social stuff there.
So we've got a very interesting behavior about which a lot of our lay assumptions are incorrect, but I'm coming to see that actually there's even more to laughter than it's an important social emotion we should look at, because it turns out people are phenomenally nuanced in terms of how we use laughter.
There's a really lovely set of studies coming out from Robert Levenson's lab in California, where he's doing a longitudinal study with couples.
He gets married couples, men and women, into the lab, and he gives them stressful conversations to have while he wires them up to a polygraph so he can see them becoming stressed.
So you've got the two of them in there, and he'll say to the husband, "Tell me something that your wife does that irritates you."
And what you see is immediately -- just run that one through your head briefly, you and your partner -- you can imagine everybody gets a bit more stressed as soon as that starts.
You can see physically, people become more stressed.
What he finds is that the couples who manage that feeling of stress with laughter, positive emotions like laughter, not only immediately become less stressed, they can see them physically feeling better, they're dealing with this unpleasant situation better together, they are also the couples that report high levels of satisfaction in their relationship and they stay together for longer.
So in fact, when you look at close relationships, laughter is a phenomenally useful index of how people are regulating their emotions together.
We're not just emitting it at each other to show that we like each other, we're making ourselves feel better together.
Now, I don't think this is going to be limited to romantic relationships.
I think this is probably going to be a characteristic of close emotional relationships such as you might have with friends, which explains my next clip, which is of a YouTube video of some young men in the former East Germany on making a video to promote their heavy metal band, and it's extremely macho, and the mood is very serious, and I want you to notice what happens in terms of laughter when things go wrong and how quickly that happens, and how that changes the mood.
He's cold. He's about to get wet. He's got swimming trunks on, got a towel.
Ice.
What might possibly happen?
Video starts.
Serious mood.
And his friends are already laughing. They are already laughing, hard.
He's not laughing yet.
(Laughter) He's starting to go now.
And now they're all off.
(Laughter) They're on the floor.
(Laughter) The thing I really like about that is it's all very serious until he jumps onto the ice, and as soon as he doesn't go through the ice, but also there isn't blood and bone everywhere, his friends start laughing.
And imagine if that had played him out with him standing there going, "No seriously, Heinrich, I think this is broken," we wouldn't enjoy watching that. That would be stressful.
Or if he was running around with a visibly broken leg laughing, and his friends are going, "Heinrich, I think we need to go to the hospital now," that also wouldn't be funny.
The fact that the laughter works, it gets him from a painful, embarrassing, difficult situation, into a funny situation, into what we're actually enjoying there, and I think that's a really interesting use, and it's actually happening all the time.
For example, I can remember something like this happening at my father's funeral.
We weren't jumping around on the ice in our underpants.
We're not Canadian.
(Laughter) (Applause) These events are always difficult, I had a relative who was being a bit difficult, my mum was not in a good place, and I can remember finding myself just before the whole thing started telling this story about something that happened in a 1970s sitcom, and I just thought at the time, I don't know why I'm doing this, and what I realized I was doing was I was coming up with something from somewhere I could use to make her laugh together with me.
It was a very basic reaction to find some reason we can do this.
We can laugh together. We're going to get through this.
We're going to be okay.
And in fact, all of us are doing this all the time.
You do it so often, you don't even notice it.
Everybody underestimates how often they laugh, and you're doing something, when you laugh with people, that's actually letting you access a really ancient evolutionary system that mammals have evolved to make and maintain social bonds, and clearly to regulate emotions, to make ourselves feel better.
It's not something specific to humans -- it's a really ancient behavior which really helps us regulate how we feel and makes us feel better.
In other words, when it comes to laughter, you and me, baby, ain't nothing but mammals. (Laughter) Thank you.
Thank you. (Applause)
My first love was for the night sky.
Love is complicated.
You're looking at a fly-through of the Hubble Space Telescope Ultra-Deep Field, one of the most distant images of our universe ever observed.
Everything you see here is a galaxy, comprised of billions of stars each.
And the farthest galaxy is a trillion, trillion kilometers away.
As an astrophysicist, I have the awesome privilege of studying some of the most exotic objects in our universe.
The objects that have captivated me from first crush throughout my career are supermassive, hyperactive black holes.
Weighing one to 10 billion times the mass of our own sun, these galactic black holes are devouring material, at a rate of upwards of 1,000 times more than your "average" supermassive black hole.
(Laughter) These two characteristics, with a few others, make them quasars.
At the same time, the objects I study are producing some of the most powerful particle streams ever observed.
These narrow streams, called jets, are moving at 99.99 percent of the speed of light, and are pointed directly at the Earth.
These jetted, Earth-pointed, hyperactive and supermassive black holes are called blazars, or blazing quasars.
What makes blazars so special is that they're some of the universe's most efficient particle accelerators, transporting incredible amounts of energy throughout a galaxy.
Here, I'm showing an artist's conception of a blazar.
The dinner plate by which material falls onto the black hole is called the accretion disc, shown here in blue.
Some of that material is slingshotted around the black hole and accelerated to insanely high speeds in the jet, shown here in white.
Although the blazar system is rare, the process by which nature pulls in material via a disk, and then flings some of it out via a jet, is more common.
We'll eventually zoom out of the blazar system to show its approximate relationship to the larger galactic context.
Beyond the cosmic accounting of what goes in to what goes out, one of the hot topics in blazar astrophysics right now is where the highest-energy jet emission comes from.
In this image, I'm interested in where this white blob forms and if, as a result, there's any relationship between the jet and the accretion disc material.
Clear answers to this question were almost completely inaccessible until 2008, when NASA launched a new telescope that better detects gamma ray light -- that is, light with energies a million times higher than your standard x-ray scan.
I simultaneously compare variations between the gamma ray light data and the visible light data from day to day and year to year, to better localize these gamma ray blobs.
My research shows that in some instances, these blobs form much closer to the black hole than we initially thought.
As we more confidently localize where these gamma ray blobs are forming, we can better understand how jets are being accelerated, and ultimately reveal the dynamic processes by which some of the most fascinating objects in our universe are formed.
This all started as a love story.
And it still is.
This love transformed me from a curious, stargazing young girl to a professional astrophysicist, hot on the heels of celestial discovery.
Who knew that chasing after the universe would ground me so deeply to my mission here on Earth.
Then again, when do we ever know where love's first flutter will truly take us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
These dragons from deep time are incredible creatures.
They're bizzarre, they're beautiful, and there's very little we know about them.
These thoughts were going through my head when I looked at the pages of my first dinosaur book.
I was about five years old at the time, and I decided there and then that I would become a paleontologist.
Paleontology allowed me to combine my love for animals with my desire to travel to far-flung corners of the world.
And now, a few years later, I've led several expeditions to the ultimate far-flung corner on this planet, the Sahara.
I've worked in the Sahara because I've been on a quest to uncover new remains of a bizarre, giant predatory dinosaur called Spinosaurus.
A few bones of this animal have been found in the deserts of Egypt and were described about 100 years ago by a German paleontologist.
Unfortunately, all his Spinosaurus bones were destroyed in World War II.
So all we're left with are just a few drawings and notes.
From these drawings, we know that this creature, which lived about 100 million years ago, was very big, it had tall spines on its back, forming a magnificent sail, and it had long, slender jaws, a bit like a crocodile, with conical teeth, that may have been used to catch slippery prey, like fish.
But that was pretty much all we knew about this animal for the next 100 years.
My fieldwork took me to the border region between Morocco and Algeria, a place called the Kem Kem.
It's a difficult place to work in.
You have to deal with sandstorms and snakes and scorpions, and it's very difficult to find good fossils there.
But our hard work paid off.
We discovered many incredible specimens.
There's the largest dinosaur bone that had ever been found in this part of the Sahara.
We found remains of giant predatory dinosaurs, medium-sized predatory dinosaurs, and seven or eight different kinds of crocodile-like hunters.
These fossils were deposited in a river system.
The river system was also home to a giant, car-sized coelacanth, a monster sawfish, and the skies over the river system were filled with pterosaurs, flying reptiles.
It was a pretty dangerous place, not the kind of place where you'd want to travel to if you had a time machine.
So we're finding all these incredible fossils of animals that lived alongside Spinosaurus, but Spinosaurus itself proved to be very elusive.
We were just finding bits and pieces and I was hoping that we'd find a partial skeleton at some point.
Finally, very recently, we were able to track down a dig site where a local fossil hunter found several bones of Spinosaurus.
We returned to the site, we collected more bones.
And so after 100 years we finally had another partial skeleton of this bizarre creature.
And we were able to reconstruct it.
We now know that Spinosaurus had a head a little bit like a crocodile, very different from other predatory dinosaurs, very different from the T. rex.
But the really interesting information came from the rest of the skeleton.
We had long spines, the spines forming the big sail.
We had leg bones, we had skull bones, we had paddle-shaped feet, wide feet -- again, very unusual, no other dinosaur has feet like this -- and we think they may have been used to walk on soft sediment, or maybe for paddling in the water.
We also looked at the fine microstructure of the bone, the inside structure of Spinosaurus bones, and it turns out that they're very dense and compact.
Again, this is something we see in animals that spend a lot of time in the water, it's useful for buoyancy control in the water.
We C.T.-scanned all of our bones and built a digital Spinosaurus skeleton.
And when we looked at the digital skeleton, we realized that yes, this was a dinosaur unlike any other.
It's bigger than a T. rex, and yes, the head has "fish-eating" written all over it, but really the entire skeleton has "water-loving" written all over it -- dense bone, paddle-like feet, and the hind limbs are reduced in size, and again, this is something we see in animals that spend a substantial amount of time in the water.
So, as we fleshed out our Spinosaurus -- I'm looking at muscle attachments and wrapping our dinosaur in skin -- we realize that we're dealing with a river monster, a predatory dinosaur, bigger than T. rex, the ruler of this ancient river of giants, feeding on the many aquatic animals I showed you earlier on.
So that's really what makes this an incredible discovery.
It's a dinosaur like no other.
And some people told me, "Wow, this is a once-in-a-lifetime discovery.
There are not many things left to discover in the world."
Well, I think nothing could be further from the truth.
I think the Sahara's still full of treasures, and when people tell me there are no places left to explore, I like to quote a famous dinosaur hunter, Roy Chapman Andrews, and he said, "Always, there has been an adventure just around the corner -- and the world is still full of corners."
That was true many decades ago when Roy Chapman Andrews wrote these lines.
And it is still true today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
To be honest, by personality, I'm just not much of a crier.
But I think in my career that's been a good thing.
I'm a civil rights lawyer, and I've seen some horrible things in the world.
I began my career working police abuse cases in the United States.
And then in 1994, I was sent to Rwanda to be the director of the U.N.'s genocide investigation.
It turns out that tears just aren't much help when you're trying to investigate a genocide.
The things I had to see, and feel and touch were pretty unspeakable.
What I can tell you is this: that the Rwandan genocide was one of the world's greatest failures of simple compassion.
That word, compassion, actually comes from two Latin words: cum passio, which simply mean "to suffer with."
And the things that I saw and experienced in Rwanda as I got up close to human suffering, it did, in moments, move me to tears.
But I just wish that I, and the rest of the world, had been moved earlier.
And not just to tears, but to actually stop the genocide.
Now by contrast, I've also been involved with one of the world's greatest successes of compassion.
And that's the fight against global poverty.
It's a cause that probably has involved all of us here.
I don't know if your first introduction might have been choruses of "We Are the World," or maybe the picture of a sponsored child on your refrigerator door, or maybe the birthday you donated for fresh water.
I don't really remember what my first introduction to poverty was but I do remember the most jarring.
It was when I met Venus -- she's a mom from Zambia.
She's got three kids and she's a widow.
When I met her, she had walked about 12 miles in the only garments she owned, to come to the capital city and to share her story.
She sat down with me for hours, just ushered me in to the world of poverty.
She described what it was like when the coals on the cooking fire finally just went completely cold.
When that last drop of cooking oil finally ran out.
When the last of the food, despite her best efforts, ran out.
She had to watch her youngest son, Peter, suffer from malnutrition, as his legs just slowly bowed into uselessness.
As his eyes grew cloudy and dim.
And then as Peter finally grew cold.
For over 50 years, stories like this have been moving us to compassion.
We whose kids have plenty to eat.
And we're moved not only to care about global poverty, but to actually try to do our part to stop the suffering.
Now there's plenty of room for critique that we haven't done enough, and what it is that we've done hasn't been effective enough, but the truth is this: The fight against global poverty is probably the broadest, longest running manifestation of the human phenomenon of compassion in the history of our species.
And so I'd like to share a pretty shattering insight that might forever change the way you think about that struggle.
But first, let me begin with what you probably already know.
Thirty-five years ago, when I would have been graduating from high school, they told us that 40,000 kids every day died because of poverty.
That number, today, is now down to 17,000.
Way too many, of course, but it does mean that every year, there's eight million kids who don't have to die from poverty.
Moreover, the number of people in our world who are living in extreme poverty, which is defined as living off about a dollar and a quarter a day, that has fallen from 50 percent, to only 15 percent.
This is massive progress, and this exceeds everybody's expectations about what is possible.
And I think you and I, I think, honestly, that we can feel proud and encouraged to see the way that compassion actually has the power to succeed in stopping the suffering of millions.
But here's the part that you might not hear very much about.
If you move that poverty mark just up to two dollars a day, it turns out that virtually the same two billion people who were stuck in that harsh poverty when I was in high school, are still stuck there, 35 years later.
So why, why are so many billions still stuck in such harsh poverty?
Well, let's think about Venus for a moment.
Now for decades, my wife and I have been moved by common compassion to sponsor kids, to fund microloans, to support generous levels of foreign aid.
But until I had actually talked to Venus, I would have had no idea that none of those approaches actually addressed why she had to watch her son die.
"We were doing fine," Venus told me, "until Brutus started to cause trouble."
Now, Brutus is Venus' neighbor and "cause trouble" is what happened the day after Venus' husband died, when Brutus just came and threw Venus and the kids out of the house, stole all their land, and robbed their market stall.
You see, Venus was thrown into destitution by violence.
And then it occurred to me, of course, that none of my child sponsorships, none of the microloans, none of the traditional anti-poverty programs were going to stop Brutus, because they weren't meant to.
This became even more clear to me when I met Griselda.
She's a marvelous young girl living in a very poor community in Guatemala.
And one of the things we've learned over the years is that perhaps the most powerful thing that Griselda and her family can do to get Griselda and her family out of poverty is to make sure that she goes to school.
The experts call this the Girl Effect.
But when we met Griselda, she wasn't going to school.
In fact, she was rarely ever leaving her home.
Days before we met her, while she was walking home from church with her family, in broad daylight, men from her community just snatched her off the street, and violently raped her.
See, Griselda had every opportunity to go to school, it just wasn't safe for her to get there.
And Griselda's not the only one.
Around the world, poor women and girls between the ages of 15 and 44, they are -- when victims of the everyday violence of domestic abuse and sexual violence -- those two forms of violence account for more death and disability than malaria, than car accidents, than war combined.
The truth is, the poor of our world are trapped in whole systems of violence.
In South Asia, for instance, I could drive past this rice mill and see this man hoisting these 100-pound sacks of rice upon his thin back.
But I would have no idea, until later, that he was actually a slave, held by violence in that rice mill since I was in high school.
Decades of anti-poverty programs right in his community were never able to rescue him or any of the hundred other slaves from the beatings and the rapes and the torture of violence inside the rice mill.
In fact, half a century of anti-poverty programs have left more poor people in slavery than in any other time in human history.
Experts tell us that there's about 35 million people in slavery today.
That's about the population of the entire nation of Canada, where we're sitting today.
This is why, over time, I have come to call this epidemic of violence the Locust Effect.
Because in the lives of the poor, it just descends like a plague and it destroys everything.
In fact, now when you survey very, very poor communities, residents will tell you that their greatest fear is violence.
But notice the violence that they fear is not the violence of genocide or the wars, it's everyday violence.
So for me, as a lawyer, of course, my first reaction was to think, well, of course we've got to change all the laws.
We've got to make all this violence against the poor illegal.
But then I found out, it already is.
The problem is not that the poor don't get laws, it's that they don't get law enforcement.
In the developing world, basic law enforcement systems are so broken that recently the U.N. issued a report that found that "most poor people live outside the protection of the law."
Now honestly, you and I have just about no idea of what that would mean because we have no first-hand experience of it.
Functioning law enforcement for us is just a total assumption.
In fact, nothing expresses that assumption more clearly than three simple numbers: 9-1-1, which, of course, is the number for the emergency police operator here in Canada and in the United States, where the average response time to a police 911 emergency call is about 10 minutes.
So we take this just completely for granted.
But what if there was no law enforcement to protect you?
A woman in Oregon recently experienced what this would be like.
She was home alone in her dark house on a Saturday night, when a man started to tear his way into her home.
This was her worst nightmare, because this man had actually put her in the hospital from an assault just two weeks before.
So terrified, she picks up that phone and does what any of us would do: She calls 911 -- but only to learn that because of budget cuts in her county, law enforcement wasn't available on the weekends.
Listen.
Dispatcher: I don't have anybody to send out there.
Woman: OK Dispatcher: Um, obviously if he comes inside the residence and assaults you, can you ask him to go away?
Or do you know if he is intoxicated or anything?
Woman: I've already asked him. I've already told him I was calling you.
He's broken in before, busted down my door, assaulted me.
Dispatcher: Uh-huh.
Woman: Um, yeah, so ...
Dispatcher: Is there any way you could safely leave the residence?
Woman: No, I can't, because he's blocking pretty much my only way out.
Dispatcher: Well, the only thing I can do is give you some advice, and call the sheriff's office tomorrow.
Obviously, if he comes in and unfortunately has a weapon or is trying to cause you physical harm, that's a different story.
You know, the sheriff's office doesn't work up there.
I don't have anybody to send."
Gary Haugen: Tragically, the woman inside that house was violently assaulted, choked and raped because this is what it means to live outside the rule of law.
And this is where billions of our poorest live.
What does that look like?
In Bolivia, for example, if a man sexually assaults a poor child, statistically, he's at greater risk of slipping in the shower and dying than he is of ever going to jail for that crime.
In South Asia, if you enslave a poor person, you're at greater risk of being struck by lightning than ever being sent to jail for that crime.
And so the epidemic of everyday violence, it just rages on.
And it devastates our efforts to try to help billions of people out of their two-dollar-a-day hell.
Because the data just doesn't lie.
It turns out that you can give all manner of goods and services to the poor, but if you don't restrain the hands of the violent bullies from taking it all away, you're going to be very disappointed in the long-term impact of your efforts.
So you would think that the disintegration of basic law enforcement in the developing world would be a huge priority for the global fight against poverty.
But it's not.
Auditors of international assistance recently couldn't find even one percent of aid going to protect the poor from the lawless chaos of everyday violence.
And honestly, when we do talk about violence against the poor, sometimes it's in the weirdest of ways.
A fresh water organization tells a heart-wrenching story of girls who are raped on the way to fetching water, and then celebrates the solution of a new well that drastically shortens their walk.
End of story.
But not a word about the rapists who are still right there in the community.
If a young woman on one of our college campuses was raped on her walk to the library, we would never celebrate the solution of moving the library closer to the dorm.
And yet, for some reason, this is okay for poor people.
Now the truth is, the traditional experts in economic development and poverty alleviation, they don't know how to fix this problem.
And so what happens?
They don't talk about it.
But the more fundamental reason that law enforcement for the poor in the developing world is so neglected, is because the people inside the developing world, with money, don't need it.
I was at the World Economic Forum not long ago talking to corporate executives who have massive businesses in the developing world and I was just asking them, "How do you guys protect all your people and property from all the violence?"
And they looked at each other, and they said, practically in unison, "We buy it."
Indeed, private security forces in the developing world are now, four, five and seven times larger than the public police force.
In Africa, the largest employer on the continent now is private security.
But see, the rich can pay for safety and can keep getting richer, but the poor can't pay for it and they're left totally unprotected and they keep getting thrown to the ground.
This is a massive and scandalous outrage.
And it doesn't have to be this way.
Broken law enforcement can be fixed.
Violence can be stopped.
Almost all criminal justice systems, they start out broken and corrupt, but they can be transformed by fierce effort and commitment.
The path forward is really pretty clear.
Number one: We have to start making stopping violence indispensable to the fight against poverty.
In fact, any conversation about global poverty that doesn't include the problem of violence must be deemed not serious.
And secondly, we have to begin to seriously invest resources and share expertise to support the developing world as they fashion new, public systems of justice, not private security, that give everybody a chance to be safe.
These transformations are actually possible and they're happening today.
Recently, the Gates Foundation funded a project in the second largest city of the Philippines, where local advocates and local law enforcement were able to transform corrupt police and broken courts so drastically, that in just four short years, they were able to measurably reduce the commercial sexual violence against poor kids by 79 percent.
You know, from the hindsight of history, what's always most inexplicable and inexcusable are the simple failures of compassion.
Because I think history convenes a tribunal of our grandchildren and they just ask us, "Grandma, Grandpa, where were you?
Where were you, Grandpa, when the Jews were fleeing Nazi Germany and were being rejected from our shores?
Where were you?
And Grandma, where were you when they were marching our Japanese-American neighbors off to internment camps?
And Grandpa, where were you when they were beating our African-American neighbors just because they were trying to register to vote?"
Likewise, when our grandchildren ask us, "Grandma, Grandpa, where were you when two billion of the world's poorest were drowning in a lawless chaos of everyday violence?"
I hope we can say that we had compassion, that we raised our voice, and as a generation, we were moved to make the violence stop.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Really powerfully argued.
Talk to us a bit about some of the things that have actually been happening to, for example, boost police training.
How hard a process is that?
GH: Well, one of the glorious things that's starting to happen now is that the collapse of these systems and the consequences are becoming obvious.
There's actually, now, political will to do that.
But it just requires now an investment of resources and transfer of expertise.
There's a political will struggle that's going to take place as well, but those are winnable fights, because we've done some examples around the world at International Justice Mission that are very encouraging.
CA: So just tell us in one country, how much it costs to make a material difference to police, for example -- I know that's only one piece of it.
GH: In Guatemala, for instance, we've started a project there with the local police and court system, prosecutors, to retrain them so that they can actually effectively bring these cases.
And we've seen prosecutions against perpetrators of sexual violence increase by more than 1,000 percent.
This project has been very modestly funded at about a million dollars a year, and the kind of bang you can get for your buck in terms of leveraging a criminal justice system that could function if it were properly trained and motivated and led, and these countries, especially a middle class that is seeing that there's really no future with this total instability and total privatization of security I think there's an opportunity, a window for change.
CA: But to make this happen, you have to look at each part in the chain -- the police, who else?
GH: So that's the thing about law enforcement, it starts out with the police, they're the front end of the pipeline of justice, but they hand if off to the prosecutors, and the prosecutors hand it off to the courts, and the survivors of violence have to be supported by social services all the way through that.
So you have to do an approach that pulls that all together.
In the past, there's been a little bit of training of the courts, but they get crappy evidence from the police, or a little police intervention that has to do with narcotics or terrorism but nothing to do with treating the common poor person with excellent law enforcement, so it's about pulling that all together, and you can actually have people in very poor communities experience law enforcement like us, which is imperfect in our own experience, for sure, but boy, is it a great thing to sense that you can call 911 and maybe someone will protect you.
CA: Gary, I think you've done a spectacular job of bringing this to the world's attention in your book and right here today.
Thanks so much.
Gary Haugen.
(Applause)
Roy Gould: Less than a year from now, the world is going to celebrate the International Year of Astronomy, which marks the 400th anniversary of Galileo's first glimpse of the night sky through a telescope.
In a few months, the world is also going to celebrate the launch of a new invention from Microsoft Research, which I think is going to have as profound an impact on the way we view the universe as Galileo did four centuries ago.
It's called the WorldWide Telescope, and I want to thank TED and Microsoft for allowing me to bring it to your attention.
And I want to urge you, when you get a chance, to give it a closer look at the TED Lab downstairs.
The WorldWide Telescope takes the best images from the world's greatest telescopes on Earth and in space, and has woven them seamlessly to produce a holistic view of the universe.
It's going to change the way we do astronomy, it's going to change the way we teach astronomy and I think most importantly it's going to change the way we see ourselves in the universe.
If we were having this TED meeting in our grandparents' day, that might not be so big a claim.
In 1920, for example, you weren't allowed to drink; if you were a woman, you weren't allowed to vote; and if you looked up at the stars and the Milky Way on a summer night, what you saw was thought to be the entire universe.
In fact, the head of Harvard's observatory back then gave a great debate in which he argued that the Milky Way Galaxy was the entire universe.
Harvard was wrong, big time. (Laughter) Of course, we know today that galaxies extend far beyond our own galaxy.
We can see all the way out to the edge of the observable universe, all the way back in time, almost to the moment of the Big Bang itself.
We can see across the entire spectrum of light, revealing worlds that had previously been invisible.
We see these magnificent star nurseries, where nature has somehow arranged for just the right numbers and just the right sizes of stars to be born for life to arise.
We see alien worlds, we see alien solar systems -- 300 now, and still counting -- and they're not like us.
We see black holes at the heart of our galaxy, in the Milky Way, and elsewhere in the universe, where time itself seems to stand still.
But until now, our view of the universe has been disconnected and fragmented, and I think that many of the marvelous stories that nature has to tell us have fallen through the cracks. And that's changing.
I want to just briefly mention three reasons why my colleagues and I, in astronomy and in education, are so excited about the WorldWide Telescope and why we think it's truly transformative.
First, it enables you to experience the universe: the WorldWide Telescope, for me, is a kind of magic carpet that lets you navigate through the universe where you want to go.
Second: you can tour the universe with astronomers as your guides.
And I'm not talking here about just experts who are telling you what you're seeing, but really people who are passionate about the various nooks and crannies of the universe, who can share their enthusiasm and can make the universe a welcoming place.
And third, you can create your own tours -- you can share them with friends, you can create them with friends -- and that's the part that I think I'm most excited about because I think that at heart, we are all storytellers.
And in telling stories, each of us is going to understand the universe in our own way.
We're going to have a personal universe.
I think we're going to see a community of storytellers evolve and emerge.
Before I introduce the person responsible for the WorldWide Telescope, I just want to leave you with this brief thought: when I ask people, "How does the night sky make you feel?"
they often say, "Oh, tiny. I feel tiny and insignificant."
Well, our gaze fills the universe.
And thanks to the creators of the WorldWide Telescope, we can now start to have a dialogue with the universe.
I think the WorldWide Telescope will convince you that we may be tiny, but we are truly, wonderfully significant.
Thank you.
(Applause) I can't tell you what a privilege it is to introduce Curtis Wong from Microsoft. (Applause) Curtis Wong: Thank you, Roy.
So, what you're seeing here is a wonderful presentation, but it's one of the tours.
And actually this tour is one that was created earlier.
And the tours are all totally interactive, so that if I were to go somewhere ...
you may be watching a tour and you can pause anywhere along the way, pull up other information -- there are lots of Web and information sources about places you might want to go -- you can zoom in, you can pull back out.
The whole resources are there available for you.
So, Microsoft -- this is a project that -- WorldWide Telescope is dedicated to Jim Gray, who's our colleague, and a lot of his work that he did is really what makes this project possible.
It's a labor of love for us and our small team, and we really hope it will inspire kids to explore and learn about the universe.
So basically, kids of all ages, like us.
And so WorldWide Telescope will be available this spring.
It'll be a free download -- thank you, Craig Mundie -- and it'll be available at the website WorldWideTelescope.org, which is something new.
And so, what you've seen today is less than a fraction of one percent of what is in here, and in the TED Lab, we have a tour that was created by a six-year-old named Benjamin that will knock your socks off. (Laughter) So we'll see you there. Thank you.
(Applause)
Growing up, I didn't always understand why my parents made me follow the rules that they did.
Like, why did I really have to mow the lawn?
Why was homework really that important?
Why couldn't I put jelly beans in my oatmeal?
My childhood was abound with questions like this.
Normal things about being a kid and realizing that sometimes, it was best to listen to my parents even when I didn't exactly understand why.
And it's not that they didn't want me to think critically.
Their parenting always sought to reconcile the tension between having my siblings and I understand the realities of the world, while ensuring that we never accepted the status quo as inevitable.
I came to realize that this, in and of itself, was a very purposeful form of education.
One of my favorite educators, Brazilian author and scholar Paulo Freire, speaks quite explicitly about the need for education to be used as a tool for critical awakening and shared humanity.
In his most famous book, "Pedagogy of the Oppressed," he states, "No one can be authentically human while he prevents others from being so."
I've been thinking a lot about this lately, this idea of humanity, and specifically, who in this world is afforded the privilege of being perceived as fully human.
Over the course of the past several months, the world has watched as unarmed black men, and women, have had their lives taken at the hands of police and vigilante.
These events and all that has transpired after them have brought me back to my own childhood and the decisions that my parents made about raising a black boy in America that growing up, I didn't always understand in the way that I do now.
I think of how hard it must have been, how profoundly unfair it must have felt for them to feel like they had to strip away parts of my childhood just so that I could come home at night.
For example, I think of how one night, when I was around 12 years old, on an overnight field trip to another city, my friends and I bought Super Soakers and turned the hotel parking lot into our own water-filled battle zone.
We hid behind cars, running through the darkness that lay between the streetlights, boundless laughter ubiquitous across the pavement.
But within 10 minutes, my father came outside, grabbed me by my forearm and led me into our room with an unfamiliar grip.
Before I could say anything, tell him how foolish he had made me look in front of my friends, he derided me for being so naive.
Looked me in the eye, fear consuming his face, and said, "Son, I'm sorry, but you can't act the same as your white friends.
You can't pretend to shoot guns.
You can't run around in the dark.
You can't hide behind anything other than your own teeth."
I know now how scared he must have been, how easily I could have fallen into the empty of the night, that some man would mistake this water for a good reason to wash all of this away.
These are the sorts of messages I've been inundated with my entire life: Always keep your hands where they can see them, don't move too quickly, take off your hood when the sun goes down.
My parents raised me and my siblings in an armor of advice, an ocean of alarm bells so someone wouldn't steal the breath from our lungs, so that they wouldn't make a memory of this skin.
So that we could be kids, not casket or concrete.
And it's not because they thought it would make us better than anyone else it's simply because they wanted to keep us alive.
All of my black friends were raised with the same message, the talk, given to us when we became old enough to be mistaken for a nail ready to be hammered to the ground, when people made our melanin synonymous with something to be feared.
But what does it do to a child to grow up knowing that you cannot simply be a child?
That the whims of adolescence are too dangerous for your breath, that you cannot simply be curious, that you are not afforded the luxury of making a mistake, that someone's implicit bias might be the reason you don't wake up in the morning.
But this cannot be what defines us.
Because we have parents who raised us to understand that our bodies weren't meant for the backside of a bullet, but for flying kites and jumping rope, and laughing until our stomachs burst.
We had teachers who taught us how to raise our hands in class, and not just to signal surrender, and that the only thing we should give up is the idea that we aren't worthy of this world.
So when we say that black lives matter, it's not because others don't, it's simply because we must affirm that we are worthy of existing without fear, when so many things tell us we are not.
I want to live in a world where my son will not be presumed guilty the moment he is born, where a toy in his hand isn't mistaken for anything other than a toy.
And I refuse to accept that we can't build this world into something new, some place where a child's name doesn't have to be written on a t-shirt, or a tombstone, where the value of someone's life isn't determined by anything other than the fact that they had lungs, a place where every single one of us can breathe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a plant geneticist.
I study genes that make plants resistant to disease and tolerant of stress.
In recent years, millions of people around the world have come to believe that there's something sinister about genetic modification.
Today, I am going to provide a different perspective.
First, let me introduce my husband, Raoul.
He's an organic farmer.
On his farm, he plants a variety of different crops.
This is one of the many ecological farming practices he uses to keep his farm healthy.
Imagine some of the reactions we get: "Really? An organic farmer and a plant geneticist?
Can you agree on anything?"
Well, we can, and it's not difficult, because we have the same goal.
We want to help nourish the growing population without further destroying the environment.
I believe this is the greatest challenge of our time.
Now, genetic modification is not new; virtually everything we eat has been genetically modified in some manner.
Let me give you a few examples.
On the left is an image of the ancient ancestor of modern corn.
You see a single roll of grain that's covered in a hard case.
Unless you have a hammer, teosinte isn't good for making tortillas.
Now, take a look at the ancient ancestor of banana.
You can see the large seeds.
And unappetizing brussel sprouts, and eggplant, so beautiful.
Now, to create these varieties, breeders have used many different genetic techniques over the years.
Some of them are quite creative, like mixing two different species together using a process called grafting to create this variety that's half tomato and half potato.
Breeders have also used other types of genetic techniques, such as random mutagenesis, which induces uncharacterized mutations into the plants.
The rice in the cereal that many of us fed our babies was developed using this approach.
Now, today, breeders have even more options to choose from.
Some of them are extraordinarily precise.
I want to give you a couple examples from my own work.
I work on rice, which is a staple food for more than half the world's people.
Each year, 40 percent of the potential harvest is lost to pest and disease.
For this reason, farmers plant rice varieties that carry genes for resistance.
This approach has been used for nearly 100 years.
Yet, when I started graduate school, no one knew what these genes were.
It wasn't until the 1990s that scientists finally uncovered the genetic basis of resistance.
In my laboratory, we isolated a gene for immunity to a very serious bacterial disease in Asia and Africa.
We found we could engineer the gene into a conventional rice variety that's normally susceptible, and you can see the two leaves on the bottom here are highly resistant to infection.
Now, the same month that my laboratory published our discovery on the rice immunity gene, my friend and colleague Dave Mackill stopped by my office.
He said, "Seventy million rice farmers are having trouble growing rice."
That's because their fields are flooded, and these rice farmers are living on less than two dollars a day.
Although rice grows well in standing water, most rice varieties will die if they're submerged for more than three days.
Flooding is expected to be increasingly problematic as the climate changes.
He told me that his graduate student Kenong Xu and himself were studying an ancient variety of rice that had an amazing property.
It could withstand two weeks of complete submergence.
He asked if I would be willing to help them isolate this gene.
I said yes -- I was very excited, because I knew if we were successful, we could potentially help millions of farmers grow rice even when their fields were flooded.
Kenong spent 10 years looking for this gene.
Then one day, he said, "Come look at this experiment. You've got to see it."
I went to the greenhouse and I saw that the conventional variety that was flooded for 18 days had died, but the rice variety that we had genetically engineered with a new gene we had discovered, called Sub1, was alive.
Kenong and I were amazed and excited that a single gene could have this dramatic effect.
But this is just a greenhouse experiment.
Would this work in the field?
Now, I'm going to show you a four-month time lapse video taken at the International Rice Research Institute.
Breeders there developed a rice variety carrying the Sub1 gene using another genetic technique called precision breeding.
On the left, you can see the Sub1 variety, and on the right is the conventional variety.
Both varieties do very well at first, but then the field is flooded for 17 days.
You can see the Sub1 variety does great.
In fact, it produces three and a half times more grain than the conventional variety.
I love this video because it shows the power of plant genetics to help farmers.
Last year, with the help of the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, three and a half million farmers grew Sub1 rice.
(Applause) Thank you.
Now, many people don't mind genetic modification when it comes to moving rice genes around, rice genes in rice plants, or even when it comes to mixing species together through grafting or random mutagenesis.
But when it comes to taking genes from viruses and bacteria and putting them into plants, a lot of people say, "Yuck."
Why would you do that?
The reason is that sometimes it's the cheapest, safest, and most effective technology for enhancing food security and advancing sustainable agriculture.
I'm going to give you three examples.
First, take a look at papaya. It's delicious, right?
But now, look at this papaya.
This papaya is infected with papaya ringspot virus.
In the 1950s, this virus nearly wiped out the entire production of papaya on the island of Oahu in Hawaii.
Many people thought that the Hawaiian papaya was doomed, but then, a local Hawaiian, a plant pathologist named Dennis Gonsalves, decided to try to fight this disease using genetic engineering.
He took a snippet of viral DNA and he inserted it into the papaya genome.
This is kind of like a human getting a vaccination.
Now, take a look at his field trial.
You can see the genetically engineered papaya in the center.
It's immune to infection.
The conventional papaya around the outside is severely infected with the virus.
Dennis' pioneering work is credited with rescuing the papaya industry.
Today, 20 years later, there's still no other method to control this disease.
There's no organic method. There's no conventional method.
Eighty percent of Hawaiian papaya is genetically engineered.
Now, some of you may still feel a little queasy about viral genes in your food, but consider this: The genetically engineered papaya carries just a trace amount of the virus.
If you bite into an organic or conventional papaya that is infected with the virus, you will be chewing on tenfold more viral protein.
Now, take a look at this pest feasting on an eggplant.
The brown you see is frass, what comes out the back end of the insect.
To control this serious pest, which can devastate the entire eggplant crop in Bangladesh, Bangladeshi farmers spray insecticides two to three times a week, sometimes twice a day, when pest pressure is high.
But we know that some insecticides are very harmful to human health, especially when farmers and their families cannot afford proper protection, like these children.
In less developed countries, it's estimated that 300,000 people die every year because of insecticide misuse and exposure.
Cornell and Bangladeshi scientists decided to fight this disease using a genetic technique that builds on an organic farming approach.
Organic farmers like my husband Raoul spray an insecticide called B.T., which is based on a bacteria.
This pesticide is very specific to caterpillar pests, and in fact, it's nontoxic to humans, fish and birds.
It's less toxic than table salt.
But this approach does not work well in Bangladesh.
That's because these insecticide sprays are difficult to find, they're expensive, and they don't prevent the insect from getting inside the plants.
In the genetic approach, scientists cut the gene out of the bacteria and insert it directly into the eggplant genome.
Will this work to reduce insecticide sprays in Bangladesh?
Definitely.
Last season, farmers reported they were able to reduce their insecticide use by a huge amount, almost down to zero.
They're able to harvest and replant for the next season.
Now, I've given you a couple examples of how genetic engineering can be used to fight pests and disease and to reduce the amount of insecticides.
My final example is an example where genetic engineering can be used to reduce malnutrition.
In less developed countries, 500,000 children go blind every year because of lack of Vitamin A.
More than half will die.
For this reason, scientists supported by the Rockefeller Foundation genetically engineered a golden rice to produce beta-carotene, which is the precursor of Vitamin A.
This is the same pigment that we find in carrots.
Researchers estimate that just one cup of golden rice per day will save the lives of thousands of children.
But golden rice is virulently opposed by activists who are against genetic modification.
Just last year, activists invaded and destroyed a field trial in the Philippines.
When I heard about the destruction, I wondered if they knew that they were destroying much more than a scientific research project, that they were destroying medicines that children desperately needed to save their sight and their lives.
Some of my friends and family still worry: How do you know genes in the food are safe to eat?
I explained the genetic engineering, the process of moving genes between species, has been used for more than 40 years in wines, in medicine, in plants, in cheeses.
In all that time, there hasn't been a single case of harm to human health or the environment.
But I say, look, I'm not asking you to believe me.
Science is not a belief system.
My opinion doesn't matter.
Let's look at the evidence.
After 20 years of careful study and rigorous peer review by thousands of independent scientists, every major scientific organization in the world has concluded that the crops currently on the market are safe to eat and that the process of genetic engineering is no more risky than older methods of genetic modification.
These are precisely the same organizations that most of us trust when it comes to other important scientific issues such as global climate change or the safety of vaccines.
Raoul and I believe that, instead of worrying about the genes in our food, we must focus on how we can help children grow up healthy.
We must ask if farmers in rural communities can thrive, and if everyone can afford the food.
We must try to minimize environmental degradation.
What scares me most about the loud arguments and misinformation about plant genetics is that the poorest people who most need the technology may be denied access because of the vague fears and prejudices of those who have enough to eat.
We have a huge challenge in front of us.
Let's celebrate scientific innovation and use it.
It's our responsibility to do everything we can to help alleviate human suffering and safeguard the environment.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Powerfully argued.
The people who argue against GMOs, as I understand it, the core piece comes from two things.
One, complexity and unintended consequence.
Nature is this incredibly complex machine.
If we put out these brand new genes that we've created, that haven't been challenged by years of evolution, and they started mixing up with the rest of what's going on, couldn't that trigger some kind of cataclysm or problem, especially when you add in the commercial incentive that some companies have to put them out there?
The fear is that those incentives mean that the decision is not made on purely scientific grounds, and even if it was, that there would be unintended consequences.
How do we know that there isn't a big risk of some unintended consequence?
Often our tinkerings with nature do lead to big, unintended consequences and chain reactions.
Pamela Ronald: Okay, so on the commercial aspects, one thing that's really important to understand is that, in the developed world, farmers in the United States, almost all farmers, whether they're organic or conventional, they buy seed produced by seed companies.
So there's definitely a commercial interest to sell a lot of seed, but hopefully they're selling seed that the farmers want to buy.
It's different in the less developed world.
Farmers there cannot afford the seed.
These seeds are not being sold.
These seeds are being distributed freely through traditional kinds of certification groups, so it is very important in less developed countries that the seed be freely available.
CA: Wouldn't some activists say that this is actually part of the conspiracy?
This is the heroin strategy.
You seed the stuff, and people have no choice but to be hooked on these seeds forever?
PR: There are a lot of conspiracy theories for sure, but it doesn't work that way.
For example, the seed that's being distributed, the flood-tolerant rice, this is distributed freely through Indian and Bangladeshi seed certification agencies, so there's no commercial interest at all.
The golden rice was developed through support of the Rockefeller Foundation.
Again, it's being freely distributed.
There are no commercial profits in this situation.
And now to address your other question about, well, mixing genes, aren't there some unintended consequences?
Absolutely -- every time we do something different, there's an unintended consequence, but one of the points I was trying to make is that we've been doing kind of crazy things to our plants, mutagenesis using radiation or chemical mutagenesis.
This induces thousands of uncharacterized mutations, and this is even a higher risk of unintended consequence than many of the modern methods.
And so it's really important not to use the term GMO because it's scientifically meaningless.
I feel it's very important to talk about a specific crop and a specific product, and think about the needs of the consumer.
CA: So part of what's happening here is that there's a mental model in a lot of people that nature is nature, and it's pure and pristine, and to tinker with it is Frankensteinian.
It's making something that's pure dangerous in some way, and I think you're saying that that whole model just misunderstands how nature is.
Nature is a much more chaotic interplay of genetic changes that have been happening all the time anyway.
PR: That's absolutely true, and there's no such thing as pure food.
I mean, you could not spray eggplant with insecticides or not genetically engineer it, but then you'd be stuck eating frass.
So there's no purity there.
CA: Pam Ronald, thank you. That was powerfully argued.
PR: Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
(Applause)
Isadora Duncan -- (Music) -- crazy, long-legged woman from San Francisco, got tired of this country, and she wanted to get out.
Isadora was famous somewhere around 1908 for putting up a blue curtain, and she would stand with her hands over her solar plexus and she would wait, and she would wait, and then, she would move.
(Music) Josh and I and Somi call this piece "The Red Circle and the Blue Curtain."
Red circle.
Blue curtain.
But, this is not the beginning of the 20th century.
This is a morning in Vancouver in 2015.
(Music) (Singing) Come on, Josh!
(Music) (Singing) Go!
Are we there yet?
I don't think so.
Hey, yeah!
(Music) What time is it?
(Music) Where are we?
Josh.
Somi.
Bill T.
Josh.
Somi.
Bill T.
(Applause) Yeah, yeah!
I work with a bunch of mathematicians, philosophers and computer scientists, and we sit around and think about the future of machine intelligence, among other things.
Some people think that some of these things are sort of science fiction-y, far out there, crazy.
But I like to say, okay, let's look at the modern human condition.
(Laughter) This is the normal way for things to be.
But if we think about it, we are actually recently arrived guests on this planet, the human species.
Think about if Earth was created one year ago, the human species, then, would be 10 minutes old.
The industrial era started two seconds ago.
Another way to look at this is to think of world GDP over the last 10,000 years, I've actually taken the trouble to plot this for you in a graph.
It looks like this.
(Laughter) It's a curious shape for a normal condition.
I sure wouldn't want to sit on it.
(Laughter) Let's ask ourselves, what is the cause of this current anomaly?
Some people would say it's technology.
Now it's true, technology has accumulated through human history, and right now, technology advances extremely rapidly -- that is the proximate cause, that's why we are currently so very productive.
But I like to think back further to the ultimate cause.
Look at these two highly distinguished gentlemen: We have Kanzi -- he's mastered 200 lexical tokens, an incredible feat.
And Ed Witten unleashed the second superstring revolution.
If we look under the hood, this is what we find: basically the same thing.
One is a little larger, it maybe also has a few tricks in the exact way it's wired.
These invisible differences cannot be too complicated, however, because there have only been 250,000 generations since our last common ancestor.
We know that complicated mechanisms take a long time to evolve.
So a bunch of relatively minor changes take us from Kanzi to Witten, from broken-off tree branches to intercontinental ballistic missiles.
So this then seems pretty obvious that everything we've achieved, and everything we care about, depends crucially on some relatively minor changes that made the human mind.
And the corollary, of course, is that any further changes that could significantly change the substrate of thinking could have potentially enormous consequences.
Some of my colleagues think we're on the verge of something that could cause a profound change in that substrate, and that is machine superintelligence.
Artificial intelligence used to be about putting commands in a box.
You would have human programmers that would painstakingly handcraft knowledge items.
You build up these expert systems, and they were kind of useful for some purposes, but they were very brittle, you couldn't scale them.
Basically, you got out only what you put in.
But since then, a paradigm shift has taken place in the field of artificial intelligence.
Today, the action is really around machine learning.
So rather than handcrafting knowledge representations and features, we create algorithms that learn, often from raw perceptual data.
Basically the same thing that the human infant does.
The result is A.I. that is not limited to one domain -- the same system can learn to translate between any pairs of languages, or learn to play any computer game on the Atari console.
Now of course, A.I. is still nowhere near having the same powerful, cross-domain ability to learn and plan as a human being has.
The cortex still has some algorithmic tricks that we don't yet know how to match in machines.
So the question is, how far are we from being able to match those tricks?
A couple of years ago, we did a survey of some of the world's leading A.I. experts, to see what they think, and one of the questions we asked was, "By which year do you think there is a 50 percent probability that we will have achieved human-level machine intelligence?"
We defined human-level here as the ability to perform almost any job at least as well as an adult human, so real human-level, not just within some limited domain.
And the median answer was 2040 or 2050, depending on precisely which group of experts we asked.
Now, it could happen much, much later, or sooner, the truth is nobody really knows.
What we do know is that the ultimate limit to information processing in a machine substrate lies far outside the limits in biological tissue.
This comes down to physics.
A biological neuron fires, maybe, at 200 hertz, 200 times a second.
But even a present-day transistor operates at the Gigahertz.
Neurons propagate slowly in axons, 100 meters per second, tops.
But in computers, signals can travel at the speed of light.
There are also size limitations, like a human brain has to fit inside a cranium, but a computer can be the size of a warehouse or larger.
So the potential for superintelligence lies dormant in matter, much like the power of the atom lay dormant throughout human history, patiently waiting there until 1945.
In this century, scientists may learn to awaken the power of artificial intelligence.
And I think we might then see an intelligence explosion.
Now most people, when they think about what is smart and what is dumb, I think have in mind a picture roughly like this.
So at one end we have the village idiot, and then far over at the other side we have Ed Witten, or Albert Einstein, or whoever your favorite guru is.
But I think that from the point of view of artificial intelligence, the true picture is actually probably more like this: AI starts out at this point here, at zero intelligence, and then, after many, many years of really hard work, maybe eventually we get to mouse-level artificial intelligence, something that can navigate cluttered environments as well as a mouse can.
And then, after many, many more years of really hard work, lots of investment, maybe eventually we get to chimpanzee-level artificial intelligence.
And then, after even more years of really, really hard work, we get to village idiot artificial intelligence.
And a few moments later, we are beyond Ed Witten.
The train doesn't stop at Humanville Station.
It's likely, rather, to swoosh right by.
Now this has profound implications, particularly when it comes to questions of power.
For example, chimpanzees are strong -- pound for pound, a chimpanzee is about twice as strong as a fit human male.
And yet, the fate of Kanzi and his pals depends a lot more on what we humans do than on what the chimpanzees do themselves.
Once there is superintelligence, the fate of humanity may depend on what the superintelligence does.
Think about it: Machine intelligence is the last invention that humanity will ever need to make.
Machines will then be better at inventing than we are, and they'll be doing so on digital timescales.
What this means is basically a telescoping of the future.
Think of all the crazy technologies that you could have imagined maybe humans could have developed in the fullness of time: cures for aging, space colonization, self-replicating nanobots or uploading of minds into computers, all kinds of science fiction-y stuff that's nevertheless consistent with the laws of physics.
All of this superintelligence could develop, and possibly quite rapidly.
Now, a superintelligence with such technological maturity would be extremely powerful, and at least in some scenarios, it would be able to get what it wants.
We would then have a future that would be shaped by the preferences of this A.I.
Now a good question is, what are those preferences?
Here it gets trickier.
To make any headway with this, we must first of all avoid anthropomorphizing.
And this is ironic because every newspaper article about the future of A.I. has a picture of this: So I think what we need to do is to conceive of the issue more abstractly, not in terms of vivid Hollywood scenarios.
We need to think of intelligence as an optimization process, a process that steers the future into a particular set of configurations.
A superintelligence is a really strong optimization process.
It's extremely good at using available means to achieve a state in which its goal is realized.
This means that there is no necessary connection between being highly intelligent in this sense, and having an objective that we humans would find worthwhile or meaningful.
Suppose we give an A.I. the goal to make humans smile.
When the A.I. is weak, it performs useful or amusing actions that cause its user to smile.
When the A.I. becomes superintelligent, it realizes that there is a more effective way to achieve this goal: take control of the world and stick electrodes into the facial muscles of humans to cause constant, beaming grins.
Another example, suppose we give A.I. the goal to solve a difficult mathematical problem.
When the A.I. becomes superintelligent, it realizes that the most effective way to get the solution to this problem is by transforming the planet into a giant computer, so as to increase its thinking capacity.
And notice that this gives the A.I.s an instrumental reason to do things to us that we might not approve of.
Human beings in this model are threats, we could prevent the mathematical problem from being solved.
Of course, perceivably things won't go wrong in these particular ways; these are cartoon examples.
But the general point here is important: if you create a really powerful optimization process to maximize for objective x, you better make sure that your definition of x incorporates everything you care about.
This is a lesson that's also taught in many a myth.
King Midas wishes that everything he touches be turned into gold.
He touches his daughter, she turns into gold.
He touches his food, it turns into gold.
This could become practically relevant, not just as a metaphor for greed, but as an illustration of what happens if you create a powerful optimization process and give it misconceived or poorly specified goals.
Now you might say, if a computer starts sticking electrodes into people's faces, we'd just shut it off.
A, this is not necessarily so easy to do if we've grown dependent on the system -- like, where is the off switch to the Internet?
B, why haven't the chimpanzees flicked the off switch to humanity, or the Neanderthals?
They certainly had reasons.
We have an off switch, for example, right here.
(Choking) The reason is that we are an intelligent adversary; we can anticipate threats and plan around them.
But so could a superintelligent agent, and it would be much better at that than we are.
The point is, we should not be confident that we have this under control here.
And we could try to make our job a little bit easier by, say, putting the A.I. in a box, like a secure software environment, a virtual reality simulation from which it cannot escape.
But how confident can we be that the A.I. couldn't find a bug.
Given that merely human hackers find bugs all the time, I'd say, probably not very confident.
So we disconnect the ethernet cable to create an air gap, but again, like merely human hackers routinely transgress air gaps using social engineering.
Right now, as I speak, I'm sure there is some employee out there somewhere who has been talked into handing out her account details by somebody claiming to be from the I.T. department.
More creative scenarios are also possible, like if you're the A.I., you can imagine wiggling electrodes around in your internal circuitry to create radio waves that you can use to communicate.
Or maybe you could pretend to malfunction, and then when the programmers open you up to see what went wrong with you, they look at the source code -- Bam! -- the manipulation can take place.
Or it could output the blueprint to a really nifty technology, and when we implement it, it has some surreptitious side effect that the A.I. had planned.
The point here is that we should not be confident in our ability to keep a superintelligent genie locked up in its bottle forever.
Sooner or later, it will out.
I believe that the answer here is to figure out how to create superintelligent A.I. such that even if -- when -- it escapes, it is still safe because it is fundamentally on our side because it shares our values.
I see no way around this difficult problem.
Now, I'm actually fairly optimistic that this problem can be solved.
We wouldn't have to write down a long list of everything we care about, or worse yet, spell it out in some computer language like C++ or Python, that would be a task beyond hopeless.
Instead, we would create an A.I. that uses its intelligence to learn what we value, and its motivation system is constructed in such a way that it is motivated to pursue our values or to perform actions that it predicts we would approve of.
We would thus leverage its intelligence as much as possible to solve the problem of value-loading.
This can happen, and the outcome could be very good for humanity.
But it doesn't happen automatically.
The initial conditions for the intelligence explosion might need to be set up in just the right way if we are to have a controlled detonation.
The values that the A.I. has need to match ours, not just in the familiar context, like where we can easily check how the A.I. behaves, but also in all novel contexts that the A.I. might encounter in the indefinite future.
And there are also some esoteric issues that would need to be solved, sorted out: the exact details of its decision theory, how to deal with logical uncertainty and so forth.
So the technical problems that need to be solved to make this work look quite difficult -- not as difficult as making a superintelligent A.I., but fairly difficult.
Here is the worry: Making superintelligent A.I. is a really hard challenge.
Making superintelligent A.I. that is safe involves some additional challenge on top of that.
The risk is that if somebody figures out how to crack the first challenge without also having cracked the additional challenge of ensuring perfect safety.
So I think that we should work out a solution to the control problem in advance, so that we have it available by the time it is needed.
Now it might be that we cannot solve the entire control problem in advance because maybe some elements can only be put in place once you know the details of the architecture where it will be implemented.
But the more of the control problem that we solve in advance, the better the odds that the transition to the machine intelligence era will go well.
This to me looks like a thing that is well worth doing and I can imagine that if things turn out okay, that people a million years from now look back at this century and it might well be that they say that the one thing we did that really mattered was to get this thing right.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The brain is an amazing and complex organ.
And while many people are fascinated by the brain, they can't really tell you that much about the properties about how the brain works because we don't teach neuroscience in schools.
And one of the reasons why is that the equipment is so complex and so expensive that it's really only done at major universities and large institutions.
And so in order to be able to access the brain, you really need to dedicate your life and spend six and a half years as a graduate student just to become a neuroscientist to get access to these tools.
And that's a shame because one out of five of us, that's 20 percent of the entire world, will have a neurological disorder.
And there are zero cures for these diseases.
And so it seems that what we should be doing is reaching back earlier in the eduction process and teaching students about neuroscience so that in the future, they may be thinking about possibly becoming a brain scientist.
When I was a graduate student, my lab mate Tim Marzullo and myself, decided that what if we took this complex equipment that we have for studying the brain and made it simple enough and affordable enough that anyone that you know, an amateur or a high school student, could learn and actually participate in the discovery of neuroscience.
And so we did just that.
A few years ago, we started a company called Backyard Brains and we make DIY neuroscience equipment and I brought some here tonight, and I want to do some demonstrations.
You guys want to see some?
So I need a volunteer.
So right before -- what is your name? (Applause) Sam Kelly: Sam.
Greg Gage: All right, Sam, I'm going to record from your brain.
Have you had this before?
SK: No.
GG: I need you to stick out your arm for science, roll up your sleeve a bit, So what I'm going to do, I'm putting electrodes on your arm, and you're probably wondering, I just said I'm going to record from your brain, what am I doing with your arm?
Well, you have about 80 billion neurons inside your brain right now.
They're sending electrical messages back and forth, and chemical messages.
But some of your neurons right here in your motor cortex are going to send messages down when you move your arm like this.
They're going to go down across your corpus callosum, down onto your spinal cord to your lower motor neuron out to your muscles here, and that electrical discharge is going to be picked up by these electrodes right here and we're going to be able to listen to exactly what your brain is going to be doing.
So I'm going to turn this on for a second.
Have you ever heard what your brain sounds like?
SK: No.
GG: Let's try it out. So go ahead and squeeze your hand.
(Rumbling) So what you're listening to, so this is your motor units happening right here.
Let's take a look at it as well.
So I'm going to stand over here, and I'm going to open up our app here.
So now I want you to squeeze.
(Rumbling) So right here, these are the motor units that are happening from her spinal cord out to her muscle right here, and as she's doing it, you're seeing the electrical activity that's happening here.
You can even click here and try to see one of them.
So keep doing it really hard.
So now we've paused on one motor action potential that's happening right now inside of your brain.
Do you guys want to see some more?
(Applause) That's interesting, but let's get it better.
I need one more volunteer.
What is your name, sir?
Miguel Goncalves: Miguel.
GG: Miguel, all right.
You're going to stand right here.
So when you're moving your arm like this, your brain is sending a signal down to your muscles right here.
I want you to move your arm as well.
So your brain is going to send a signal down to your muscles.
And so it turns out that there is a nerve that's right here that runs up here that innervates these three fingers, and it's close enough to the skin that we might be able to stimulate that so that what we can do is copy your brain signals going out to your hand and inject it into your hand, so that your hand will move when your brain tells your hand to move.
So in a sense, she will take away your free will and you will no longer have any control over this hand.
You with me?
So I just need to hook you up.
(Laughter) So I'm going to find your ulnar nerve, which is probably right around here.
You don't know what you're signing up for when you come up.
So now I'm going to move away and we're going to plug it in to our human-to-human interface over here.
Okay, so Sam, I want you to squeeze your hand again.
Do it again. Perfect.
So now I'm going to hook you up over here so that you get the -- It's going to feel a little bit weird at first, this is going to feel like a -- (Laughter) You know, when you lose your free will, and someone else becomes your agent, it does feel a bit strange.
Now I want you to relax your hand.
Sam, you're with me?
So you're going to squeeze.
I'm not going to turn it on yet, so go ahead and give it a squeeze.
So now, are you ready, Miguel?
MG: Ready as I'll ever be.
GG: I've turned it on, so go ahead and turn your hand.
Do you feel that a little bit? MG: Nope.
GG: Okay, do it again? MG: A little bit.
GG: A little bit? (Laughter) So relax.
So hit it again.
(Laughter) Oh, perfect, perfect.
So relax, do it again.
All right, so right now, your brain is controlling your arm and it's also controlling his arm, so go ahead and just do it one more time.
All right, so it's perfect. (Laughter) So now, what would happen if I took over my control of your hand?
And so, just relax your hand.
What happens?
Ah, nothing.
Why not?
Because the brain has to do it.
So you do it again.
All right, that's perfect.
Thank you guys for being such a good sport.
This is what's happening all across the world -- electrophysiology!
We're going to bring on the neuro-revolution.
Thank you.
(Applause)
You may not realize this, but there are more bacteria in your body than stars in our entire galaxy.
This fascinating universe of bacteria inside of us is an integral part of our health, and our technology is evolving so rapidly that today we can program these bacteria like we program computers.
Now, the diagram that you see here, I know it looks like some kind of sports play, but it is actually a blueprint of the first bacterial program I developed.
And like writing software, we can print and write DNA into different algorithms and programs inside of bacteria.
What this program does is produces fluorescent proteins in a rhythmic fashion and generates a small molecule that allows bacteria to communicate and synchronize, as you're seeing in this movie.
The growing colony of bacteria that you see here is about the width of a human hair.
Now, what you can't see is that our genetic program instructs these bacteria to each produce small molecules, and these molecules travel between the thousands of individual bacteria telling them when to turn on and off.
And the bacteria synchronize quite well at this scale, but because the molecule that synchronizes them together can only travel so fast, in larger colonies of bacteria, this results in traveling waves between bacteria that are far away from each other, and you can see these waves going from right to left across the screen.
Now, our genetic program relies on a natural phenomenon called quorum sensing, in which bacteria trigger coordinated and sometimes virulent behaviors once they reach a critical density.
You can observe quorum sensing in action in this movie, where a growing colony of bacteria only begins to glow once it reaches a high or critical density.
Our genetic program continues producing these rhythmic patterns of fluorescent proteins as the colony grows outwards.
This particular movie and experiment we call The Supernova, because it looks like an exploding star.
Now, besides programming these beautiful patterns, I wondered, what else can we get these bacteria to do?
And I decided to explore how we can program bacteria to detect and treat diseases in our bodies like cancer.
One of the surprising facts about bacteria is that they can naturally grow inside of tumors.
This happens because typically tumors are areas where the immune system has no access, and so bacteria find these tumors and use them as a safe haven to grow and thrive.
We started using probiotic bacteria which are safe bacteria that have a health benefit, and found that when orally delivered to mice, these probiotics would selectively grow inside of liver tumors.
We realized that the most convenient way to highlight the presence of the probiotics, and hence, the presence of the tumors, was to get these bacteria to produce a signal that would be detectable in the urine, and so we specifically programmed these probiotics to make a molecule that would change the color of your urine to indicate the presence of cancer.
We went on to show that this technology could sensitively and specifically detect liver cancer, one that is challenging to detect otherwise.
Now, since these bacteria specifically localize to tumors, we've been programming them to not only detect cancer but also to treat cancer by producing therapeutic molecules from within the tumor environment that shrink the existing tumors, and we've been doing this using quorum sensing programs like you saw in the previous movies.
Altogether, imagine in the future taking a programmed probiotic that could detect and treat cancer, or even other diseases.
Our ability to program bacteria and program life opens up new horizons in cancer research, and to share this vision, I worked with artist Vik Muniz to create the symbol of the universe, made entirely out of bacteria or cancer cells.
Ultimately, my hope is that the beauty and purpose of this microscopic universe can inspire new and creative approaches for the future of cancer research.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most of us think of motion as a very visual thing.
If I walk across this stage or gesture with my hands while I speak, that motion is something that you can see.
But there's a world of important motion that's too subtle for the human eye, and over the past few years, we've started to find that cameras can often see this motion even when humans can't.
So let me show you what I mean.
On the left here, you see video of a person's wrist, and on the right, you see video of a sleeping infant, but if I didn't tell you that these were videos, you might assume that you were looking at two regular images, because in both cases, these videos appear to be almost completely still.
But there's actually a lot of subtle motion going on here, and if you were to touch the wrist on the left, you would feel a pulse, and if you were to hold the infant on the right, you would feel the rise and fall of her chest as she took each breath.
And these motions carry a lot of significance, but they're usually too subtle for us to see, so instead, we have to observe them through direct contact, through touch.
But a few years ago, my colleagues at MIT developed what they call a motion microscope, which is software that finds these subtle motions in video and amplifies them so that they become large enough for us to see.
And so, if we use their software on the left video, it lets us see the pulse in this wrist, and if we were to count that pulse, we could even figure out this person's heart rate.
And if we used the same software on the right video, it lets us see each breath that this infant takes, and we can use this as a contact-free way to monitor her breathing.
And so this technology is really powerful because it takes these phenomena that we normally have to experience through touch and it lets us capture them visually and non-invasively.
So a couple years ago, I started working with the folks that created that software, and we decided to pursue a crazy idea.
We thought, it's cool that we can use software to visualize tiny motions like this, and you can almost think of it as a way to extend our sense of touch.
But what if we could do the same thing with our ability to hear?
What if we could use video to capture the vibrations of sound, which are just another kind of motion, and turn everything that we see into a microphone?
Now, this is a bit of a strange idea, so let me try to put it in perspective for you.
Traditional microphones work by converting the motion of an internal diaphragm into an electrical signal, and that diaphragm is designed to move readily with sound so that its motion can be recorded and interpreted as audio.
But sound causes all objects to vibrate.
Those vibrations are just usually too subtle and too fast for us to see.
So what if we record them with a high-speed camera and then use software to extract tiny motions from our high-speed video, and analyze those motions to figure out what sounds created them?
This would let us turn visible objects into visual microphones from a distance.
And so we tried this out, and here's one of our experiments, where we took this potted plant that you see on the right and we filmed it with a high-speed camera while a nearby loudspeaker played this sound.
(Music: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") And so here's the video that we recorded, and we recorded it at thousands of frames per second, but even if you look very closely, all you'll see are some leaves that are pretty much just sitting there doing nothing, because our sound only moved those leaves by about a micrometer.
That's one ten-thousandth of a centimeter, which spans somewhere between a hundredth and a thousandth of a pixel in this image.
So you can squint all you want, but motion that small is pretty much perceptually invisible.
But it turns out that something can be perceptually invisible and still be numerically significant, because with the right algorithms, we can take this silent, seemingly still video and we can recover this sound.
(Music: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") (Applause) So how is this possible?
How can we get so much information out of so little motion?
Well, let's say that those leaves move by just a single micrometer, and let's say that that shifts our image by just a thousandth of a pixel.
That may not seem like much, but a single frame of video may have hundreds of thousands of pixels in it, and so if we combine all of the tiny motions that we see from across that entire image, then suddenly a thousandth of a pixel can start to add up to something pretty significant.
On a personal note, we were pretty psyched when we figured this out.
(Laughter) But even with the right algorithm, we were still missing a pretty important piece of the puzzle.
You see, there are a lot of factors that affect when and how well this technique will work.
There's the object and how far away it is; there's the camera and the lens that you use; how much light is shining on the object and how loud your sound is.
And even with the right algorithm, we had to be very careful with our early experiments, because if we got any of these factors wrong, there was no way to tell what the problem was.
We would just get noise back.
And so a lot of our early experiments looked like this.
And so here I am, and on the bottom left, you can kind of see our high-speed camera, which is pointed at a bag of chips, and the whole thing is lit by these bright lamps.
And like I said, we had to be very careful in these early experiments, so this is how it went down.
(Video) Abe Davis: Three, two, one, go.
Mary had a little lamb! Little lamb! Little lamb!
(Laughter) AD: So this experiment looks completely ridiculous.
(Laughter) I mean, I'm screaming at a bag of chips -- (Laughter) -- and we're blasting it with so much light, we literally melted the first bag we tried this on. (Laughter) But ridiculous as this experiment looks, it was actually really important, because we were able to recover this sound.
(Audio) Mary had a little lamb! Little lamb! Little lamb!
(Applause) AD: And this was really significant, because it was the first time we recovered intelligible human speech from silent video of an object.
And so it gave us this point of reference, and gradually we could start to modify the experiment, using different objects or moving the object further away, using less light or quieter sounds.
And we analyzed all of these experiments until we really understood the limits of our technique, because once we understood those limits, we could figure out how to push them.
And that led to experiments like this one, where again, I'm going to speak to a bag of chips, but this time we've moved our camera about 15 feet away, outside, behind a soundproof window, and the whole thing is lit by only natural sunlight.
And so here's the video that we captured.
And this is what things sounded like from inside, next to the bag of chips.
(Audio) Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, that lamb was sure to go.
AD: And here's what we were able to recover from our silent video captured outside behind that window.
(Audio) Mary had a little lamb whose fleece was white as snow, and everywhere that Mary went, that lamb was sure to go.
(Applause) AD: And there are other ways that we can push these limits as well.
So here's a quieter experiment where we filmed some earphones plugged into a laptop computer, and in this case, our goal was to recover the music that was playing on that laptop from just silent video of these two little plastic earphones, and we were able to do this so well that I could even Shazam our results.
(Laughter) (Music: "Under Pressure" by Queen) (Applause) And we can also push things by changing the hardware that we use.
Because the experiments I've shown you so far were done with a camera, a high-speed camera, that can record video about a 100 times faster than most cell phones, but we've also found a way to use this technique with more regular cameras, and we do that by taking advantage of what's called a rolling shutter.
You see, most cameras record images one row at a time, and so if an object moves during the recording of a single image, there's a slight time delay between each row, and this causes slight artifacts that get coded into each frame of a video.
And so what we found is that by analyzing these artifacts, we can actually recover sound using a modified version of our algorithm.
So here's an experiment we did where we filmed a bag of candy while a nearby loudspeaker played the same "Mary Had a Little Lamb" music from before, but this time, we used just a regular store-bought camera, and so in a second, I'll play for you the sound that we recovered, and it's going to sound distorted this time, but listen and see if you can still recognize the music.
(Audio: "Mary Had a Little Lamb") And so, again, that sounds distorted, but what's really amazing here is that we were able to do this with something that you could literally run out and pick up at a Best Buy.
So at this point, a lot of people see this work, and they immediately think about surveillance.
And to be fair, it's not hard to imagine how you might use this technology to spy on someone.
But keep in mind that there's already a lot of very mature technology out there for surveillance.
In fact, people have been using lasers to eavesdrop on objects from a distance for decades.
But what's really new here, what's really different, is that now we have a way to picture the vibrations of an object, which gives us a new lens through which to look at the world, and we can use that lens to learn not just about forces like sound that cause an object to vibrate, but also about the object itself.
And so I want to take a step back and think about how that might change the ways that we use video, because we usually use video to look at things, and I've just shown you how we can use it to listen to things.
But there's another important way that we learn about the world: that's by interacting with it.
We push and pull and poke and prod things.
We shake things and see what happens.
And that's something that video still won't let us do, at least not traditionally.
So I want to show you some new work, and this is based on an idea I had just a few months ago, so this is actually the first time I've shown it to a public audience.
And the basic idea is that we're going to use the vibrations in a video to capture objects in a way that will let us interact with them and see how they react to us.
So here's an object, and in this case, it's a wire figure in the shape of a human, and we're going to film that object with just a regular camera.
So there's nothing special about this camera.
In fact, I've actually done this with my cell phone before.
But we do want to see the object vibrate, so to make that happen, we're just going to bang a little bit on the surface where it's resting while we record this video.
So that's it: just five seconds of regular video, while we bang on this surface, and we're going to use the vibrations in that video to learn about the structural and material properties of our object, and we're going to use that information to create something new and interactive.
And so here's what we've created.
And it looks like a regular image, but this isn't an image, and it's not a video, because now I can take my mouse and I can start interacting with the object.
And so what you see here is a simulation of how this object would respond to new forces that we've never seen before, and we created it from just five seconds of regular video.
(Applause) And so this is a really powerful way to look at the world, because it lets us predict how objects will respond to new situations, and you could imagine, for instance, looking at an old bridge and wondering what would happen, how would that bridge hold up if I were to drive my car across it.
And that's a question that you probably want to answer before you start driving across that bridge.
And of course, there are going to be limitations to this technique, just like there were with the visual microphone, but we found that it works in a lot of situations that you might not expect, especially if you give it longer videos.
So for example, here's a video that I captured of a bush outside of my apartment, and I didn't do anything to this bush, but by capturing a minute-long video, a gentle breeze caused enough vibrations that we could learn enough about this bush to create this simulation.
(Applause) And so you could imagine giving this to a film director, and letting him control, say, the strength and direction of wind in a shot after it's been recorded.
Or, in this case, we pointed our camera at a hanging curtain, and you can't even see any motion in this video, but by recording a two-minute-long video, natural air currents in this room created enough subtle, imperceptible motions and vibrations that we could learn enough to create this simulation.
And ironically, we're kind of used to having this kind of interactivity when it comes to virtual objects, when it comes to video games and 3D models, but to be able to capture this information from real objects in the real world using just simple, regular video, is something new that has a lot of potential.
So here are the amazing people who worked with me on these projects.
(Applause) And what I've shown you today is only the beginning.
We've just started to scratch the surface of what you can do with this kind of imaging, because it gives us a new way to capture our surroundings with common, accessible technology.
And so looking to the future, it's going to be really exciting to explore what this can tell us about the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On the path that American children travel to adulthood, two institutions oversee the journey.
The first is the one we hear a lot about: college.
Some of you may remember the excitement that you felt when you first set off for college.
Some of you may be in college right now and you're feeling this excitement at this very moment.
College has some shortcomings.
It's expensive; it leaves young people in debt.
But all in all, it's a pretty good path.
Young people emerge from college with pride and with great friends and with a lot of knowledge about the world.
And perhaps most importantly, a better chance in the labor market than they had before they got there.
Today I want to talk about the second institution overseeing the journey from childhood to adulthood in the United States.
And that institution is prison.
Young people on this journey are meeting with probation officers instead of with teachers.
They're going to court dates instead of to class.
Their junior year abroad is instead a trip to a state correctional facility.
And they're emerging from their 20s not with degrees in business and English, but with criminal records.
This institution is also costing us a lot, about 40,000 dollars a year to send a young person to prison in New Jersey.
But here, taxpayers are footing the bill and what kids are getting is a cold prison cell and a permanent mark against them when they come home and apply for work.
There are more and more kids on this journey to adulthood than ever before in the United States and that's because in the past 40 years, our incarceration rate has grown by 700 percent.
I have one slide for this talk.
Here it is.
Here's our incarceration rate, about 716 people per 100,000 in the population.
Here's the OECD countries.
What's more, it's poor kids that we're sending to prison, too many drawn from African-American and Latino communities so that prison now stands firmly between the young people trying to make it and the fulfillment of the American Dream.
The problem's actually a bit worse than this 'cause we're not just sending poor kids to prison, we're saddling poor kids with court fees, with probation and parole restrictions, with low-level warrants, we're asking them to live in halfway houses and on house arrest, and we're asking them to negotiate a police force that is entering poor communities of color, not for the purposes of promoting public safety, but to make arrest counts, to line city coffers.
This is the hidden underside to our historic experiment in punishment: young people worried that at any moment, they will be stopped, searched and seized.
Not just in the streets, but in their homes, at school and at work.
I got interested in this other path to adulthood when I was myself a college student attending the University of Pennsylvania in the early 2000s.
Penn sits within a historic African-American neighborhood.
So you've got these two parallel journeys going on simultaneously: the kids attending this elite, private university, and the kids from the adjacent neighborhood, some of whom are making it to college, and many of whom are being shipped to prison.
In my sophomore year, I started tutoring a young woman who was in high school who lived about 10 minutes away from the university.
Soon, her cousin came home from a juvenile detention center.
He was 15, a freshman in high school.
I began to get to know him and his friends and family, and I asked him what he thought about me writing about his life for my senior thesis in college.
This senior thesis became a dissertation at Princeton and now a book.
By the end of my sophomore year, I moved into the neighborhood and I spent the next six years trying to understand what young people were facing as they came of age.
The first week I spent in this neighborhood, I saw two boys, five and seven years old, play this game of chase, where the older boy ran after the other boy.
He played the cop.
When the cop caught up to the younger boy, he pushed him down, handcuffed him with imaginary handcuffs, took a quarter out of the other child's pocket, saying, "I'm seizing that."
He asked the child if he was carrying any drugs or if he had a warrant.
Many times, I saw this game repeated, sometimes children would simply give up running, and stick their bodies flat against the ground with their hands above their heads, or flat up against a wall.
Children would yell at each other, "I'm going to lock you up, I'm going to lock you up and you're never coming home!"
Once I saw a six-year-old child pull another child's pants down and try to do a cavity search.
In the first 18 months that I lived in this neighborhood, I wrote down every time I saw any contact between police and people that were my neighbors.
So in the first 18 months, I watched the police stop pedestrians or people in cars, search people, run people's names, chase people through the streets, pull people in for questioning, or make an arrest every single day, with five exceptions.
Fifty-two times, I watched the police break down doors, chase people through houses or make an arrest of someone in their home.
Fourteen times in this first year and a half, I watched the police punch, choke, kick, stomp on or beat young men after they had caught them.
Bit by bit, I got to know two brothers, Chuck and Tim.
Chuck was 18 when we met, a senior in high school.
He was playing on the basketball team and making C's and B's.
His younger brother, Tim, was 10.
And Tim loved Chuck; he followed him around a lot, looked to Chuck to be a mentor.
They lived with their mom and grandfather in a two-story row home with a front lawn and a back porch.
Their mom was struggling with addiction all while the boys were growing up.
She never really was able to hold down a job for very long.
It was their grandfather's pension that supported the family, not really enough to pay for food and clothes and school supplies for growing boys.
The family was really struggling.
So when we met, Chuck was a senior in high school.
He had just turned 18.
That winter, a kid in the schoolyard called Chuck's mom a crack whore.
Chuck pushed the kid's face into the snow and the school cops charged him with aggravated assault.
The other kid was fine the next day, I think it was his pride that was injured more than anything.
But anyway, since Chuck was 18, this agg. assault case sent him to adult county jail on State Road in northeast Philadelphia, where he sat, unable to pay the bail -- he couldn't afford it -- while the trial dates dragged on and on and on through almost his entire senior year.
Finally, near the end of this season, the judge on this assault case threw out most of the charges and Chuck came home with only a few hundred dollars' worth of court fees hanging over his head.
Tim was pretty happy that day.
The next fall, Chuck tried to re-enroll as a senior, but the school secretary told him that he was then 19 and too old to be readmitted.
Then the judge on his assault case issued him a warrant for his arrest because he couldn't pay the 225 dollars in court fees that came due a few weeks after the case ended.
Then he was a high school dropout living on the run.
Tim's first arrest came later that year after he turned 11.
Chuck had managed to get his warrant lifted and he was on a payment plan for the court fees and he was driving Tim to school in his girlfriend's car.
So a cop pulls them over, runs the car, and the car comes up as stolen in California.
Chuck had no idea where in the history of this car it had been stolen.
His girlfriend's uncle bought it from a used car auction in northeast Philly.
Chuck and Tim had never been outside of the tri-state, let alone to California.
But anyway, the cops down at the precinct charged Chuck with receiving stolen property.
And then a juvenile judge, a few days later, charged Tim, age 11, with accessory to receiving a stolen property and then he was placed on three years of probation.
With this probation sentence hanging over his head, Chuck sat his little brother down and began teaching him how to run from the police.
They would sit side by side on their back porch looking out into the shared alleyway and Chuck would coach Tim how to spot undercover cars, how to negotiate a late-night police raid, how and where to hide.
I want you to imagine for a second what Chuck and Tim's lives would be like if they were living in a neighborhood where kids were going to college, not prison.
A neighborhood like the one I got to grow up in.
Okay, you might say.
But Chuck and Tim, kids like them, they're committing crimes!
Don't they deserve to be in prison?
Don't they deserve to be living in fear of arrest?
Well, my answer would be no.
They don't.
And certainly not for the same things that other young people with more privilege are doing with impunity.
If Chuck had gone to my high school, that schoolyard fight would have ended there, as a schoolyard fight.
It never would have become an aggravated assault case.
Not a single kid that I went to college with has a criminal record right now.
Not a single one.
But can you imagine how many might have if the police had stopped those kids and searched their pockets for drugs as they walked to class?
Or had raided their frat parties in the middle of the night?
Okay, you might say.
But doesn't this high incarceration rate partly account for our really low crime rate?
Crime is down. That's a good thing.
Totally, that is a good thing. Crime is down.
It dropped precipitously in the '90s and through the 2000s.
But according to a committee of academics convened by the National Academy of Sciences last year, the relationship between our historically high incarceration rates and our low crime rate is pretty shaky.
It turns out that the crime rate goes up and down irrespective of how many young people we send to prison.
We tend to think about justice in a pretty narrow way: good and bad, innocent and guilty.
Injustice is about being wrongfully convicted.
So if you're convicted of something you did do, you should be punished for it.
There are innocent and guilty people, there are victims and there are perpetrators.
Maybe we could think a little bit more broadly than that.
Right now, we're asking kids who live in the most disadvantaged neighborhoods, who have the least amount of family resources, who are attending the country's worst schools, who are facing the toughest time in the labor market, who are living in neighborhoods where violence is an everyday problem, we're asking these kids to walk the thinnest possible line -- to basically never do anything wrong.
Why are we not providing support to young kids facing these challenges?
Why are we offering only handcuffs, jail time and this fugitive existence?
Can we imagine something better?
Can we imagine a criminal justice system that prioritizes recovery, prevention, civic inclusion, rather than punishment?
(Applause) A criminal justice system that acknowledges the legacy of exclusion that poor people of color in the U.S. have faced and that does not promote and perpetuate those exclusions.
(Applause) And finally, a criminal justice system that believes in black young people, rather than treating black young people as the enemy to be rounded up.
(Applause) The good news is that we already are.
A few years ago, Michelle Alexander wrote "The New Jim Crow," which got Americans to see incarceration as a civil rights issue of historic proportions in a way they had not seen it before.
President Obama and Attorney General Eric Holder have come out very strongly on sentencing reform, on the need to address racial disparity in incarceration.
We're seeing states throw out Stop and Frisk as the civil rights violation that it is.
We're seeing cities and states decriminalize possession of marijuana.
New York, New Jersey and California have been dropping their prison populations, closing prisons, while also seeing a big drop in crime.
Texas has gotten into the game now, also closing prisons, investing in education.
This curious coalition is building from the right and the left, made up of former prisoners and fiscal conservatives, of civil rights activists and libertarians, of young people taking to the streets to protest police violence against unarmed black teenagers, and older, wealthier people -- some of you are here in the audience -- pumping big money into decarceration initiatives In a deeply divided Congress, the work of reforming our criminal justice system is just about the only thing that the right and the left are coming together on.
I did not think I would see this political moment in my lifetime.
I think many of the people who have been working tirelessly to write about the causes and consequences of our historically high incarceration rates did not think we would see this moment in our lifetime.
The question for us now is, how much can we make of it?
How much can we change?
I want to end with a call to young people, the young people attending college and the young people struggling to stay out of prison or to make it through prison and return home.
It may seem like these paths to adulthood are worlds apart, but the young people participating in these two institutions conveying us to adulthood, they have one thing in common: Both can be leaders in the work of reforming our criminal justice system.
Young people have always been leaders in the fight for equal rights, the fight for more people to be granted dignity and a fighting chance at freedom.
The mission for the generation of young people coming of age in this, a sea-change moment, potentially, is to end mass incarceration and build a new criminal justice system, emphasis on the word justice.
Thanks.
(Applause)
In June of 1998, Tori Murden McClure left Nags Head, North Carolina for France.
That's her boat, the American Pearl.
It's 23 feet long and just six feet across at its widest point.
The deck was the size of a cargo bed of a Ford F-150 pickup truck.
Tori and her friends built it by hand, and it weighed about 1,800 pounds.
Her plan was to row it alone across the Atlantic Ocean -- no motor, no sail -- something no woman and no American had ever done before.
This would be her route: over 3,600 miles across the open North Atlantic Ocean.
Professionally, Tori worked as a project administrator for the city of Louisville, Kentucky, her hometown, but her real passion was exploring.
This was not her first big expedition.
Several years earlier, she'd become the first woman to ski to the South Pole.
She was an accomplished rower in college, even competed for a spot on the 1992 U.S. Olympic team, but this, this was different.
(Video) (Music) Tori Murden McClure: Hi. It's Sunday, July 5.
Sector time 9 a.m.
So that's Kentucky time now.
Dawn Landes: Tori made these videos as she rowed.
This is her 21st day at sea.
At this point, she'd covered over 1,000 miles, had had no radio contact in more than two weeks following a storm that disabled all her long-range communications systems just five days in.
Most days looked like this.
At this point, she'd rowed over 200,000 strokes, fighting the current and the wind.
Some days, she traveled as little as 15 feet.
Yeah.
And as frustrating as those days were, other days were like this.
(Video) TMM: And I want to show you my little friends.
DL: She saw fish, dolphins, whales, sharks, and even some sea turtles.
After two weeks with no human contact, Tori was able to contact a local cargo ship via VHF radio.
(Video) TMM: Do you guys have a weather report, over?
Man: Heading up to a low ahead of you but it's heading, and you're obviously going northeast and there's a high behind us.
That'd be coming east-northeast also.
TMM: Good.
DL: She's pretty happy to talk to another human at this point.
(Video) TMM: So weather report says nothing dramatic is going to happen soon.
DL: What the weather report didn't tell her was that she was rowing right into the path of Hurricane Danielle in the worst hurricane season on record in the North Atlantic.
(Video) TMM: Just sprained my ankle.
There's a very strong wind from the east now.
It's blowing about.
It's blowing!
After 12 days of storm I get to row for four hours without a flagging wind.
I'm not very happy right now.
As happy as I was this morning, I am unhappy now, so ...
DL: After nearly three months at sea, she'd covered over 3,000 miles.
She was two thirds of the way there, but in the storm, the waves were the size of a seven-story building.
Her boat kept capsizing.
Some of them were pitchpole capsizes, flipping her end over end, and rowing became impossible.
(Video) TMM: It's 6:30 a.m.
I'm in something big, bad and ugly.
Two capsizes.
Last capsize, I took the rib off the top of my ceiling with my back.
I've had about six capsizes now.
The last one was a pitchpole.
I have the Argus beacon with me.
I would set off the distress signal, but quite frankly, I don't think they'd ever be able to find this little boat.
It's so far underwater right now, the only part that's showing pretty much is the cabin.
It's about 10 a.m.
I've lost track of the number of capsizes.
I seem to capsize about every 15 minutes.
I think I may have broken my left arm.
The waves are tearing the boat to shreds.
I keep praying because I'm not sure I'm going to make it through this.
DL: Tori set off her distress beacon and was rescued by a passing container ship.
They found her abandoned boat two months later adrift near France.
I read about it in the newspaper.
In 1998, I was a high school student living in Louisville, Kentucky.
Now, I live in New York City. I'm a songwriter.
And her bravery stuck with me, and I'm adapting her story into a musical called "Row."
When Tori returned home, she was feeling disheartened, she was broke.
She was having a hard time making the transition back into civilization.
In this scene, she sits at home.
The phone is ringing, her friends are calling, but she doesn't know how to talk to them.
She sings this song. It's called "Dear Heart."
(Guitar) When I was dreaming, I took my body to beautiful places I'd never been.
I saw Gibraltar, and stars of Kentucky burned in the moonlight, making me smile.
And when I awoke here, the sky was so cloudy.
I walked to a party where people I know try hard to know me and ask where I've been, but I can't explain what I've seen to them.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
Just pay attention, go right from the start.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
You can fall off the map, but don't fall apart.
When I was out there, the ocean would hold me, rock me and throw me, light as a child.
But now I'm so heavy, nothing consoles me.
My mind floats like driftwood, wayward and wild.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
Just pay attention, go right from the start.
Ah, listen, dear heart.
You can fall off the map, but don't fall apart.
Eventually, Tori starts to get her feet under her.
She starts hanging out with her friends again.
She meets a guy and falls in love for the first time.
She gets a new job working for another Louisville native, Muhammad Ali.
One day, at lunch with her new boss, Tori shares the news that two other women are setting out to row across the mid-Atlantic, to do something that she almost died trying to do.
His response was classic Ali: "You don't want to go through life as the woman who almost rowed across the ocean."
He was right.
Tori rebuilt the American Pearl, and in December of 1999, she did it.
(Applause) (Guitar) Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) These bees are in my backyard in Berkeley, California.
Until last year, I'd never kept bees before, but National Geographic asked me to photograph a story about them, and I decided, to be able to take compelling images, I should start keeping bees myself.
And as you may know, bees pollinate one third of our food crops, and lately they've been having a really hard time.
So as a photographer, I wanted to explore what this problem really looks like.
So I'm going to show you what I found over the last year.
This furry little creature is a fresh young bee halfway emerged from its brood cell, and bees right now are dealing with several different problems, including pesticides, diseases, and habitat loss, but the single greatest threat is a parasitic mite from Asia, Varroa destructor.
And this pinhead-sized mite crawls onto young bees and sucks their blood.
This eventually destroys a hive because it weakens the immune system of the bees, and it makes them more vulnerable to stress and disease.
Now, bees are the most sensitive when they're developing inside their brood cells, and I wanted to know what that process really looks like, so I teamed up with a bee lab at U.C. Davis and figured out how to raise bees in front of a camera.
I'm going to show you the first 21 days of a bee's life condensed into 60 seconds.
This is a bee egg as it hatches into a larva, and those newly hatched larvae swim around their cells feeding on this white goo that nurse bees secrete for them.
Then, their head and their legs slowly differentiate as they transform into pupae.
Here's that same pupation process, and you can actually see the mites running around in the cells.
Then the tissue in their body reorganizes and the pigment slowly develops in their eyes.
The last step of the process is their skin shrivels up and they sprout hair.
(Music) So -- (Applause) As you can see halfway through that video, the mites were running around on the baby bees, and the way that beekeepers typically manage these mites is they treat their hives with chemicals.
In the long run, that's bad news, so researchers are working on finding alternatives to control these mites.
This is one of those alternatives.
It's an experimental breeding program at the USDA Bee Lab in Baton Rouge, and this queen and her attendant bees are part of that program.
Now, the researchers figured out that some of the bees have a natural ability to fight mites, so they set out to breed a line of mite-resistant bees.
This is what it takes to breed bees in a lab.
The virgin queen is sedated and then artificially inseminated using this precision instrument.
Now, this procedure allows the researchers to control exactly which bees are being crossed, but there's a tradeoff in having this much control.
They succeeded in breeding mite-resistant bees, but in that process, those bees started to lose traits like their gentleness and their ability to store honey, so to overcome that problem, these researchers are now collaborating with commercial beekeepers.
This is Bret Adee opening one of his 72,000 beehives.
He and his brother run the largest beekeeping operation in the world, and the USDA is integrating their mite-resistant bees into his operation with the hope that over time, they'll be able to select the bees that are not only mite-resistant but also retain all of these qualities that make them useful to us.
And to say it like that makes it sound like we're manipulating and exploiting bees, and the truth is, we've been doing that for thousands of years.
We took this wild creature and put it inside of a box, practically domesticating it, and originally that was so that we could harvest their honey, but over time we started losing our native pollinators, our wild pollinators, and there are many places now where those wild pollinators can no longer meet the pollination demands of our agriculture, so these managed bees have become an integral part of our food system.
So when people talk about saving bees, my interpretation of that is we need to save our relationship to bees, and in order to design new solutions, we have to understand the basic biology of bees and understand the effects of stressors that we sometimes cannot see.
In other words, we have to understand bees up close.
Thank you.
(Applause)
By day, I'm a venture capitalist.
On weekends, I love rockets.
I'm going to talk about a hobby that can scale and show you photos I've taken over the years with kids like these, that hopefully will grow up to love rocketry and eventually become a Richard Branson or Diamandis.
My son designed a rocket that became stable, a golf ball rocket.
I thought it was quite an interesting experiment in the principles of rocket science.
Baking soda and vinegar.
Night shots are beautiful, piercing the Big Dipper and the Milky Way.
2-stage rockets with video cameras on them, onboard computers logging their flights, rocket gliders that fly back to Earth.
I use RockSim to simulate flights before they go to see if they'll break supersonic, then fly them with onboard computers to verify performance.
To launch the big stuff, you go to the middle of nowhere: Black Rock Desert, where dangerous things happen.
The boys and the rockets get bigger.
They use motors used on cruise-missile boosters.
They rumble the belly and leave even photographers in awe, watching the spectacle.
These rockets use experimental motors like nitrous oxide.
They use solid propellant most frequently.
It's a strange kind of love.
RocketMavericks.com with my photos, if you want to learn about this, participate, be a spectator.
This one was great, went to 100,000 feet -- but didn't quite.
Actually, it went 11 feet into solid clay and became a bunker-buster.
It had to be dug out.
Rockets often spiral out of control if you put too much propellant in them.
Here was a drag race.
At night you can see what happened in a second; in daytime, we call them land sharks.
Sometimes they just explode before your eyes or come down supersonic.
(Laughter) To take this shot, I did what I often do, which is go way beyond the pads, where none of the spectators are.
And if we can run the video, I'll show you what it took to get this DreamWorks shot.
(Video) Voices: Woo-hoo! Yeah. Nice.
Steve Jurvetson: They realize the computer failed, they're yelling "Deploy!"
(Video) Man: Oh, shit.
SJ: This is when they realize everything's gone haywire.
(Video) Man: It's going ballistic.
Come on, come on, come on.
SJ: And that's me over there, taking photos the whole way.
Things often go wrong.
Some people watch this because of a NASCAR-like fascination with things bumping and grinding.
Burning the parachute as it fell. That was last weekend.
This guy went up, went supersonic, ripped the fin can off.
The art sale in the sky.
These things dropped down from above all through the weekend of rocket launch after rocket launch.
It's a cadence you can't quite imagine.
I try to capture the mishaps; it's a challenge in photography when these things take place in a fraction of a second.
Why do it? For things like this: Gene from Alabama drives out there with this rocket he's built with X-ray sensors, video cameras, festooned with electronics.
He succeeds getting to 100,000 feet, leaving the atmosphere, seeing a thin blue line of space.
It is this breathtaking image -- success, of course -- that motivates us and motivates kids to follow and understand rocket science, understand the importance of physics and math and, in many ways, to have that awe at exploration of the frontiers of the unknown.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) Dannielle Hadley: Life in Pennsylvania means just that: life without the possibility of parole.
For us lifers, as we call ourselves, our only chance for release is through commutation, which has only been granted to two women since 1989, close to 30 years ago.
Our song, "This Is Not Our Home," it tells of our experiences while doing life without the possibility of parole.
(Music) Brenda Watkins: I'm a woman.
I'm a grandmother.
I'm a daughter.
I have a son.
I'm not an angel.
I'm not the devil.
I came to jail when I was so young.
I spend my time here inside these prison walls.
Lost friends to death, saw some go home.
Watch years pass, people come and go, while I do life without parole.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here.
This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone?
As the years go by, I hold back my tears, because if I cry I'd give in to fear.
I must be strong, have to hold on.
Gotta get through another year.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here. This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone?
I'm not saying that I'm not guilty, I'm not saying that I shouldn't pay.
All I'm asking is for forgiveness.
Gotta have hope I'll be free someday.
Is there a place for me in the world out there?
Will they ever know or care that I'm chained?
Is there redemption for the sin of my younger days?
Because I've changed.
Lord knows I've changed.
I am a prisoner for the wrong I've done.
I'm doing time here. This is not my home.
Dream of freedom, hope for mercy.
Will I see my family or die alone?
Will I see my family or die alone?
I'm known to you as Inmate 008106.
Incarcerated 29 years.
My name is Brenda Watkins.
I was born and raised in Hoffman, North Carolina.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Thelma Nichols: Inmate number 0B2472.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Thelma Nichols.
I was born and raised in Philadelphia, P.A.
This is not my home.
(Applause) DH: 008494.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Dannielle Hadley.
I was born and raised in Philadelphia, P.A, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Theresa Battles: Inmate 008309.
I've been incarcerated for 27 years.
My name is Theresa Battles.
I'm from Norton, New Jersey, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Debra Brown: I am known as Inmate 007080.
I've been incarcerated for 30 years.
My name is Debra Brown.
I'm from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Joann Butler: 005961.
I've been incarcerated for 37 years.
My name is Joann Butler, and I was born and raised in Philadelphia.
This is not my home.
(Applause) Diane Hamill Metzger: Number 005634.
I've been incarcerated for 39 and one half years.
My name is Diane Hamill Metzger.
I'm from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Lena Brown: I am 004867.
Incarcerated 40 years.
My name is Lena Brown, and I was born and raised in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Trina Garnett: My number is 005545.
My name is Trina Garnett, I've been incarcerated for 37 years, since I was 14 years old.
Born and raised in Chester, Pennsylvania, and this is not my home.
(Applause) Will I see my family or die alone?
Or die alone?
(Applause)
When I was nine years old, my mom asked me what I would want my house to look like, and I drew this fairy mushroom.
And then she actually built it.
(Laughter) I don't think I realized this was so unusual at the time, and maybe I still haven't, because I'm still designing houses.
This is a six-story bespoke home on the island of Bali.
It's built almost entirely from bamboo.
The living room overlooks the valley from the fourth floor.
You enter the house by a bridge.
It can get hot in the tropics, so we make big curving roofs to catch the breezes.
But some rooms have tall windows to keep the air conditioning in and the bugs out.
This room we left open.
We made an air-conditioned, tented bed.
And one client wanted a TV room in the corner of her living room.
Boxing off an area with tall walls just didn't feel right, so instead, we made this giant woven pod.
Now, we do have all the necessary luxuries, like bathrooms.
This one is a basket in the corner of the living room, and I've got tell you, some people actually hesitate to use it.
We have not quite figured out our acoustic insulation.
(Laughter) So there are lots of things that we're still working on, but one thing I have learned is that bamboo will treat you well if you use it right.
It's actually a wild grass.
It grows on otherwise unproductive land -- deep ravines, mountainsides.
It lives off of rainwater, spring water, sunlight, and of the 1,450 species of bamboo that grow across the world, we use just seven of them.
That's my dad.
He's the one who got me building with bamboo, and he is standing in a clump of Dendrocalamus asper niger that he planted just seven years ago.
Each year, it sends up a new generation of shoots.
That shoot, we watched it grow a meter in three days just last week, so we're talking about sustainable timber in three years.
Now, we harvest from hundreds of family-owned clumps.
Betung, as we call it, it's really long, up to 18 meters of usable length.
Try getting that truck down the mountain.
And it's strong: it has the tensile strength of steel, the compressive strength of concrete.
Slam four tons straight down on a pole, and it can take it.
Because it's hollow, it's lightweight, light enough to be lifted by just a few men, or, apparently, one woman.
(Laughter) (Applause) And when my father built Green School in Bali, he chose bamboo for all of the buildings on campus, because he saw it as a promise.
It's a promise to the kids.
It's one sustainable material that they will not run out of.
And when I first saw these structures under construction about six years ago, I just thought, this makes perfect sense.
It is growing all around us.
It's strong. It's elegant.
It's earthquake-resistant.
Why hasn't this happened sooner, and what can we do with it next?
So along with some of the original builders of Green School, I founded Ibuku.
Ibu means "mother," and ku means "mine," so it represents my Mother Earth, and at Ibuku, we are a team of artisans, architects and designers, and what we're doing together is creating a new way of building.
Over the past five years together, we have built over 50 unique structures, most of them in Bali.
Nine of them are at Green Village -- you've just seen inside some of these homes -- and we fill them with bespoke furniture, we surround them with veggie gardens, we would love to invite you all to come visit someday.
And while you're there, you can also see Green School -- we keep building classrooms there each year -- as well as an updated fairy mushroom house.
We're also working on a little house for export.
This is a traditional Sumbanese home that we replicated, right down to the details and textiles.
A restaurant with an open-air kitchen.
It looks a lot like a kitchen, right?
And a bridge that spans 22 meters across a river.
Now, what we're doing, it's not entirely new.
From little huts to elaborate bridges like this one in Java, bamboo has been in use across the tropical regions of the world for literally tens of thousands of years.
There are islands and even continents that were first reached by bamboo rafts.
But until recently, it was almost impossible to reliably protect bamboo from insects, and so, just about everything that was ever built out of bamboo is gone.
Unprotected bamboo weathers.
Untreated bamboo gets eaten to dust.
And so that's why most people, especially in Asia, think that you couldn't be poor enough or rural enough to actually want to live in a bamboo house.
And so we thought, what will it take to change their minds, to convince people that bamboo is worth building with, much less worth aspiring to?
First, we needed safe treatment solutions.
Borax is a natural salt.
It turns bamboo into a viable building material.
Treat it properly, design it carefully, and a bamboo structure can last a lifetime.
Second, build something extraordinary out of it.
Inspire people.
Fortunately, Balinese culture fosters craftsmanship.
It values the artisan.
So combine those with the adventurous outliers from new generations of locally trained architects and designers and engineers, and always remember that you are designing for curving, tapering, hollow poles.
No two poles alike, no straight lines, no two-by-fours here.
The tried-and-true, well-crafted formulas and vocabulary of architecture do not apply here.
We have had to invent our own rules.
We ask the bamboo what it's good at, what it wants to become, and what it says is: respect it, design for its strengths, protect it from water, and to make the most of its curves.
So we design in real 3D, making scale structural models out of the same material that we'll later use to build the house.
And bamboo model-making, it's an art, as well as some hardcore engineering.
So that's the blueprint of the house.
(Laughter) And we bring it to site, and with tiny rulers, we measure each pole, and consider each curve, and we choose a piece of bamboo from the pile to replicate that house on site.
When it comes down to the details, we consider everything.
Why are doors so often rectangular?
Why not round?
How could you make a door better?
Well, its hinges battle with gravity, and gravity will always win in the end, so why not have it pivot on the center where it can stay balanced?
And while you're at it, why not doors shaped like teardrops?
To reap the selective benefits and work within the constraints of this material, we have really had to push ourselves, and within that constraint, we have found space for something new.
It's a challenge: how do you make a ceiling if you don't have any flat boards to work with?
Let me tell you, sometimes I dream of sheet rock and plywood.
(Laughter) But if what you've got is skilled craftsmen and itsy bitsy little splits, weave that ceiling together, stretch a canvas over it, lacquer it.
How do you design durable kitchen countertops that do justice to this curving structure you've just built?
Slice up a boulder like a loaf of bread, hand-carve each to fit the other, leave the crusts on, and what we're doing, it is almost entirely handmade.
The structural connections of our buildings are reinforced by steel joints, but we use a lot of hand-whittled bamboo pins.
There are thousands of pins in each floor.
This floor is made of glossy and durable bamboo skin.
You can feel the texture under bare feet.
And the floor that you walk on, can it affect the way that you walk?
Can it change the footprint that you'll ultimately leave on the world?
I remember being nine years old and feeling wonder, and possibility, and a little bit of idealism.
And we've got a really long way to go, there's a lot left to learn, but one thing I know is that with creativity and commitment, you can create beauty and comfort and safety and even luxury out of a material that will grow back.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why do we cheat?
And why do happy people cheat?
And when we say "infidelity," what exactly do we mean?
Is it a hookup, a love story, paid sex, a chat room, a massage with a happy ending?
Why do we think that men cheat out of boredom and fear of intimacy, but women cheat out of loneliness and hunger for intimacy?
And is an affair always the end of a relationship?
For the past 10 years, I have traveled the globe and worked extensively with hundreds of couples who have been shattered by infidelity.
There is one simple act of transgression that can rob a couple of their relationship, their happiness and their very identity: an affair.
And yet, this extremely common act is so poorly understood.
So this talk is for anyone who has ever loved.
Adultery has existed since marriage was invented, and so, too, the taboo against it.
In fact, infidelity has a tenacity that marriage can only envy, so much so, that this is the only commandment that is repeated twice in the Bible: once for doing it, and once just for thinking about it.
(Laughter) So how do we reconcile what is universally forbidden, yet universally practiced?
Now, throughout history, men practically had a license to cheat with little consequence, and supported by a host of biological and evolutionary theories that justified their need to roam, so the double standard is as old as adultery itself.
But who knows what's really going on under the sheets there, right?
Because when it comes to sex, the pressure for men is to boast and to exaggerate, but the pressure for women is to hide, minimize and deny, which isn't surprising when you consider that there are still nine countries where women can be killed for straying.
Now, monogamy used to be one person for life.
Today, monogamy is one person at a time.
(Laughter) (Applause) I mean, many of you probably have said, "I am monogamous in all my relationships."
(Laughter) We used to marry, and had sex for the first time.
But now we marry, and we stop having sex with others.
The fact is that monogamy had nothing to do with love.
Men relied on women's fidelity in order to know whose children these are, and who gets the cows when I die.
Now, everyone wants to know what percentage of people cheat.
I've been asked that question since I arrived at this conference.
(Laughter) It applies to you.
But the definition of infidelity keeps on expanding: sexting, watching porn, staying secretly active on dating apps.
So because there is no universally agreed-upon definition of what even constitutes an infidelity, estimates vary widely, from 26 percent to 75 percent.
But on top of it, we are walking contradictions.
So 95 percent of us will say that it is terribly wrong for our partner to lie about having an affair, but just about the same amount of us will say that that's exactly what we would do if we were having one.
(Laughter) Now, I like this definition of an affair -- it brings together the three key elements: a secretive relationship, which is the core structure of an affair; an emotional connection to one degree or another; and a sexual alchemy.
And alchemy is the key word here, because the erotic frisson is such that the kiss that you only imagine giving, can be as powerful and as enchanting as hours of actual lovemaking.
As Marcel Proust said, it's our imagination that is responsible for love, not the other person.
So it's never been easier to cheat, and it's never been more difficult to keep a secret.
And never has infidelity exacted such a psychological toll.
When marriage was an economic enterprise, infidelity threatened our economic security.
But now that marriage is a romantic arrangement, infidelity threatens our emotional security.
Ironically, we used to turn to adultery -- that was the space where we sought pure love.
But now that we seek love in marriage, adultery destroys it.
Now, there are three ways that I think infidelity hurts differently today.
We have a romantic ideal in which we turn to one person to fulfill an endless list of needs: to be my greatest lover, my best friend, the best parent, my trusted confidant, my emotional companion, my intellectual equal.
And I am it: I'm chosen, I'm unique, I'm indispensable, I'm irreplaceable, I'm the one.
And infidelity tells me I'm not.
It is the ultimate betrayal.
Infidelity shatters the grand ambition of love.
But if throughout history, infidelity has always been painful, today it is often traumatic, because it threatens our sense of self.
So my patient Fernando, he's plagued.
He goes on: "I thought I knew my life.
I thought I knew who you were, who we were as a couple, who I was.
Now, I question everything."
Infidelity -- a violation of trust, a crisis of identity.
"Can I ever trust you again?" he asks.
"Can I ever trust anyone again?"
And this is also what my patient Heather is telling me, when she's talking to me about her story with Nick.
Married, two kids.
Nick just left on a business trip, and Heather is playing on his iPad with the boys, when she sees a message appear on the screen: "Can't wait to see you."
Strange, she thinks, we just saw each other.
And then another message: "Can't wait to hold you in my arms."
And Heather realizes these are not for her.
She also tells me that her father had affairs, but her mother, she found one little receipt in the pocket, and a little bit of lipstick on the collar.
Heather, she goes digging, and she finds hundreds of messages, and photos exchanged and desires expressed.
The vivid details of Nick's two-year affair unfold in front of her in real time, And it made me think: Affairs in the digital age are death by a thousand cuts.
But then we have another paradox that we're dealing with these days.
Because of this romantic ideal, we are relying on our partner's fidelity with a unique fervor.
But we also have never been more inclined to stray, and not because we have new desires today, but because we live in an era where we feel that we are entitled to pursue our desires, because this is the culture where I deserve to be happy.
And if we used to divorce because we were unhappy, today we divorce because we could be happier.
And if divorce carried all the shame, today, choosing to stay when you can leave is the new shame.
So Heather, she can't talk to her friends because she's afraid that they will judge her for still loving Nick, and everywhere she turns, she gets the same advice: Leave him. Throw the dog on the curb.
And if the situation were reversed, Nick would be in the same situation.
Staying is the new shame.
So if we can divorce, why do we still have affairs?
Now, the typical assumption is that if someone cheats, either there's something wrong in your relationship or wrong with you.
But millions of people can't all be pathological.
The logic goes like this: If you have everything you need at home, then there is no need to go looking elsewhere, assuming that there is such a thing as a perfect marriage that will inoculate us against wanderlust.
But what if passion has a finite shelf life?
What if there are things that even a good relationship can never provide?
If even happy people cheat, what is it about?
The vast majority of people that I actually work with are not at all chronic philanderers.
They are often people who are deeply monogamous in their beliefs, and at least for their partner.
But they find themselves in a conflict between their values and their behavior.
They often are people who have actually been faithful for decades, but one day they cross a line that they never thought they would cross, and at the risk of losing everything.
But for a glimmer of what?
Affairs are an act of betrayal, and they are also an expression of longing and loss.
At the heart of an affair, you will often find a longing and a yearning for an emotional connection, for novelty, for freedom, for autonomy, for sexual intensity, a wish to recapture lost parts of ourselves or an attempt to bring back vitality in the face of loss and tragedy.
I'm thinking about another patient of mine, Priya, who is blissfully married, loves her husband, and would never want to hurt the man.
But she also tells me that she's always done what was expected of her: good girl, good wife, good mother, taking care of her immigrant parents.
Priya, she fell for the arborist who removed the tree from her yard after Hurricane Sandy.
And with his truck and his tattoos, he's quite the opposite of her.
But at 47, Priya's affair is about the adolescence that she never had.
And her story highlights for me that when we seek the gaze of another, it isn't always our partner that we are turning away from, but the person that we have ourselves become.
And it isn't so much that we're looking for another person, as much as we are looking for another self.
Now, all over the world, there is one word that people who have affairs always tell me.
They feel alive.
And they often will tell me stories of recent losses -- of a parent who died, and a friend that went too soon, and bad news at the doctor.
Death and mortality often live in the shadow of an affair, because they raise these questions.
Is this it? Is there more?
Am I going on for another 25 years like this?
Will I ever feel that thing again?
And it has led me to think that perhaps these questions are the ones that propel people to cross the line, and that some affairs are an attempt to beat back deadness, in an antidote to death.
And contrary to what you may think, affairs are way less about sex, and a lot more about desire: desire for attention, desire to feel special, desire to feel important.
And the very structure of an affair, the fact that you can never have your lover, keeps you wanting.
That in itself is a desire machine, because the incompleteness, the ambiguity, keeps you wanting that which you can't have.
Now some of you probably think that affairs don't happen in open relationships, but they do.
First of all, the conversation about monogamy is not the same as the conversation about infidelity.
But the fact is that it seems that even when we have the freedom to have other sexual partners, we still seem to be lured by the power of the forbidden, that if we do that which we are not supposed to do, then we feel like we are really doing what we want to.
And I've also told quite a few of my patients that if they could bring into their relationships one tenth of the boldness, the imagination and the verve that they put into their affairs, they probably would never need to see me.
(Laughter) So how do we heal from an affair?
Desire runs deep.
Betrayal runs deep.
But it can be healed.
And some affairs are death knells for relationships that were already dying on the vine.
But others will jolt us into new possibilities.
The fact is, the majority of couples who have experienced affairs stay together.
But some of them will merely survive, and others will actually be able to turn a crisis into an opportunity.
They'll be able to turn this into a generative experience.
And I'm actually thinking even more so for the deceived partner, who will often say, "You think I didn't want more?
But I'm not the one who did it."
But now that the affair is exposed, they, too, get to claim more, and they no longer have to uphold the status quo that may not have been working for them that well, either.
I've noticed that a lot of couples, in the immediate aftermath of an affair, because of this new disorder that may actually lead to a new order, will have depths of conversations with honesty and openness that they haven't had in decades.
And, partners who were sexually indifferent find themselves suddenly so lustfully voracious, they don't know where it's coming from.
Something about the fear of loss will rekindle desire, and make way for an entirely new kind of truth.
So when an affair is exposed, what are some of the specific things that couples can do?
We know from trauma that healing begins when the perpetrator acknowledges their wrongdoing.
So for the partner who had the affair, for Nick, one thing is to end the affair, but the other is the essential, important act of expressing guilt and remorse for hurting his wife.
But the truth is that I have noticed that quite a lot of people who have affairs may feel terribly guilty for hurting their partner, but they don't feel guilty for the experience of the affair itself.
And that distinction is important.
And Nick, he needs to hold vigil for the relationship.
He needs to become, for a while, the protector of the boundaries.
It's his responsibility to bring it up, because if he thinks about it, he can relieve Heather from the obsession, and from having to make sure that the affair isn't forgotten, and that in itself begins to restore trust.
But for Heather, or deceived partners, it is essential to do things that bring back a sense of self-worth, to surround oneself with love and with friends and activities that give back joy and meaning and identity.
But even more important, is to curb the curiosity to mine for the sordid details -- Where were you? Where did you do it?
How often? Is she better than me in bed? -- questions that only inflict more pain, and keep you awake at night.
And instead, switch to what I call the investigative questions, the ones that mine the meaning and the motives -- What did this affair mean for you?
What were you able to express or experience there that you could no longer do with me?
What was it like for you when you came home?
What is it about us that you value?
Are you pleased this is over?
Every affair will redefine a relationship, and every couple will determine what the legacy of the affair will be.
But affairs are here to stay, and they're not going away.
And the dilemmas of love and desire, they don't yield just simple answers of black and white and good and bad, and victim and perpetrator.
Betrayal in a relationship comes in many forms.
There are many ways that we betray our partner: with contempt, with neglect, with indifference, with violence.
Sexual betrayal is only one way to hurt a partner.
In other words, the victim of an affair is not always the victim of the marriage.
Now, you've listened to me, and I know what you're thinking: She has a French accent, she must be pro-affair.
(Laughter) So, you're wrong.
I am not French.
(Laughter) (Applause) And I'm not pro-affair.
But because I think that good can come out of an affair, I have often been asked this very strange question: Would I ever recommend it?
Now, I would no more recommend you have an affair than I would recommend you have cancer, and yet we know that people who have been ill often talk about how their illness has yielded them a new perspective.
The main question that I've been asked since I arrived at this conference when I said I would talk about infidelity is, for or against?
I said, "Yes."
(Laughter) I look at affairs from a dual perspective: hurt and betrayal on one side, growth and self-discovery on the other -- what it did to you, and what it meant for me.
And so when a couple comes to me in the aftermath of an affair that has been revealed, I will often tell them this: Today in the West, most of us are going to have two or three relationships or marriages, and some of us are going to do it with the same person.
Your first marriage is over.
Would you like to create a second one together?
Thank you.
(Applause)
I know what you're thinking: "Why does that guy get to sit down?"
That's because this is radio.
(Music) I tell radio stories about design, and I report on all kinds of stories: buildings and toothbrushes, mascots and wayfinding and fonts.
My mission is to get people to engage with the design that they care about so they begin to pay attention to all forms of design.
When you decode the world with design intent in mind, the world becomes kind of magical.
Instead of seeing the broken things, you see all the little bits of genius that anonymous designers have sweated over to make our lives better.
And that's essentially the definition of design: making life better and providing joy.
And few things give me greater joy than a well-designed flag.
(Laughter) Yeah!
(Applause) Happy 50th anniversary on your flag, Canada.
It is beautiful, gold standard.
I'm kind of obsessed with flags.
Sometimes I bring up the topic of flags, and people are like, "I don't care about flags," and then we start talking about flags, and trust me, 100 percent of people care about flags.
There's just something about them that works on our emotions.
My family wrapped my Christmas presents as flags this year, including the blue gift bag that's dressed up as the flag of Scotland.
I put this picture online, and sure enough, within the first few minutes, someone left a comment that said, "You can take that Scottish Saltire and shove it up your ass."
(Laughter) See, people are passionate about flags, you know?
That's the way it is.
What I love about flags is that once you understand the design of flags, what makes a good flag, what makes a bad flag, you can understand the design of almost anything.
So what I'm going to do here is, I cracked open an episode of my radio show, "99% Invisible," and I'm going to reconstruct it here on stage, so when I press a button over here -- Voice: S for Sound -- Roman Mars: It's going to make a sound, and so whenever you hear a sound or a voice or a piece of music, it's because I pressed a button.
Voice: Sound.
RM: All right, got it? Here we go.
Three, two.
This is 99% Invisible. I'm Roman Mars.
(Music) Narrator: The five basic principles of flag design.
Roman Mars: According to the North American Vexillological Association.
Vexillological.
Ted Kaye: Vexillology is the study of flags.
RM: It's that extra "lol" that makes it sound weird.
Narrator: Number one, keep it simple.
The flag should be so simple that a child can draw it from memory.
RM: Before I moved to Chicago in 2005, I didn't even know cities had their own flags.
TK: Most larger cities do have flags.
RM: Well, I didn't know that, that's Ted Kaye, by the way.
TK: Hello.
RM: He's a flag expert, he's a totally awesome guy.
TK: I'm Ted Kaye, I have edited a scholarly journal on flag studies, and I am currently involved with the Portland Flag Association and the North American Vexillological Association.
RM: Ted literally wrote the book on flag design.
Narrator: "Good Flag, Bad Flag."
RM: It's more of a pamphlet, really, it's about 16 pages.
TK: Yes, it's called "Good Flag, Bad Flag: How to Design a Great Flag."
RM: And that first city flag I discovered in Chicago is a beaut: white field, two horizontal blue stripes, and four six-pointed red stars down the middle.
(Sound) Narrator: Number two, use meaningful symbolism.
TK: The blue stripes represent the water, the river and the lake.
Narrator: The flag's images, colors or pattern should relate to what it symbolizes.
TK: The red stars represent significant events in Chicago's history.
RM: Namely, the founding of Fort Dearborn on the future site of Chicago, the Great Chicago Fire, the World Columbian Exposition, which everyone remembers because of the White City, and the Century of Progress Exposition, which no one remembers at all.
Narrator: Number three, use two to three basic colors.
TK: The basic rule for colors is to use two to three colors from the standard color set: red, white, blue, green, yellow and black.
RM: The design of the Chicago flag has complete buy-in with an entire cross-section of the city.
It is everywhere; every municipal building flies the flag.
Whet Moser: There's probably at least one store on every block near where I work that sells some sort of Chicago flag paraphernalia.
RM: That's Whet Moser from Chicago magazine.
WM: Today, just for example, I went to get a haircut, and when I sat down in the barber's chair, there was a Chicago flag on the box that the barber kept all his tools in, and then in the mirror, there was a Chicago flag on the wall behind me.
When I left, a guy passed me who had a Chicago flag badge on his backpack.
RM: It's adaptable and remixable.
The six-pointed stars in particular show up in all kinds of places.
WM: The coffee I bought the other day had a Chicago star on it.
RM: It's a distinct symbol of Chicago pride.
TK: When a police officer or a firefighter dies in Chicago, often it's not the flag of the United States on his casket.
It can be the flag of the city of Chicago.
That's how deeply the flag has gotten into the civic imagery of Chicago.
RM: And it isn't just that people love Chicago and therefore love the flag.
I also think that people love Chicago more because the flag is so cool.
TK: A positive feedback loop there between great symbolism and civic pride.
RM: OK, so when I moved back to San Francisco in 2008, I researched its flag, because I had never seen it in the previous eight years I lived there.
And I found it, I am sorry to say, sadly lacking.
(Laughter) I know.
It hurts me, too.
(Laughter) TK: Well, let me start from the top.
Narrator: Number one, keep it simple.
TK: Keeping it simple.
Narrator: The flag should be so simple that a child can draw it from memory.
TK: It's a relatively complex flag.
RM: OK, here we go, OK.
The main component of the San Francisco flag is a phoenix representing the city rising from the ashes after the devastating fires of the 1850s.
TK: A powerful symbol for San Francisco.
RM: I still don't really dig the phoenix.
Design-wise, it manages to both be too crude and have too many details at the same time, which if you were trying for that, you wouldn't be able to do it, and it just looks bad at a distance, but having deep meaning puts that element in the plus column.
Behind the phoenix, the background is mostly white, and then it has a substantial gold border around it.
TK: Which is a very attractive design element.
RM: I think it's OK, but -- (Laughter) here come the big no-nos of flag design.
Narrator: Number four, no lettering or seals.
Never use writing of any kind.
RM: Underneath the phoenix, there's a motto on a ribbon that translates to "Gold in peace, iron in war," plus -- and this is the big problem -- it says San Francisco across the bottom.
TK: If you need to write the name of what you're representing on your flag, your symbolism has failed.
(Laughter) (Applause) RM: The United States flag doesn't say "USA" across the front.
In fact, country flags, they tend to behave.
Like, hats off to South Africa and Turkey and Israel and Somalia and Japan and Gambia.
There's a bunch of really great country flags, but they obey good design principles because the stakes are high.
They're on the international stage.
But city, state and regional flags are another story.
(Laughter) There is a scourge of bad flags -- (Laughter) and they must be stopped.
(Laughter) (Applause) That is the truth and that is the dare.
The first step is to recognize that we have a problem.
(Laughter) A lot of people tend to think that good design is just a matter of taste, and quite honestly, sometimes it is, actually, but sometimes it isn't, all right?
(Laughter) Here's the full list of NAVA flag design principles.
Narrator: Number one. TK: Keep it simple.
Narrator: Number two. TK: Use meaningful symbolism.
Narrator: Number three. TK: Use two to three basic colors.
Narrator: Number four. TK: No lettering or seals.
Narrator: Never use writing of any kind.
TK: Because you can't read that at a distance.
Narrator: Number five. TK: And be distinctive.
RM: All the best flags tend to stick to these principles.
And like I said before, most country flags are OK.
But here's the thing: if you showed this list of principles to any designer of almost anything, they would say these principles -- simplicity, deep meaning, having few colors or being thoughtful about colors, uniqueness, don't have writing you can't read -- all those principles apply to them, too.
But sadly, good design principles are rarely invoked in US city flags.
Our biggest problem seems to be that fourth one.
We just can't stop ourselves from putting our names on our flags, or little municipal seals with tiny writing on them.
Here's the thing about municipal seals: They were designed to be on pieces of paper where you can read them, not on flags 100 feet away flapping in the breeze.
So here's a bunch of flags again.
Vexillologists call these SOBs: Seals on a bedsheet -- (Laughter) and if you can't tell what city they go to, yeah, that's exactly the problem, except for Anaheim, apparently, they fixed it.
(Laughter) These flags are everywhere in the US.
The European equivalent of the municipal seal is the city coat of arms ...
and this is where we can learn a lesson for how to do things right.
So this is the city coat of arms of Amsterdam.
Now, if this were a United States city, the flag would probably look like this.
You know, yeah.
(Laughter) But instead, the flag of Amsterdam looks like this.
Rather than plopping the whole coat of arms on a solid background and writing "Amsterdam" below it, they just take the key elements of the escutcheon, the shield, and they turn it into the most badass city flag in the world.
(Laughter) (Applause) And because it's so badass, those flags and crosses are found throughout Amsterdam, just like Chicago, they're used.
Even though seal-on-a-bedsheet flags are particularly painful and offensive to me, nothing can quite prepare you for one of the biggest train wrecks in vexillological history.
(Laughter) Are you ready?
It's the flag of Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
(Laughter) I mean, it's distinctive, I'll give them that.
Steve Kodis: It was adopted in 1955.
RM: The city ran a contest and gathered a bunch of submissions with all kinds of designs.
SK: And an alderman by the name of Fred Steffan cobbled together parts of the submissions to make what is now the Milwaukee flag.
RM: It's a kitchen sink flag.
There's a gigantic gear representing industry, there's a ship recognizing the port, a giant stalk of wheat paying homage to the brewing industry.
It's a hot mess, and Steve Kodis, a graphic designer from Milwaukee, wants to change it.
SK: It's really awful.
It's a misstep on the city's behalf, to say the least.
RM: But what puts the Milwaukee flag over the top, almost to the point of self-parody, is on it is a picture of the Civil War battle flag of the Milwaukee regiment.
SK: So that's the final element in it that just makes it that much more ridiculous, that there is a flag design within the Milwaukee flag.
RM: On the flag. Yeah. Yeah.
(Laughter) Yeah.
(Music) Now, Milwaukee is a fantastic city.
I've been there, I love it.
The most depressing part of this flag, though, is that there have been two major redesign contests.
The last one was held in 2001.
105 entries were received.
TK: But in the end, the members of the Milwaukee Arts Board decided that none of the new entries were worthy of flying over the city.
RM: They couldn't agree to change that thing!
(Laughter) That's discouraging enough to make you think that good design and democracy just simply do not go together.
(Laughter) But Steve Kotas is going to try one more time to redesign the Milwaukee flag.
SK: I believe Milwaukee is a great city.
Every great city deserves a great flag.
RM: Steve isn't ready to reveal his design yet.
One of the things about proposing one of these things is you have to get people on board, and then you reveal your design.
But here's the trick: If you want to design a great flag, a kick-ass flag like Chicago's or DC's, which also has a great flag, start by drawing a one-by-one-and-a-half-inch rectangle on a piece of paper.
Your design has to fit within that tiny rectangle.
Here's why.
TK: A three-by-five-foot flag on a pole 100 feet away looks about the same size as a one-by-one-and-a-half-inch rectangle seen about 15 inches from your eye.
You'd be surprised by how compelling and simple the design can be when you hold yourself to that limitation.
RM: Meanwhile, back in San Francisco.
Is there anything we can do?
TK: I like to say that in every bad flag there's a good flag trying to get out.
The way to make San Francisco's flag a good flag is to take the motto off because you can't read that at a distance.
Take the name off, and the border might even be made thicker, so it's more a part of the flag.
And I would simply take the phoenix and make it a great big element in the middle of the flag.
RM: But the current phoenix, that's got to go.
TK: I would simplify or stylize the phoenix.
Depict a big, wide-winged bird coming out of flames.
Emphasize those flames.
RM: So this San Francisco flag was designed by Frank Chimero based on Ted Kaye's suggestions.
I don't know what he would do if we was completely unfettered and didn't follow those guidelines.
Fans of my radio show and podcast, heard me complain about bad flags.
They've sent me other suggested designs.
This one's by Neil Mussett.
Both are so much better.
(Laughter) And I think if they were adopted, I would see them around the city.
In my crusade to make flags of the world more beautiful, many listeners have taken it upon themselves to redesign their flags and look into the feasibility of getting them officially adopted.
(Music) If you see your city flag and like it, fly it, even if it violates a design rule or two.
I don't care.
But if you don't see your city flag, maybe it doesn't exist, but maybe it does, and it just sucks, and I dare you to join the effort to try to change that.
As we move more and more into cities, the city flag will become not just a symbol of that city as a place, but also, it could become a symbol of how that city considers design itself, especially today, as the populace is becoming more design-aware.
And I think design awareness is at an all-time high.
A well-designed flag could be seen as an indicator of how a city considers all of its design systems: its public transit, its parks, its signage.
It might seem frivolous, but it's not.
TK: Often when city leaders say, "We have more important things to do than worry about a city flag," my response is, "If you had a great city flag, you would have a banner for people to rally under to face those more important things."
(Music) RM: I've seen firsthand what a good city flag can do in the case of Chicago.
The marriage of good design and civic pride is something that we need in all places.
The best part about municipal flags is that we own them.
They are an open-source, publicly owned design language of the community.
When they are done well, they are remixable, adaptable, and they are powerful.
We could control the branding and graphical imagery of our cities with a good flag, but instead, by having bad flags we don't use, we cede that territory to sports teams and chambers of commerce and tourism boards.
Sports teams can leave and break our hearts.
And besides, some of us don't really care about sports.
And tourism campaigns can just be cheesy.
But a great city flag is something that represents a city to its people and its people to the world at large.
And when that flag is a beautiful thing, that connection is a beautiful thing.
So maybe all the city flags can be as inspiring as Hong Kong or Portland or Trondheim, and we can do away with all the bad flags like San Francisco, Milwaukee, Cedar Rapids, and finally, when we're all done, we can do something about Pocatello, Idaho, considered by the North American Vexillological Association as the worst city flag in North America.
[Proud to be Pocatello] (Laughter) (Applause) Yeah.
(Applause) That thing has a trademark symbol on it, people.
(Laughter) That hurts me just to look at.
(Laughter) Thank you so much for listening.
(Applause) [Music by: Melodium (@melodiumbox) and Keegan DeWitt (@keegandewitt)]
I'd like to have you look at this pencil.
It's a thing. It's a legal thing.
And so are books you might have or the cars you own.
They're all legal things.
The great apes that you'll see behind me, they too are legal things.
Now, I can do that to a legal thing.
I can do whatever I want to my book or my car.
These great apes, you'll see.
The photographs are taken by a man named James Mollison who wrote a book called "James &amp; Other Apes."
And he tells in his book how every single one them, almost every one of them, is an orphan who saw his mother and father die before his eyes.
They're legal things.
So for centuries, there's been a great legal wall that separates legal things from legal persons.
On one hand, legal things are invisible to judges.
They don't count in law.
They don't have any legal rights.
They don't have the capacity for legal rights.
They are the slaves.
On the other side of that legal wall are the legal persons.
Legal persons are very visible to judges.
They count in law.
They may have many rights.
They have the capacity for an infinite number of rights.
And they're the masters.
Right now, all nonhuman animals are legal things.
All human beings are legal persons.
But being human and being a legal person has never been, and is not today, synonymous with a legal person.
Humans and legal persons are not synonymous.
On the one side, there have been many human beings over the centuries who have been legal things.
Slaves were legal things.
Women, children, were sometimes legal things.
Indeed, a great deal of civil rights struggle over the last centuries has been to punch a hole through that wall and begin to feed these human things through the wall and have them become legal persons.
But alas, that hole has closed up.
Now, on the other side are legal persons, but they've never only been limited to human beings.
There are, for example, there are many legal persons who are not even alive.
In the United States, we're aware of the fact that corporations are legal persons.
In pre-independence India, a court held that a Hindu idol was a legal person, that a mosque was a legal person.
In 2000, the Indian Supreme Court held that the holy books of the Sikh religion was a legal person, and in 2012, just recently, there was a treaty between the indigenous peoples of New Zealand and the crown, in which it was agreed that a river was a legal person who owned its own riverbed.
Now, I read Peter Singer's book in 1980, when I had a full head of lush, brown hair, and indeed I was moved by it, because I had become a lawyer because I wanted to speak for the voiceless, defend the defenseless, and I'd never realized how voiceless and defenseless the trillions, billions of nonhuman animals are.
And I began to work as an animal protection lawyer.
And by 1985, I realized that I was trying to accomplish something that was literally impossible, the reason being that all of my clients, all the animals whose interests I was trying to defend, were legal things; they were invisible.
It was not going to work, so I decided that the only thing that was going to work was they had, at least some of them, had to also be moved through a hole that we could open up again in that wall and begin feeding the appropriate nonhuman animals through that hole onto the other side of being legal persons.
Now, at that time, there was very little known about or spoken about truly animal rights, about the idea of having legal personhood or legal rights for a nonhuman animal, and I knew it was going to take a long time.
And so, in 1985, I figured that it would take about 30 years before we'd be able to even begin a strategic litigation, long-term campaign, in order to be able to punch another hole through that wall.
It turned out that I was pessimistic, that it only took 28.
So what we had to do in order to begin was not only to write law review articles and teach classes, write books, but we had to then begin to get down to the nuts and bolts of how you litigate that kind of case.
So one of the first things we needed to do was figure out what a cause of action was, a legal cause of action.
And a legal cause of action is a vehicle that lawyers use to put their arguments in front of courts.
It turns out there's a very interesting case that had occurred almost 250 years ago in London called Somerset vs. Stewart, whereby a black slave had used the legal system and had moved from a legal thing to a legal person.
I was so interested in it that I eventually wrote an entire book about it.
James Somerset was an eight-year-old boy when he was kidnapped from West Africa.
He survived the Middle Passage, and he was sold to a Scottish businessman named Charles Stewart in Virginia.
Now, 20 years later, Stewart brought James Somerset to London, and after he got there, James decided he was going to escape.
And so one of the first things he did was to get himself baptized, because he wanted to get a set of godparents, because to an 18th-century slave, they knew that one of the major responsibilities of godfathers was to help you escape.
And so in the fall of 1771, James Somerset had a confrontation with Charles Stewart.
We don't know exactly what happened, but then James dropped out of sight.
An enraged Charles Stewart then hired slave catchers to canvass the city of London, find him, bring him not back to Charles Stewart, but to a ship, the Ann and Mary, that was floating in London Harbour, and he was chained to the deck, and the ship was to set sail for Jamaica where James was to be sold in the slave markets and be doomed to the three to five years of life that a slave had harvesting sugar cane in Jamaica.
Well now James' godparents swung into action.
They approached the most powerful judge, Lord Mansfield, who was chief judge of the court of King's Bench, and they demanded that he issue a common law writ of habeus corpus on behalf of James Somerset.
Now, the common law is the kind of law that English-speaking judges can make when they're not cabined in by statutes or constitutions, and a writ of habeus corpus is called the Great Writ, capital G, capital W, and it's meant to protect any of us who are detained against our will.
A writ of habeus corpus is issued.
The detainer is required to bring the detainee in and give a legally sufficient reason for depriving him of his bodily liberty.
Well, Lord Mansfield had to make a decision right off the bat, because if James Somerset was a legal thing, he was not eligible for a writ of habeus corpus, only if he could be a legal person.
So Lord Mansfield decided that he would assume, without deciding, that James Somerset was indeed a legal person, and he issued the writ of habeus corpus, and James's body was brought in by the captain of the ship.
There were a series of hearings over the next six months.
On June 22, 1772, Lord Mansfield said that slavery was so odious, and he used the word "odious," that the common law would not support it, and he ordered James free.
At that moment, James Somerset underwent a legal transubstantiation.
The free man who walked out of the courtroom looked exactly like the slave who had walked in, but as far as the law was concerned, they had nothing whatsoever in common.
The next thing we did is that the Nonhuman Rights Project, which I founded, then began to look at what kind of values and principles do we want to put before the judges?
What values and principles did they imbibe with their mother's milk, were they taught in law school, do they use every day, do they believe with all their hearts -- and we chose liberty and equality.
Now, liberty right is the kind of right to which you're entitled because of how you're put together, and a fundamental liberty right protects a fundamental interest.
And the supreme interest in the common law are the rights to autonomy and self-determination.
So they are so powerful that in a common law country, if you go to a hospital and you refuse life-saving medical treatment, a judge will not order it forced upon you, because they will respect your self-determination and your autonomy.
Now, an equality right is the kind of right to which you're entitled because you resemble someone else in a relevant way, and there's the rub, relevant way.
So if you are that, then because they have the right, you're like them, you're entitled to the right.
Now, courts and legislatures draw lines all the time.
Some are included, some are excluded.
But you have to, at the bare minimum you must -- that line has to be a reasonable means to a legitimate end.
The Nonhuman Rights Project argues that drawing a line in order to enslave an autonomous and self-determining being like you're seeing behind me, that that's a violation of equality.
We then searched through 80 jurisdictions, it took us seven years, to find the jurisdiction where we wanted to begin filing our first suit.
We chose the state of New York.
Then we decided upon who our plaintiffs are going to be.
We decided upon chimpanzees, not just because Jane Goodall was on our board of directors, but because they, Jane and others, have studied chimpanzees intensively for decades.
We know the extraordinary cognitive capabilities that they have, and they also resemble the kind that human beings have.
And so we chose chimpanzees, and we began to then canvass the world to find the experts in chimpanzee cognition.
We found them in Japan, Sweden, Germany, Scotland, England and the United States, and amongst them, they wrote 100 pages of affidavits in which they set out more than 40 ways in which their complex cognitive capability, either individually or together, all added up to autonomy and self-determination.
Now, these included, for example, that they were conscious.
But they're also conscious that they're conscious.
They know they have a mind. They know that others have minds.
They know they're individuals, and that they can live.
They understand that they lived yesterday and they will live tomorrow.
They engage in mental time travel. They remember what happened yesterday.
They can anticipate tomorrow, which is why it's so terrible to imprison a chimpanzee, especially alone.
It's the thing that we do to our worst criminals, and we do that to chimpanzees without even thinking about it.
They have some kind of moral capacity.
When they play economic games with human beings, they'll spontaneously make fair offers, even when they're not required to do so.
They are numerate. They understand numbers.
They can do some simple math.
They can engage in language -- or to stay out of the language wars, they're involved in intentional and referential communication in which they pay attention to the attitudes of those with whom they are speaking.
They have culture.
They have a material culture, a social culture.
They have a symbolic culture.
Scientists in the Taï Forests in the Ivory Coast found chimpanzees who were using these rocks to smash open the incredibly hard hulls of nuts.
It takes a long time to learn how to do that, and they excavated the area and they found that this material culture, this way of doing it, these rocks, had passed down for at least 4,300 years through 225 chimpanzee generations.
So now we needed to find our chimpanzee.
Our chimpanzee, first we found two of them in the state of New York.
Both of them would die before we could even get our suits filed.
Then we found Tommy.
Tommy is a chimpanzee. You see him behind me.
Tommy was a chimpanzee. We found him in that cage.
We found him in a small room that was filled with cages in a larger warehouse structure on a used trailer lot in central New York.
We found Kiko, who is partially deaf.
Kiko was in the back of a cement storefront in western Massachusetts.
And we found Hercules and Leo.
They're two young male chimpanzees who are being used for biomedical, anatomical research at Stony Brook.
We found them.
And so on the last week of December 2013, the Nonhuman Rights Project filed three suits all across the state of New York using the same common law writ of habeus corpus argument that had been used with James Somerset, and we demanded that the judges issue these common law writs of habeus corpus.
We wanted the chimpanzees out, and we wanted them brought to Save the Chimps, a tremendous chimpanzee sanctuary in South Florida which involves an artificial lake with 12 or 13 islands -- there are two or three acres where two dozen chimpanzees live on each of them.
And these chimpanzees would then live the life of a chimpanzee, with other chimpanzees in an environment that was as close to Africa as possible.
Now, all these cases are still going on.
We have not yet run into our Lord Mansfield.
We shall. We shall.
This is a long-term strategic litigation campaign. We shall.
And to quote Winston Churchill, the way we view our cases is that they're not the end, they're not even the beginning of the end, but they are perhaps the end of the beginning.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So if I told you that this was the face of pure joy, would you call me crazy?
I wouldn't blame you, because every time I look at this Arctic selfie, I shiver just a little bit.
I want to tell you a little bit about this photograph.
I was swimming around in the Lofoten Islands in Norway, just inside the Arctic Circle, and the water was hovering right at freezing.
The air? A brisk -10 with windchill, and I could literally feel the blood trying to leave my hands, feet and face, and rush to protect my vital organs.
It was the coldest I've ever been.
But even with swollen lips, sunken eyes, and cheeks flushed red, I have found that this place right here is somewhere I can find great joy.
Now, when it comes to pain, psychologist Brock Bastian probably said it best when he wrote, "Pain is a kind of shortcut to mindfulness.
It makes us suddenly aware of everything in the environment.
It brutally draws us in to a virtual sensory awareness of the world much like meditation."
If shivering is a form of meditation, then I would consider myself a monk.
(Laughter) Now, before we get into the why would anyone ever want to surf in freezing cold water?
I would love to give you a little perspective on what a day in my life can look like.
(Music) (Video) Man: I mean, I know we were hoping for good waves, but I don't think anybody thought that was going to happen.
I can't stop shaking.
I am so cold.
(Music) (Applause) Chris Burkard: So, surf photographer, right?
I don't even know if it's a real job title, to be honest.
My parents definitely didn't think so when I told them at 19 I was quitting my job to pursue this dream career: blue skies, warm tropical beaches, and a tan that lasts all year long.
I mean, to me, this was it. Life could not get any better.
Sweating it out, shooting surfers in these exotic tourist destinations.
But there was just this one problem.
You see, the more time I spent traveling to these exotic locations, the less gratifying it seemed to be.
I set out seeking adventure, and what I was finding was only routine.
It was things like wi-fi, TV, fine dining, and a constant cellular connection that to me were all the trappings of places heavily touristed in and out of the water, and it didn't take long for me to start feeling suffocated.
I began craving wild, open spaces, and so I set out to find the places others had written off as too cold, too remote, and too dangerous to surf, and that challenge intrigued me.
I began this sort of personal crusade against the mundane, because if there's one thing I've realized, it's that any career, even one as seemingly glamorous as surf photography, has the danger of becoming monotonous.
So in my search to break up this monotony, I realized something: There's only about a third of the Earth's oceans that are warm, and it's really just that thin band around the equator.
So if I was going to find perfect waves, it was probably going to happen somewhere cold, where the seas are notoriously rough, and that's exactly where I began to look.
And it was my first trip to Iceland that I felt like I found exactly what I was looking for.
I was blown away by the natural beauty of the landscape, but most importantly, I couldn't believe we were finding perfect waves in such a remote and rugged part of the world.
At one point, we got to the beach only to find massive chunks of ice had piled on the shoreline.
They created this barrier between us and the surf, and we had to weave through this thing like a maze just to get out into the lineup.
and once we got there, we were pushing aside these ice chunks trying to get into waves.
It was an incredible experience, one I'll never forget, because amidst those harsh conditions, I felt like I stumbled onto one of the last quiet places, somewhere that I found a clarity and a connection with the world I knew I would never find on a crowded beach.
I was hooked. I was hooked. (Laughter) Cold water was constantly on my mind, and from that point on, my career focused on these types of harsh and unforgiving environments, and it took me to places like Russia, Norway, Alaska, Iceland, Chile, the Faroe Islands, and a lot of places in between.
And one of my favorite things about these places was simply the challenge and the creativity it took just to get there: hours, days, weeks spent on Google Earth trying to pinpoint any remote stretch of beach or reef we could actually get to.
And once we got there, the vehicles were just as creative: snowmobiles, six-wheel Soviet troop carriers, and a couple of super-sketchy helicopter flights.
(Laughter) Helicopters really scare me, by the way.
There was this one particularly bumpy boat ride up the coast of Vancouver Island to this kind of remote surf spot, where we ended up watching helplessly from the water as bears ravaged our camp site.
They walked off with our food and bits of our tent, clearly letting us know that we were at the bottom of the food chain and that this was their spot, not ours.
But to me, that trip was a testament to the wildness I traded for those touristy beaches.
Now, it wasn't until I traveled to Norway -- (Laughter) -- that I really learned to appreciate the cold.
So this is the place where some of the largest, the most violent storms in the world send huge waves smashing into the coastline.
We were in this tiny, remote fjord, just inside the Arctic Circle.
It had a greater population of sheep than people, so help if we needed it was nowhere to be found.
I was in the water taking pictures of surfers, and it started to snow.
And then the temperature began to drop.
And I told myself, there's not a chance you're getting out of the water.
You traveled all this way, and this is exactly what you've been waiting for: freezing cold conditions with perfect waves.
And although I couldn't even feel my finger to push the trigger, I knew I wasn't getting out.
So I just did whatever I could. I shook it off, whatever.
But that was the point that I felt this wind gush through the valley and hit me, and what started as this light snowfall quickly became a full-on blizzard, and I started to lose perception of where I was.
I didn't know if I was drifting out to sea or towards shore, and all I could really make out was the faint sound of seagulls and crashing waves.
Now, I knew this place had a reputation for sinking ships and grounding planes, and while I was out there floating, I started to get a little bit nervous.
Actually, I was totally freaking out -- (Laughter) -- and I was borderline hypothermic, and my friends eventually had to help me out of the water.
And I don't know if it was delirium setting in or what, but they told me later I had a smile on my face the entire time.
Now, it was this trip and probably that exact experience where I really began to feel like every photograph was precious, because all of a sudden in that moment, it was something I was forced to earn.
And I realized, all this shivering had actually taught me something: In life, there are no shortcuts to joy.
Anything that is worth pursuing is going to require us to suffer just a little bit, and that tiny bit of suffering that I did for my photography, it added a value to my work that was so much more meaningful to me than just trying to fill the pages of magazines.
See, I gave a piece of myself in these places, and what I walked away with was a sense of fulfillment I had always been searching for.
So I look back at this photograph.
It's easy to see frozen fingers and cold wetsuits and even the struggle that it took just to get there, but most of all, what I see is just joy.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
In 2011, during the final six months of Kim Jong-Il's life, I lived undercover in North Korea.
I was born and raised in South Korea, their enemy.
I live in America, their other enemy.
Since 2002, I had visited North Korea a few times.
And I had come to realize that to write about it with any meaning, or to understand the place beyond the regime's propaganda, the only option was total immersion.
So I posed as a teacher and a missionary at an all-male university in Pyongyang.
The Pyongyang University of Science and Technology was founded by Evangelical Christians who cooperate with the regime to educate the sons of the North Korean elite, without proselytizing, which is a capital crime there.
The students were 270 young men, expected to be the future leaders of the most isolated and brutal dictatorship in existence.
When I arrived, they became my students.
2011 was a special year, marking the 100th anniversary of the birth of North Korea's original Great Leader, Kim Il-Sung.
To celebrate the occasion, the regime shut down all universities, and sent students off to the fields to build the DPRK's much-heralded ideal as the world's most powerful and prosperous nation.
My students were the only ones spared from that fate.
North Korea is a gulag posing as a nation.
Everything there is about the Great Leader.
Every book, every newspaper article, every song, every TV program -- there is just one subject.
The flowers are named after him, the mountains are carved with his slogans.
Every citizen wears the badge of the Great Leader at all times.
Even their calendar system begins with the birth of Kim Il-Sung.
The school was a heavily guarded prison, posing as a campus.
Teachers could only leave on group outings accompanied by an official minder.
Even then, our trips were limited to sanctioned national monuments celebrating the Great Leader.
The students were not allowed to leave the campus, or communicate with their parents.
Their days were meticulously mapped out, and any free time they had was devoted to honoring their Great Leader.
Lesson plans had to meet the approval of North Korean staff, every class was recorded and reported on, every room was bugged, and every conversation, overheard.
Every blank space was covered with the portraits of Kim Il-Sung and Kim Jong-Il, like everywhere else in North Korea.
We were never allowed to discuss the outside world.
As students of science and technology, many of them were computer majors but they did not know the existence of the Internet.
They had never heard of Mark Zuckerberg or Steve Jobs.
Facebook, Twitter -- none of those things would have meant a thing.
And I could not tell them.
I went there looking for truth.
But where do you even start when an entire nation's ideology, my students' day-to-day realities, and even my own position at the universities, were all built on lies?
I started with a game.
We played "Truth and Lie."
A volunteer would write a sentence on the chalkboard, and the other students had to guess whether it was a truth or a lie.
Once a student wrote, "I visited China last year on vacation," and everyone shouted, "Lie!"
They all knew this wasn't possible.
Virtually no North Korean is allowed to leave the country.
Even traveling within their own country requires a travel pass.
I had hoped that this game would reveal some truth about my students, because they lie so often and so easily, whether about the mythical accomplishments of their Great Leader, or the strange claim that they cloned a rabbit as fifth graders.
The difference between truth and lies seemed at times hazy to them.
It took me a while to understand the different types of lies; they lie to shield their system from the world, or they were taught lies, and were just regurgitating them.
Or, at moments, they lied out of habit.
But if all they have ever known were lies, how could we expect them to be otherwise?
Next, I tried to teach them essay writing.
But that turned out to be nearly impossible.
Essays are about coming up with one's own thesis, and making an evidence-based argument to prove it.
These students, however, were simply told what to think, and they obeyed.
In their world, critical thinking was not allowed.
I also gave them the weekly assignment of writing a personal letter, to anybody.
It took a long time, but eventually some of them began to write to their mothers, their friends, their girlfriends.
Although those were just homework, and would never reach their intended recipients, my students slowly began to reveal their true feelings in them.
They wrote that they were fed up with the sameness of everything.
They were worried about their future.
In those letters, they rarely ever mentioned their Great Leader.
I was spending all of my time with these young men.
We all ate meals together, played basketball together.
I often called them gentlemen, which made them giggle.
They blushed at the mention of girls.
And I came to adore them.
And watching them open up even in the tiniest of ways, was deeply moving.
But something also felt wrong.
During those months of living in their world, I often wondered if the truth would, in fact, improve their lives.
I wanted so much to tell them the truth, of their country and of the outside world, where Arab youth were turning their rotten regime inside out, using the power of social media, where everyone except them was connected through the world wide web, which wasn't worldwide after all.
But for them, the truth was dangerous.
By encouraging them to run after it, I was putting them at risk -- of persecution, of heartbreak.
When you're not allowed to express anything in the open, you become good at reading what is unspoken.
In one of their personal letters to me, a student wrote that he understood why I always called them gentlemen.
It was because I was wishing them to be gentle in life, he said.
On my last day in December of 2011, the day Kim Jong-Il's death was announced, their world shattered.
I had to leave without a proper goodbye.
But I think they knew how sad I was for them.
Once, toward the end of my stay, a student said to me, "Professor, we never think of you as being different from us.
Our circumstances are different, but you're the same as us.
We want you to know that we truly think of you as being the same."
Today, if I could respond to my students with a letter of my own, which is of course impossible, I would tell them this: "My dear gentlemen, It's been a bit over three years since I last saw you.
And now, you must be 22 -- maybe even as old as 23.
At our final class, I asked you if there was anything you wanted.
The only wish you expressed, the only thing you ever asked of me in all those months we spent together, was for me to speak to you in Korean.
Just once.
I was there to teach you English; you knew it wasn't allowed.
But I understood then, you wanted to share that bond of our mother tongue.
I called you my gentlemen, but I don't know if being gentle in Kim Jong-Un's merciless North Korea is a good thing.
I don't want you to lead a revolution -- let some other young person do it.
The rest of the world might casually encourage or even expect some sort of North Korean Spring, but I don't want you to do anything risky, because I know in your world, someone is always watching.
I don't want to imagine what might happen to you.
If my attempts to reach you have inspired something new in you, I would rather you forget me.
Become soldiers of your Great Leader, and live long, safe lives.
You once asked me if I thought your city of Pyongyang was beautiful, and I could not answer truthfully then.
But I know why you asked.
I know that it was important for you to hear that I, your teacher, the one who has seen the world that you are forbidden from, declare your city as the most beautiful.
I know hearing that would make your lives there a bit more bearable, but no, I don't find your capital beautiful.
Not because it's monotone and concrete, but because of what it symbolizes: a monster that feeds off the rest of the country, where citizens are soldiers and slaves.
All I see there is darkness.
But it's your home, so I cannot hate it.
And I hope instead that you, my lovely young gentlemen, will one day help make it beautiful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was growing up, I really liked playing hide-and-seek a lot.
One time, though, I thought climbing a tree would lead to a great hiding spot, but I fell and broke my arm.
I actually started first grade with a big cast all over my torso.
It was taken off six weeks later, but even then, I couldn't extend my elbow, and I had to do physical therapy to flex and extend it, 100 times per day, seven days per week.
I barely did it, because I found it boring and painful, and as a result, it took me another six weeks to get better.
Many years later, my mom developed frozen shoulder, which leads to pain and stiffness in the shoulder.
The person I believed for half of my life to have superpowers suddenly needed help to get dressed or to cut food.
She went each week to physical therapy, but just like me, she barely followed the home treatment, and it took her over five months to feel better.
Both my mom and I required physical therapy, a process of doing a suite of repetitive exercises in order to regain the range of movement lost due to an accident or injury.
At first, a physical therapist works with patients, but then it's up to the patients to do their exercises at home.
But patients find physical therapy boring, frustrating, confusing and lengthy before seeing results.
Sadly, patient noncompliance can be as high as 70 percent.
This means the majority of patients don't do their exercises and therefore take a lot longer to get better.
All physical therapists agree that special exercises reduce the time needed for recovery, but patients lack the motivation to do them.
So together with three friends, all of us software geeks, we asked ourselves, wouldn't it be interesting if patients could play their way to recovery?
We started building MIRA, A P.C. software platform that uses this Kinect device, a motion capture camera, to transform traditional exercises into video games.
My physical therapist has already set up a schedule for my particular therapy.
Let's see how this looks.
The first game asks me to fly a bee up and down to gather pollen to deposit in beehives, all while avoiding the other bugs.
I control the bee by doing elbow extension and flexion, just like when I was seven years old after the cast was taken off.
When designing a game, we speak to physical therapists at first to understand what movement patients need to do.
We then make that a video game to give patients simple, motivating objectives to follow.
But the software is very customizable, and physical therapists can also create their own exercises.
Using the software, my physical therapist recorded herself performing a shoulder abduction, which is one of the movements my mom had to do when she had frozen shoulder.
I can follow my therapist's example on the left side of the screen, while on the right, I see myself doing the recommended movement.
I feel more engaged and confident, as I'm exercising alongside my therapist with the exercises my therapist thinks are best for me.
This basically extends the application for physical therapists to create whatever exercises they think are best.
This is an auction house game for preventing falls, designed to strengthen muscles and improve balance.
As a patient, I need to do sit and stand movements, and when I stand up, I bid for the items I want to buy.
(Laughter) In two days, my grandmother will be 82 years old, and there's a 50 percent chance for people over 80 to fall at least once per year, which could lead to a broken hip or even worse.
Poor muscle tone and impaired balance are the number one cause of falls, so reversing these problems through targeted exercise will help keep older people like my grandmother safer and independent for longer.
When my schedule ends, MIRA briefly shows me how I progressed throughout my session.
I have just shown you three different games for kids, adults and seniors.
These can be used with orthopedic or neurologic patients, but we'll soon have options for children with autism, mental health or speech therapy.
My physical therapist can go back to my profile and see the data gathered during my sessions.
She can see how much I moved, how many points I scored, with what speed I moved my joints, and so on.
My physical therapist can use all of this to adapt my treatment.
I'm so pleased this version is now in use in over 10 clinics across Europe and the U.S., and we're working on the home version.
We want to enable physical therapists to prescribe this digital treatment and help patients play their way to recovery at home.
If my mom or I had a tool like this when we needed physical therapy, then we would have been more successful following the treatment, and perhaps gotten better a lot sooner.
Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: So Cosmin, tell me what hardware is this that they're rapidly putting away?
What is that made of, and how much does it cost?
Cosmin Milhau: So it's a Microsoft Surface Pro 3 for the demo, but you just need a computer and a Kinect, which is 120 dollars.
TR: Right, and the Kinect is the thing that people use for their Xboxes to do 3D games, right?
CM: Exactly, but you don't need the Xbox, you only need a camera.
TR: Right, so this is less than a $1,000 solution.
CM: Definitely, 400 dollars, you can definitely use it.
TR: So right now, you're doing clinical trials in clinics.
CM: Yes.
TR: And then the hope is to get it so it's a home version and I can do my exercise remotely, and the therapist at the clinic can see how I'm doing and stuff like that.
CM: Exactly.
TR: Cool. Thanks so much. CM: Thank you.
Chris Anderson: So I guess what we're going to do is we're going to talk about your life, and using some pictures that you shared with me.
And I think we should start right here with this one.
Okay, now who is this?
Martine Rothblatt: This is me with our oldest son Eli.
He was about age five.
This is taken in Nigeria right after having taken the Washington, D.C. bar exam.
CA: Okay. But this doesn't really look like a Martine.
MR: Right. That was myself as a male, the way I was brought up.
Before I transitioned from male to female and Martin to Martine.
CA: You were brought up Martin Rothblatt.
MR: Correct.
CA: And about a year after this picture, you married a beautiful woman.
Was this love at first sight? What happened there?
MR: It was love at the first sight.
I saw Bina at a discotheque in Los Angeles, and we later began living together, but the moment I saw her, I saw just an aura of energy around her.
I asked her to dance.
She said she saw an aura of energy around me.
I was a single male parent. She was a single female parent.
We showed each other our kids' pictures, and we've been happily married for a third of a century now.
(Applause) CA: And at the time, you were kind of this hotshot entrepreneur, working with satellites.
I think you had two successful companies, and then you started addressing this problem of how could you use satellites to revolutionize radio.
Tell us about that.
MR: Right. I always loved space technology, and satellites, to me, are sort of like the canoes that our ancestors first pushed out into the water.
So it was exciting for me to be part of the navigation of the oceans of the sky, and as I developed different types of satellite communication systems, the main thing I did was to launch bigger and more powerful satellites, the consequence of which was that the receiving antennas could be smaller and smaller, and after going through direct television broadcasting, I had the idea that if we could make a more powerful satellite, the receiving dish could be so small that it would just be a section of a parabolic dish, a flat little plate embedded into the roof of an automobile, and it would be possible to have nationwide satellite radio, and that's Sirius XM today.
CA: Wow. So who here has used Sirius?
(Applause) MR: Thank you for your monthly subscriptions.
(Laughter) CA: So that succeeded despite all predictions at the time.
It was a huge commercial success, but soon after this, in the early 1990s, there was this big transition in your life and you became Martine.
MR: Correct. CA: So tell me, how did that happen?
MR: It happened in consultation with Bina and our four beautiful children, and I discussed with each of them that I felt my soul was always female, and as a woman, but I was afraid people would laugh at me if I expressed it, so I always kept it bottled up and just showed my male side.
And each of them had a different take on this.
Bina said, "I love your soul, and whether the outside is Martin and Martine, it doesn't it matter to me, I love your soul."
My son said, "If you become a woman, will you still be my father?"
And I said, "Yes, I'll always be your father," and I'm still his father today.
My youngest daughter did an absolutely brilliant five-year-old thing.
She told people, "I love my dad and she loves me."
So she had no problem with a gender blending whatsoever.
CA: And a couple years after this, you published this book: "The Apartheid of Sex."
What was your thesis in this book?
MR: My thesis in this book is that there are seven billion people in the world, and actually, seven billion unique ways to express one's gender.
And while people may have the genitals of a male or a female, the genitals don't determine your gender or even really your sexual identity.
That's just a matter of anatomy and reproductive tracts, and people could choose whatever gender they want if they weren't forced by society into categories of either male or female the way South Africa used to force people into categories of black or white.
We know from anthropological science that race is fiction, even though racism is very, very real, and we now know from cultural studies that separate male or female genders is a constructed fiction.
The reality is a gender fluidity that crosses the entire continuum from male to female.
CA: You yourself don't always feel 100 percent female.
MR: Correct. I would say in some ways I change my gender about as often as I change my hairstyle.
CA: (Laughs) Okay, now, this is your gorgeous daughter, Jenesis.
And I guess she was about this age when something pretty terrible happened.
MR: Yes, she was finding herself unable to walk up the stairs in our house to her bedroom, and after several months of doctors, she was diagnosed to have a rare, almost invariably fatal disease called pulmonary arterial hypertension.
CA: So how did you respond to that?
MR: Well, we first tried to get her to the best doctors we could.
We ended up at Children's National Medical Center in Washington, D.C.
The head of pediatric cardiology told us that he was going to refer her to get a lung transplant, but not to hold out any hope, because there are very few lungs available, especially for children.
He said that all people with this illness died, and if any of you have seen the film "Lorenzo's Oil," there's a scene when the protagonist kind of rolls down the stairway crying and bemoaning the fate of his son, and that's exactly how we felt about Jenesis.
CA: But you didn't accept that as the limit of what you could do.
You started trying to research and see if you could find a cure somehow.
MR: Correct. She was in the intensive care ward for weeks at a time, and Bina and I would tag team to stay at the hospital while the other watched the rest of the kids, and when I was in the hospital and she was sleeping, I went to the hospital library.
I read every article that I could find on pulmonary hypertension.
I had not taken any biology, even in college, so I had to go from a biology textbook to a college-level textbook and then medical textbook and the journal articles, back and forth, and eventually I knew enough to think that it might be possible that somebody could find a cure.
So we started a nonprofit foundation.
I wrote a description asking people to submit grants and we would pay for medical research.
I became an expert on the condition -- doctors said to me, Martine, we really appreciate all the funding you've provided us, but we are not going to be able to find a cure in time to save your daughter.
However, there is a medicine that was developed at the Burroughs Wellcome Company that could halt the progression of the disease, but Burroughs Wellcome has just been acquired by Glaxo Wellcome.
They made a decision not to develop any medicines for rare and orphan diseases, and maybe you could use your expertise in satellite communications to develop this cure for pulmonary hypertension.
CA: So how on earth did you get access to this drug?
MR: I went to Glaxo Wellcome and after three times being rejected and having the door slammed in my face because they weren't going to out-license the drug to a satellite communications expert, they weren't going to send the drug out to anybody at all, and they thought I didn't have the expertise, finally I was able to persuade a small team of people to work with me and develop enough credibility.
I wore down their resistance, and they had no hope this drug would even work, by the way, and they tried to tell me, "You're just wasting your time.
We're sorry about your daughter."
But finally, for 25,000 dollars and agreement to pay 10 percent of any revenues we might ever get, they agreed to give me worldwide rights to this drug.
CA: And so you put this drug on the market in a really brilliant way, by basically charging what it would take to make the economics work.
MR: Oh yes, Chris, but this really wasn't a drug that I ended up -- after I wrote the check for 25,000, and I said, "Okay, where's the medicine for Jenesis?"
they said, "Oh, Martine, there's no medicine for Jenesis.
This is just something we tried in rats."
And they gave me, like, a little plastic Ziploc bag of a small amount of powder.
They said, "Don't give it to any human," and they gave me a piece of paper which said it was a patent, and from that, we had to figure out a way to make this medicine.
A hundred chemists in the U.S. at the top universities all swore that little patent could never be turned into a medicine.
If it was turned into a medicine, it could never be delivered because it had a half-life of only 45 minutes.
CA: And yet, a year or two later, you were there with a medicine that worked for Jenesis.
MR: Chris, the astonishing thing is that this absolutely worthless piece of powder that had the sparkle of a promise of hope for Jenesis is not only keeping Jenesis and other people alive today, but produces almost a billion and a half dollars a year in revenue.
(Applause) CA: So here you go.
So you took this company public, right?
And made an absolute fortune.
And how much have you paid Glaxo, by the way, after that 25,000?
MR: Yeah, well, every year we pay them 10 percent of 1.5 billion, 150 million dollars, last year 100 million dollars.
It's the best return on investment they ever received. (Laughter) CA: And the best news of all, I guess, is this.
MR: Yes. Jenesis is an absolutely brilliant young lady.
She's alive, healthy today at 30.
You see me, Bina and Jenesis there.
The most amazing thing about Jenesis is that while she could do anything with her life, and believe me, if you grew up your whole life with people in your face saying that you've got a fatal disease, I would probably run to Tahiti and just not want to run into anybody again.
But instead she chooses to work in United Therapeutics.
She says she wants to do all she can to help other people with orphan diseases get medicines, and today, she's our project leader for all telepresence activities, where she helps digitally unite the entire company to work together to find cures for pulmonary hypertension.
CA: But not everyone who has this disease has been so fortunate.
There are still many people dying, and you are tackling that too. How?
MR: Exactly, Chris. There's some 3,000 people a year in the United States alone, perhaps 10 times that number worldwide, who continue to die of this illness because the medicines slow down the progression but they don't halt it.
The only cure for pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, emphysema, COPD, what Leonard Nimoy just died of, is a lung transplant, but sadly, there are only enough available lungs for 2,000 people in the U.S. a year to get a lung transplant, whereas nearly a half million people a year die of end-stage lung failure.
CA: So how can you address that?
MR: So I conceptualize the possibility that just like we keep cars and planes and buildings going forever with an unlimited supply of building parts and machine parts, why can't we create an unlimited supply of transplantable organs to keep people living indefinitely, and especially people with lung disease.
So we've teamed up with the decoder of the human genome, Craig Venter, and the company he founded with Peter Diamandis, the founder of the X Prize, to genetically modify the pig genome so that the pig's organs will not be rejected by the human body and thereby to create an unlimited supply of transplantable organs.
We do this through our company, United Therapeutics.
CA: So you really believe that within, what, a decade, that this shortage of transplantable lungs maybe be cured, through these guys?
MR: Absolutely, Chris.
I'm as certain of that as I was of the success that we've had with direct television broadcasting, Sirius XM.
It's actually not rocket science.
It's straightforward engineering away one gene after another.
We're so lucky to be born in the time that sequencing genomes is a routine activity, and the brilliant folks at Synthetic Genomics are able to zero in on the pig genome, find exactly the genes that are problematic, and fix them.
CA: But it's not just bodies that -- though that is amazing.
(Applause) It's not just long-lasting bodies that are of interest to you now.
It's long-lasting minds.
And I think this graph for you says something quite profound.
What does this mean?
MR: What this graph means, and it comes from Ray Kurzweil, is that the rate of development in computer processing hardware, firmware and software, has been advancing along a curve such that by the 2020s, as we saw in earlier presentations today, there will be information technology that processes information and the world around us at the same rate as a human mind.
CA: And so that being so, you're actually getting ready for this world by believing that we will soon be able to, what, actually take the contents of our brains and somehow preserve them forever?
How do you describe that?
MR: Well, Chris, what we're working on is creating a situation where people can create a mind file, and a mind file is the collection of their mannerisms, personality, recollection, feelings, beliefs, attitudes and values, everything that we've poured today into Google, into Amazon, into Facebook, and all of this information stored there will be able, in the next couple decades, once software is able to recapitulate consciousness, be able to revive the consciousness which is imminent in our mind file.
CA: Now you're not just messing around with this.
You're serious. I mean, who is this?
MR: This is a robot version of my beloved spouse, Bina.
And we call her Bina 48.
She was programmed by Hanson Robotics out of Texas.
There's the centerfold from National Geographic magazine with one of her caregivers, and she roams the web and has hundreds of hours of Bina's mannerisms, personalities.
She's kind of like a two-year-old kid, but she says things that blow people away, best expressed by perhaps a New York Times Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Amy Harmon who says her answers are often frustrating, but other times as compelling as those of any flesh person she's interviewed.
CA: And is your thinking here, part of your hope here, is that this version of Bina can in a sense live on forever, or some future upgrade to this version can live on forever?
MR: Yes. Not just Bina, but everybody.
You know, it costs us virtually nothing to store our mind files on Facebook, Instagram, what-have-you.
Social media is I think one of the most extraordinary inventions of our time, and as apps become available that will allow us to out-Siri Siri, better and better, and develop consciousness operating systems, everybody in the world, billions of people, will be able to develop mind clones of themselves that will have their own life on the web.
CA: So the thing is, Martine, that in any normal conversation, this would sound stark-staring mad, but in the context of your life, what you've done, some of the things we've heard this week, the constructed realities that our minds give, I mean, you wouldn't bet against it.
MR: Well, I think it's really nothing coming from me.
If anything, I'm perhaps a bit of a communicator of activities that are being undertaken by the greatest companies in China, Japan, India, the U.S., Europe.
There are tens of millions of people working on writing code that expresses more and more aspects of our human consciousness, and you don't have to be a genius to see that all these threads are going to come together and ultimately create human consciousness, and it's something we'll value.
There are so many things to do in this life, and if we could have a simulacrum, a digital doppelgänger of ourselves that helps us process books, do shopping, be our best friends, I believe our mind clones, these digital versions of ourselves, will ultimately be our best friends, and for me personally and Bina personally, we love each other like crazy.
Each day, we are always saying, like, "Wow, I love you even more than 30 years ago.
And so for us, the prospect of mind clones and regenerated bodies is that our love affair, Chris, can go on forever.
And we never get bored of each other. I'm sure we never will.
CA: I think Bina's here, right? MR: She is, yeah.
CA: Would it be too much, I don't know, do we have a handheld mic?
Bina, could we invite you to the stage? I just have to ask you one question.
Besides, we need to see you.
(Applause) Thank you, thank you.
Come and join Martine here.
I mean, look, when you got married, if someone had told you that, in a few years time, the man you were marrying would become a woman, and a few years after that, you would become a robot -- (Laughter) -- how has this gone? How has it been?
Bina Rothblatt: It's been really an exciting journey, and I would have never thought that at the time, but we started making goals and setting those goals and accomplishing things, and before you knew it, we just keep going up and up and we're still not stopping, so it's great.
CA: Martine told me something really beautiful, just actually on Skype before this, which was that he wanted to live for hundreds of years as a mind file, but not if it wasn't with you.
BR: That's right, we want to do it together.
We're cryonicists as well, and we want to wake up together.
CA: So just so as you know, from my point of view, this isn't only one of the most astonishing lives I have heard, it's one of the most astonishing love stories I've ever heard.
It's just a delight to have you both here at TED.
Thank you so much.
MR: Thank you.
(Applause)
So I grew up in Orlando, Florida.
I was the son of an aerospace engineer.
I lived and breathed the Apollo program.
We either saw the launches from our backyard or we saw it by driving in the hour over to the Cape.
I was impressed by, obviously, space and everything about it, but I was most impressed by the engineering that went into it.
Behind me you see an amazing view, a picture that was taken from the International Space Station, and it shows a portion of our planet that's rarely seen and rarely studied and almost never explored.
That place is called the stratosphere.
If you start on the planet and you go up and up and up, it gets colder and colder and colder, until you reach the beginning of the stratosphere, and then an amazing thing happens.
It gets colder at a much slower rate, and then it starts warming up, and then it gets warmer and warmer until the point where you can almost survive without any protection, about zero degrees, and then you end up getting colder and colder, and that's the top of the stratosphere.
It is one of the least accessible places on our planet.
Most often, when it's visited, it's by astronauts who are blazing up at it at probably several times the speed of sound, and they get a few seconds on the way up, and then they get this blazing ball of fire coming back in, on the way back in.
But the question I asked is, is it possible to linger in the stratosphere?
Is it possible to experience the stratosphere?
Is it possible to explore the stratosphere?
I studied this using my favorite search engine for quite a while, about a year, and then I made a scary phone call.
It was a reference from a friend of mine to call Taber MacCallum from Paragon Space Development Corporation, and I asked him the question: is it possible to build a system to go into the stratosphere?
And he said it was.
And after a period of about three years, we proceeded to do just that.
And on October 24 of last year, in this suit, I started on the ground, I went up in a balloon to 135,890 feet -- but who's counting?
(Laughter) Came back to Earth at speeds of up to 822 miles an hour.
It was a four-minute and 27-second descent.
And when I got to 10,000 feet, I opened a parachute and I landed.
(Applause) But this is really a science talk, and it's really an engineering talk, and what was amazing to me about that experience is that Taber said, yes, I think we can build a stratospheric suit, and more than that, come down tomorrow and let's talk to the team that formed the core of the group that actually built it.
And they did something which I think is important, which is they took the analogy of scuba diving.
So in scuba diving, you have a self-contained system.
You have everything that you could ever need.
You have a scuba tank.
You have a wetsuit.
You have visibility.
And that scuba is exactly this system, and we're going to launch it into the stratosphere.
Three years later, this is what we have.
We've got an amazing suit that was made by ILC Dover.
ILC Dover was the company that made all of the Apollo suits and all of the extravehicular activity suits.
They had never sold a suit commercially, only to the government, but they sold one to me, which I am very grateful for.
Up here we have a parachute. This was all about safety.
Everyone on the team knew that I have a wife and two small children -- 10 and 15 -- and I wanted to come back safely.
So there's a main parachute and a reserve parachute, and if I do nothing, the reserve parachute is going to open because of an automatic opening device.
The suit itself can protect me from the cold.
This area in the front here has thermal protection.
It will actually heat water that will wrap around my body.
It has two redundant oxygen tanks.
Even if I was to get a quarter-inch hole in this suit, which is extremely unlikely, this system would still protect me from the low pressure of space.
The main advantage of this system is weight and complexity.
So the system weighs about 500 pounds, and if you compare it to the other attempt recently to go up in the stratosphere, they used a capsule.
And to do a capsule, there's an amazing amount of complexity that goes into it, and it weighed about 3,000 pounds, and to raise 3,000 pounds to an altitude of 135,000 feet, which was my target altitude, it would have taken a balloon that was 45 to 50 million cubic feet.
Because I only weighed 500 pounds in this system, we could do it with a balloon that was five times smaller than that, and that allowed us to use a launch system that was dramatically simpler than what needs to be done for a much larger balloon.
So with that, I want to take you to Roswell, New Mexico, on October 24.
We had an amazing team that got up in the middle of the night.
And here's the suit.
Again, this is using the front loader that you'll see in a second, and I want to play you a video of the actual launch.
Roswell's a great place to launch balloons, but it's a fantastic place to land under a parachute, especially when you're going to land 70 miles away from the place you started.
That's a helium truck in the background.
It's darkness.
I've already spent about an hour and a half pre-breathing.
And then here you see the suit going on.
It takes about an hour to get the suit on.
Astronauts get this really nice air-conditioned van to go to the launch pad, but I got a front loader.
(Laughter) You can see the top. You can see the balloon up there.
That's where the helium is.
This is Dave clearing the airspace with the FAA for 15 miles.
And there we go.
(Laughter) That's me waving with my left hand.
The reason I'm waving with my left hand is because on the right hand is the emergency cutaway.
(Laughter) My team forbade me from using my right hand.
So the trip up is beautiful. It's kind of like Google Earth in reverse.
(Laughter) It took two hours and seven minutes to go up, and it was the most peaceful two hours and seven minutes.
I was mostly trying to relax.
My heart rate was very low and I was trying not to use very much oxygen.
You can see how the fields in the background are relatively big at this point, and you can see me going up and up.
It's interesting here, because if you look, I'm right over the airport, and I'm probably at 50,000 feet, but immediately I'm about to go into a stratospheric wind of over 120 miles an hour.
This is my flight director telling me that I had just gone higher than anybody else had ever gone in a balloon, and I was about 4,000 feet from release.
This is what it looks like.
You can see the darkness of space, the curvature of the Earth, the fragile planet below.
I'm practicing my emergency procedures mentally right now.
If anything goes wrong, I want to be ready.
And the main thing that I want to do here is to have a release and fall and stay completely stable.
(Video) Ground control. Everyone ready?
Five. Four. Three. Two. One.
Alan Eustace: There's the balloon going by, fully inflated at this point.
And there you can see a drogue parachute, which I'll demonstrate in just a second, because that's really important.
There's the balloon going by a second time.
Right now, I'm about at the speed of sound.
There's nothing for me to tell it's the speed of sound, and very soon I will actually be as fast as I ever get, 822 miles an hour.
(Video) Ground control: We lost the data.
AE: So now I'm down low right now and you can basically see the parachute come out right there.
At this point, I'm very happy that there's a parachute out.
I thought I was the only one happy, but it turns out mission control was really happy as well.
The really nice thing about this is the moment I opened -- I had a close of friend of mine, Blikkies, my parachute guy.
He flew in another airplane, and he actually jumped out and landed right next to me.
He was my wingman on the descent.
This is my landing, but it's probably more properly called a crash.
(Laughter) I hate to admit it, but this wasn't even close to my worst landing.
(Laughter) (Applause) (Video) Man: How are you doing?
AE: Hi there!
Yay.
(Laughter) So I want to tell you one thing that you might not have seen in that video, but one of the most critical parts of the entire thing was the release and what happens right after you release.
And what we tried to do was use something called a drogue parachute, and a drogue parachute was there to stabilize me.
And I'll show you one of those right now.
If any of you have ever gone tandem skydiving, you probably used one of these.
But the problem with one of these things is right when you release, you're in zero gravity.
So it's very easy for this to just turn right around you.
And before you know it, you can be tangled up or spinning, or you can release this drogue late, in which case what happens is you're going down at 800 miles an hour, and this thing is going to destroy itself and not be very useful.
But the guys at United Parachute Technologies came up with this idea, and it was a roll that looks like that, but watch what happens when I pull it out.
It's forming a pipe.
This pipe is so solid that you can take this drogue parachute and wrap it around, and there's no way it will ever tangle with you.
And that prevented a very serious potential problem.
So nothing is possible without an amazing team of people.
The core of this was about 20 people that worked on this for the three years, and they were incredible.
People asked me what the best part of this whole thing was, and it was a chance to work with the best experts in meteorology and ballooning and parachute technology and environmental systems and high altitude medicine.
It was fantastic. It's an engineer's dream to work with that group of people.
And I also at the same time wanted to thank my friends at Google, both for supporting me during this effort and also covering for me in the times that I was away.
But there's one other group I wanted to thank, and that's my family.
Yay.
(Applause) I would constantly give them speeches about the safety of technology, and they weren't hearing any of it.
It was super hard on them, and the only reason that my wife put up with it was because I came back incredibly happy after each of the 250 tests, and she didn't want to take that away from me.
So I want to close with a story.
My daughter Katelyn, my 15-year-old, she and I were in the car, and we were driving down the road, and she was sitting there, and she had this idea, and she goes, "Dad, I've got this idea."
And so I listened to her idea and I said, "Katelyn, that's impossible."
And she looks at me and she goes, "Dad, after what you just did, how can you call anything impossible?"
And I laughed, and I said, "OK, it's not impossible, it's just very, very hard."
And then I paused for a second, and I said, "Katelyn, it may not be impossible, it may not even be very, very hard, it's just that I don't know how to do it."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm here to tell you about the real search for alien life.
Not little green humanoids arriving in shiny UFOs, although that would be nice.
But it's the search for planets orbiting stars far away.
Every star in our sky is a sun.
And if our sun has planets -- Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, etc., surely those other stars should have planets also, and they do.
And in the last two decades, astronomers have found thousands of exoplanets.
Our night sky is literally teeming with exoplanets.
We know, statistically speaking, that every star has at least one planet.
And in the search for planets, and in the future, planets that might be like Earth, we're able to help address some of the most amazing and mysterious questions that have faced humankind for centuries.
Why are we here?
Why does our universe exist?
How did Earth form and evolve?
How and why did life originate and populate our planet?
The second question that we often think about is: Are we alone?
Is there life out there?
Who is out there?
You know, this question has been around for thousands of years, since at least the time of the Greek philosophers.
But I'm here to tell you just how close we're getting to finding out the answer to this question.
It's the first time in human history that this really is within reach for us.
Now when I think about the possibilities for life out there, I think of the fact that our sun is but one of many stars.
This is a photograph of a real galaxy, we think our Milky Way looks like this galaxy.
It's a collection of bound stars.
But our [sun] is one of hundreds of billions of stars and our galaxy is one of upwards of hundreds of billions of galaxies.
Knowing that small planets are very common, you can just do the math.
And there are just so many stars and so many planets out there, that surely, there must be life somewhere out there.
Well, the biologists get furious with me for saying that, because we have absolutely no evidence for life beyond Earth yet.
Well, if we were able to look at our galaxy from the outside and zoom in to where our sun is, we see a real map of the stars.
And the highlighted stars are those with known exoplanets.
This is really just the tip of the iceberg.
Here, this animation is zooming in onto our solar system.
And you'll see here the planets as well as some spacecraft that are also orbiting our sun.
Now if we can imagine going to the West Coast of North America, and looking out at the night sky, here's what we'd see on a spring night.
And you can see the constellations overlaid and again, so many stars with planets.
There's a special patch of the sky where we have thousands of planets.
This is where the Kepler Space Telescope focused for many years.
Let's zoom in and look at one of the favorite exoplanets.
This star is called Kepler-186f.
It's a system of about five planets.
And by the way, most of these exoplanets, we don't know too much about.
We know their size, and their orbit and things like that.
But there's a very special planet here called Kepler-186f.
This planet is in a zone that is not too far from the star, so that the temperature may be just right for life.
Here, the artist's conception is just zooming in and showing you what that planet might be like.
So, many people have this romantic notion of astronomers going to the telescope on a lonely mountaintop and looking at the spectacular night sky through a big telescope.
But actually, we just work on our computers like everyone else, and we get our data by email or downloading from a database.
So instead of coming here to tell you about the somewhat tedious nature of the data and data analysis and the complex computer models we make, I have a different way to try to explain to you some of the things that we're thinking about exoplanets.
Here's a travel poster: "Kepler-186f: Where the grass is always redder on the other side."
That's because Kepler-186f orbits a red star, and we're just speculating that perhaps the plants there, if there is vegetation that does photosynthesis, it has different pigments and looks red.
"Enjoy the gravity on HD 40307g, a Super-Earth."
This planet is more massive than Earth and has a higher surface gravity.
"Relax on Kepler-16b, where your shadow always has company."
(Laughter) We know of a dozen planets that orbit two stars, and there's likely many more out there.
If we could visit one of those planets, you literally would see two sunsets and have two shadows.
So actually, science fiction got some things right.
Tatooine from Star Wars.
And I have a couple of other favorite exoplanets to tell you about.
This one is Kepler-10b, it's a hot, hot planet.
It orbits over 50 times closer to its star than our Earth does to our sun.
And actually, it's so hot, we can't visit any of these planets, but if we could, we would melt long before we got there.
We think the surface is hot enough to melt rock and has liquid lava lakes.
Gliese 1214b.
This planet, we know the mass and the size and it has a fairly low density.
It's somewhat warm.
We actually don't know really anything about this planet, but one possibility is that it's a water world, like a scaled-up version of one of Jupiter's icy moons that might be 50 percent water by mass.
And in this case, it would have a thick steam atmosphere overlaying an ocean, not of liquid water, but of an exotic form of water, a superfluid -- not quite a gas, not quite a liquid.
And under that wouldn't be rock, but a form of high-pressure ice, like ice IX.
So out of all these planets out there, and the variety is just simply astonishing, we mostly want to find the planets that are Goldilocks planets, we call them.
Not too big, not too small, not too hot, not too cold -- but just right for life.
But to do that, we'd have to be able to look at the planet's atmosphere, because the atmosphere acts like a blanket trapping heat -- the greenhouse effect.
We have to be able to assess the greenhouse gases on other planets.
Well, science fiction got some things wrong.
The Star Trek Enterprise had to travel vast distances at incredible speeds to orbit other planets so that First Officer Spock could analyze the atmosphere to see if the planet was habitable or if there were lifeforms there.
Well, we don't need to travel at warp speeds to see other planet atmospheres, although I don't want to dissuade any budding engineers from figuring out how to do that.
We actually can and do study planet atmospheres from here, from Earth orbit.
This is a picture, a photograph of the Hubble Space Telescope taken by the shuttle Atlantis as it was departing after the last human space flight to Hubble.
They installed a new camera, actually, that we use for exoplanet atmospheres.
And so far, we've been able to study dozens of exoplanet atmospheres, about six of them in great detail.
But those are not small planets like Earth.
They're big, hot planets that are easy to see.
We're not ready, we don't have the right technology yet to study small exoplanets.
But nevertheless, I wanted to try to explain to you how we study exoplanet atmospheres.
I want you to imagine, for a moment, a rainbow.
And if we could look at this rainbow closely, we would see that some dark lines are missing.
And here's our sun, the white light of our sun split up, not by raindrops, but by a spectrograph.
And you can see all these dark, vertical lines.
Some are very narrow, some are wide, some are shaded at the edges.
And this is actually how astronomers have studied objects in the heavens, literally, for over a century.
So here, each different atom and molecule has a special set of lines, a fingerprint, if you will.
And that's how we study exoplanet atmospheres.
And I'll just never forget when I started working on exoplanet atmospheres 20 years ago, how many people told me, "This will never happen.
We'll never be able to study them. Why are you bothering?"
And that's why I'm pleased to tell you about all the atmospheres studied now, and this is really a field of its own.
So when it comes to other planets, other Earths, in the future when we can observe them, what kind of gases would we be looking for?
Well, you know, our own Earth has oxygen in the atmosphere to 20 percent by volume.
That's a lot of oxygen.
But without plants and photosynthetic life, there would be no oxygen, virtually no oxygen in our atmosphere.
So oxygen is here because of life.
And our goal then is to look for gases in other planet atmospheres, gases that don't belong, that we might be able to attribute to life.
But which molecules should we search for?
I actually told you how diverse exoplanets are.
We expect that to continue in the future when we find other Earths.
And that's one of the main things I'm working on now, I have a theory about this.
It reminds me that nearly every day, I receive an email or emails from someone with a crazy theory about physics of gravity or cosmology or some such.
So, please don't email me one of your crazy theories.
(Laughter) Well, I had my own crazy theory.
But, who does the MIT professor go to?
Well, I emailed a Nobel Laureate in Physiology or Medicine and he said, "Sure, come and talk to me."
So I brought my two biochemistry friends and we went to talk to him about our crazy theory.
And that theory was that life produces all small molecules, so many molecules.
Like, everything I could think of, but not being a chemist.
Think about it: carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, molecular hydrogen, molecular nitrogen, methane, methyl chloride -- so many gases.
They also exist for other reasons, but just life even produces ozone.
So we go to talk to him about this, and immediately, he shot down the theory.
He found an example that didn't exist.
So, we went back to the drawing board and we think we have found something very interesting in another field.
But back to exoplanets, the point is that life produces so many different types of gases, literally thousands of gases.
And so what we're doing now is just trying to figure out on which types of exoplanets, which gases could be attributed to life.
And so when it comes time when we find gases in exoplanet atmospheres that we won't know if they're being produced by intelligent aliens or by trees, or a swamp, or even just by simple, single-celled microbial life.
So working on the models and thinking about biochemistry, it's all well and good.
But a really big challenge ahead of us is: how?
How are we going to find these planets?
There are actually many ways to find planets, several different ways.
But the one that I'm most focused on is how can we open a gateway so that in the future, we can find hundreds of Earths.
We have a real shot at finding signs of life.
And actually, I just finished leading a two-year project in this very special phase of a concept we call the starshade.
And the starshade is a very specially shaped screen and the goal is to fly that starshade so it blocks out the light of a star so that the telescope can see the planets directly.
Here, you can see myself and two team members holding up one small part of the starshade.
It's shaped like a giant flower, and this is one of the prototype petals.
The concept is that a starshade and telescope could launch together, with the petals unfurling from the stowed position.
The central truss would expand, with the petals snapping into place.
Now, this has to be made very precisely, literally, the petals to microns and they have to deploy to millimeters.
And this whole structure would have to fly tens of thousands of kilometers away from the telescope.
It's about tens of meters in diameter.
And the goal is to block out the starlight to incredible precision so that we'd be able to see the planets directly.
And it has to be a very special shape, because of the physics of defraction.
Now this is a real project that we worked on, literally, you would not believe how hard.
Just so you believe it's not just in movie format, here's a real photograph of a second-generation starshade deployment test bed in the lab.
And in this case, I just wanted you to know that that central truss has heritage left over from large radio deployables in space.
So after all of that hard work where we try to think of all the crazy gases that might be out there, and we build the very complicated space telescopes that might be out there, what are we going to find?
Well, in the best case, we will find an image of another exo-Earth.
Here is Earth as a pale blue dot.
And this is actually a real photograph of Earth taken by the Voyager 1 spacecraft, four billion miles away.
And that red light is just scattered light in the camera optics.
But what's so awesome to consider is that if there are intelligent aliens orbiting on a planet around a star near to us and they build complicated space telescopes of the kind that we're trying to build, all they'll see is this pale blue dot, a pinprick of light.
And so sometimes, when I pause to think about my professional struggle and huge ambition, it's hard to think about that in contrast to the vastness of the universe.
But nonetheless, I am devoting the rest of my life to finding another Earth.
And I can guarantee that in the next generation of space telescopes, in the second generation, we will have the capability to find and identity other Earths.
And the capability to split up the starlight so that we can look for gases and assess the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, estimate the surface temperature, and look for signs of life.
But there's more.
In this case of searching for other planets like Earth, we are making a new kind of map of the nearby stars and of the planets orbiting them, including [planets] that actually might be inhabitable by humans.
And so I envision that our descendants, hundreds of years from now, will embark on an interstellar journey to other worlds.
And they will look back at all of us as the generation who first found the Earth-like worlds.
Thank you.
(Applause) June Cohen: And I give you, for a question, Rosetta Mission Manager Fred Jansen.
Fred Jansen: You mentioned halfway through that the technology to actually look at the spectrum of an exoplanet like Earth is not there yet.
When do you expect this will be there, and what's needed?
Actually, what we expect is what we call our next-generation Hubble telescope.
And this is called the James Webb Space Telescope, and that will launch in 2018, and that's what we're going to do, we're going to look at a special kind of planet called transient exoplanets, and that will be our first shot at studying small planets for gases that might indicate the planet is habitable.
JC: I'm going to ask you one follow-up question, too, Sara, as the generalist.
So I am really struck by the notion in your career of the opposition you faced, that when you began thinking about exoplanets, there was extreme skepticism in the scientific community that they existed, and you proved them wrong.
What did it take to take that on?
SS: Well, the thing is that as scientists, we're supposed to be skeptical, because our job to make sure that what the other person is saying actually makes sense or not.
But being a scientist, I think you've seen it from this session, it's like being an explorer.
You have this immense curiosity, this stubbornness, this sort of resolute will that you will go forward no matter what other people say.
JC: I love that. Thank you, Sara.
(Applause)
I've learned some of my most important life lessons from drug dealers and gang members and prostitutes, and I've had some of my most profound theological conversations not in the hallowed halls of a seminary but on a street corner on a Friday night, at 1 a.m.
That's a little unusual, since I am a Baptist minister, seminary-trained, and pastored a church for over 20 years, but it's true.
It came as a part of my participation in a public safety crime reduction strategy that saw a 79 percent reduction in violent crime over an eight-year period in a major city.
But I didn't start out wanting to be a part of somebody's crime reduction strategy.
I was 25, had my first church.
If you would have asked me what my ambition was, I would have told you I wanted to be a megachurch pastor.
I wanted a 15-, 20,000-member church.
I wanted my own television ministry.
I wanted my own clothing line.
(Laughter) I wanted to be your long distance carrier.
You know, the whole nine yards.
(Laughter) After about a year of pastoring, my membership went up about 20 members.
So megachurchdom was way down the road.
But seriously, if you'd have said, "What is your ambition?"
I would have said just to be a good pastor, to be able to be with people through all the passages of life, to preach messages that would have an everyday meaning for folks, and in the African-American tradition, to be able to represent the community that I serve.
But there was something else that was happening in my city and in the entire metro area, and in most metro areas in the United States, and that was the homicide rate started to rise precipitously.
And there were young people who were killing each other for reasons that I thought were very trivial, like bumping into someone in a high school hallway, and then after school, shooting the person.
Someone with the wrong color shirt on, on the wrong street corner at the wrong time.
And something needed to be done about that.
It got to the point where it started to change the character of the city.
You could go to any housing project, for example, like the one that was down the street from my church, and you would walk in, and it would be like a ghost town, because the parents wouldn't allow their kids to come out and play, even in the summertime, because of the violence.
You would listen in the neighborhoods on any given night, and to the untrained ear, it sounded like fireworks, but it was gunfire.
You'd hear it almost every night, when you were cooking dinner, telling your child a bedtime story, or just watching TV.
And you can go to any emergency room at any hospital, and you would see lying on gurneys young black and Latino men shot and dying.
And I was doing funerals, but not of the venerated matriarchs and patriarchs who'd lived a long life and there's a lot to say.
I was doing funerals of 18-year-olds, 17-year-olds, and 16-year-olds, and I was standing in a church or at a funeral home struggling to say something that would make some meaningful impact.
And so while my colleagues were building these cathedrals great and tall and buying property outside of the city and moving their congregations out so that they could create or recreate their cities of God, the social structures in the inner cities were sagging under the weight of all of this violence.
And so I stayed, because somebody needed to do something, and so I had looked at what I had and moved on that.
I started to preach decrying the violence in the community.
And I started to look at the programming in my church, and I started to build programs that would catch the at-risk youth, those who were on the fence to the violence.
I even tried to be innovative in my preaching.
You all have heard of rap music, right?
Rap music?
I even tried to rap sermon one time.
It didn't work, but at least I tried it.
I'll never forget the young person who came to me after that sermon.
He waited until everybody was gone, and he said, "Rev, rap sermon, huh?" And I was like, "Yeah, what do you think?"
And he said, "Don't do that again, Rev."
(Laughter) But I preached and I built these programs, and I thought maybe if my colleagues did the same that it would make a difference.
But the violence just careened out of control, and people who were not involved in the violence were getting shot and killed: somebody going to buy a pack of cigarettes at a convenience store, or someone who was sitting at a bus stop just waiting for a bus, or kids who were playing in the park, oblivious to the violence on the other side of the park, but it coming and visiting them.
Things were out of control, and I didn't know what to do, and then something happened that changed everything for me.
It was a kid by the name of Jesse McKie, walking home with his friend Rigoberto Carrion to the housing project down the street from my church.
They met up with a group of youth who were from a gang in Dorchester, and they were killed.
But as Jesse was running from the scene mortally wounded, he was running in the direction of my church, and he died some 100, 150 yards away.
If he would have gotten to the church, it wouldn't have made a difference, because the lights were out; nobody was home.
And I took that as a sign.
When they caught some of the youth that had done this deed, to my surprise, they were around my age, but the gulf that was between us was vast.
It was like we were in two completely different worlds.
And so as I contemplated all of this and looked at what was happening, I suddenly realized that there was a paradox that was emerging inside of me, and the paradox was this: in all of those sermons that I preached decrying the violence, I was also talking about building community, but I suddenly realized that there was a certain segment of the population that I was not including in my definition of community.
And so the paradox was this: If I really wanted the community that I was preaching for, I needed to reach out and embrace this group that I had cut out of my definition.
Which meant not about building programs to catch those who were on the fences of violence, but to reach out and to embrace those who were committing the acts of violence, the gang bangers, the drug dealers.
As soon as I came to that realization, a quick question came to my mind.
Why me?
I mean, isn't this a law enforcement issue?
This is why we have the police, right?
As soon as the question, "Why me?" came, the answer came just as quickly: Why me? Because I'm the one who can't sleep at night thinking about it.
Because I'm the one looking around saying somebody needs to do something about this, and I'm starting to realize that that someone is me.
I mean, isn't that how movements start anyway?
They don't start with a grand convention and people coming together and then walking in lockstep with a statement.
But it starts with just a few, or maybe just one.
It started with me that way, and so I decided to figure out the culture of violence in which these young people who were committing them existed, and I started to volunteer at the high school.
After about two weeks of volunteering at the high school, I realized that the youth that I was trying to reach, they weren't going to high school.
I started to walk in the community, and it didn't take a rocket scientist to realize that they weren't out during the day.
So I started to walk the streets at night, late at night, going into the parks where they were, building the relationship that was necessary.
A tragedy happened in Boston that brought a number of clergy together, and there was a small cadre of us who came to the realization that we had to come out of the four walls of our sanctuary and meet the youth where they were, and not try to figure out how to bring them in.
And so we decided to walk together, and we would get together in one of the most dangerous neighborhoods in the city on a Friday night and on a Saturday night at 10 p.m., and we would walk until 2 or 3 in the morning.
I imagine we were quite the anomaly when we first started walking.
I mean, we weren't drug dealers.
We weren't drug customers.
We weren't the police. Some of us would have collars on.
It was probably a really odd thing.
But they started speaking to us after a while, and what we found out is that while we were walking, they were watching us, and they wanted to make sure of a couple of things: that number one, we were going to be consistent in our behavior, that we would keep coming out there; and then secondly, they had wanted to make sure that we weren't out there to exploit them.
Because there was always somebody who would say, "We're going to take back the streets," but they would always seem to have a television camera with them, or a reporter, and they would enhance their own reputation to the detriment of those on the streets.
So when they saw that we had none of that, they decided to talk to us.
And then we did an amazing thing for preachers.
We decided to listen and not preach.
Come on, give it up for me.
(Laughter) (Applause) All right, come on, you're cutting into my time now, okay? (Laughter) But it was amazing.
We said to them, "We don't know our own communities after 9 p.m. at night, between 9 p.m. and 5 a.m., but you do.
You are the subject matter experts, if you will, of that period of time.
So talk to us. Teach us.
Help us to see what we're not seeing.
Help us to understand what we're not understanding."
And they were all too happy to do that, and we got an idea of what life on the streets was all about, very different than what you see on the 11 o'clock news, very different than what is portrayed in popular media and even social media.
And as we were talking with them, a number of myths were dispelled about them with us.
And one of the biggest myths was that these kids were cold and heartless and uncharacteristically bold in their violence.
What we found out was the exact opposite.
Most of the young people who were out there on the streets are just trying to make it on the streets.
And we also found out that some of the most intelligent and creative and magnificent and wise people that we've ever met were on the street, engaged in a struggle.
And I know some of them call it survival, but I call them overcomers, because when you're in the conditions that they're in, to be able to live every day is an accomplishment of overcoming.
And as a result of that, we said to them, "How do you see this church, how do you see this institution helping this situation?"
And we developed a plan in conversation with these youths.
We stopped looking at them as the problem to be solved, and we started looking at them as partners, as assets, as co-laborers in the struggle to reduce violence in the community.
Imagine developing a plan, you have one minister at one table and a heroin dealer at the other table, coming up with a way in which the church can help the entire community.
The Boston Miracle was about bringing people together.
We had other partners.
We had law enforcement partners.
We had police officers.
It wasn't the entire force, because there were still some who still had that lock-'em-up mentality, but there were other cops who saw the honor in partnering with the community, who saw the responsibility from themselves to be able to work as partners with community leaders and faith leaders in order to reduce violence in the community.
Same with probation officers, same with judges, same with folks who were up that law enforcement chain, because they realized, like we did, that we'll never arrest ourselves out of this situation, that there will not be enough prosecutions made, and you cannot fill these jails up enough in order to alleviate the problem.
I helped to start an organization 20 years ago, a faith-based organization, to deal with this issue.
I left it about four years ago and started working in cities across the United States, 19 in total, and what I found out was that in those cities, there was always this component of community leaders who put their heads down and their nose to the grindstone, who checked their egos at the door and saw the whole as greater than the sum of its parts, and came together and found ways to work with youth out on the streets, that the solution is not more cops, but the solution is mining the assets that are there in the community, to have a strong community component in the collaboration around violence reduction.
Now, there is a movement in the United States of young people who I am very proud of who are dealing with the structural issues that need to change if we're going to be a better society.
But there is this political ploy to try to pit police brutality and police misconduct against black-on-black violence.
But it's a fiction.
It's all connected.
When you think about decades of failed housing policies and poor educational structures, when you think about persistent unemployment and underemployment in a community, when you think about poor healthcare, and then you throw drugs into the mix and duffel bags full of guns, little wonder that you would see this culture of violence emerge.
And then the response that comes from the state is more cops and more suppression of hot spots.
It's all connected, and one of the wonderful things that we've been able to do is to be able to show the value of partnering together -- community, law enforcement, private sector, the city -- in order to reduce violence.
You have to value that community component.
I believe that we can end the era of violence in our cities.
I believe that it is possible and that people are doing it even now.
But I need your help.
It can't just come from folks who are burning themselves out in the community.
They need support. They need help.
Go back to your city.
Find those people.
"You need some help? I'll help you out."
Find those people. They're there.
Bring them together with law enforcement, the private sector, and the city, with the one aim of reducing violence, but make sure that that community component is strong.
Because the old adage that comes from Burundi is right: that you do for me, without me, you do to me.
God bless you. Thank you.
(Applause)
Someone who looks like me walks past you in the street.
Do you think they're a mother, a refugee or a victim of oppression?
Or do you think they're a cardiologist, a barrister or maybe your local politician?
Do you look me up and down, wondering how hot I must get or if my husband has forced me to wear this outfit?
What if I wore my scarf like this?
I can walk down the street in the exact same outfit and what the world expects of me and the way I'm treated depends on the arrangement of this piece of cloth.
But this isn't going to be another monologue about the hijab because Lord knows, Muslim women are so much more than the piece of cloth they choose, or not, to wrap their head in.
This is about looking beyond your bias.
What if I walked past you and later on you'd found out that actually I was a race car engineer, and that I designed my own race car and I ran my university's race team, because it's true.
What if I told you that I was actually trained as a boxer for five years, because that's true, too.
Would it surprise you?
Why?
Ladies and gentlemen, ultimately, that surprise and the behaviors associated with it are the product of something called unconscious bias, or implicit prejudice.
And that results in the ridiculously detrimental lack of diversity in our workforce, particularly in areas of influence.
Hello, Australian Federal Cabinet.
(Applause) Let me just set something out from the outset: Unconscious bias is not the same as conscious discrimination.
I'm not saying that in all of you, there's a secret sexist or racist or ageist lurking within, waiting to get out.
That's not what I'm saying.
We all have our biases.
They're the filters through which we see the world around us.
I'm not accusing anyone, bias is not an accusation.
Rather, it's something that has to be identified, acknowledged and mitigated against.
Bias can be about race, it can be about gender.
It can also be about class, education, disability.
The fact is, we all have biases against what's different, what's different to our social norms.
The thing is, if we want to live in a world where the circumstances of your birth do not dictate your future and where equal opportunity is ubiquitous, then each and every one of us has a role to play in making sure unconscious bias does not determine our lives.
There's this really famous experiment in the space of unconscious bias and that's in the space of gender in the 1970s and 1980s.
So orchestras, back in the day, were made up mostly of dudes, up to only five percent were female.
And apparently, that was because men played it differently, presumably better, presumably.
But in 1952, The Boston Symphony Orchestra started an experiment.
They started blind auditions.
So rather than face-to-face auditions, you would have to play behind a screen.
Now funnily enough, no immediate change was registered until they asked the audition-ers to take their shoes off before they entered the room.
because the clickity-clack of the heels against the hardwood floors was enough to give the ladies away.
Now get this, there results of the audition showed that there was a 50 percent increased chance a woman would progress past the preliminary stage.
And it almost tripled their chances of getting in.
What does that tell us?
Well, unfortunately for the guys, men actually didn't play differently, but there was the perception that they did.
And it was that bias that was determining their outcome.
So what we're doing here is identifying and acknowledging that a bias exists.
And look, we all do it.
Let me give you an example.
A son and his father are in a horrible car accident.
The father dies on impact and the son, who's severely injured, is rushed to hospital.
The surgeon looks at the son when they arrive and is like, "I can't operate."
Why?
"The boy is my son."
How can that be?
Ladies and gentlemen, the surgeon is his mother.
Now hands up -- and it's okay -- but hands up if you initially assumed the surgeon was a guy?
There's evidence that that unconscious bias exists, but we all just have to acknowledge that it's there and then look at ways that we can move past it so that we can look at solutions.
Now one of the interesting things around the space of unconscious bias is the topic of quotas.
And this something that's often brought up.
And of of the criticisms is this idea of merit.
Look, I don't want to be picked because I'm a chick, I want to be picked because I have merit, because I'm the best person for the job.
It's a sentiment that's pretty common among female engineers that I work with and that I know.
And yeah, I get it, I've been there.
But, if the merit idea was true, why would identical resumes, in an experiment done in 2012 by Yale, identical resumes sent out for a lab technician, why would Jennifers be deemed less competent, be less likely to be offered the job, and be paid less than Johns.
The unconscious bias is there, but we just have to look at how we can move past it.
And, you know, it's interesting, there's some research that talks about why this is the case and it's called the merit paradox.
And in organizations -- and this is kind of ironic -- in organizations that talk about merit being their primary value-driver in terms of who they hire, they were more likely to hire dudes and more likely to pay the guys more because apparently merit is a masculine quality.
But, hey.
So you guys think you've got a good read on me, you kinda think you know what's up.
Can you imagine me running one of these?
Can you imagine me walking in and being like, "Hey boys, this is what's up. This is how it's done."
Well, I'm glad you can.
(Applause) Because ladies and gentlemen, that's my day job.
And the cool thing about it is that it's pretty entertaining.
Actually, in places like Malaysia, Muslim women on rigs isn't even comment-worthy.
There are that many of them.
But, it is entertaining.
I remember, I was telling one of the guys, "Hey, mate, look, I really want to learn how to surf."
And he's like, "Yassmin, I don't know how you can surf with all that gear you've got on, and I don't know any women-only beaches."
And then, the guy came up with a brilliant idea, he was like, "I know, you run that organization Youth Without Borders, right?
Why don't you start a clothing line for Muslim chicks in beaches.
You can call it Youth Without Boardshorts."
(Laughter) And I was like, "Thanks, guys."
And I remember another bloke telling me that I should eat all the yogurt I could because that was the only culture I was going to get around there.
But, the problem is, it's kind of true because there's an intense lack of diversity in our workforce, particularly in places of influence.
Now, in 2010, The Australian National University did an experiment where they sent out 4,000 identical applications to entry level jobs, essentially.
To get the same number of interviews as someone with an Anglo-Saxon name, if you were Chinese, you had to send out 68 percent more applications.
If you were Middle Eastern -- Abdel-Magied -- you had to send out 64 percent, and if you're Italian, you're pretty lucky, you only have to send out 12 percent more.
In places like Silicon Valley, it's not that much better.
In Google, they put out some diversity results and 61 percent white, 30 percent Asian and nine, a bunch of blacks, Hispanics, all that kind of thing.
And the rest of the tech world is not that much better and they've acknowledged it, but I'm not really sure what they're doing about it.
The thing is, it doesn't trickle up.
In a study done by Green Park, who are a British senior exec supplier, they said that over half of the FTSE 100 companies don't have a nonwhite leader at their board level, executive or non-executive.
And two out of every three don't have an executive who's from a minority.
And most of the minorities that are at that sort of level are non-executive board directors.
So their influence isn't that great.
I've told you a bunch of terrible things.
You're like, "Oh my god, how bad is that? What can I do about it?"
Well, fortunately, we've identified that there's a problem.
There's a lack of opportunity, and that's due to unconscious bias.
But you might be sitting there thinking, "I ain't brown. What's that got to do with me?"
Let me offer you a solution.
And as I've said before, we live in a world where we're looking for an ideal.
And if we want to create a world where the circumstances of your birth don't matter, we all have to be part of the solution.
And interestingly, the author of the lab resume experiment offered some sort of a solution.
She said the one thing that brought the successful women together, the one thing that they had in common, was the fact that they had good mentors.
So mentoring, we've all kind of heard that before, it's in the vernacular.
Here's another challenge for you.
I challenge each and every one of you to mentor someone different.
Think about it.
Everyone wants to mentor someone who kind of is familiar, who looks like us, we have shared experiences.
If I see a Muslim chick who's got a bit of attitude, I'm like, "What's up? We can hang out."
You walk into a room and there's someone who went to the same school, you play the same sports, there's a high chance that you're going to want to help that person out.
But for the person in the room who has no shared experiences with you it becomes extremely difficult to find that connection.
The idea of finding someone different to mentor, someone who doesn't come from the same background as you, whatever that background is, is about opening doors for people who couldn't even get to the damn hallway.
Because ladies and gentlemen, the world is not just.
People are not born with equal opportunity.
I was born in one of the poorest cities in the world, Khartoum.
I was born brown, I was born female, and I was born Muslim in a world that is pretty suspicious of us for reasons I can't control.
However, I also acknowledge the fact that I was born with privilege.
I was born with amazing parents, I was given an education and had the blessing of migrating to Australia.
But also, I've been blessed with amazing mentors who've opened doors for me that I didn't even know were there.
A mentor who said to me, "Hey, your story's interesting.
Let's write something about it so that I can share it with people."
A mentor who said, "I know you're all those things that don't belong on an Australian rig, but come on anyway."
And here I am, talking to you.
And I'm not the only one.
There's all sorts of people in my communities that I see have been helped out by mentors.
A young Muslim man in Sydney who ended up using his mentor's help to start up a poetry slam in Bankstown and now it's a huge thing.
And he's able to change the lives of so many other young people.
Or a lady here in Brisbane, an Afghan lady who's a refugee, who could barely speak English when she came to Australia, her mentors helped her become a doctor and she took our Young Queenslander of the Year Award in 2008.
She's an inspiration.
This is so not smooth.
This is me.
But I'm also the woman in the rig clothes, and I'm also the woman who was in the abaya at the beginning.
Would you have chosen to mentor me if you had seen me in one of those other versions of who I am?
Because I'm that same person.
We have to look past our unconscious bias, find someone to mentor who's at the opposite end of your spectrum because structural change takes time, and I don't have that level of patience.
So if we're going to create a change, if we're going to create a world where we all have those kinds of opportunities, then choose to open doors for people.
Because you might think that diversity has nothing to do with you, but we are all part of this system and we can all be part of that solution.
And if you don't know where to find someone different, go to the places you wouldn't usually go.
If you enroll in private high school tutoring, go to your local state school or maybe just drop into your local refugee tutoring center.
Or perhaps you work at an office.
Take out that new grad who looks totally out of place -- 'cause that was me -- and open doors for them, not in a tokenistic way, because we're not victims, but show them the opportunities because opening up your world will make you realize that you have access to doors that they didn't even know existed and you didn't even know they didn't have.
Ladies and gentlemen, there is a problem in our community with lack of opportunity, especially due to unconscious bias.
But each and every one one of you has the potential to change that.
I know you've been given a lot of challenges today, but if you can take this one piece and think about it a little differently, because diversity is magic.
And I encourage you to look past your initial perceptions because I bet you, they're probably wrong.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The FBI is responsible for more terrorism plots in the United States than any other organization.
More than al Qaeda, more than al Shabaab, more than the Islamic State, more than all of them combined.
This isn't likely how you think about the FBI.
You probably think of FBI agents gunning down bad guys like John Dillinger, or arresting corrupt politicians.
After the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the FBI became less concerned with gangsters and crooked elected officials.
The new target became terrorists, and the pursuit of terrorists has consumed the FBI.
Every year, the Bureau spends 3.3 billion dollars on domestic counterterrorism activities.
Compare than to just 2.6 billion dollars combined for organized crime, financial fraud, public corruption and all other types of traditional criminal activity.
I've spent years pouring through the case files of terrorism prosecutions in the United States, and I've come to the conclusion that the FBI is much better at creating terrorists than it is at catching terrorists.
In the 14 years since 9/11, you can count about six real terrorist attacks in the United States.
These include the Boston Marathon bombings in 2013, as well as failed attacks, such as the time when a man named Faisal Shahzad tried to deliver a car bomb to Times Square.
In those same 14 years, the Bureau, however, has bragged about how it's foiled dozens of terrorism plots.
In all, the FBI has arrested more than 175 people in aggressive, undercover conterterrorism stings.
These operations, which are usually led by an informant, provide the means and opportunity, and sometimes even the idea, for mentally ill and economically desperate people to become what we now term terrorists.
After 9/11, the FBI was given an edict: never again.
Never another attack on American soil.
FBI agents were told to find terrorists before they struck.
To do this, agents recruited a network of more than 15,000 informants nationwide, all looking for anyone who might be dangerous.
An informant can earn 100,000 dollars or more for every terrorism case they bring to the FBI.
That's right, the FBI is paying mostly criminals and con men six figures to spy on communities in the United States, but mostly Muslim American communities.
These informants nab people like Abu Khalid Abdul-Latif and Walli Mujahidh.
Both are mentally ill.
Abdul-Latif had a history of huffing gasoline and attempting suicide.
Mujahidh had schizoaffective disorder, he had trouble distinguishing between reality and fantasy.
In 2012, the FBI arrested these two men for conspiring to attack a military recruiting station outside Seattle with weapons provided, of course, by the FBI.
The FBI's informant was Robert Childs, a convicted rapist and child molester who was paid 90,000 dollars for his work on the case.
This isn't an outlier.
In 2009, an FBI informant who had fled Pakistan on murder charges led four men in a plot to bomb synagogues in the Bronx.
The lead defendant was James Cromitie, a broke Walmart employee with a history of mental problems.
And the informant had offered him 250,000 dollars if he participated in that plot.
There are many more examples.
Today, The Intercept published my new story about a counterterrorism sting in Tampa involving Sami Osmakac, a young man who was living near Tampa, Florida.
Osmakac also had schizoaffective disorder.
He too was broke, and he had no connections to international terrorist groups.
Nonetheless, an FBI informant gave him a job, handed him money, introduced him to an undercover agent posing as a terrorist, and lured him in a plot to bomb an Irish bar.
But here's what's interesting: The lead undercover agent -- you can see him in this picture with his face blurred -- would go back to the Tampa field office with his recording equipment on.
Behind closed doors, FBI agents admitted that what they were doing was farcical.
A federal judge doesn't want you to hear about these conversations.
He sealed the transcripts and placed them under a protective order in an attempt to prevent someone like me from doing something like this.
Behind closed doors, the lead agent, the squad supervisor, described their would-be terrorist as a "retarded fool who didn't have a pot to piss in."
They described his terrorist ambitions as wishy-washy and a pipe dream scenario.
But that didn't stop the FBI.
They provided Sami Osmakac everything he needed.
They gave him a car bomb, they gave him an AK-47, they helped him make a so-called martyrdom video, and they even gave him money for a taxi cab so that he could get to where they wanted him to go.
As they were working the sting, the squad supervisor tells his agents he wanted a Hollywood ending.
And he got a Hollywood ending.
When Sami Osmakac attempted to deliver what he thought was a car bomb, he was arrested, convicted and sentenced to 40 years in prison.
Sami Osmakac isn't alone.
He's one of more than 175 so-called terrorists, for whom the FBI has created Hollywood endings.
U.S. government officials call this the War on Terror.
It's really just theater, a national security theater, with mentally ill men like Sami Osmakac unwitting actors in a carefully choreographed production brought to you by the FBI.
Thank you.
(Applause) Tom Rielly: So, those are some pretty strong accusations, pretty strong charges.
How can you back this up?
Trevor Aaronson: My research began in 2010 when I received a grant from the Investigative Reporting Program at U.C. Berkeley, and a research assistant and I put together a database of all terrorism prosecutions at the time during the first decade after 9/11.
And we used the court file to find out whether the defendants had any connections to international terrorist groups, whether an informant was used, and whether the informant played the role of an agent provocateur by providing the means and opportunity.
And we submitted that to the FBI and we asked them to respond to our database.
If they believed there were any errors, we asked them to tell us what they were and we'd go back and check and they never challenged any of our findings.
Later, I used that data in a magazine article and later in my book, and on appearances on places like CBS and NPR, they were offered that opportunity again to say, "Trevor Aaronson's findings are wrong."
And they've never come forward and said, "These are the problems with those findings."
So the data has since been used by groups like Human Rights Watch on its recent report on these types of sting operations.
And so far, the FBI has never really responded to these charges that it's really not catching terrorists so much as it's catching mentally ill people that it can dress up as terrorists in these types of sting operations.
TR: So The Intercept is that new investigative journalism website, that's cofounded by Glenn Greenwald.
Tell us about your article and why there.
TA: The Intercept seemed to be the most logical place for this because my article is really leveraging the fact that a source had leaked to me transcripts of these private FBI conversations that a federal judge had sealed based on the government's claim that their release would irreparably damage the U.S. government's law enforcement strategy.
So a place like The Intercept was set up to protect journalists and publish their work when they're dealing with very sensitive matters like this.
So my story in The Intercept, which was just published today, tells the story of how Sami Osmakac was set up in this FBI sting and goes into much greater detail.
In this talk, I could only highlight the things that they said, such as calling him a "retarded fool."
But it was much more elaborate, they went to great lengths to put money in Sami Osmakac's hands, which he then used to purchase weapons from the undercover agent.
When he went to trial, the central piece of evidence was that he paid for these weapons, when in truth, these transcripts show how the FBI orchestrated someone who was essentially mentally ill and broke to get money to then pay for weapons that they could then charge him in a conspiracy for.
TR: One final question.
Less than 10 days ago, the FBI arrested some potential ISIS suspects in Brooklyn, saying that they might be headed to Syria, and were those real, or examples of more of the same?
TA: Well so far, we only know what's come out in the court file, but they seem to suggest it's another example of the same.
These types of sting operations have moved from flavor to flavor.
So initially it was al Qaeda plots, and now the Islamic State is the current flavor.
What's worth noting about that case is that the three men that were charged only began the plot to go to Syria after the introduction of the FBI informant, and in fact, the FBI informant had helped them with the travel documents that they needed.
In kind of a comical turn in that particular case, one of the defendant's mother had found out that he was interested in going to Syria and had hid his passport.
So it's unclear that even if he had showed up at the airport, that he ever could have gone anywhere.
So yes, there are people who might be interested in joining the Islamic State in the United States, and those are people that the United States government should be looking at to see if they're interested in violence here.
In this particular case, given the evidence that's so far come out, it suggests the FBI made it possible for these guys to move along in a plan to go to Syria when they were never close to that in the first place.
Now, I've been making pictures for quite a long time, and normally speaking, a picture like this, for me, should be straightforward.
I'm in southern Ethiopia. I'm with the Daasanach.
There's a big family, there's a very beautiful tree, and I make these pictures with this very large, extremely cumbersome, very awkward technical plate film camera.
Does anybody know 4x5 and 10x8 sheets of film, and you're setting it up, putting it on the tripod.
I've got the family, spent the better part of a day talking with them.
They sort of understand what I'm on about.
They think I'm a bit crazy, but that's another story.
And what's most important for me is the beauty and the aesthetic, and that's based on the light.
So the light's setting on my left-hand side, and there's a balance in the communication with the Daasanach, the family of 30, all ages.
There's babies and there's grandparents, I'm getting them in the tree and waiting for the light to set, and it's going, going, and I've got one sheet of film left, and I think, I'm okay, I'm in control, I'm in control.
I'm setting it up and I'm setting up, and the light's just about to go, and I want it to be golden, I want it to be beautiful.
I want it to be hanging on the horizon so it lights these people, in all the potential glory that they could be presented.
And it's about to go and it's about to go, and I put my sheet in the camera, it's all focused, and all of a sudden there's a massive "whack," and I'm looking around, and in the top corner of the tree, one of the girls slaps the girl next to her, and the girl next to her pulls her hair, and all hell breaks loose, and I'm standing there going, "But the light, the light.
Wait, I need the light. Stay still! Stay still!"
And they start screaming, and then one of the men turns around and starts screaming, shouting, and the whole tree collapses, not the tree, but the people in the tree.
They're all running around screaming, and they run back off into the village in this sort of cloud of smoke, and I'm left there standing behind my tripod.
I've got my sheet, and the light's gone, and I can't make the picture.
Where have they all gone? I had no idea.
It took me a week, it took me a week to make the picture which you see here today, and I'll tell you why. (Applause) It's very, very, very simple -- I spent a week going around the village, and I went to every single one: "Hello, can you meet at the tree?
What's your story? Who are you?"
And it all turned out to be about a boyfriend, for crying out loud.
I mean, I have teenage kids. I should know.
It was about a boyfriend. The girl on the top, she'd kissed the wrong boy, and they'd started having a fight.
And there was a very, very beautiful lesson for me in that: If I was going to photograph these people in the dignified, respectful way that I had intended, and put them on a pedestal, I had to understand them.
It wasn't just about turning up. It wasn't just about shaking a hand.
It wasn't about just saying, "I'm Jimmy, I'm a photographer."
I had to get to know every single one of them, right down to whose boyfriend is who and who is allowed to kiss who.
So in the end, a week later, and I was absolutely exhausted, I mean on my knees going, "Please get back up in that tree.
It's a picture I need to make."
They all came back. I put them all back up in the tree.
I made sure the girls were in the right position, and the ones that slapped, one was over there.
They did look at each other. If you look at it later, they're staring at each other very angrily, and I've got the tree and everything, and then at the last minute, I go, "The goat, the goat!
I need something for the eye to look at. I need a white goat in the middle."
So I swapped all the goats around. I put the goats in.
But even then I got it wrong, because if you can see on the left-hand side, another little boy storms off because I didn't choose his goat.
So the moral being I have to learn to speak Goat as well as Daasanach.
But anyway, the effort that goes into that picture and the story that I've just related to you, as you can imagine, there are hundreds of other bizarre, eccentric stories of hundreds of other people around the world.
And this was about four years ago, and I set off on a journey, to be honest, a very indulgent journey.
I'm a real romantic. I'm an idealist, perhaps in some ways naive.
But I truly believe that there are people on the planet that are beautiful.
It's very, very simple. It's not rocket science.
I wanted to put these people on a pedestal.
I wanted to put them on a pedestal like they'd never been seen before.
So, I chose about 35 different groups, tribes, indigenous cultures.
They were chosen purely because of their aesthetic, and I'll talk more about that later.
I'm not an anthropologist, I have no technical study with the subject, but I do have a very, very, very deep passion, and I believe that I had to choose the most beautiful people on the planet in the most beautiful environment that they lived in, and put the two together and present them to you.
About a year ago, I published the first pictures, and something extraordinarily exciting happened.
The whole world came running, and it was a bizarre experience, because everybody, from everywhere: "Who are they? What are they? How many are they?
Where did you find them? Are they real? You faked it.
Tell me. Tell me. Tell me. Tell me." Millions of questions for which, to be honest, I don't have the answers.
I really didn't have the answers, and I could sort of understand, okay, they're beautiful, that was my intention, but the questions that I was being fired at, I could not answer them.
Until, it was quite amusing, about a year ago somebody said, "You've been invited to do a TED Talk."
And I said, "Ted? Ted? Who's Ted? I haven't met Ted before."
He said, "No, a TED Talk." I said, "But who's Ted?
Do I have to talk to him or do we sit with each other on the stage?"
And, "No, no, the TED group. You must know about it."
And I said, "I've been in a teepee and in a yurt for the last five years.
How do I know who Ted is? Introduce me to him."
Anyway, to cut a long story short, he said, "We have to do a TED Talk."
Researched. Oh, exciting. That's great!
And then eventually you're going to go to TEDGlobal.
Even more exciting.
But what you need to do, you need to teach the people lessons, lessons that you've learned on your travels around the world with these tribes.
I thought, lessons, okay, well, what did I learn? Good question.
Three. You need three lessons, and they need to be terribly profound.
(Laughter) And I thought, three lessons, well, I'm going to think about it.
(Applause) So I thought long and hard, and I stood here two days ago, and I had my test run, and I had my cards and my clicker in my hands and my pictures were on the screen, and I had my three lessons, and I started presenting them, and I had this very odd out-of-body experience.
I sort of looked at myself standing there, going, "Oh, Jimmy, this is complete loads of codswallop.
All these people sitting here, they've had more of these talks, they've heard more lessons in their life.
Who are you to tell them what you've learned?
Who are you to guide them and who are you to show them what is right, what is wrong, what these people have to say?"
And I had a little bit of a, it was very private, a little bit of a meltdown.
I went back, and a little bit like the boy walking away from the tree with his goats, very disgruntled, going, that didn't work, It wasn't what I wanted to communicate.
And I thought long and hard about it, and I thought, well, the only thing I can communicate is very, very basic.
You have to turn it all the way around.
There's only one person I know here, and that's me.
I'm still getting to know myself, and it's a lifelong journey, and I probably won't have all the answers, but I did learn some extraordinary things on this journey.
So what I'm going to do is share with you my lessons.
It's a very, as I explained at the beginning, very indulgent, very personal, how and why I made these pictures, and I leave it to you as the audience to interpret what these lessons have meant to me, what they could perhaps mean to you.
I traveled enormously as a child.
I was very nomadic. It was actually very exciting.
All around the world, and I had this feeling that I was pushed off at great speed to become somebody, become that individual, Jimmy.
Go off into the planet, and so I ran, and I ran, and my wife sometimes kids me, "Jimmy, you look a bit like Forrest Gump," but I'm, "No, it's all about something, trust me."
So I kept running and I kept running, and I sort of got somewhere and I sort of stood there and looked around me and I thought, well, where do I belong? Where do I fit?
What am I? Where am I from? I had no idea.
So I hope there aren't too many psychologists in this audience.
Perhaps part of this journey is about me trying to find out where I belonged.
So whilst going, and don't worry, I didn't when I arrived with these tribes, I didn't paint myself yellow and run around with these spears and loincloths.
But what I did find were people that belonged themselves, and they inspired me, some extraordinary people, and I'd like to introduce you to some heroes of mine.
They're the Huli.
Now, the Huli are some of the most extraordinarily beautiful people on the planet.
They're proud. They live in the Papua New Guinean highlands.
There's not many of them left, and they're called the Huli wigmen.
And images like this, I mean, this is what it's all about for me.
And you've spent weeks and months there talking with them, getting there, and I want to put them on a pedestal, and I said, "You have something that many people have not seen.
You sit in this stunning nature."
And it really does look like this, and they really do look like this.
This is the real thing.
And you know why they're proud? You know why they look like this, and why I broke my back literally to photograph them and present them to you?
It's because they have these extraordinary rituals.
And the Huli have this ritual: When they're teenagers, becoming a man, they have to shave their heads, and they spend the rest of their life shaving their heads every single day, and what they do with that hair, they make it into a creation, a creation that's a very personal creation.
It's their creation. It's their Huli creation.
So they're called the Huli wigmen.
That's a wig on his head.
It's all made out of his human hair.
And then they decorate that wig with the feathers of the birds of paradise, and don't worry, there are many birds there.
There's very few people living, so nothing to get too upset about, and they spend the rest of their life recreating these hats and getting further and further, and it's extraordinary, and there's another group, they're called the Kalam, and they live in the next valley, but they speak a completely different language, they look completely different, and they wear a hat, and it's built out of scarabs, these fantastic emerald green little scarabs, and sometimes there are 5,000 or 6,000 scarabs in this hat, and they spend the whole of their life collecting these scarabs to build these hats.
So the Huli inspired me in that they belong.
Perhaps I have to work harder at finding a ritual which matters for me and going back into my past to see where I actually fit.
An extremely important part of this project was about how I photograph these extraordinary people.
And it's basically beauty. I think beauty matters.
We spend the whole of our existence revolving around beauty: beautiful places, beautiful things, and ultimately, beautiful people.
It's very, very, very significant.
I've spent all of my life analyzing what do I look like?
Am I perceived as beautiful?
Does it matter if I'm a beautiful person or not, or is it purely based on my aesthetic?
And then when I went off, I came to a very narrow conclusion.
Do I have to go around the world photographing, excuse me, women between the age of 25 and 30? Is that what beauty is going to be?
Is everything before and after that utterly irrelevant?
And it was only until I went on a journey, a journey that was so extreme, I still get shivers when I think about it.
I went to a part of the world, and I don't know whether any of you have ever heard of Chukotka. Has anybody ever heard of Chukotka?
Chukotka probably is, technically, as far as one can go and still be on the living planet.
It's 13 hours' flight from Moscow.
First you've got to get to Moscow, and then 13 hours' flight nonstop from Moscow.
And that's if you get there.
As you can see, some people sort of miss the runway.
And then when you land there, in Chukotka are the Chukchis.
Now, the Chukchis are the last indigenous Inuits of Siberia, and they're people I'd heard about, I'd hardly seen any images of, but I knew they were there, and I'd been in touch with this guide, and this guide said, "There's this fantastic tribe. There's only about 40 of them.
You'll be okay. We'll find them." So off we went on this journey.
When we arrived there, after a month of traveling across the ice, and we'd got to them, but then I was not allowed to photograph them.
They said, "You cannot photograph us. You have to wait.
You have to wait until you get to know us. You have to wait until you understand us.
You have to wait until you see how we interact with one another."
And only then, it was many, many weeks later, I saw a respect.
They had zero judgment.
They observed one another, from the youth, from the middle aged to the old.
They need each other.
The children need to chew the meat all day because the adults don't have any teeth, but at the same time, the children take the old aged people out to the toilet because they're infirm, so there's this fantastic community of respect.
And they adore and admire one another, and they truly taught me what beauty was.
(Applause) Now I'm going to ask for a little bit of audience interaction.
This is extremely important for the end of my talk.
If you could look at somebody left to the right of you, and I want you to observe them, and I want you to give them a compliment. This is very important.
Now, it may be their nose or their hair or even their aura, I don't mind, but please look at each other, give them a compliment.
You have to be quick, because I'm running out of time.
And you have to remember it.
Okay, thank you, thank you, thank you, you've given each other compliments.
Hold that compliment very, very tightly. Hold it for later.
And the last thing, it was extraordinarily profound, and it happened only two weeks ago. Two weeks ago I went back to the Himba.
Now, the Himba live in northern Namibia on the border of Angola, and I'd been there a few times before, and I'd gone back to present this book I'd made, to show them the pictures, to get into a discussion with them, to say, "This is how I saw you. This is how I love you.
This is how I respect you. What do you think? Am I right? Am I wrong?"
So I wanted this debate. It was very, very, very emotional, and one night we were sitting around the campfire, and I have to be honest, I think I'd had a little bit too much to drink, and I was sort of sitting under the stars going, "This is great, you've seen my pictures, we love each other." (Laughter) And I'm a little bit slow, and I looked around me, and I said, I thought, maybe, the fence is missing.
Wasn't there a fence here last time I came?
You know, this big protective fence around the village, and they sort of looked at me and go, "Yeah, chief die."
And I thought, okay, chief dying, right, you know, look up at the stars again, look at the campfire.
Chief die. What on Earth does chief die have to do with the fence?
"Chief die.
First we destroy, yeah? Then we reflect.
Then we rebuild. Then we respect."
And I burst out in tears, because my father had only just died prior to this journey, and I didn't ever acknowledge him, I didn't ever appreciate him for the fact that I'm probably standing here today because of him.
These people taught me that we are only who we are because of our parents and our grandparents and our forefathers going on and on and on before that, and I, no matter how romantic or how idealistic I am on this journey, I did not know that until two weeks ago.
I did not know that until two weeks ago.
So what's this all about?
Well, there's an image I'd like to show you, quite a special image, and it wasn't essentially the image I wanted to choose.
I was sitting there the other day, and I have to finish on a strong image.
And somebody said, "You have to show them the picture of the Nenets. The Nenets."
I was like, yeah, but that's not my favorite picture.
She went, "No no no no no no no. It's an amazing picture.
You're in his eyes."
I said, "What do you mean I'm in his eyes? It's a picture of the Nenets."
She said, "No, look, look closely, you're in his eyes."
And when you look closely at this picture, there is a reflection of me in his eyes, so I think perhaps he has my soul, and I'm in his soul, and whilst these pictures look at you, I ask you to look at them.
You may not be reflected in his eyes, but there is something extraordinarily important about these people.
I don't ultimately have the answers, as I've just shared with you, but you must do. There must be something there.
So if you can briefly reflect on what I was discussing about beauty and about belonging and about our ancestors and our roots, and I need you all to stand for me, please.
(Laughter) Now you have no excuse. It's almost lunchtime, and this is not a standing ovation, so don't worry, I'm not fishing for compliments.
But you were given a compliment a few minutes ago.
Now I want you to stand tall.
I want you to breathe in. This is what I say.
I'm not going to get on my knees for two weeks.
I'm not going to ask you to carry a goat, and I know you don't have any camels.
Photography's extraordinarily powerful.
It's this language which we now all understand.
We truly do all understand it, and we have this global digital fireplace, don't we, but I want to share you with the world, because you are also a tribe.
You are the TED tribe, yeah? But you have to remember that compliment.
You have to stand tall, breathe in through your nose, and I'm going to photograph you. Okay?
I need to do a panoramic shot, so it's going to take a minute, so you have to concentrate, okay?
Breathe in, stand tall, no laughing. Shh, breathe through your nose.
I'm going to photograph.
(Clicks) Thank you.
(Applause)
Mark Twain summed up what I take to be one of the fundamental problems of cognitive science with a single witticism.
He said, "There's something fascinating about science.
One gets such wholesale returns of conjecture out of such a trifling investment in fact."
(Laughter) Twain meant it as a joke, of course, but he's right: There's something fascinating about science.
From a few bones, we infer the existence of dinosuars.
From spectral lines, the composition of nebulae.
From fruit flies, the mechanisms of heredity, and from reconstructed images of blood flowing through the brain, or in my case, from the behavior of very young children, we try to say something about the fundamental mechanisms of human cognition.
In particular, in my lab in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at MIT, I have spent the past decade trying to understand the mystery of how children learn so much from so little so quickly.
Because, it turns out that the fascinating thing about science is also a fascinating thing about children, which, to put a gentler spin on Mark Twain, is precisely their ability to draw rich, abstract inferences rapidly and accurately from sparse, noisy data.
I'm going to give you just two examples today.
One is about a problem of generalization, and the other is about a problem of causal reasoning.
And although I'm going to talk about work in my lab, this work is inspired by and indebted to a field.
I'm grateful to mentors, colleagues, and collaborators around the world.
Let me start with the problem of generalization.
Generalizing from small samples of data is the bread and butter of science.
We poll a tiny fraction of the electorate and we predict the outcome of national elections.
We see how a handful of patients responds to treatment in a clinical trial, and we bring drugs to a national market.
But this only works if our sample is randomly drawn from the population.
If our sample is cherry-picked in some way -- say, we poll only urban voters, or say, in our clinical trials for treatments for heart disease, we include only men -- the results may not generalize to the broader population.
So scientists care whether evidence is randomly sampled or not, but what does that have to do with babies?
Well, babies have to generalize from small samples of data all the time.
They see a few rubber ducks and learn that they float, or a few balls and learn that they bounce.
And they develop expectations about ducks and balls that they're going to extend to rubber ducks and balls for the rest of their lives.
And the kinds of generalizations babies have to make about ducks and balls they have to make about almost everything: shoes and ships and sealing wax and cabbages and kings.
So do babies care whether the tiny bit of evidence they see is plausibly representative of a larger population?
Let's find out.
I'm going to show you two movies, one from each of two conditions of an experiment, and because you're going to see just two movies, you're going to see just two babies, and any two babies differ from each other in innumerable ways.
But these babies, of course, here stand in for groups of babies, and the differences you're going to see represent average group differences in babies' behavior across conditions.
In each movie, you're going to see a baby doing maybe just exactly what you might expect a baby to do, and we can hardly make babies more magical than they already are.
But to my mind the magical thing, and what I want you to pay attention to, is the contrast between these two conditions, because the only thing that differs between these two movies is the statistical evidence the babies are going to observe.
We're going to show babies a box of blue and yellow balls, and my then-graduate student, now colleague at Stanford, Hyowon Gweon, is going to pull three blue balls in a row out of this box, and when she pulls those balls out, she's going to squeeze them, and the balls are going to squeak.
And if you're a baby, that's like a TED Talk.
It doesn't get better than that.
(Laughter) But the important point is it's really easy to pull three blue balls in a row out of a box of mostly blue balls.
You could do that with your eyes closed.
It's plausibly a random sample from this population.
And if you can reach into a box at random and pull out things that squeak, then maybe everything in the box squeaks.
So maybe babies should expect those yellow balls to squeak as well.
Now, those yellow balls have funny sticks on the end, so babies could do other things with them if they wanted to.
They could pound them or whack them.
But let's see what the baby does.
(Video) Hyowon Gweon: See this? (Ball squeaks) Did you see that? (Ball squeaks) Cool.
See this one?
(Ball squeaks) Wow.
Laura Schulz: Told you. (Laughs) (Video) HG: See this one? (Ball squeaks) Hey Clara, this one's for you. You can go ahead and play.
(Laughter) LS: I don't even have to talk, right?
All right, it's nice that babies will generalize properties of blue balls to yellow balls, and it's impressive that babies can learn from imitating us, but we've known those things about babies for a very long time.
The really interesting question is what happens when we show babies exactly the same thing, and we can ensure it's exactly the same because we have a secret compartment and we actually pull the balls from there, but this time, all we change is the apparent population from which that evidence was drawn.
This time, we're going to show babies three blue balls pulled out of a box of mostly yellow balls, and guess what?
You [probably won't] randomly draw three blue balls in a row out of a box of mostly yellow balls.
That is not plausibly randomly sampled evidence.
That evidence suggests that maybe Hyowon was deliberately sampling the blue balls.
Maybe there's something special about the blue balls.
Maybe only the blue balls squeak.
Let's see what the baby does.
(Video) HG: See this? (Ball squeaks) See this toy? (Ball squeaks) Oh, that was cool. See? (Ball squeaks) Now this one's for you to play. You can go ahead and play.
(Fussing) (Laughter) LS: So you just saw two 15-month-old babies do entirely different things based only on the probability of the sample they observed.
Let me show you the experimental results.
On the vertical axis, you'll see the percentage of babies who squeezed the ball in each condition, and as you'll see, babies are much more likely to generalize the evidence when it's plausibly representative of the population than when the evidence is clearly cherry-picked.
And this leads to a fun prediction: Suppose you pulled just one blue ball out of the mostly yellow box.
You [probably won't] pull three blue balls in a row at random out of a yellow box, but you could randomly sample just one blue ball.
That's not an improbable sample.
And if you could reach into a box at random and pull out something that squeaks, maybe everything in the box squeaks.
So even though babies are going to see much less evidence for squeaking, and have many fewer actions to imitate in this one ball condition than in the condition you just saw, we predicted that babies themselves would squeeze more, and that's exactly what we found.
So 15-month-old babies, in this respect, like scientists, care whether evidence is randomly sampled or not, and they use this to develop expectations about the world: what squeaks and what doesn't, what to explore and what to ignore.
Let me show you another example now, this time about a problem of causal reasoning.
And it starts with a problem of confounded evidence that all of us have, which is that we are part of the world.
And this might not seem like a problem to you, but like most problems, it's only a problem when things go wrong.
Take this baby, for instance.
Things are going wrong for him.
He would like to make this toy go, and he can't.
I'll show you a few-second clip.
And there's two possibilities, broadly: Maybe he's doing something wrong, or maybe there's something wrong with the toy.
So in this next experiment, we're going to give babies just a tiny bit of statistical data supporting one hypothesis over the other, and we're going to see if babies can use that to make different decisions about what to do.
Here's the setup.
Hyowon is going to try to make the toy go and succeed.
I am then going to try twice and fail both times, and then Hyowon is going to try again and succeed, and this roughly sums up my relationship to my graduate students in technology across the board.
But the important point here is it provides a little bit of evidence that the problem isn't with the toy, it's with the person.
Some people can make this toy go, and some can't.
Now, when the baby gets the toy, he's going to have a choice.
His mom is right there, so he can go ahead and hand off the toy and change the person, but there's also going to be another toy at the end of that cloth, and he can pull the cloth towards him and change the toy.
So let's see what the baby does.
(Video) HG: Two, three. Go! (Music) LS: One, two, three, go!
Arthur, I'm going to try again. One, two, three, go!
YG: Arthur, let me try again, okay?
One, two, three, go! (Music) Look at that. Remember these toys?
See these toys? Yeah, I'm going to put this one over here, and I'm going to give this one to you.
You can go ahead and play.
LS: Okay, Laura, but of course, babies love their mommies.
Of course babies give toys to their mommies when they can't make them work.
So again, the really important question is what happens when we change the statistical data ever so slightly.
This time, babies are going to see the toy work and fail in exactly the same order, but we're changing the distribution of evidence.
This time, Hyowon is going to succeed once and fail once, and so am I.
And this suggests it doesn't matter who tries this toy, the toy is broken.
It doesn't work all the time.
Again, the baby's going to have a choice.
Her mom is right next to her, so she can change the person, and there's going to be another toy at the end of the cloth.
Let's watch what she does.
(Video) HG: Two, three, go! (Music) Let me try one more time. One, two, three, go!
Hmm.
LS: Let me try, Clara.
One, two, three, go!
Hmm, let me try again.
One, two, three, go! (Music) HG: I'm going to put this one over here, and I'm going to give this one to you.
You can go ahead and play.
(Applause) LS: Let me show you the experimental results.
On the vertical axis, you'll see the distribution of children's choices in each condition, and you'll see that the distribution of the choices children make depends on the evidence they observe.
So in the second year of life, babies can use a tiny bit of statistical data to decide between two fundamentally different strategies for acting in the world: asking for help and exploring.
I've just shown you two laboratory experiments out of literally hundreds in the field that make similar points, because the really critical point is that children's ability to make rich inferences from sparse data underlies all the species-specific cultural learning that we do.
Children learn about new tools from just a few examples.
They learn new causal relationships from just a few examples.
They even learn new words, in this case in American Sign Language.
I want to close with just two points.
If you've been following my world, the field of brain and cognitive sciences, for the past few years, three big ideas will have come to your attention.
The first is that this is the era of the brain.
And indeed, there have been staggering discoveries in neuroscience: localizing functionally specialized regions of cortex, turning mouse brains transparent, activating neurons with light.
A second big idea is that this is the era of big data and machine learning, and machine learning promises to revolutionize our understanding of everything from social networks to epidemiology.
And maybe, as it tackles problems of scene understanding and natural language processing, to tell us something about human cognition.
And the final big idea you'll have heard is that maybe it's a good idea we're going to know so much about brains and have so much access to big data, because left to our own devices, humans are fallible, we take shortcuts, we err, we make mistakes, we're biased, and in innumerable ways, we get the world wrong.
I think these are all important stories, and they have a lot to tell us about what it means to be human, but I want you to note that today I told you a very different story.
It's a story about minds and not brains, and in particular, it's a story about the kinds of computations that uniquely human minds can perform, which involve rich, structured knowledge and the ability to learn from small amounts of data, the evidence of just a few examples.
And fundamentally, it's a story about how starting as very small children and continuing out all the way to the greatest accomplishments of our culture, we get the world right.
Folks, human minds do not only learn from small amounts of data.
Human minds think of altogether new ideas.
Human minds generate research and discovery, and human minds generate art and literature and poetry and theater, and human minds take care of other humans: our old, our young, our sick.
We even heal them.
In the years to come, we're going to see technological innovations beyond anything I can even envision, but we are very unlikely to see anything even approximating the computational power of a human child in my lifetime or in yours.
If we invest in these most powerful learners and their development, in babies and children and mothers and fathers and caregivers and teachers the ways we invest in our other most powerful and elegant forms of technology, engineering and design, we will not just be dreaming of a better future, we will be planning for one.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Laura, thank you. I do actually have a question for you.
First of all, the research is insane.
I mean, who would design an experiment like that? (Laughter) I've seen that a couple of times, and I still don't honestly believe that that can truly be happening, but other people have done similar experiments; it checks out.
The babies really are that genius.
LS: You know, they look really impressive in our experiments, but think about what they look like in real life, right?
It starts out as a baby.
Eighteen months later, it's talking to you, and babies' first words aren't just things like balls and ducks, they're things like "all gone," which refer to disappearance, or "uh-oh," which refer to unintentional actions.
It has to be that powerful.
It has to be much more powerful than anything I showed you.
They're figuring out the entire world.
A four-year-old can talk to you about almost anything.
(Applause) CA: And if I understand you right, the other key point you're making is, we've been through these years where there's all this talk of how quirky and buggy our minds are, that behavioral economics and the whole theories behind that that we're not rational agents.
You're really saying that the bigger story is how extraordinary, and there really is genius there that is underappreciated.
LS: One of my favorite quotes in psychology comes from the social psychologist Solomon Asch, and he said the fundamental task of psychology is to remove the veil of self-evidence from things.
There are orders of magnitude more decisions you make every day that get the world right.
You know about objects and their properties.
You know them when they're occluded. You know them in the dark.
You can walk through rooms.
You can figure out what other people are thinking. You can talk to them.
You can navigate space. You know about numbers.
You know causal relationships. You know about moral reasoning.
You do this effortlessly, so we don't see it, but that is how we get the world right, and it's a remarkable and very difficult-to-understand accomplishment.
CA: I suspect there are people in the audience who have this view of accelerating technological power who might dispute your statement that never in our lifetimes will a computer do what a three-year-old child can do, but what's clear is that in any scenario, our machines have so much to learn from our toddlers.
LS: I think so. You'll have some machine learning folks up here.
I mean, you should never bet against babies or chimpanzees or technology as a matter of practice, but it's not just a difference in quantity, it's a difference in kind.
We have incredibly powerful computers, and they do do amazingly sophisticated things, often with very big amounts of data.
Human minds do, I think, something quite different, and I think it's the structured, hierarchical nature of human knowledge that remains a real challenge.
CA: Laura Schulz, wonderful food for thought. Thank you so much.
LS: Thank you. (Applause)
You know, I've talked about some of these projects before -- about the human genome and what that might mean, and discovering new sets of genes.
We're actually starting at a new point: we've been digitizing biology, and now we're trying to go from that digital code into a new phase of biology with designing and synthesizing life.
So, we've always been trying to ask big questions.
"What is life?" is something that I think many biologists have been trying to understand at various levels.
We've tried various approaches, paring it down to minimal components.
We've been digitizing it now for almost 20 years; when we sequenced the human genome, it was going from the analog world of biology into the digital world of the computer.
Now we're trying to ask, "Can we regenerate life or can we create new life out of this digital universe?"
This is the map of a small organism, Mycoplasma genitalium, that has the smallest genome for a species that can self-replicate in the laboratory, and we've been trying to just see if we can come up with an even smaller genome.
We're able to knock out on the order of 100 genes out of the 500 or so that are here.
When we look at its metabolic map, it's relatively simple compared to ours -- trust me, this is simple -- but when we look at all the genes that we can knock out one at a time, it's very unlikely that this would yield a living cell.
So we decided the only way forward was to actually synthesize this chromosome so we could vary the components to ask some of these most fundamental questions.
And so we started down the road of: can we synthesize a chromosome?
Can chemistry permit making these really large molecules where we've never been before?
And if we do, can we boot up a chromosome?
A chromosome, by the way, is just a piece of inert chemical material.
So, our pace of digitizing life has been increasing at an exponential pace.
Our ability to write the genetic code has been moving pretty slowly but has been increasing, and our latest point would put it on, now, an exponential curve.
We started this over 15 years ago.
It took several stages, in fact, starting with a bioethical review before we did the first experiments.
But it turns out synthesizing DNA is very difficult.
There are tens of thousands of machines around the world that make small pieces of DNA -- 30 to 50 letters in length -- and it's a degenerate process, so the longer you make the piece, the more errors there are.
So we had to create a new method for putting these little pieces together and correct all the errors.
And this was our first attempt, starting with the digital information of the genome of phi X174.
It's a small virus that kills bacteria.
We designed the pieces, went through our error correction and had a DNA molecule of about 5,000 letters.
The exciting phase came when we took this piece of inert chemical and put it in the bacteria, and the bacteria started to read this genetic code, made the viral particles.
The viral particles then were released from the cells and came back and killed the E. coli.
I was talking to the oil industry recently and I said they clearly understood that model.
(Laughter) They laughed more than you guys are. (Laughter) And so, we think this is a situation where the software can actually build its own hardware in a biological system.
But we wanted to go much larger: we wanted to build the entire bacterial chromosome -- it's over 580,000 letters of genetic code -- so we thought we'd build them in cassettes the size of the viruses so we could actually vary the cassettes to understand what the actual components of a living cell are.
Design is critical, and if you're starting with digital information in the computer, that digital information has to be really accurate.
When we first sequenced this genome in 1995, the standard of accuracy was one error per 10,000 base pairs.
We actually found, on resequencing it, 30 errors; had we used that original sequence, it never would have been able to be booted up.
Part of the design is designing pieces that are 50 letters long that have to overlap with all the other 50-letter pieces to build smaller subunits we have to design so they can go together.
We design unique elements into this.
You may have read that we put watermarks in.
Think of this: we have a four-letter genetic code -- A, C, G and T.
Triplets of those letters code for roughly 20 amino acids, such that there's a single letter designation for each of the amino acids.
So we can use the genetic code to write out words, sentences, thoughts.
Initially, all we did was autograph it.
Some people were disappointed there was not poetry.
We designed these pieces so we can just chew back with enzymes; there are enzymes that repair them and put them together.
And we started making pieces, starting with pieces that were 5,000 to 7,000 letters, put those together to make 24,000-letter pieces, then put sets of those going up to 72,000.
At each stage, we grew up these pieces in abundance so we could sequence them because we're trying to create a process that's extremely robust that you can see in a minute.
We're trying to get to the point of automation.
So, this looks like a basketball playoff.
When we get into these really large pieces over 100,000 base pairs, they won't any longer grow readily in E. coli -- it exhausts all the modern tools of molecular biology -- and so we turned to other mechanisms.
We knew there's a mechanism called homologous recombination that biology uses to repair DNA that can put pieces together.
Here's an example of it: there's an organism called Deinococcus radiodurans that can take three millions rads of radiation.
You can see in the top panel, its chromosome just gets blown apart.
Twelve to 24 hours later, it put it back together exactly as it was before.
We have thousands of organisms that can do this.
These organisms can be totally desiccated; they can live in a vacuum.
I am absolutely certain that life can exist in outer space, move around, find a new aqueous environment.
In fact, NASA has shown a lot of this is out there.
Here's an actual micrograph of the molecule we built using these processes, actually just using yeast mechanisms with the right design of the pieces we put them in; yeast puts them together automatically.
This is not an electron micrograph; this is just a regular photomicrograph.
It's such a large molecule we can see it with a light microscope.
These are pictures over about a six-second period.
So, this is the publication we had just a short while ago.
This is over 580,000 letters of genetic code; it's the largest molecule ever made by humans of a defined structure.
It's over 300 million molecular weight.
If we printed it out at a 10 font with no spacing, it takes 142 pages just to print this genetic code.
Well, how do we boot up a chromosome? How do we activate this?
Obviously, with a virus it's pretty simple; it's much more complicated dealing with bacteria.
It's also simpler when you go into eukaryotes like ourselves: you can just pop out the nucleus and pop in another one, and that's what you've all heard about with cloning.
With bacteria and Archaea, the chromosome is integrated into the cell, but we recently showed that we can do a complete transplant of a chromosome from one cell to another and activate it.
We purified a chromosome from one microbial species -- roughly, these two are as distant as human and mice -- we added a few extra genes so we could select for this chromosome, we digested it with enzymes to kill all the proteins, and it was pretty stunning when we put this in the cell -- and you'll appreciate our very sophisticated graphics here.
The new chromosome went into the cell.
In fact, we thought this might be as far as it went, but we tried to design the process a little bit further.
This is a major mechanism of evolution right here.
We find all kinds of species that have taken up a second chromosome or a third one from somewhere, adding thousands of new traits in a second to that species.
So, people who think of evolution as just one gene changing at a time have missed much of biology.
There are enzymes called restriction enzymes that actually digest DNA.
The chromosome that was in the cell doesn't have one; the chromosome we put in does.
It got expressed and it recognized the other chromosome as foreign material, chewed it up, and so we ended up just with a cell with the new chromosome.
It turned blue because of the genes we put in it.
And with a very short period of time, all the characteristics of one species were lost and it converted totally into the new species based on the new software that we put in the cell.
All the proteins changed, the membranes changed; when we read the genetic code, it's exactly what we had transferred in.
So, this may sound like genomic alchemy, but we can, by moving the software of DNA around, change things quite dramatically.
Now I've argued, this is not genesis; this is building on three and a half billion years of evolution.
And I've argued that we're about to perhaps create a new version of the Cambrian explosion, where there's massive new speciation based on this digital design.
Why do this?
I think this is pretty obvious in terms of some of the needs.
We're about to go from six and a half to nine billion people over the next 40 years.
To put it in context for myself: I was born in 1946.
There are now three people on the planet for every one of us that existed in 1946; within 40 years, there'll be four.
We have trouble feeding, providing fresh, clean water, medicines, fuel for the six and a half billion.
It's going to be a stretch to do it for nine.
We use over five billion tons of coal, 30 billion-plus barrels of oil -- that's a hundred million barrels a day.
When we try to think of biological processes or any process to replace that, it's going to be a huge challenge.
Then of course, there's all that CO2 from this material that ends up in the atmosphere.
We now, from our discovery around the world, have a database with about 20 million genes, and I like to think of these as the design components of the future.
The electronics industry only had a dozen or so components, and look at the diversity that came out of that.
We're limited here primarily by a biological reality and our imagination.
We now have techniques, because of these rapid methods of synthesis, to do what we're calling combinatorial genomics.
We have the ability now to build a large robot that can make a million chromosomes a day.
When you think of processing these 20 million different genes or trying to optimize processes to produce octane or to produce pharmaceuticals, new vaccines, we can just with a small team, do more molecular biology than the last 20 years of all science.
And it's just standard selection: we can select for viability, chemical or fuel production, vaccine production, etc.
This is a screen snapshot of some true design software that we're working on to actually be able to sit down and design species in the computer.
You know, we don't know necessarily what it'll look like: we know exactly what their genetic code looks like.
We're focusing on now fourth-generation fuels.
You've seen recently, corn to ethanol is just a bad experiment.
We have second- and third-generation fuels that will be coming out relatively soon that are sugar, to much higher-value fuels like octane or different types of butanol.
But the only way we think that biology can have a major impact without further increasing the cost of food and limiting its availability is if we start with CO2 as its feedstock, and so we're working with designing cells to go down this road.
And we think we'll have the first fourth-generation fuels in about 18 months.
Sunlight and CO2 is one method ...
(Applause) but in our discovery around the world, we have all kinds of other methods.
This is an organism we described in 1996.
It lives in the deep ocean, about a mile and a half deep, almost at boiling-water temperatures.
It takes CO2 to methane using molecular hydrogen as its energy source.
We're looking to see if we can take captured CO2, which can easily be piped to sites, convert that CO2 back into fuel to drive this process.
So, in a short period of time, we think that we might be able to increase what the basic question is of "What is life?"
We truly, you know, have modest goals of replacing the whole petrol-chemical industry -- (Laughter) (Applause) Yeah. If you can't do that at TED, where can you? -- (Laughter) become a major source of energy ...
But also, we're now working on using these same tools to come up with instant sets of vaccines.
You've seen this year with flu; we're always a year behind and a dollar short when it comes to the right vaccine.
I think that can be changed by building combinatorial vaccines in advance.
Here's what the future may begin to look like with changing, now, the evolutionary tree, speeding up evolution with synthetic bacteria, Archaea and, eventually, eukaryotes.
We're a ways away from improving people: our goal is just to make sure that we have a chance to survive long enough to maybe do that. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Do you remember a time when you felt hormonal and moody?
Your skin was breaking out, your body was growing in strange places and very fast, and at the same time, people were expecting you to be grown-up in this new way.
Teenagers, right?
Well, these same changes happen to a woman when she's having a baby.
And we know that it's normal for teenagers to feel all over the place, so why don't we talk about pregnancy in the same way?
There are entire textbooks written about the developmental arc of adolescence, and we don't even have a word to describe the transition to motherhood.
We need one.
I'm a psychiatrist who works with pregnant and postpartum women, a reproductive psychiatrist, and in the decade that I've been working in this field, I've noticed a pattern.
It goes something like this: a woman calls me up, she's just had a baby, and she's concerned.
She says, "I'm not good at this. I'm not enjoying this.
Do I have postpartum depression?"
So I go through the symptoms of that diagnosis, and it's clear to me that she's not clinically depressed, and I tell her that.
But she isn't reassured.
"It isn't supposed to feel like this," she insists.
So I say, "OK. What did you expect it to feel like?"
She says, "I thought motherhood would make feel whole and happy.
I thought my instincts would naturally tell me what to do.
I thought I'd always want to put the baby first."
This -- this is an unrealistic expectation of what the transition to motherhood feels like.
And it wasn't just her.
I was getting calls with questions like this from hundreds of women, all concerned that something was wrong, because they couldn't measure up.
And I didn't know how to help them, because telling them that they weren't sick wasn't making them feel better.
I wanted to find a way to normalize this transition, to explain that discomfort is not always the same thing as disease.
So I set out to learn more about the psychology of motherhood.
But there actually wasn't much in the medical textbooks, because doctors mostly write about disease.
So I turned to anthropology.
And it took me two years, but in an out-of-print essay written in 1973 by Dana Raphael, I finally found a helpful way to frame this conversation: matrescence.
It's not a coincidence that "matrescence" sounds like "adolescence."
Both are times when body morphing and hormone shifting lead to an upheaval in how a person feels emotionally and how they fit into the world.
And like adolescence, matrescence is not a disease, but since it's not in the medical vocabulary, since doctors aren't educating people about it, it's being confused with a more serious condition called postpartum depression.
I've been building on the anthropology literature and have been talking about matrescence with my patients using a concept called the "push and pull."
Here's the pull part.
As humans, our babies are uniquely dependent.
Unlike other animals, our babies can't walk, they can't feed themselves, they're very hard to take care of.
So evolution has helped us out with this hormone called oxytocin.
It's released around childbirth and also during skin-to-skin touch, so it rises even if you didn't give birth to the baby.
Oxytocin helps a human mother's brain zoom in, pulling her attention in, so that the baby is now at the center of her world.
But at the same time, her mind is pushing away, because she remembers there are all these other parts to her identity -- other relationships, her work, hobbies, a spiritual and intellectual life, not to mention physical needs: to sleep, to eat, to exercise, to have sex, to go to the bathroom, alone -- (Laughter) if possible.
This is the emotional tug-of-war of matrescence.
This is the tension the women calling me were feeling.
It's why they thought they were sick.
If women understood the natural progression of matrescence, if they knew that most people found it hard to live inside this push and pull, if they knew that under these circumstances, ambivalence was normal and nothing to be ashamed of, they would feel less alone, they would feel less stigmatized, and I think it would even reduce rates of postpartum depression.
I'd love to study that one day.
I'm a believer in talk therapy, so if we're going to change the way our culture understands this transition to motherhood, women need to be talking to each other, not just me.
So mothers, talk about your matrescence with other mothers, with your friends, and, if you have one, with your partner, so that they can understand their own transition and better support you.
But it's not just about protecting your relationship.
When you preserve a separate part of your identity, you're also leaving room for your child to develop their own.
When a baby is born, so is a mother, each unsteady in their own way.
Matrescence is profound, but it's also hard, and that's what makes it human.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) (Singing) It was a teenage wedding and the old folks wished them well.
You could see that Pierre did truly love the mademoiselle.
Oh, and now the young monsieur and madame have rung the chapel bell.
C'est la vie, say the old folks, it goes to show you never can tell.
No, no.
They furnished off an apartment with a two-room Roebuck sale.
The coolerator was crammed with TV dinners and ginger ale.
Oh, but when Pierre found work, the little money comin' worked out well .
C'est la vie, say the old folks, it goes to show you never can tell.
You never can tell.
They bought a souped-up jitney, was a cherry red '53.
They drove it down to New Orleans to celebrate their anniversary.
Oh, it was there where Pierre was wedded to the lovely mademoiselle.
C'est la vie, say the old folks, it goes to show you never can tell.
No, no, you never can tell.
No, no, you never can tell.
You never can tell.
You never can tell.
No, no, you never can tell.
(Applause and cheers) Thank you.
I recently had the tremendous opportunity of searching for gold in the vast mine of songs released by Chess Records, a Chicago-based label that was really very active in the '50s and '60s in the US and that music spread all over the world.
And the songs that I'm singing tonight are from an album that I just put out called, "Playing Chess," that pays homage to those songs.
And these guys were really the innovators of rock 'n' roll and soul and R&amp;B as we now know it.
(Applause) (Music) (Singing) Over the mountain, across the sea, there's a girl waiting, she's waiting for ...
me.
(Music) Over the river, beyond every cloud, she's passed the wind blowin' loud.
Over the mountain, a girl waits for me.
(Music) Tell the sands, every blade of grass, please tell the wind to let my love pass.
Over the mountain, a girl waits for me.
Tell the moon up -- up in the sky.
Tell all the birds that fly on by that over and over the mountain ...
my love waits for me.
Oh, into each dark, starry night, oh, what a mystery that's sealed so tight.
Over the mountain, a girl waits for me.
Tell the moon up -- up in the sky.
Tell the birds that fly by that over and over the mountain my love waits for me.
Into each dark and starry night, oh, what a mystery that's sealed so tight.
Over the mountains, a girl waits for me.
She waits for me.
Oh, she waits for me.
I know, I know, I know, I know, I know.
Oh, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know.
Oh, I know, I know, I know, I know, I know, oh oh, oh oh.
(Applause and cheers)
Almost 20 years have passed since 9/11.
It is time to take stock of where we stand and stop and think.
It is time to ask ourselves, have the assumptions and policies we developed in the wake of those tragic events truly made us more secure?
Have they made our societies, both in Europe and in the United States, more resilient?
I've worked all my life in the field of security and defense, and I am convinced that now, more than ever, we need to radically reframe the way we think and act about security, and especially about international security.
By international security, I actually mean what we do, how we prepare our countries to better respond and prevent external threats, and how we protect our citizens.
The key to both is to focus on protecting civilians, both in our own countries and in those where we are present in the name of security.
Now, this idea goes against the fixed narrative that we developed over the past 20 years over what security is and how to get it, but that narrative is flawed, and worse, it is counterproductive.
Over the past 20 years, both in the United States and in Europe, we've come to accept that we must talk about security in zero sum terms, as if the only way to gain more security is by compromising on values and rights: security versus human rights, safety versus freedom and development.
This is a false opposition.
It just doesn't work like that.
We need to recognize that security and human rights are not opposite values, they are intrinsically related.
After all, the most basic human right is the right to live and to be free from violence, and a state's most basic responsibility is to guarantee that right for its citizens.
Conversely, if we think about communities all over the world affected by war and conflict, it is insecurity and violence that stops them from achieving their full freedom and development.
Now, they need basic security just as much as we do and they need it so they can live a normal life and so that they can enjoy their human rights.
This is why we need to shift.
We need to acknowledge that sustainable security builds on a foundation of human rights, builds on promoting and respecting human rights.
Also, over the past two decades, we have accepted that the best way to guarantee our own security is by defeating our enemies, and to do that, we need to rely almost exclusively on the military.
Again, this clashes with my work, with my research, with what I see in the field.
What I see is that building sustainable security has a lot less to do with crushing enemies, has a lot less to do with winning on the battlefield, and has a lot more to do with protecting victims and building stability.
And to do that, well, the military alone is simply insufficient.
This is why I believe we need to shelve the never-ending War on Terror, and we need to replace it with a security agenda that is driven by the principle of protecting civilians, no matter where they are from, what passport they hold, or where they live: Vancouver, New York, Kabul, Mosul, Aleppo or Douma.
Sustainable security tells us that we're more likely to have long-term security at home for ourselves if we focus our engagements abroad on protecting civilians and on ensuring their lives are lived in dignity and free from violence.
For example, we all know that defeating ISIS is a security achievement.
Absolutely.
But rebuilding destroyed homes, restoring order, ensuring a representative political system, these are just as, if not more important, and not just for the security of civilians in Iraq and in Syria, but for our own security and for global stability.
More fundamentally, ISIS's danger should not just be counted in the number of weapons it holds but also in the number of children it has kept out of school or indoctrinated.
This is from a security perspective.
From a security perspective, the long-term generational impact of having millions of children in Syria growing up knowing only war and out of school, this is a far more dangerous threat to stability than all of ISIS's weapons combined, and we should spend just as much time and just as much energy to counter this as what we spend when countering ISIS militarily.
Over the past two decades, our security policy has been short-term.
It has focused on the here and now.
It has systematically downplayed the link between what we do today in the name of security and the long-term impact of those choices.
In the years after 9/11, some of the choices, some of the policies we've implemented have probably made us less, not more secure in the long term.
Sustainable, civilian-centered security needs to look at what happens in the long term.
Again, for example, relying on drones to target enemies in faraway countries may be a tool.
It may be a tool to make sure or to lessen the threat of an imminent attack on the United States.
But what about the long-term impact?
If civilians are killed, if communities are targeted, this will feed a vicious circle of war, conflict, trauma and radicalization, and that vicious circle is at the center of so many of the security challenges we face today.
This will not make us safer in the long term.
We need civilian security, we need sustainable civilian-centered security, and we need it now.
We need to encourage thinking and research around this concept, and to implement it.
We live in a dangerous world.
We have many threats to peace and conflict.
Much like in the days after 9/11, we simply cannot afford not to think about international security.
But we have to learn the lessons of the past 20 years.
To get it right, to get security right, we need to focus on the long term.
We need to focus on protecting civilians.
And we need to respect and acknowledge the fact that sustainable security builds on a foundation of human rights.
Otherwise, in the name of security, we risk leaving the world a far more dangerous and unstable place than what we already found it in.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm really excited to share with you some findings that really surprise me about what makes companies succeed the most, what factors actually matter the most for startup success.
I believe that the startup organization is one of the greatest forms to make the world a better place.
If you take a group of people with the right equity incentives and organize them in a startup, you can unlock human potential in a way never before possible.
You get them to achieve unbelievable things.
But if the startup organization is so great, why do so many fail?
That's what I wanted to find out.
I wanted to find out what actually matters most for startup success.
And I wanted to try to be systematic about it, avoid some of my instincts and maybe misperceptions I have from so many companies I've seen over the years.
I wanted to know this because I've been starting businesses since I was 12 years old when I sold candy at the bus stop in junior high school, to high school, when I made solar energy devices, to college, when I made loudspeakers.
And when I graduated from college, I started software companies.
And 20 years ago, I started Idealab, and in the last 20 years, we started more than 100 companies, many successes, and many big failures.
We learned a lot from those failures.
So I tried to look across what factors accounted the most for company success and failure.
So I looked at these five.
First, the idea.
I used to think that the idea was everything.
I named my company Idealab for how much I worship the "aha!" moment when you first come up with the idea.
But then over time, I came to think that maybe the team, the execution, adaptability, that mattered even more than the idea.
I never thought I'd be quoting boxer Mike Tyson on the TED stage, but he once said, "Everybody has a plan, until they get punched in the face." (Laughter) And I think that's so true about business as well.
So much about a team's execution is its ability to adapt to getting punched in the face by the customer.
The customer is the true reality.
And that's why I came to think that the team maybe was the most important thing.
Then I started looking at the business model.
Does the company have a very clear path generating customer revenues?
That started rising to the top in my thinking about maybe what mattered most for success.
Then I looked at the funding.
Sometimes companies received intense amounts of funding.
Maybe that's the most important thing?
And then of course, the timing.
Is the idea way too early and the world's not ready for it?
Is it early, as in, you're in advance and you have to educate the world?
Is it just right?
Or is it too late, and there's already too many competitors?
So I tried to look very carefully at these five factors across many companies.
And I looked across all 100 Idealab companies, and 100 non-Idealab companies to try and come up with something scientific about it.
So first, on these Idealab companies, the top five companies -- Citysearch, CarsDirect, GoTo, NetZero, Tickets.com -- those all became billion-dollar successes.
And the five companies on the bottom -- Z.com, Insider Pages, MyLife, Desktop Factory, Peoplelink -- we all had high hopes for, but didn't succeed.
So I tried to rank across all of those attributes how I felt those companies scored on each of those dimensions.
And then for non-Idealab companies, I looked at wild successes, like Airbnb and Instagram and Uber and Youtube and LinkedIn.
And some failures: Webvan, Kozmo, Pets.com Flooz and Friendster.
The bottom companies had intense funding, they even had business models in some cases, but they didn't succeed.
I tried to look at what factors actually accounted the most for success and failure across all of these companies, and the results really surprised me.
The number one thing was timing.
Timing accounted for 42 percent of the difference between success and failure.
Team and execution came in second, and the idea, the differentiability of the idea, the uniqueness of the idea, that actually came in third.
Now, this isn't absolutely definitive, it's not to say that the idea isn't important, but it very much surprised me that the idea wasn't the most important thing.
Sometimes it mattered more when it was actually timed.
The last two, business model and funding, made sense to me actually.
I think business model makes sense to be that low because you can start out without a business model and add one later if your customers are demanding what you're creating.
And funding, I think as well, if you're underfunded at first but you're gaining traction, especially in today's age, it's very, very easy to get intense funding.
So now let me give you some specific examples about each of these.
So take a wild success like Airbnb that everybody knows about.
Well, that company was famously passed on by many smart investors because people thought, "No one's going to rent out a space in their home to a stranger."
Of course, people proved that wrong.
But one of the reasons it succeeded, aside from a good business model, a good idea, great execution, is the timing.
That company came out right during the height of the recession when people really needed extra money, and that maybe helped people overcome their objection to renting out their own home to a stranger.
Same thing with Uber.
Uber came out, incredible company, incredible business model, great execution, too.
But the timing was so perfect for their need to get drivers into the system.
Drivers were looking for extra money; it was very, very important.
Some of our early successes, Citysearch, came out when people needed web pages.
GoTo.com, which we announced actually at TED in 1998, was when companies were looking for cost-effective ways to get traffic.
We thought the idea was so great, but actually, the timing was probably maybe more important.
And then some of our failures.
We started a company called Z.com, it was an online entertainment company.
We were so excited about it -- we raised enough money, we had a great business model, we even signed incredibly great Hollywood talent to join the company.
But broadband penetration was too low in 1999-2000.
It was too hard to watch video content online, you had to put codecs in your browser and do all this stuff, and the company eventually went out of business in 2003.
Just two years later, when the codec problem was solved by Adobe Flash and when broadband penetration crossed 50 percent in America, YouTube was perfectly timed.
Great idea, but unbelievable timing.
In fact, YouTube didn't even have a business model when it first started.
It wasn't even certain that that would work out.
But that was beautifully, beautifully timed.
So what I would say, in summary, is execution definitely matters a lot.
The idea matters a lot.
But timing might matter even more.
And the best way to really assess timing is to really look at whether consumers are really ready for what you have to offer them.
And to be really, really honest about it, not be in denial about any results that you see, because if you have something you love, you want to push it forward, but you have to be very, very honest about that factor on timing.
As I said earlier, I think startups can change the world and make the world a better place.
I hope some of these insights can maybe help you have a slightly higher success ratio, and thus make something great come to the world that wouldn't have happened otherwise.
Thank you very much, you've been a great audience.
(Applause)
(Music) (Music) (Applause) (Applause)
In the great 1980s movie "The Blues Brothers," there's a scene where John Belushi goes to visit Dan Aykroyd in his apartment in Chicago for the very first time.
It's a cramped, tiny space and it's just three feet away from the train tracks.
As John sits on Dan's bed, a train goes rushing by, rattling everything in the room.
John asks, "How often does that train go by?"
Dan replies, "So often, you won't even notice it."
And then, something falls off the wall.
We all know what he's talking about.
As human beings, we get used to everyday things really fast.
As a product designer, it's my job to see those everyday things, to feel them, and try to improve upon them.
For example, see this piece of fruit?
See this little sticker?
That sticker wasn't there when I was a kid.
But somewhere as the years passed, someone had the bright idea to put that sticker on the fruit.
Why?
Well that's great, we can get in and out of the store quickly.
But now, there's a new problem.
When we get home and we're hungry and we see this ripe, juicy piece of fruit on the counter, we just want to pick it up and eat it.
Except now, we have to look for this little sticker.
And dig at it with our nails, damaging the flesh.
Then rolling up that sticker -- you know what I mean.
And then trying to flick it off your fingers.
(Applause) It's not fun, not at all.
But something interesting happened.
See the first time you did it, you probably felt those feelings.
You just wanted to eat the piece of fruit.
You felt upset.
By the 10th time, you started to become less upset and you just started peeling the label off.
By the 100th time, at least for me, I became numb to it.
I simply picked up the piece of fruit, dug at it with my nails, tried to flick it off, and then wondered, "Was there another sticker?"
So why is that?
Why do we get used to everyday things?
Well as human beings, we have limited brain power.
And so our brains encode the everyday things we do into habits so we can free up space to learn new things.
It's a process called habituation and it's one of the most basic ways, as humans, we learn.
Now, habituation isn't always bad.
Remember learning to drive?
I sure do.
Your hands clenched at 10 and 2 on the wheel, looking at every single object out there -- the cars, the lights, the pedestrians.
It's a nerve-wracking experience.
So much so, that I couldn't even talk to anyone else in the car and I couldn't even listen to music.
But then something interesting happened.
As the weeks went by, driving became easier and easier.
You habituated it.
It started to become fun and second nature.
And then, you could talk to your friends again and listen to music.
So there's a good reason why our brains habituate things.
If we didn't, we'd notice every little detail, all the time.
It would be exhausting, and we'd have no time to learn about new things.
But sometimes, habituation isn't good.
If it stops us from noticing the problems that are around us, well, that's bad.
And if it stops us from noticing and fixing those problems, well, then that's really bad.
Comedians know all about this.
Jerry Seinfeld's entire career was built on noticing those little details, those idiotic things we do every day that we don't even remember.
He tells us about the time he visited his friends and he just wanted to take a comfortable shower.
He'd reach out and grab the handle and turn it slightly one way, and it was 100 degrees too hot.
And then he'd turn it the other way, and it was 100 degrees too cold.
He just wanted a comfortable shower.
Now, we've all been there, we just don't remember it.
But Jerry did, and that's a comedian's job.
But designers, innovators and entrepreneurs, it's our job to not just notice those things, but to go one step further and try to fix them.
See this, this person, this is Mary Anderson.
In 1902 in New York City, she was visiting.
It was a cold, wet, snowy day and she was warm inside a streetcar.
As she was going to her destination, she noticed the driver opening the window to clean off the excess snow so he could drive safely.
When he opened the window, though, he let all this cold, wet air inside, making all the passengers miserable.
Now probably, most of those passengers just thought, "It's a fact of life, he's got to open the window to clean it.
That's just how it is."
But Mary didn't.
Mary thought, "What if the diver could actually clean the windshield from the inside so that he could stay safe and drive and the passengers could actually stay warm?"
So she picked up her sketchbook right then and there, and began drawing what would become the world's first windshield wiper.
Now as a product designer, I try to learn from people like Mary to try to see the world the way it really is, not the way we think it is.
Why?
But it's hard to solve a problem that almost no one sees.
Now some people think you're born with this ability or you're not, as if Mary Anderson was hardwired at birth to see the world more clearly.
That wasn't the case for me.
I had to work at it.
During my years at Apple, Steve Jobs challenged us to come into work every day, to see our products through the eyes of the customer, the new customer, the one that has fears and possible frustrations and hopeful exhilaration that their new technology product could work straightaway for them.
He called it staying beginners, and wanted to make sure that we focused on those tiny little details to make them faster, easier and seamless for the new customers.
So I remember this clearly in the very earliest days of the iPod.
See, back in the '90s, being a gadget freak like I am, I would rush out to the store for the very, very latest gadget.
I'd take all the time to get to the store, I'd check out, I'd come back home, I'd start to unbox it.
And then, there was another little sticker: the one that said, "Charge before use."
What!
I can't believe it!
I just spent all this time buying this product and now I have to charge before use.
I have to wait what felt like an eternity to use that coveted new toy.
It was crazy.
But you know what?
When it had batteries in it, you had to charge it before you used it.
Well, Steve noticed that and he said, "We're not going to let that happen to our product."
So what did we do?
Typically, when you have a product that has a hard drive in it, you run it for about 30 minutes in the factory to make sure that hard drive's going to be working years later for the customer after they pull it out of the box.
What did we do instead?
We ran that product for over two hours.
Why?
Well, first off, we could make a higher quality product, be easy to test, and make sure it was great for the customer.
But most importantly, the battery came fully charged right out of the box, ready to use.
So that customer, with all that exhilaration, could just start using the product.
It was great, and it worked.
Today, almost every product that you get that's battery powered comes out of the box fully charged, even if it doesn't have a hard drive.
But back then, we noticed that detail and we fixed it, and now everyone else does that as well.
No more, "Charge before use."
So why am I telling you this?
Well, it's seeing the invisible problem, not just the obvious problem, that's important, not just for product design, but for everything we do.
You see, there are invisible problems all around us, ones we can solve.
But first we need to see them, to feel them.
So, I'm hesitant to give you any tips about neuroscience or psychology.
There's far too many experienced people in the TED community who would know much more about that than I ever will.
But let me leave you with a few tips that I do, that we all can do, to fight habituation.
My first tip is to look broader.
You see, when you're tackling a problem, sometimes, there are a lot of steps that lead up to that problem.
And sometimes, a lot of steps after it.
If you can take a step back and look broader, maybe you can change some of those boxes before the problem.
Maybe you can combine them.
Maybe you can remove them altogether to make that better.
Take thermostats, for instance.
In the 1900s when they first came out, they were really simple to use.
You could turn them up or turn them down.
People understood them.
But in the 1970s, the energy crisis struck, and customers started thinking about how to save energy.
So what happened?
Thermostat designers decided to add a new step.
Instead of just turning up and down, you now had to program it.
So you could tell it the temperature you wanted at a certain time.
Now that seemed great.
Every thermostat had started adding that feature.
But it turned out that no one saved any energy.
Now, why is that?
Well, people couldn't predict the future.
They just didn't know how their weeks would change season to season, year to year.
So no one was saving energy, and what happened?
Thermostat designers went back to the drawing board and they focused on that programming step.
They made better U.I.s, they made better documentation.
But still, years later, people were not saving any energy because they just couldn't predict the future.
So what did we do?
We put a machine-learning algorithm in instead of the programming that would simply watch when you turned it up and down, when you liked a certain temperature when you got up, or when you went away.
And you know what?
It worked.
People are saving energy without any programming.
So, it doesn't matter what you're doing.
If you take a step back and look at all the boxes, maybe there's a way to remove one or combine them so that you can make that process much simpler.
So that's my first tip: look broader.
For my second tip, it's to look closer.
One of my greatest teachers was my grandfather.
He taught me all about the world.
He taught me how things were built and how they were repaired, the tools and techniques necessary to make a successful project.
I remember one story he told me about screws, and about how you need to have the right screw for the right job.
There are many different screws: wood screws, metal screws, anchors, concrete screws, the list went on and on.
Our job is to make products that are easy to install for all of our customs themselves without professionals.
So what did we do?
I remembered that story that my grandfather told me, and so we thought, "How many different screws can we put in the box?
Was it going to be two, three, four, five?
Because there's so many different wall types."
So we thought about it, we optimized it, and we came up with three different screws to put in the box.
We thought that was going to solve the problem.
But it turned out, it didn't.
So we shipped the product, and people weren't having a great experience.
So what did we do?
We went back to the drawing board just instantly after we figured out we didn't get it right.
And we designed a special screw, a custom screw, much to the chagrin of our investors.
They were like, "Why are you spending so much time on a little screw?
Get out there and sell more!"
And we said, "We will sell more if we get this right."
And it turned out, we did.
With that custom little screw, there was just one screw in the box, that was easy to mount and put on the wall.
So if we focus on those tiny details, the ones we may not see and we look at them as we say, "Are those important or is that the way we've always done it?
Maybe there's a way to get rid of those."
So my last piece of advice is to think younger.
Every day, I'm confronted with interesting questions from my three young kids.
They come up with questions like, "Why can't cars fly around traffic?"
Or, "Why don't my shoelaces have Velcro instead?"
Sometimes, those questions are smart.
My son came to me the other day and I asked him, "Go run out to the mailbox and check it."
He looked at me, puzzled, and said, "Why doesn't the mailbox just check itself and tell us when it has mail?" (Laughter) I was like, "That's a pretty good question."
So, they can ask tons of questions and sometimes we find out we just don't have the right answers.
We say, "Son, that's just the way the world works."
So the more we're exposed to something, the more we get used to it.
But kids haven't been around long enough to get used to those things.
And so when they run into problems, they immediately try to solve them, and sometimes they find a better way, and that way really is better.
So my advice that we take to heart is to have young people on your team, or people with young minds.
Because if you have those young minds, they cause everyone in the room to think younger.
Picasso once said, "Every child is an artist.
The problem is when he or she grows up, is how to remain an artist."
We all saw the world more clearly when we saw it for the first time, before a lifetime of habits got in the way.
Our challenge is to get back there, to feel that frustration, to see those little details, to look broader, look closer, and to think younger so we can stay beginners.
It's not easy.
It requires us pushing back against one of the most basic ways we make sense of the world.
But if we do, we could do some pretty amazing things.
For me, hopefully, that's better product design.
For you, that could mean something else, something powerful.
Our challenge is to wake up each day and say, "How can I experience the world better?"
And if we do, maybe, just maybe, we can get rid of these dumb little stickers.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
About 10 years ago, I went through a little bit of a hard time.
So I decided to go see a therapist.
I had been seeing her for a few months, when she looked at me one day and said, "Who actually raised you until you were three?"
Seemed like a weird question. I said, "My parents."
And she said, "I don't think that's actually the case; because if it were, we'd be dealing with things that are far more complicated than just this."
It sounded like the setup to a joke, but I knew she was serious.
Because when I first started seeing her, I was trying to be the funniest person in the room.
And I would try and crack these jokes, but she caught on to me really quickly, and whenever I tried to make a joke, she would look at me and say, "That is actually really sad."
(Laughter) It's terrible.
So I knew I had to be serious, and I asked my parents who had actually raised me until I was three?
And to my surprise, they said my primary caregiver had been a distant relative of the family.
I had called her my auntie.
I remember my auntie so clearly, it felt like she had been part of my life when I was much older.
I remember the thick, straight hair, and how it would come around me like a curtain when she bent to pick me up; her soft, southern Thai accent; the way I would cling to her, even if she just wanted to go to the bathroom or get something to eat.
I loved her, but [with] the ferocity that a child has sometimes before she understands that love also requires letting go.
But my clearest and sharpest memory of my auntie, is also one of my first memories of life at all.
I remember her being beaten and slapped by another member of my family.
I remember screaming hysterically and wanting it to stop, as I did every single time it happened, for things as minor as wanting to go out with her friends, or being a little late.
I became so hysterical over her treatment, that eventually, she was just beaten behind closed doors.
Things got so bad for her that eventually she ran away.
As an adult, I learned later that she had been just 19 when she was brought over from Thailand to the States to care for me, on a tourist visa.
She wound up working in Illinois for a time, before eventually returning to Thailand, which is where I ran into her again, at a political rally in Bangkok.
I clung to her again, as I had when I was a child, and I let go, and then I promised that I would call.
I never did, though.
Because I was afraid if I said everything that she meant to me -- that I owed perhaps the best parts of who I became to her care, and that the words "I'm sorry" were like a thimble to bail out all the guilt and shame and rage I felt over everything she had endured to care for me for as long as she had -- I thought if I said those words to her, I would never stop crying again.
Because she had saved me.
And I had not saved her.
I'm a journalist, and I've been writing and researching human trafficking for the past eight years or so, and even so, I never put together this personal story with my professional life until pretty recently.
I think this profound disconnect actually symbolizes most of our understanding about human trafficking.
Because human trafficking is far more prevalent, complex and close to home than most of us realize.
I spent time in jails and brothels, interviewed hundreds of survivors and law enforcement, NGO workers.
And when I think about what we've done about human trafficking, I am hugely disappointed.
Partly because we don't even talk about the problem right at all.
When I say "human trafficking," most of you probably don't think about someone like my auntie.
You probably think about a young girl or woman, who's been brutally forced into prostitution by a violent pimp.
That is real suffering, and that is a real story.
That story makes me angry for far more than just the reality of that situation, though.
As a journalist, I really care about how we relate to each other through language, and the way we tell that story, with all the gory, violent detail, the salacious aspects -- I call that "look at her scars" journalism.
We use that story to convince ourselves that human trafficking is a bad man doing a bad thing to an innocent girl.
That story lets us off the hook.
It takes away all the societal context that we might be indicted for, for the structural inequality, or the poverty, or the barriers to migration.
We let ourselves think that human trafficking is only about forced prostitution, when in reality, human trafficking is embedded in our everyday lives.
Let me show you what I mean.
Forced prostitution accounts for 22 percent of human trafficking.
Ten percent is in state- imposed forced labor.
but a whopping 68 percent is for the purpose of creating the goods and delivering the services that most of us rely on every day, in sectors like agricultural work, domestic work and construction.
That is food and care and shelter.
And somehow, these most essential workers are also among the world's most underpaid and exploited today.
Human trafficking is the use of force, fraud or coercion to compel another person's labor.
And it's found in cotton fields, and coltan mines, and even car washes in Norway and England.
It's found in U.S. military bases in Iraq and Afghanistan.
It's found in Thailand's fishing industry.
That country has become the largest exporter of shrimp in the world.
But what are the circumstances behind all that cheap and plentiful shrimp?
Thai military were caught selling Burmese and Cambodian migrants onto fishing boats.
Those fishing boats were taken out, the men put to work, and they were thrown overboard if they made the mistake of falling sick, or trying to resist their treatment.
Those fish were then used to feed shrimp, The shrimp were then sold to four major global retailers: Costco, Tesco, Walmart and Carrefour.
Human trafficking is found on a smaller scale than just that, and in places you would never even imagine.
Traffickers have forced young people to drive ice cream trucks, or to sing in touring boys' choirs.
Trafficking has even been found in a hair braiding salon in New Jersey.
The scheme in that case was incredible.
The traffickers found young families who were from Ghana and Togo, and they told these families that "your daughters are going to get a fine education in the United States."
They then located winners of the green card lottery, and they told them, "We'll help you out.
We'll get you a plane ticket. We'll pay your fees.
All you have to do is take this young girl with you, say that she's your sister or your spouse.
Once everyone arrived in New Jersey, the young girls were taken away, and put to work for 14-hour days, seven days a week, for five years.
They made their traffickers nearly four million dollars.
This is a huge problem.
So what have we done about it?
We've mostly turned to the criminal justice system.
But keep in mind, most victims of human trafficking are poor and marginalized.
They're migrants, people of color.
Sometimes they're in the sex trade.
And for populations like these, the criminal justice system is too often part of the problem, rather than the solution.
In study after study, in countries ranging from Bangladesh to the United States, between 20 and 60 percent of the people in the sex trade who were surveyed said that they had been raped or assaulted by the police in the past year alone.
People in prostitution, including people who have been trafficked into it, regularly receive multiple convictions for prostitution.
Having that criminal record makes it so much more difficult to leave poverty, leave abuse, or leave prostitution, if that person so desires.
Workers outside of the sex sector -- if they try and resist their treatment, they risk deportation.
In case after case I've studied, employers have no problem calling on law enforcement to try and threaten or deport their striking trafficked workers.
If those workers run away, they risk becoming part of the great mass of undocumented workers who are also subject to the whims of law enforcement if they're caught.
Law enforcement is supposed to identify victims and prosecute traffickers.
But out of an estimated 21 million victims of human trafficking in the world, they have helped and identified fewer than 50,000 people.
That's like comparing the population of the world to the population of Los Angeles, proportionally speaking.
As for convictions, out of an estimated 5,700 convictions in 2013, fewer than 500 were for labor trafficking.
Keep in mind that labor trafficking accounts for 68 percent of all trafficking, but fewer than 10 percent of the convictions.
I've heard one expert say that trafficking happens where need meets greed.
I'd like to add one more element to that.
Trafficking happens in sectors where workers are excluded from protections, and denied the right to organize.
Trafficking doesn't happen in a vacuum.
It happens in systematically degraded work environments.
You might be thinking, oh, she's talking about failed states, or war-torn states, or -- I'm actually talking about the United States.
Let me tell you what that looks like.
I spent many months researching a trafficking case called Global Horizons, involving hundreds of Thai farm workers.
They were sent all over the States, to work in Hawaii pineapple plantations, and Washington apple orchards, and anywhere the work was needed.
They were promised three years of solid agricultural work.
So they made a calculated risk.
They sold their land, they sold their wives' jewelry, to make thousands in recruitment fees for this company, Global Horizons.
But once they were brought over, their passports were confiscated.
Some of the men were beaten and held at gunpoint.
They worked so hard they fainted in the fields.
This case hit me so hard.
After I came back home, I was wandering through the grocery store, and I froze in the produce department.
I was remembering the over-the-top meals the Global Horizons survivors would make for me every time I showed up to interview them.
They finished one meal with this plate of perfect, long-stemmed strawberries, and as they handed them to me, they said, "Aren't these the kind of strawberries you eat with somebody special in the States?
And don't they taste so much better when you know the people whose hands picked them for you?"
As I stood in that grocery store weeks later, I realized I had no idea of who to thank for this plenty, and no idea of how they were being treated.
So, like the journalist I am, I started digging into the agricultural sector.
And I found there are too many fields, and too few labor inspectors.
I found multiple layers of plausible deniability between grower and distributor and processor, and God knows who else.
The Global Horizons survivors had been brought to the States on a temporary guest worker program.
That guest worker program ties a person's legal status to his or her employer, and denies that worker the right to organize.
Mind you, none of what I am describing about this agricultural sector or the guest worker program is actually human trafficking.
It is merely what we find legally tolerable.
And I would argue this is fertile ground for exploitation.
And all of this had been hidden to me, before I had tried to understand it.
I wasn't the only person grappling with these issues.
Pierre Omidyar, founder of eBay, is one of the biggest anti-trafficking philanthropists in the world.
And even he wound up accidentally investing nearly 10 million dollars in the pineapple plantation cited as having the worst working conditions in that Global Horizons case.
When he found out, he and his wife were shocked and horrified, and they wound up writing an op-ed for a newspaper, saying that it was up to all of us to learn everything we can about the labor and supply chains of the products that we support.
I totally agree.
What would happen if each one of us decided that we are no longer going to support companies if they don't eliminate exploitation from their labor and supply chains?
If we demanded laws calling for the same?
If all the CEOs out there decided that they were going to go through their businesses and say, "no more"?
If we ended recruitment fees for migrant workers?
If we decided that guest workers should have the right to organize without fear of retaliation?
These would be decisions heard around the world.
This isn't a matter of buying a fair-trade peach and calling it a day, buying a guilt-free zone with your money.
That's not how it works.
This is the decision to change a system that is broken, and that we have unwittingly but willingly allowed ourselves to profit from and benefit from for too long.
We often dwell on human trafficking survivors' victimization.
But that is not my experience of them.
Over all the years that I've been talking to them, they have taught me that we are more than our worst days.
Each one of us is more than what we have lived through.
Especially trafficking survivors.
These people were the most resourceful and resilient and responsible in their communities.
They were the people that you would take a gamble on.
You'd say, I'm gong to sell my rings, because I have the chance to send you off to a better future.
They were the emissaries of hope.
These survivors don't need saving.
They need solidarity, because they're behind some of the most exciting social justice movements out there today.
The nannies and housekeepers who marched with their families and their employers' families -- their activism got us an international treaty on domestic workers' rights.
The Nepali women who were trafficked into the sex trade -- they came together, and they decided that they were going to make the world's first anti-trafficking organization actually headed and run by trafficking survivors themselves.
These Indian shipyard workers were trafficked to do post-Hurricane Katrina reconstruction.
They were threatened with deportation, but they broke out of their work compound and they marched from New Orleans to Washington, D.C., to protest labor exploitation.
They cofounded an organization called the National Guest Worker Alliance, and through this organization, they have wound up helping other workers bring to light exploitation and abuses in supply chains in Walmart and Hershey's factories.
And although the Department of Justice declined to take their case, a team of civil rights lawyers won the first of a dozen civil suits this February, and got their clients 14 million dollars.
These survivors are fighting for people they don't even know yet, other workers, and for the possibility of a just world for all of us.
This is our chance to do the same.
This is our chance to make the decision that tells us who we are, as a people and as a society; that our prosperity is no longer prosperity, as long as it is pinned to other people's pain; that our lives are inextricably woven together; and that we have the power to make a different choice.
I was so reluctant to share my story of my auntie with you.
Before I started this TED process and climbed up on this stage, I had told literally a handful of people about it, because, like many a journalist, I am far more interested in learning about your stories than sharing much, if anything, about my own.
I also haven't done my journalistic due diligence on this.
I haven't issued my mountains of document requests, and interviewed everyone and their mother, and I haven't found my auntie yet.
I don't know her story of what happened, and of her life now.
The story as I've told it to you is messy and unfinished.
But I think it mirrors the messy and unfinished situation we're all in, when it comes to human trafficking.
We are all implicated in this problem.
But that means we are all also part of its solution.
Figuring out how to build a more just world is our work to do, and our story to tell.
So let us tell it the way we should have done, from the very beginning.
Let us tell this story together.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
A confession: I am an archaeologist and a museum curator, but a paradoxical one.
For my museum, I collect things, but I also return things back to where they came from.
I love museums because they're social and educational, but I'm most drawn to them because of the magic of objects: a one-million-year-old hand axe, a totem pole, an impressionist painting all take us beyond our own imaginations.
In museums, we pause to muse, to gaze upon our human empire of things in meditation and wonder.
I understand why US museums alone host more than 850 million visits each year.
Yet, in recent years, museums have become a battleground.
Communities around the world don't want to see their culture in distant institutions which they have no control over.
They want to see their cultural treasures repatriated, returned to their places of origin.
Greece seeks the return of the Parthenon Marbles, a collection of classical sculptures held by the British Museum.
Egypt demands antiquities from Germany.
New Zealand's Maori want to see returned ancestral tattooed heads from museums everywhere.
Yet these claims pale in comparison to those made by Native Americans.
Already, US museums have returned more than one million artifacts and 50,000 sets of Native American skeletons.
To illustrate what's at stake, let's start with the War Gods.
This is a wood carving made by members of the Zuni tribe in New Mexico.
In the 1880s, anthropologists began to collect them as evidence of American Indian religion.
They came to be seen as beautiful, the precursor to the stark sculptures of Picasso and Paul Klee, helping to usher in the modern art movement.
From one viewpoint, the museum did exactly as it's supposed to with the War God.
It helped introduce a little-known art form for the world to appreciate.
But from another point of view, the museum had committed a terrible crime of cultural violence.
For Zunis, the War God is not a piece of art, it is not even a thing.
It is a being.
For Zunis, every year, priests ritually carve new War Gods, the Ahayu:da, breathing life into them in a long ceremony.
They are placed on sacred shrines where they live to protect the Zuni people and keep the universe in balance.
No one can own or sell a War God.
They belong only to the earth.
And so Zunis want them back from museums so they can go to their shrine homes to fulfill their spiritual purpose.
What is a curator to do?
I believe that the War Gods should be returned.
This might be a startling answer.
After all, my conclusion contradicts the refrain of the world's most famous archaeologist: "That belongs in a museum!"
(Laughter) is what Indiana Jones said, not just to drive movie plots, but to drive home the unquestionable good of museums for society.
I did not come to my view easily.
I grew up in Tucson, Arizona, and fell in love with the Sonoran Desert's past.
I was amazed that beneath the city's bland strip malls was 12,000 years of history just waiting to be discovered.
When I was 16 years old, I started taking archaeology classes and going out on digs.
A high school teacher of mine even helped me set up my own laboratory to study animal bones.
But in college, I came to learn that my future career had a dark history.
Starting in the 1860s, Native American skeletons became a tool for science, collected in the thousands to prove new theories of social and racial hierarchies.
Native American human remains were plundered from graves, even taken fresh from battlefields.
When archaeologists came across white graves, the skeleton was often quickly reburied, while Native bones were deposited as specimens on museum shelves.
In the wake of war, stolen land, boarding schools, laws banning religion, anthropologists collected sacred objects in the belief that Native peoples were on the cusp of extinction.
You can call it racism or colonialism, but the labels don't matter as much as the fact that over the last century, Native American rights and culture were taken from them.
In 1990, after years of Native protests, the US government, through the US Congress, finally passed a law that allowed Native Americans to reclaim cultural items, sacred objects and human remains from museums.
Many archaeologists were panicked.
For scientists, it can be hard to fully grasp how a piece of wood can be a living god or how spirits surround bones.
And they knew that modern science, especially with DNA, can provide luminous insights into the past.
As the anthropologist Frank Norwick declared, "We are doing important work that benefits all of mankind.
We are not returning anything to anyone."
As a college student, all of this was an enigma that was hard to decipher.
Why did Native Americans want their heritage back from the very places preserving it?
And how could scientists spend their entire lives studying dead Indians but seem to care so little about living ones?
I graduated but wasn't sure what to do next, so I traveled.
One day, in South Africa, I visited Nelson Mandela's former prison cell on Robben Island.
I had an epiphany.
Here was a man who helped a country bridge vast divides to seek, however imperfectly, reconciliation.
I'm no Mandela, but I ask myself: Could I, too, plant seeds of hope in the ruins of the past?
In 2007, I was hired as a curator at the Denver Museum of Nature and Science.
Our team agreed that unlike many other institutions, we needed to proactively confront the legacy of museum collecting.
We started with the skeletons in our closet, 100 of them.
After months and then years, we met with dozens of tribes to figure out how to get these remains home.
And this is hard work.
It involves negotiating who will receive the remains, how to respectfully transfer them, where will they go.
Native American leaders become undertakers, planning funerals for dead relatives they had never wanted unearthed.
A decade later, the Denver Museum and our Native partners have reburied nearly all of the human remains in the collection.
We have returned hundreds of sacred objects.
But I've come to see that these battles are endless.
Repatriation is now a permanent feature of the museum world.
Hundreds of tribes are waiting their turn.
There are always more museums with more stuff.
Every catalogued War God in an American public museum has now been returned -- 106, so far -- but there are more beyond the reach of US law, in private collections and outside our borders.
In 2014, I had the chance to travel with a respected religious leader from the Zuni tribe named Octavius Seowtewa to visit five museums in Europe with War Gods.
At the Ethnological Museum of Berlin, we saw a War God with a history of dubious care.
An overly enthusiastic curator had added chicken feathers to it.
Its necklace had once been stolen.
At the Musée du quai Branly in Paris, an official told us that the War God there is now state property with no provisions for repatriation.
He insisted that the War God no longer served Zunis but museum visitors.
He said, "We give all of the objects to the world."
At the British Museum, we were warned that the Zuni case would establish a dangerous precedent for bigger disputes, such as the Parthenon Marbles, claimed by Greece.
After visiting the five museums, Octavius returned home to his people empty-handed.
He later told me, "It hurts my heart to see the Ahayu:da so far away.
They all belong together.
It's like a family member that's missing from a family dinner.
When one is gone, their strength is broken."
I wish that my colleagues in Europe and beyond could see that the War Gods do not represent the end of museums but the chance for a new beginning.
When you walk the halls of a museum, you're likely just seeing about one percent of the total collections.
The rest is in storage.
Even after returning 500 cultural items and skeletons, my museum still retains 99.999 percent of its total collections.
Though we no longer have War Gods, we have Zuni traditional pottery, jewelry, tools, clothing and arts.
And even more precious than these objects are the relationships that we formed with Native Americans through the process of repatriation.
Now, we can ask Zunis to share their culture with us.
Not long ago, I had the chance to visit the returned War Gods.
A shrine sits up high atop a mesa overlooking beautiful Zuni homeland.
The shrine is enclosed by a roofless stone building threaded at the top with barbed wire to ensure that they're not stolen again.
And there they are, inside, the Ahayu:da, 106 War Gods amid offerings of turquoise, cornmeal, shell, even T-shirts ...
a modern gift to ancient beings.
And standing there, I got a glimpse at the War Gods' true purpose in the world.
And it occurred to me then that we do not get to choose the histories that we inherit.
Museum curators today did not pillage ancient graves or steal spiritual objects, but we can accept responsibility for correcting past mistakes.
We can help restore dignity, hope and humanity to Native Americans, the very people who were once the voiceless objects of our curiosity.
And this doesn't even require us to fully understand others' beliefs, only that we respect them.
Museums are temples to things past.
Now they must also become places for living cultures.
As I turned to walk away from the shrine, I drank in the warm summer air, and I watched an eagle turn lazy circles high above.
I thought of the Zunis, whose offerings ensure that their culture is not dead and gone but alive and well, and I could think of no better place for the War Gods to be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It was November 1, 2002, my first day as a principal, but hardly my first day in the school district of Philadelphia.
I graduated from Philadelphia public schools, and I went on to teach special education for 20 years in a low-income, low-performing school in North Philadelphia, where crime is rampant and deep poverty is among the highest in the nation.
Shortly after I walked into my new school, a huge fight broke out among the girls.
After things were quickly under control, I immediately called a meeting in the school's auditorium to introduce myself as the school's new principal.
(Applause) I walked in angry, a little nervous -- (Laughter) -- but I was determined to set the tone for my new students.
I started listing as forcefully as I could my expectations for their behavior and my expectations for what they would learn in school.
When, all of a sudden, a girl way in the back of the auditorium, she stood up and she said, "Miss!
Miss!"
When our eyes locked, she said, "Why do you keep calling this a school?
This is not a school."
In one outburst, Ashley had expressed what I felt and never quite was able to articulate about my own experience when I attended a low-performing school in the same neighborhood, many, many, many years earlier.
That school was definitely not a school.
Fast forwarding a decade later to 2012, I was entering my third low-performing school as principal.
I was to be Strawberry Mansion's fourth principal in four years.
It was labeled "low-performing and persistently dangerous" due to its low test scores and high number of weapons, drugs, assaults and arrests.
Shortly as I approached the door of my new school and attempted to enter, and found the door locked with chains, I could hear Ashley's voice in my ears going, "Miss! Miss!
This is not a school."
The halls were dim and dark from poor lighting.
There were tons of piles of broken old furniture and desks in the classrooms, and there were thousands of unused materials and resources.
This was not a school.
As the year progressed, I noticed that the classrooms were nearly empty.
The students were just scared: scared to sit in rows in fear that something would happen; scared because they were often teased in the cafeteria for eating free food.
They were scared from all the fighting and all the bullying.
This was not a school.
And then, there were the teachers, who were incredibly afraid for their own safety, so they had low expectations for the students and themselves, and they were totally unaware of their role in the destruction of the school's culture.
This was the most troubling of all.
You see, Ashley was right, and not just about her school.
For far too many schools, for kids who live in poverty, their schools are really not schools at all.
But this can change.
Let me tell you how it's being done at Strawberry Mansion High School.
Anybody who's ever worked with me will tell you I am known for my slogans.
(Laughter) So today, I am going to use three that have been paramount in our quest for change.
My first slogan is: if you're going to lead, lead.
I always believed that what happens in a school and what does not happen in a school is up to the principal.
I am the principal, and having that title required me to lead.
I was not going to stay in my office, I was not going to delegate my work, and I was not going to be afraid to address anything that was not good for children, whether that made me liked or not.
I am a leader, so I know I cannot do anything alone.
So, I assembled a top-notch leadership team who believed in the possibility of all the children, and together, we tackled the small things, like resetting every single locker combination by hand so that every student could have a secure locker.
We decorated every bulletin board in that building with bright, colorful, and positive messages.
We took the chains off the front doors of the school.
We got the lightbulbs replaced, and we cleaned every classroom to its core, recycling every, every textbook that was not needed, and discarded thousands of old materials and furniture.
We used two dumpsters per day.
And, of course, of course, we tackled the big stuff, like rehauling the entire school budget so that we can reallocate funds to have more teachers and support staff.
We rebuilt the entire school day schedule from scratch to add a variety of start and end times, remediation, honors courses, extracurricular activities, and counseling, all during the school day.
All during the school day.
We created a deployment plan that specified where every single support person and police officer would be every minute of the day, and we monitored at every second of the day, and, our best invention ever, we devised a schoolwide discipline program titled "Non-negotiables."
It was a behavior system -- designed to promote positive behavior at all times.
The results?
Strawberry Mansion was removed from the Persistently Dangerous List our first year after being -- (Applause) -- after being on the Persistently Dangerous List for five consecutive years.
Leaders make the impossible possible.
That brings me to my second slogan: So what? Now what?
(Laughter) (Applause) When we looked at the data, and we met with the staff, there were many excuses for why Strawberry Mansion was low-performing and persistently dangerous.
They said that only 68 percent of the kids come to school on a regular basis, 100 percent of them live in poverty, only one percent of the parents participate, many of the children come from incarceration and single-parent homes, 39 percent of the students have special needs, and the state data revealed that six percent of the students were proficient in algebra, and 10 were proficient in literature.
After they got through telling us all the stories of how awful the conditions and the children were, I looked at them, and I said, "So what. Now what?
What are we gonna do about it?"
(Applause) Eliminating excuses at every turn became my primary responsibility.
We addressed every one of those excuses through a mandatory professional development, paving the way for intense focus on teaching and learning.
After many observations, what we determined was that teachers knew what to teach but they did not know how to teach so many children with so many vast abilities.
So, we developed a lesson delivery model for instruction that focused on small group instruction, making it possible for all the students to get their individual needs met in the classroom.
The results?
After one year, state data revealed that our scores have grown by 171 percent in Algebra and 107 percent in literature.
(Applause) We have a very long way to go, a very long way to go, but we now approach every obstacle with a "So What. Now What?" attitude.
And that brings me to my third and final slogan.
(Laughter) If nobody told you they loved you today, you remember I do, and I always will.
My students have problems: social, emotional and economic problems you could never imagine.
Some of them are parents themselves, and some are completely alone.
If someone asked me my real secret for how I truly keep Strawberry Mansion moving forward, I would have to say that I love my students and I believe in their possibilities unconditionally.
When I look at them, I can only see what they can become, and that is because I am one of them.
I grew up poor in North Philadelphia too.
I know what it feels like to go to a school that's not a school.
I know what it feels like to wonder if there's ever going to be any way out of poverty.
But because of my amazing mother, I got the ability to dream despite the poverty that surrounded me.
So -- (Applause) -- if I'm going to push my students toward their dream and their purpose in life, I've got to get to know who they are.
So I have to spend time with them, so I manage the lunchroom every day.
(Laughter) And while I'm there, I talk to them about deeply personal things, and when it's their birthday, I sing "Happy Birthday" even though I cannot sing at all.
(Laughter) I often ask them, "Why do you want me to sing when I cannot sing at all?"
(Laughter) And they respond by saying, "Because we like feeling special."
We hold monthly town hall meetings to listen to their concerns, to find out what is on their minds.
They ask us questions like, "Why do we have to follow rules?"
"Why are there so many consequences?"
"Why can't we just do what we want to do?"
(Laughter) They ask, and I answer each question honestly, and this exchange in listening helps to clear up any misconceptions.
Every moment is a teachable moment.
My reward, my reward for being non-negotiable in my rules and consequences is their earned respect.
I insist on it, and because of this, we can accomplish things together.
They are clear about my expectations for them, and I repeat those expectations every day over the P.A. system.
I remind them -- (Laughter) I remind them of those core values of focus, tradition, excellence, integrity and perseverance, and I remind them every day how education can truly change their lives.
And I end every announcement the same: "If nobody told you they loved you today, you remember I do, and I always will."
Ashley's words of "Miss, Miss, this is not a school," is forever etched in my mind.
If we are truly going to make real progress in addressing poverty, then we have to make sure that every school that serves children in poverty is a real school, a school, a school -- (Applause) -- a school that provides them with knowledge and mental training to navigate the world around them.
I do not know all the answers, but what I do know is for those of us who are privileged and have the responsibility of leading a school that serves children in poverty, we must truly lead, and when we are faced with unbelievable challenges, we must stop and ask ourselves, "So what. Now what?
What are we going to do about it?"
And as we lead, we must never forget that every single one of our students is just a child, often scared by what the world tells them they should be, and no matter what the rest of the world tells them they should be, we should always provide them with hope, our undivided attention, unwavering belief in their potential, consistent expectations, and we must tell them often, if nobody told them they loved them today, remember we do, and we always will.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you, Jesus.
I love a great mystery, and I'm fascinated by the greatest unsolved mystery in science, perhaps because it's personal.
It's about who we are, and I can't help but be curious.
The mystery is this: What is the relationship between your brain and your conscious experiences, such as your experience of the taste of chocolate or the feeling of velvet?
Now, this mystery is not new.
In 1868, Thomas Huxley wrote, "How it is that anything so remarkable as a state of consciousness comes about as the result of irritating nervous tissue is just as unaccountable as the appearance of the genie when Aladdin rubbed his lamp."
Now, Huxley knew that brain activity and conscious experiences are correlated, but he didn't know why.
To the science of his day, it was a mystery.
In the years since Huxley, science has learned a lot about brain activity, but the relationship between brain activity and conscious experiences is still a mystery.
Why? Why have we made so little progress?
Well, some experts think that we can't solve this problem because we lack the necessary concepts and intelligence.
We don't expect monkeys to solve problems in quantum mechanics, and as it happens, we can't expect our species to solve this problem either.
Well, I disagree. I'm more optimistic.
I think we've simply made a false assumption.
Once we fix it, we just might solve this problem.
Today, I'd like tell you what that assumption is, why it's false, and how to fix it.
Let's begin with a question: Do we see reality as it is?
I open my eyes and I have an experience that I describe as a red tomato a meter away.
As a result, I come to believe that in reality, there's a red tomato a meter away.
I then close my eyes, and my experience changes to a gray field, but is it still the case that in reality, there's a red tomato a meter away?
I think so, but could I be wrong?
Could I be misinterpreting the nature of my perceptions?
We have misinterpreted our perceptions before.
We used to think the Earth is flat, because it looks that way.
Pythagorus discovered that we were wrong.
Then we thought that the Earth is the unmoving center of the Universe, again because it looks that way.
Copernicus and Galileo discovered, again, that we were wrong.
Galileo then wondered if we might be misinterpreting our experiences in other ways.
He wrote: "I think that tastes, odors, colors, and so on reside in consciousness.
Hence if the living creature were removed, all these qualities would be annihilated."
Now, that's a stunning claim.
Could Galileo be right?
Could we really be misinterpreting our experiences that badly?
What does modern science have to say about this?
Well, neuroscientists tell us that about a third of the brain's cortex is engaged in vision.
When you simply open your eyes and look about this room, billions of neurons and trillions of synapses are engaged.
Now, this is a bit surprising, because to the extent that we think about vision at all, we think of it as like a camera.
It just takes a picture of objective reality as it is.
Now, there is a part of vision that's like a camera: the eye has a lens that focuses an image on the back of the eye where there are 130 million photoreceptors, so the eye is like a 130-megapixel camera.
But that doesn't explain the billions of neurons and trillions of synapses that are engaged in vision.
What are these neurons up to?
Well, neuroscientists tell us that they are creating, in real time, all the shapes, objects, colors, and motions that we see.
It feels like we're just taking a snapshot of this room the way it is, but in fact, we're constructing everything that we see.
We don't construct the whole world at once.
We construct what we need in the moment.
Now, there are many demonstrations that are quite compelling that we construct what we see.
I'll just show you two.
In this example, you see some red discs with bits cut out of them, but if I just rotate the disks a little bit, suddenly, you see a 3D cube pop out of the screen.
Now, the screen of course is flat, so the three-dimensional cube that you're experiencing must be your construction.
In this next example, you see glowing blue bars with pretty sharp edges moving across a field of dots.
In fact, no dots move.
All I'm doing from frame to frame is changing the colors of dots from blue to black or black to blue.
But when I do this quickly, your visual system creates the glowing blue bars with the sharp edges and the motion.
There are many more examples, but these are just two that you construct what you see.
But neuroscientists go further.
They say that we reconstruct reality.
So, when I have an experience that I describe as a red tomato, that experience is actually an accurate reconstruction of the properties of a real red tomato that would exist even if I weren't looking.
Now, why would neuroscientists say that we don't just construct, we reconstruct?
Well, the standard argument given is usually an evolutionary one.
Those of our ancestors who saw more accurately had a competitive advantage compared to those who saw less accurately, and therefore they were more likely to pass on their genes.
We are the offspring of those who saw more accurately, and so we can be confident that, in the normal case, our perceptions are accurate.
You see this in the standard textbooks.
One textbook says, for example, "Evolutionarily speaking, vision is useful precisely because it is so accurate."
So the idea is that accurate perceptions are fitter perceptions.
They give you a survival advantage.
Now, is this correct?
Is this the right interpretation of evolutionary theory?
Well, let's first look at a couple of examples in nature.
The Australian jewel beetle is dimpled, glossy and brown.
The female is flightless.
The male flies, looking, of course, for a hot female.
When he finds one, he alights and mates.
There's another species in the outback, Homo sapiens.
The male of this species has a massive brain that he uses to hunt for cold beer.
(Laughter) And when he finds one, he drains it, and sometimes throws the bottle into the outback.
Now, as it happens, these bottles are dimpled, glossy, and just the right shade of brown to tickle the fancy of these beetles.
The males swarm all over the bottles trying to mate.
They lose all interest in the real females.
Classic case of the male leaving the female for the bottle.
(Laughter) (Applause) The species almost went extinct.
Australia had to change its bottles to save its beetles.
(Laughter) Now, the males had successfully found females for thousands, perhaps millions of years.
It looked like they saw reality as it is, but apparently not.
Evolution had given them a hack.
A female is anything dimpled, glossy and brown, the bigger the better.
(Laughter) Even when crawling all over the bottle, the male couldn't discover his mistake.
Now, you might say, beetles, sure, they're very simple creatures, but surely not mammals.
Mammals don't rely on tricks.
Well, I won't dwell on this, but you get the idea. (Laughter) So this raises an important technical question: Does natural selection really favor seeing reality as it is?
Fortunately, we don't have to wave our hands and guess; evolution is a mathematically precise theory.
We can use the equations of evolution to check this out.
We can have various organisms in artificial worlds compete and see which survive and which thrive, which sensory systems are more fit.
A key notion in those equations is fitness.
Consider this steak: What does this steak do for the fitness of an animal?
Well, for a hungry lion looking to eat, it enhances fitness.
For a well-fed lion looking to mate, it doesn't enhance fitness.
And for a rabbit in any state, it doesn't enhance fitness, so fitness does depend on reality as it is, yes, but also on the organism, its state and its action.
Fitness is not the same thing as reality as it is, and it's fitness, and not reality as it is, that figures centrally in the equations of evolution.
So, in my lab, we have run hundreds of thousands of evolutionary game simulations with lots of different randomly chosen worlds and organisms that compete for resources in those worlds.
Some of the organisms see all of the reality, others see just part of the reality, and some see none of the reality, only fitness.
Who wins?
Well, I hate to break it to you, but perception of reality goes extinct.
In almost every simulation, organisms that see none of reality but are just tuned to fitness drive to extinction all the organisms that perceive reality as it is.
So the bottom line is, evolution does not favor veridical, or accurate perceptions.
Those perceptions of reality go extinct.
Now, this is a bit stunning.
How can it be that not seeing the world accurately gives us a survival advantage?
That is a bit counterintuitive.
But remember the jewel beetle.
The jewel beetle survived for thousands, perhaps millions of years, using simple tricks and hacks.
What the equations of evolution are telling us is that all organisms, including us, are in the same boat as the jewel beetle.
We do not see reality as it is.
We're shaped with tricks and hacks that keep us alive.
Still, we need some help with our intuitions.
How can not perceiving reality as it is be useful?
Well, fortunately, we have a very helpful metaphor: the desktop interface on your computer.
Consider that blue icon for a TED Talk that you're writing.
Now, the icon is blue and rectangular and in the lower right corner of the desktop.
Does that mean that the text file itself in the computer is blue, rectangular, and in the lower right-hand corner of the computer?
Of course not.
Anyone who thought that misinterprets the purpose of the interface.
It's not there to show you the reality of the computer.
In fact, it's there to hide that reality.
You don't want to know about the diodes and resistors and all the megabytes of software.
If you had to deal with that, you could never write your text file or edit your photo.
So the idea is that evolution has given us an interface that hides reality and guides adaptive behavior.
Space and time, as you perceive them right now, are your desktop.
Physical objects are simply icons in that desktop.
There's an obvious objection.
Hoffman, if you think that train coming down the track at 200 MPH is just an icon of your desktop, why don't you step in front of it?
And after you're gone, and your theory with you, we'll know that there's more to that train than just an icon.
Well, I wouldn't step in front of that train for the same reason that I wouldn't carelessly drag that icon to the trash can: not because I take the icon literally -- the file is not literally blue or rectangular -- but I do take it seriously.
I could lose weeks of work.
Similarly, evolution has shaped us with perceptual symbols that are designed to keep us alive.
We'd better take them seriously.
If you see a snake, don't pick it up.
If you see a cliff, don't jump off.
They're designed to keep us safe, and we should take them seriously.
That does not mean that we should take them literally.
That's a logical error.
Another objection: There's nothing really new here.
Physicists have told us for a long time that the metal of that train looks solid but really it's mostly empty space with microscopic particles zipping around.
There's nothing new here.
Well, not exactly.
It's like saying, I know that that blue icon on the desktop is not the reality of the computer, but if I pull out my trusty magnifying glass and look really closely, I see little pixels, and that's the reality of the computer.
Well, not really -- you're still on the desktop, and that's the point.
Those microscopic particles are still in space and time: they're still in the user interface.
So I'm saying something far more radical than those physicists.
Finally, you might object, look, we all see the train, therefore none of us constructs the train.
But remember this example.
In this example, we all see a cube, but the screen is flat, so the cube that you see is the cube that you construct.
We all see a cube because we all, each one of us, constructs the cube that we see.
The same is true of the train.
We all see a train because we each see the train that we construct, and the same is true of all physical objects.
We're inclined to think that perception is like a window on reality as it is.
The theory of evolution is telling us that this is an incorrect interpretation of our perceptions.
Instead, reality is more like a 3D desktop that's designed to hide the complexity of the real world and guide adaptive behavior.
Space as you perceive it is your desktop.
Physical objects are just the icons in that desktop.
We used to think that the Earth is flat because it looks that way.
Then we thought that the Earth is the unmoving center of reality because it looks that way.
We were wrong.
We had misinterpreted our perceptions.
Now we believe that spacetime and objects are the nature of reality as it is.
The theory of evolution is telling us that once again, we're wrong.
We're misinterpreting the content of our perceptual experiences.
There's something that exists when you don't look, but it's not spacetime and physical objects.
It's as hard for us to let go of spacetime and objects as it is for the jewel beetle to let go of its bottle.
Why? Because we're blind to our own blindnesses.
But we have an advantage over the jewel beetle: our science and technology.
By peering through the lens of a telescope we discovered that the Earth is not the unmoving center of reality, and by peering through the lens of the theory of evolution we discovered that spacetime and objects are not the nature of reality.
When I have a perceptual experience that I describe as a red tomato, I am interacting with reality, but that reality is not a red tomato and is nothing like a red tomato.
Similarly, when I have an experience that I describe as a lion or a steak, I'm interacting with reality, but that reality is not a lion or a steak.
And here's the kicker: When I have a perceptual experience that I describe as a brain, or neurons, I am interacting with reality, but that reality is not a brain or neurons and is nothing like a brain or neurons.
And that reality, whatever it is, is the real source of cause and effect in the world -- not brains, not neurons.
Brains and neurons have no causal powers.
They cause none of our perceptual experiences, and none of our behavior.
Brains and neurons are a species-specific set of symbols, a hack.
What does this mean for the mystery of consciousness?
Well, it opens up new possibilities.
For instance, perhaps reality is some vast machine that causes our conscious experiences.
I doubt this, but it's worth exploring.
Perhaps reality is some vast, interacting network of conscious agents, simple and complex, that cause each other's conscious experiences.
Actually, this isn't as crazy an idea as it seems, and I'm currently exploring it.
But here's the point: Once we let go of our massively intuitive but massively false assumption about the nature of reality, it opens up new ways to think about life's greatest mystery.
I bet that reality will end up turning out to be more fascinating and unexpected than we've ever imagined.
The theory of evolution presents us with the ultimate dare: Dare to recognize that perception is not about seeing truth, it's about having kids.
And by the way, even this TED is just in your head.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: If that's really you there, thank you.
So there's so much from this.
I mean, first of all, some people may just be profoundly depressed at the thought that, if evolution does not favor reality, I mean, doesn't that to some extent undermine all our endeavors here, all our ability to think that we can think the truth, possibly even including your own theory, if you go there?
Donald Hoffman: Well, this does not stop us from a successful science.
What we have is one theory that turned out to be false, that perception is like reality and reality is like our perceptions.
That theory turns out to be false.
Okay, throw that theory away.
That doesn't stop us from now postulating all sorts of other theories about the nature of reality, so it's actually progress to recognize that one of our theories was false.
So science continues as normal. There's no problem here.
CA: So you think it's possible -- (Laughter) -- This is cool, but what you're saying I think is it's possible that evolution can still get you to reason.
DH: Yes. Now that's a very, very good point.
The evolutionary game simulations that I showed were specifically about perception, and they do show that our perceptions have been shaped not to show us reality as it is, but that does not mean the same thing about our logic or mathematics.
We haven't done these simulations, but my bet is that we'll find that there are some selection pressures for our logic and our mathematics to be at least in the direction of truth.
I mean, if you're like me, math and logic is not easy.
We don't get it all right, but at least the selection pressures are not uniformly away from true math and logic.
So I think that we'll find that we have to look at each cognitive faculty one at a time and see what evolution does to it.
What's true about perception may not be true about math and logic.
CA: I mean, really what you're proposing is a kind of modern-day Bishop Berkeley interpretation of the world: consciousness causes matter, not the other way around.
DH: Well, it's slightly different than Berkeley.
Berkeley thought that, he was a deist, and he thought that the ultimate nature of reality is God and so forth, and I don't need to go where Berkeley's going, so it's quite a bit different from Berkeley.
I call this conscious realism. It's actually a very different approach.
CA: Don, I could literally talk with you for hours, and I hope to do that.
Thanks so much for that. DH: Thank you. (Applause)
This is a play called "Sell/Buy/Date."
It's my first since "Bridge and Tunnel," which I did on Broadway, and this one, I -- thank you -- I've excerpted it just for you, so here we go.
Right. Class, let's be absolutely certain all electronic devices are switched off before we begin.
So class, hopefully you'll recognize what you just heard me say as the -- ?
Very good, the cellular phone announcement.
Right? This was also known as a mobile phone.
So you'll remember, people of that era would have had an external electronic device, right, something like this, and they all would have carried one of these around with them, and amongst their biggest fears was the sheer mortification that one of these might ring at some inopportune moment.
Right? So a bit of trivia about that era for you.
(Laughter) So the format of today's class is I will be presenting multiple BERT modules today from that period in history, right, so starting circa 2016.
And remember, this was the very first year of the BERT program.
So we've got quite a few of these to get through.
Bear in mind, I will be living into various different bodies, different ages, also what were then called races, or ethnic groups, as you'll remember from Unit 1.
And -- (Laughter) -- and along the gender continuum, I will be living into males as well.
It was quite binary at that time.
(Laughter) Also, don't forget, we are reading the book module for next week's focus on gender.
Now, I know some of you have requested the book in pill form.
I know people still believe ingesting it is better for retention, but since we are trying to experience what our forebears did, right, let's please just consider doing the actual ocular reading, okay?
And also, how many people have your emotional shunts engaged?
Right. Please toggle them off. Okay?
I know it's challenging, but I want you to be able to feel the entire natural emo range, all right?
It is essential to this part of the syllabus.
Yes, Macy?
All right. I understand. If you're unwilling to -- All right, well, we can discuss that after class.
All right, we will discuss your concerns.
Just relax. Nobody's died and gone to composting.
Okay. After class. Okay? After class.
Let's just get started, okay.
This first subject identified as a middle-class homemaker.
Remember, these early modules in these people's full identities were protected, and this allowed them to speak more freely on our topic, which for many of them was taboo.
Okay honey, now, I'm ready when you are.
No, sweetheart, I said, I'm ready when you are.
I'm freezing.
It's like a meat locker in here in this recording studio.
I should have brought a shmata.
All this fancy technology but they can't afford heat.
What is he saying? I can't hear you!
I can't hear you through the glass, honey!
There you are in my ear.
Oh, you can hear me?
The whole time.
Oh, yes, I am a little chilly.
Yes, oh the cold is for the machines, the new technology. Okay.
Yes, now remind me again, you're recording not only my voice but my feelings and my memories? Right.
Yes, BERT, yes, I read about it.
Bio-Empathetic Resonant Technology.
Right, right, so people will be able to feel my experience and my memory? Okay.
No, right, I'm ready.
I just thought you were going to give me a test to see how my memory's doing.
I was going to tell you you're too late, it's already bad news.
No, no, go ahead, honey.
Oh, that's the first question?
What do I think of prostitution?
Are you soliciting me, young man?
I've heard of May-December romances, but what are you, about 20 years old?
Eighteen? Eighteen years.
I think I have candies in my purse older than 18 years old.
(Laughter) I'm teasing you, sweetheart. No, I'm comfortable with any question.
Sure. So about the prostitution -- oh, sex worker, sex worker.
No, just in my day, they called it prostitution, not sex work.
Oh, because it includes pornography also?
Okay.
No, well, I guess when I was a girl, we didn't really have a name for that either.
We would have said dirty magazines, I suppose, or dirty movies.
Well, it's not like what you have with the Internet.
No, well, I don't mind sharing.
My late husband and I, we were a very romantic couple.
Lots of tenderness, you understand.
Well, as you get older, you know, at one point I thought my husband might be helped by using some of the pills men can take, but he wasn't interested in those, so I thought, what about maybe watching an adult movie on the Internet?
Just for inspiration, you understand.
Well, at the time, neither of us were very good on the computer, so usually, if we needed help with the Internet, we would just call our children or our grandchildren, but obviously, in this case, that wasn't an option, so I thought, I'll have a look myself, just to see.
How difficult could it be?
You search for certain key words and you look -- Oh wow is right, young man.
You can't imagine what I saw.
Well, first of all, I was just trying to find, you know, couples, normal couples making love, but this, so many people together at one time.
You couldn't tell which part belonged to which body.
How they even got the cameras to capture some of this, I couldn't tell you.
But the one thing they didn't capture was making love.
There was lots of making of something, but they took the love part right out of it, you know, the fun.
It was all very extreme, you know?
Like you would say, with the extreme sports.
Lots of endurance, but never tenderness.
So anyway, needless to say, that was $19.95 I'll never get back again, but it only showed up on the credit card as "entertainment services," so my husband was never the wiser, and after all of that, well, you could say it turned out he didn't need the extra inspiration after all.
Right, so next subject is a young woman -- (Applause) -- Next subject, class, is a young woman called Bella, a university student interviewed in 2016 during what was called an Intro to Feminist Porn class as part of her major in sex work at a college in the Bay Area.
(Laughter) Yeah, I just want to, like, get a recording of, like, you guys recording me, like a meta recording, or whatever.
It's just like this whole experience is just, like, really amazing, and I'd like to capture that for, like, Instagram and my Tumblr.
So, like, hi guys, it's me, Bella, and I am, like, being interviewed right now for this, like, really amazing Bio-Empathetic Resonance Technology, which is, like, basically where they are, like, recording, as you can see from these, whatever, like, electrodes, the formation of, like, neuropeptides in my hippocampus, or whatever.
They will later be able to reconstitute these as, like, my own actual memory, like actual experiences, so other people can, like, actually feel what I'm feeling right now.
Okay. Okay.
So, like, hello, BERT person of the future who is experiencing me.
This is what it feels like to be, like, a college freshman, and also the, like, headache that you are experiencing through me is the, like, residual effect of the Jell-O shots which I had last night at the bi-weekly feminist pole dancing party which I cohost on Wednesdays.
It's called "Don't Get All Pole-emical" -- (Laughter) -- and it's in Beekman Hall, and, what else, like, non-Jell-O shots are also available for vegans, and, oh, okay, yeah, totally, yeah, we should also focus on your questions also.
So for your record, I am, like, a sex work studies major but minoring in social media with a concentration on notable YouTube memes.
(Laughter) Yes, well, of course, like, I consider myself to be, like, obviously, like, a feminist.
I was named for Bella Abzug, who was, like, a famous, like, feminist from history, and, like, also I feel that it is, like, important to, like, represent women who are, like, sex-positive feminists.
What is sex-negative?
Well, like, I guess I would ask, like, what do you think sex-negative is? (Laughter) Yeah, because, like, the terms that we use are, like, so important, because, like, we call it sex work because it helps people understand that, like, it's work, and, like, you know, just like there are, like, healthcare providers and, like, insurance providers, like, we think of these workers as, like, sex care providers.
Yeah, but like, I don't think of myself like, providing direct sex care services per se as, like, being a requirement for me to be, like, an advocate.
Like, I support other women's right to choose it voluntarily, like, if they enjoy it.
Yeah, but, like, I see myself going forward as more likely, like, protecting sex workers', like, legal freedoms and rights.
Yeah, so, like, basically, I'm planning on becoming a lawyer.
Right, class. (Laughter) (Applause) So these next two modules are also circa 2016.
One subject is an Irishwoman with a particularly noteworthy relationship to this issue, but first will be a West Indian woman, a self-described escort who was recorded at a sex workers' rights rally and parade.
She was interviewed whilst marching in full carnival headdress and very little else.
All right, you want me to start talking now.
Yeah, I told you, you can put those wires anywhere you want to as long as it don't get in the way.
Yeah, no, but, tell me again what the name of -- BERT? BERT.
Yeah, I was telling you, you know, I think I have in all my time I have had at least one client with that name, so this won't be the first time I had BERT all over me.
Oh, I'm sorry, but you got to get into the spirit of it if you're going to interview me.
All right? You can say it.
No justice, no piece! No justice, no piece!
But you see the sign? You get it? P-I-E-C-E. No justice, no piece of us.
You understand?
Right, so that's the part where I was telling you is that when I first came to this country, I worked every job I could find.
I was a nanny; I was a home care attendant for all these different old people, and then I said, child, if I have to touch another white man's backside, I might as well get paid a lot more money for it than this, you understand?
Pshh, you know how hard it is being a domestic worker?
Some of these men, they're heavy.
You have to pick them up and flip them over.
Now, I let them pick me up and flip me over, you understand?
Well, you have to have a sense of humor about it, that's what I think.
No, but see, listen, you find me somebody who don't hate some part of their job.
I mean, there's a lot of things about this job that I hate, but the money is not one of them, and I will tell you, as long as this is the best possibility for me to make real money, I am going to be Jamaican-No-Fakin' if that's what they want to call me.
No, I'm not even from Jamaica. That's how they market me.
My family is from Trinidad and the Virgin Islands.
They don't know what I do, but you know what?
My children, they know that their school fees are paid, they have their books and their computer, and this way, I know that they have a chance.
So I'm not going to tell you that what I do, it's easy, I'm not going to tell you that I feel -- what's that you said, liberated?
But I'm going to tell you that I feel paid.
Right. (Applause) Thanks, that's lovely, and just the cup of tea, love, and just a splash of the whiskey.
It's perfect, that's grand. Just a drop more. A splash. Perfect.
What was your name? Peter? Is that right, so, Peter?
Right. So that, that is the unique part of it for me, right, is that I ended up in both, first in the convent, and then in the prostitution after. That's right.
(Laughter) So one woman at the university here in Dublin, she wrote about me.
She said, Maureen Fitzroy is the living embodiment of the whore-virgin dichotomy.
Right? (Laughter) Doesn't it sound like something you need to go into hospital?
Well, I've got this terrible dichotomy.
Doesn't it.
Right. Well, for me though, it was, as a girl, it started with me dad.
I mean, half the time, when he spoke to us, it was just a sort of tell us we were all useless rotten idiots and we had no morals, that type of thing.
And I certainly didn't do myself any favors.
By the time I was 16, I had started messing about with this older fella, and he wanted it to be our little secret, and I did as I was told, didn't I, and when that got back to me dad, he had me sent straightaway to the convent.
Well no, that older fella, he would still come to find me in the convent.
Yeah, he'd leave me notes tucked into the holes in the brick at the back of the charity shop so we could meet.
And he'd tell me how he's leaving his wife, and I believed him, until I got pregnant.
I did, Peter, and I left him a note about it in our special place there, and I never did hear from him again.
No, I gave it up for adoption so it could have a decent life, and then they wouldn't let me back into the convent.
No, my one sister Virginia gave me a fiver for the coach to Dublin, and that's how I ended up here.
Well, surprise, surprise, I fell in love with another fella much older than me, and I always say I was just so happy because he didn't drink, I married the bastard.
Well, he didn't drink, but he did have just the wee heroin problem, didn't he, and -- That's right, and before I knew it, he was the one who turned me on to the prostitution, my own husband.
He had me supporting the both of us.
I was 18.
Well, it wasn't Pretty Woman, I can tell you that.
That Julia Roberts, if she'd ever had to sleep with a man to put a few pounds in her pocket, I don't think she'd ever have made that film.
Well, for your record, my opinion of the legalization, I'd say I'm against it.
I just, I don't care what these young girls say.
You know, living like that, you're just lost, and, you know, I'm 63 years old.
I'm still trying to find who I am.
You know, I never was a wife or a nun, or a prostitute even, really, not really.
Nobody ever asked who I wanted to be.
They just told me, and if you legalize it, then you're really telling these girls, "Go on and get lost for a living," and a lot of them, they'll do as they're told.
All right, so four perspectives from four quite -- (Applause) -- four quite different voices there, right?
One woman saying sex itself is natural but the sex industry seems to mechanize or industrialize it.
Then the second woman considered sex work to be empowering, liberating, and feminist, though she, herself, notably, did not seem keen to do it.
The third woman, who actually was a so-called sex worker did not agree that it was liberating but she wanted the right to the economic empowerment, and then we hear the fourth woman saying not only prostitution itself but proscribed roles for women in general prevented her from ever finding who she was, right?
So another fact most people did not know was the average age of an at-risk girl being introduced to the sex industry was 12 or 13.
Also consider that the age when all girls in that society first became exposed to sexualized images of women was quite a bit earlier, right?
This was a doll called Barbie, right?
I initially thought she was an educational tool for anorexia prevention -- (Laughter) -- but actually she was considered by many to be a wholesome symbol of femininity, and often young girls began what was called dieting.
Remember this? This was restricting food intake on purpose by the age of six, and defining themselves based on attractiveness by around that same time. Right?
Yes?
Right, Bradley, okay, excellent point.
So there was a lucrative market in that society in convincing all people they had to look a certain way to even have a sex life, right?
But girls, especially, were expected to be "sexy" while avoiding being perceived as "sluts" for being sexual. Right?
So there's that shame piece we've heard about.
Yes.
Valerie, right? Okay, very good.
Of course, men were having sex as well, but you'll remember from the reading, what were male sluts called?
Very good, they were called men.
(Laughter) (Applause) So not easy living in a world like that, right?
Though it was not all bad news either.
Most women in the early 2000s considered themselves empowered, and men generally felt they were also evolved in this area, and, in fact, most people would have been aware of issues like human trafficking, for example, but they would have seen that as quite separate from more recreational adult entertainment.
And so we'll just very briefly, class -- we don't have a lot of time -- we'll just very briefly hear from a man on our topic at this stage.
So this next subject was interviewed on the night of his bachelor party.
Dude, can you, all right, can you just keep it down?
I'm trying to talk to BERT right now.
Oh, your name's not BERT.
BERT's the name of the, oh, all right.
No, no, no, totally, it's totally fine. I'm mostly sober, so I just want to be helpful.
Yeah, and I totally believe in causes, yeah, like, all that stuff.
(Laughter) And actually, I'm wearing Toms right now.
Yeah, Toms, like, the shoes, like, you buy a pair and then a kid in Africa gets clean water.
Yeah. Totally.
But what was the question again? Sorry.
Of course I believe in women's rights. I'm marrying a woman.
(Laughter) No, but I mean, like, just because I'm in a strip club parking lot doesn't mean that I'm, like, a sexist or whatever.
My fiancee is totally amazing, she's totally a strong girl, woman, smart woman, like, the whole thing.
Yeah, she knows I'm here. She's probably at a strip club herself right now, like, as a joke, same as me.
My best man, I told him he could surprise me, and he thought this would be hilarious, but this is not something.
Yeah, we all went to B school together.
Wharton.
(Laughter) Yeah, so, dude, can you guys -- All right, but it's my bachelor party, and I can spend it in the parking lot with Anderson Cooper if I want to.
All right, I'll see you in there.
All right, okay, so Anderson, so, like, first of all, stripping, but then, like, all the other things you're talking about, prostitution and all that stuff, that's, like, not the same thing at all.
You know? Like, you keep calling it the sex industry or whatever, but it's like, if the girl wants to be an exotic dancer and she's 18, like, that's her right.
Whoa, whoa, I hear what you're saying, but I just feel like people, they just want to make it seem like all dudes are just, like, predators, that we would just automatically go to a prostitute, or whatever.
Even, like, when I pledged, you know, like when I rushed my fraternity.
My brothers who I'm close to, those guys, they're all like me.
We're just normal people, but, like, there's this myth that you must be that guy who is kind of an asshole, and like, all bros before hos or whatever.
And actually, like, bros before hos, it doesn't mean like what it sounds like.
It's actually just like a joking way of saying that you care about your brothers and you put them first.
Yeah, but, you can't blame the media, either.
I mean, like, if you go watch "Hangover 2," and you think that's an instruction manual for your life, like, I don't know what to tell you.
You know? You don't watch "Bourne Identity" and go drive your car over a gondola in Venice. (Laughter) Well, yeah, okay, like, if you're a little kid or whatever, of course it's different, but -- Yeah, all right, I remember one thing like that.
I was at this kid's house one time playing GTA, uh, Grand Theft Auto?
Dude, are you from Canada? (Laughter) So, like, whatever, with Grand Theft Auto, you're this kid, like, you're this guy walking around or whatever, and you can basically, like, the more cops you kill, the more points you get, and stuff like that.
But also, you can find prostitutes and obviously you can do sexual stuff with them, but you can, like, kill them and take your money back.
Yeah, this kid, I remember he ran over a couple of them a few times with his car and he got all these points.
We were, like, 10, I think.
It felt pretty terrible, actually.
No, I don't think I said anything, I just finished playing and went home.
All right class, so then there were men who had more than just a passing relationship to this issue. (Laughter) The next subject described himself as a reformed and remorseful pimp turned motivational speaker, life coach and therapist, but if you want to know more about him, you'll have to come to the entire play.
Thank you so much, you beautiful TED audience.
I will see you for "Sell/Buy/Date."
(Applause)
Our emotions influence every aspect of our lives, from our health and how we learn, to how we do business and make decisions, big ones and small.
Our emotions also influence how we connect with one another.
We've evolved to live in a world like this, but instead, we're living more and more of our lives like this -- this is the text message from my daughter last night -- in a world that's devoid of emotion.
So I'm on a mission to change that.
I want to bring emotions back into our digital experiences.
I started on this path 15 years ago.
I was a computer scientist in Egypt, and I had just gotten accepted to a Ph.D. program at Cambridge University.
So I did something quite unusual for a young newlywed Muslim Egyptian wife: With the support of my husband, who had to stay in Egypt, I packed my bags and I moved to England.
At Cambridge, thousands of miles away from home, I realized I was spending more hours with my laptop than I did with any other human.
Yet despite this intimacy, my laptop had absolutely no idea how I was feeling.
It had no idea if I was happy, having a bad day, or stressed, confused, and so that got frustrating.
Even worse, as I communicated online with my family back home, I felt that all my emotions disappeared in cyberspace.
I was homesick, I was lonely, and on some days I was actually crying, but all I had to communicate these emotions was this.
(Laughter) Today's technology has lots of I.Q., but no E.Q.; lots of cognitive intelligence, but no emotional intelligence.
So that got me thinking, what if our technology could sense our emotions?
What if our devices could sense how we felt and reacted accordingly, just the way an emotionally intelligent friend would?
Those questions led me and my team to create technologies that can read and respond to our emotions, and our starting point was the human face.
So our human face happens to be one of the most powerful channels that we all use to communicate social and emotional states, everything from enjoyment, surprise, empathy and curiosity.
In emotion science, we call each facial muscle movement an action unit.
So for example, action unit 12, it's not a Hollywood blockbuster, it is actually a lip corner pull, which is the main component of a smile.
Try it everybody. Let's get some smiles going on.
Another example is action unit 4. It's the brow furrow.
It's when you draw your eyebrows together and you create all these textures and wrinkles.
We don't like them, but it's a strong indicator of a negative emotion.
So we have about 45 of these action units, and they combine to express hundreds of emotions.
Teaching a computer to read these facial emotions is hard, because these action units, they can be fast, they're subtle, and they combine in many different ways.
So take, for example, the smile and the smirk.
They look somewhat similar, but they mean very different things.
(Laughter) So the smile is positive, a smirk is often negative.
Sometimes a smirk can make you become famous.
But seriously, it's important for a computer to be able to tell the difference between the two expressions.
So how do we do that?
We give our algorithms tens of thousands of examples of people we know to be smiling, from different ethnicities, ages, genders, and we do the same for smirks.
And then, using deep learning, the algorithm looks for all these textures and wrinkles and shape changes on our face, and basically learns that all smiles have common characteristics, all smirks have subtly different characteristics.
And the next time it sees a new face, it essentially learns that this face has the same characteristics of a smile, and it says, "Aha, I recognize this. This is a smile expression."
So the best way to demonstrate how this technology works is to try a live demo, so I need a volunteer, preferably somebody with a face.
(Laughter) Cloe's going to be our volunteer today.
So over the past five years, we've moved from being a research project at MIT to a company, where my team has worked really hard to make this technology work, as we like to say, in the wild.
And we've also shrunk it so that the core emotion engine works on any mobile device with a camera, like this iPad.
So let's give this a try.
As you can see, the algorithm has essentially found Cloe's face, so it's this white bounding box, and it's tracking the main feature points on her face, so her eyebrows, her eyes, her mouth and her nose.
The question is, can it recognize her expression?
So we're going to test the machine.
So first of all, give me your poker face. Yep, awesome. (Laughter) And then as she smiles, this is a genuine smile, it's great.
So you can see the green bar go up as she smiles.
Now that was a big smile.
Can you try a subtle smile to see if the computer can recognize?
It does recognize subtle smiles as well.
We've worked really hard to make that happen.
And then eyebrow raised, indicator of surprise.
Brow furrow, which is an indicator of confusion.
Frown. Yes, perfect.
So these are all the different action units. There's many more of them.
This is just a slimmed-down demo.
But we call each reading an emotion data point, and then they can fire together to portray different emotions.
So on the right side of the demo -- look like you're happy.
So that's joy. Joy fires up.
And then give me a disgust face.
Try to remember what it was like when Zayn left One Direction.
(Laughter) Yeah, wrinkle your nose. Awesome.
And the valence is actually quite negative, so you must have been a big fan.
So valence is how positive or negative an experience is, and engagement is how expressive she is as well.
So imagine if Cloe had access to this real-time emotion stream, and she could share it with anybody she wanted to.
Thank you.
(Applause) So, so far, we have amassed 12 billion of these emotion data points.
It's the largest emotion database in the world.
We've collected it from 2.9 million face videos, people who have agreed to share their emotions with us, and from 75 countries around the world.
It's growing every day.
It blows my mind away that we can now quantify something as personal as our emotions, and we can do it at this scale.
So what have we learned to date?
Gender.
Our data confirms something that you might suspect.
Women are more expressive than men.
Not only do they smile more, their smiles last longer, and we can now really quantify what it is that men and women respond to differently.
Let's do culture: So in the United States, women are 40 percent more expressive than men, but curiously, we don't see any difference in the U.K. between men and women.
(Laughter) Age: People who are 50 years and older are 25 percent more emotive than younger people.
Women in their 20s smile a lot more than men the same age, perhaps a necessity for dating.
But perhaps what surprised us the most about this data is that we happen to be expressive all the time, even when we are sitting in front of our devices alone, and it's not just when we're watching cat videos on Facebook.
We are expressive when we're emailing, texting, shopping online, or even doing our taxes.
Where is this data used today?
In understanding how we engage with media, so understanding virality and voting behavior; and also empowering or emotion-enabling technology, and I want to share some examples that are especially close to my heart.
Emotion-enabled wearable glasses can help individuals who are visually impaired read the faces of others, and it can help individuals on the autism spectrum interpret emotion, something that they really struggle with.
In education, imagine if your learning apps sense that you're confused and slow down, or that you're bored, so it's sped up, just like a great teacher would in a classroom.
What if your wristwatch tracked your mood, or your car sensed that you're tired, or perhaps your fridge knows that you're stressed, so it auto-locks to prevent you from binge eating. (Laughter) I would like that, yeah.
What if, when I was in Cambridge, I had access to my real-time emotion stream, and I could share that with my family back home in a very natural way, just like I would've if we were all in the same room together?
I think five years down the line, all our devices are going to have an emotion chip, and we won't remember what it was like when we couldn't just frown at our device and our device would say, "Hmm, you didn't like that, did you?"
Our biggest challenge is that there are so many applications of this technology, my team and I realize that we can't build them all ourselves, so we've made this technology available so that other developers can get building and get creative.
We recognize that there are potential risks and potential for abuse, but personally, having spent many years doing this, I believe that the benefits to humanity from having emotionally intelligent technology far outweigh the potential for misuse.
And I invite you all to be part of the conversation.
The more people who know about this technology, the more we can all have a voice in how it's being used.
So as more and more of our lives become digital, we are fighting a losing battle trying to curb our usage of devices in order to reclaim our emotions.
So what I'm trying to do instead is to bring emotions into our technology and make our technologies more responsive.
So I want those devices that have separated us to bring us back together.
And by humanizing technology, we have this golden opportunity to reimagine how we connect with machines, and therefore, how we, as human beings, connect with one another.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A great way to start, I think, with my view of simplicity is to take a look at TED. Here you are, understanding why we're here, what's going on with no difficulty at all.
The best A.I. in the planet would find it complex and confusing, and my little dog Watson would find it simple and understandable but would miss the point.
(Laughter) He would have a great time.
And of course, if you're a speaker here, like Hans Rosling, a speaker finds this complex, tricky. But in Hans Rosling's case, he had a secret weapon yesterday, literally, in his sword swallowing act.
And I must say, I thought of quite a few objects that I might try to swallow today and finally gave up on, but he just did it and that was a wonderful thing.
So Puck meant not only are we fools in the pejorative sense, but that we're easily fooled. In fact, what Shakespeare was pointing out is we go to the theater in order to be fooled, so we're actually looking forward to it.
We go to magic shows in order to be fooled.
And this makes many things fun, but it makes it difficult to actually get any kind of picture on the world we live in or on ourselves.
And our friend, Betty Edwards, the "Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain" lady, shows these two tables to her drawing class and says, "The problem you have with learning to draw is not that you can't move your hand, but that the way your brain perceives images is faulty.
It's trying to perceive images into objects rather than seeing what's there."
And to prove it, she says, "The exact size and shape of these tabletops is the same, and I'm going to prove it to you."
She does this with cardboard, but since I have an expensive computer here I'll just rotate this little guy around and ...
Now having seen that -- and I've seen it hundreds of times, because I use this in every talk I give -- I still can't see that they're the same size and shape, and I doubt that you can either.
So what do artists do? Well, what artists do is to measure.
They measure very, very carefully.
And if you measure very, very carefully with a stiff arm and a straight edge, you'll see that those two shapes are exactly the same size.
And the Talmud saw this a long time ago, saying, "We see things not as they are, but as we are."
I certainly would like to know what happened to the person who had that insight back then, if they actually followed it to its ultimate conclusion.
So if the world is not as it seems and we see things as we are, then what we call reality is a kind of hallucination happening inside here. It's a waking dream, and understanding that that is what we actually exist in is one of the biggest epistemological barriers in human history.
And what that means: "simple and understandable" might not be actually simple or understandable, and things we think are "complex" might be made simple and understandable.
Somehow we have to understand ourselves to get around our flaws.
We can think of ourselves as kind of a noisy channel.
The way I think of it is, we can't learn to see until we admit we're blind.
Once you start down at this very humble level, then you can start finding ways to see things.
And what's happened, over the last 400 years in particular, is that human beings have invented "brainlets" -- little additional parts for our brain -- made out of powerful ideas that help us see the world in different ways.
And these are in the form of sensory apparatus -- telescopes, microscopes -- reasoning apparatus -- various ways of thinking -- and, most importantly, in the ability to change perspective on things.
I'll talk about that a little bit.
It's this change in perspective on what it is we think we're perceiving that has helped us make more progress in the last 400 years than we have in the rest of human history.
And yet, it is not taught in any K through 12 curriculum in America that I'm aware of.
So one of the things that goes from simple to complex is when we do more. We like more.
If we do more in a kind of a stupid way, the simplicity gets complex and, in fact, we can keep on doing it for a very long time.
But Murray Gell-Mann yesterday talked about emergent properties; another name for them could be "architecture" as a metaphor for taking the same old material and thinking about non-obvious, non-simple ways of combining it.
And in fact, what Murray was talking about yesterday in the fractal beauty of nature -- of having the descriptions at various levels be rather similar -- all goes down to the idea that the elementary particles are both sticky and standoffish, and they're in violent motion.
Those three things give rise to all the different levels of what seem to be complexity in our world.
But how simple?
So, when I saw Roslings' Gapminder stuff a few years ago, I just thought it was the greatest thing I'd seen in conveying complex ideas simply.
But then I had a thought of, "Boy, maybe it's too simple."
And I put some effort in to try and check to see how well these simple portrayals of trends over time actually matched up with some ideas and investigations from the side, and I found that they matched up very well.
So the Roslings have been able to do simplicity without removing what's important about the data.
Whereas the film yesterday that we saw of the simulation of the inside of a cell, as a former molecular biologist, I didn't like that at all.
Not because it wasn't beautiful or anything, but because it misses the thing that most students fail to understand about molecular biology, and that is: why is there any probability at all of two complex shapes finding each other just the right way so they combine together and be catalyzed?
And what we saw yesterday was every reaction was fortuitous; they just swooped in the air and bound, and something happened.
But in fact, those molecules are spinning at the rate of about a million revolutions per second; they're agitating back and forth their size every two nanoseconds; they're completely crowded together, they're jammed, they're bashing up against each other.
And if you don't understand that in your mental model of this stuff, what happens inside of a cell seems completely mysterious and fortuitous, and I think that's exactly the wrong image for when you're trying to teach science.
So, another thing that we do is to confuse adult sophistication with the actual understanding of some principle.
So a kid who's 14 in high school gets this version of the Pythagorean theorem, which is a truly subtle and interesting proof, but in fact it's not a good way to start learning about mathematics.
So a more direct one, one that gives you more of the feeling of math, is something closer to Pythagoras' own proof, which goes like this: so here we have this triangle, and if we surround that C square with three more triangles and we copy that, notice that we can move those triangles down like this.
And that leaves two open areas that are kind of suspicious ...
and bingo. That is all you have to do.
And this kind of proof is the kind of proof that you need to learn when you're learning mathematics in order to get an idea of what it means before you look into the, literally, 1,200 or 1,500 proofs of Pythagoras' theorem that have been discovered.
Now let's go to young children.
This is a very unusual teacher who was a kindergarten and first-grade teacher, but was a natural mathematician.
So she was like that jazz musician friend you have who never studied music but is a terrific musician; she just had a feeling for math.
And here are her six-year-olds, and she's got them making shapes out of a shape.
So they pick a shape they like -- like a diamond, or a square, or a triangle, or a trapezoid -- and then they try and make the next larger shape of that same shape, and the next larger shape.
You can see the trapezoids are a little challenging there.
And what this teacher did on every project was to have the children act like first it was a creative arts project, and then something like science.
So they had created these artifacts.
Now she had them look at them and do this ... laborious, which I thought for a long time, until she explained to me was to slow them down so they'll think.
So they're cutting out the little pieces of cardboard here and pasting them up.
But the whole point of this thing is for them to look at this chart and fill it out.
"What have you noticed about what you did?"
And so six-year-old Lauren there noticed that the first one took one, and the second one took three more and the total was four on that one, the third one took five more and the total was nine on that one, and then the next one.
She saw right away that the additional tiles that you had to add around the edges was always going to grow by two, so she was very confident about how she made those numbers there.
And she could see that these were the square numbers up until about six, where she wasn't sure what six times six was and what seven times seven was, but then she was confident again.
So that's what Lauren did.
And then the teacher, Gillian Ishijima, had the kids bring all of their projects up to the front of the room and put them on the floor, and everybody went batshit: "Holy shit! They're the same!"
No matter what the shapes were, the growth law is the same.
And the mathematicians and scientists in the crowd will recognize these two progressions as a first-order discrete differential equation and a second-order discrete differential equation, derived by six-year-olds.
Well, that's pretty amazing.
That isn't what we usually try to teach six-year-olds.
So, let's take a look now at how we might use the computer for some of this.
And so the first idea here is just to show you the kind of things that children do.
I'm using the software that we're putting on the $100 laptop.
So I'd like to draw a little car here -- I'll just do this very quickly -- and put a big tire on him.
And I get a little object here and I can look inside this object, I'll call it a car. And here's a little behavior: car forward.
Each time I click it, car turn.
If I want to make a little script to do this over and over again, I just drag these guys out and set them going.
And I can try steering the car here by ...
See the car turn by five here?
So what if I click this down to zero?
It goes straight. That's a big revelation for nine-year-olds.
Make it go in the other direction.
But of course, that's a little bit like kissing your sister as far as driving a car, so the kids want to do a steering wheel; so they draw a steering wheel.
And we'll call this a wheel.
See this wheel's heading here?
If I turn this wheel, you can see that number over there going minus and positive.
That's kind of an invitation to pick up this name of those numbers coming out there and to just drop it into the script here, and now I can steer the car with the steering wheel.
And it's interesting.
You know how much trouble the children have with variables, but by learning it this way, in a situated fashion, they never forget from this single trial what a variable is and how to use it.
And we can reflect here the way Gillian Ishijima did.
So if you look at the little script here, the speed is always going to be 30.
We're going to move the car according to that over and over again.
And I'm dropping a little dot for each one of these things; they're evenly spaced because they're 30 apart.
And what if I do this progression that the six-year-olds did of saying, "OK, I'm going to increase the speed by two each time, and then I'm going to increase the distance by the speed each time?
What do I get there?"
We get a visual pattern of what these nine-year-olds called acceleration.
So how do the children do science?
(Video) Teacher: [Choose] objects that you think will fall to the Earth at the same time.
Student 1: Ooh, this is nice.
Teacher: Do not pay any attention to what anybody else is doing.
Who's got the apple?
Alan Kay: They've got little stopwatches.
Student 2: What did you get? What did you get?
AK: Stopwatches aren't accurate enough.
Student 3: 0.99 seconds.
Teacher: So put "sponge ball" ...
Student 4l: [I decided to] do the shot put and the sponge ball because they're two totally different weights, and if you drop them at the same time, maybe they'll drop at the same speed.
Teacher: Drop. Class: Whoa!
AK: So obviously, Aristotle never asked a child about this particular point because, of course, he didn't bother doing the experiment, and neither did St. Thomas Aquinas.
And it was not until Galileo actually did it that an adult thought like a child, only 400 years ago.
We get one child like that about every classroom of 30 kids who will actually cut straight to the chase.
Now, what if we want to look at this more closely?
We can take a movie of what's going on, but even if we single stepped this movie, it's tricky to see what's going on.
And so what we can do is we can lay out the frames side by side or stack them up.
So when the children see this, they say, "Ah! Acceleration," remembering back four months when they did their cars sideways, and they start measuring to find out what kind of acceleration it is.
So what I'm doing is measuring from the bottom of one image to the bottom of the next image, about a fifth of a second later, like that. And they're getting faster and faster each time, and if I stack these guys up, then we see the differences; the increase in the speed is constant.
And they say, "Oh, yeah. Constant acceleration.
We've done that already."
And how shall we look and verify that we actually have it?
So you can't tell much from just making the ball drop there, but if we drop the ball and run the movie at the same time, we can see that we have come up with an accurate physical model.
Galileo, by the way, did this very cleverly by running a ball backwards down the strings of his lute.
I pulled out those apples to remind myself to tell you that this is actually probably a Newton and the apple type story, but it's a great story.
And I thought I would do just one thing on the $100 laptop here just to prove that this stuff works here.
So once you have gravity, here's this -- increase the speed by something, increase the ship's speed.
If I start the little game here that the kids have done, it'll crash the space ship.
But if I oppose gravity, here we go ... Oops!
(Laughter) One more.
Yeah, there we go. Yeah, OK?
I guess the best way to end this is with two quotes: Marshall McLuhan said, "Children are the messages that we send to the future," but in fact, if you think of it, children are the future we send to the future.
Forget about messages; children are the future, and children in the first and second world and, most especially, in the third world need mentors.
And this summer, we're going to build five million of these $100 laptops, and maybe 50 million next year.
But we couldn't create 1,000 new teachers this summer to save our life.
That means that we, once again, have a thing where we can put technology out, but the mentoring that is required to go from a simple new iChat instant messaging system to something with depth is missing.
I believe this has to be done with a new kind of user interface, and this new kind of user interface could be done with an expenditure of about 100 million dollars.
It sounds like a lot, but it is literally 18 minutes of what we're spending in Iraq -- we're spending 8 billion dollars a month; 18 minutes is 100 million dollars -- so this is actually cheap.
And Einstein said, "Things should be as simple as possible, but not simpler."
Thank you.
Along the ancient path of the Monongahela River, Braddock, Pennsylvania sits in the eastern region of Allegheny County, approximately nine miles outside of Pittsburgh.
An industrial suburb, Braddock is home to Andrew Carnegie's first steel mill, the Edgar Thomson Works.
Operating since 1875, it is the last functioning steel mill in the region.
For 12 years, I have produced collaborative portraits, still lifes, landscapes and aerial views in order to build a visual archive to address the intersection of the steel industry, the environment, and the health care system's impact on the bodies of my family and community.
The tradition and grand narrative of Braddock is mostly comprised of stories of industrialists and trade unions.
Currently, the new narrative about Braddock, a poster child for Rust Belt revitalization, is a story of urban pioneers discovering a new frontier.
Mass media has omitted the fact that Braddock is predominantly black.
Our existence has been co-opted, silenced and erased.
Fourth generation in a lineage of women, I was raised under the protection and care of Grandma Ruby, off 8th Street at 805 Washington Avenue.
She worked as a manager for Goodwill.
Mom was a nurse's aid.
She watched the steel mills close and white flight to suburban developments.
By the time my generation walked the streets, disinvestment at the local, state and federal level, eroded infrastructure, and the War on Drugs dismantled my family and community.
Grandma Ruby's stepfather Gramps was one of few black men to retire from Carnegie's mill with his pension.
He worked in high temperatures, tearing down and rebuilding furnaces, cleaning up spilt metal and slag.
The history of a place is written on the body and the landscape.
Areas of heavy truck traffic, exposure to benzene and atomized metals, risk cancer and lupus.
One hundred twenty-three licensed beds, 652 employees, rehabilitation programs decimated.
A housing discrimination lawsuit against Allegheny County removed where the projects Talbot Towers once stood.
Recent rezoning for more light industry has since appeared.
Google Maps and Google Earth pixelations conceal the flammable waste being used to squeeze the Bunn family off their home and land.
In 2013, I chartered a helicopter with my cameras to document this aggressive dispossession.
In flight, my observation reveals thousands of plastic white bundles owned by a conservation industry that claims it's eco-friendly and recycles millions of tires to preserve people's lives and to improve people's lives.
My work spirals from the micro to the macro level, excavating hidden histories.
Recently, at the Seattle Art Museum, Isaac Bunn and I mounted this exhibition, and the exhibition was used as a platform to launch his voice.
Through reclamation of our narrative, we will continue to fight historic erasure and socioeconomic inequality.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The first time I uttered a prayer was in a glass-stained cathedral.
I was kneeling long after the congregation was on its feet, dip both hands into holy water, trace the trinity across my chest, my tiny body drooping like a question mark all over the wooden pew.
I asked Jesus to fix me, and when he did not answer I befriended silence in the hopes that my sin would burn and salve my mouth would dissolve like sugar on tongue, but shame lingered as an aftertaste.
And in an attempt to reintroduce me to sanctity, my mother told me of the miracle I was, said I could grow up to be anything I want.
I decided to be a boy.
It was cute.
I had snapback, toothless grin, used skinned knees as street cred, played hide and seek with what was left of my goal.
I was it.
The winner to a game the other kids couldn't play, I was the mystery of an anatomy, a question asked but not answered, tightroping between awkward boy and apologetic girl, and when I turned 12, the boy phase wasn't deemed cute anymore.
It was met with nostalgic aunts who missed seeing my knees in the shadow of skirts, who reminded me that my kind of attitude would never bring a husband home, that I exist for heterosexual marriage and child-bearing.
And I swallowed their insults along with their slurs.
Naturally, I did not come out of the closet.
The kids at my school opened it without my permission.
Called me by a name I did not recognize, said "lesbian," but I was more boy than girl, more Ken than Barbie.
It had nothing to do with hating my body, I just love it enough to let it go, I treat it like a house, and when your house is falling apart, you do not evacuate, you make it comfortable enough to house all your insides, you make it pretty enough to invite guests over, you make the floorboards strong enough to stand on.
My mother fears I have named myself after fading things.
As she counts the echoes left behind by Mya Hall, Leelah Alcorn, Blake Brockington.
She fears that I'll die without a whisper, that I'll turn into "what a shame" conversations at the bus stop.
She claims I have turned myself into a mausoleum, that I am a walking casket, news headlines have turned my identity into a spectacle, Bruce Jenner on everyone's lips while the brutality of living in this body becomes an asterisk at the bottom of equality pages.
No one ever thinks of us as human because we are more ghost than flesh, because people fear that my gender expression is a trick, that it exists to be perverse, that it ensnares them without their consent, that my body is a feast for their eyes and hands and once they have fed off my queer, they'll regurgitate all the parts they did not like.
They'll put me back into the closet, hang me with all the other skeletons.
I will be the best attraction.
Can you see how easy it is to talk people into coffins, to misspell their names on gravestones.
And people still wonder why there are boys rotting, they go away in high school hallways they are afraid of becoming another hashtag in a second afraid of classroom discussions becoming like judgment day and now oncoming traffic is embracing more transgender children than parents.
I wonder how long it will be before the trans suicide notes start to feel redundant, before we realize that our bodies become lessons about sin way before we learn how to love them.
Like God didn't save all this breath and mercy, like my blood is not the wine that washed over Jesus' feet.
My prayers are now getting stuck in my throat.
Maybe I am finally fixed, maybe I just don't care, maybe God finally listened to my prayers.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My story starts in the northern Galapagos Islands, under 50 feet of water and a big school of sharks.
I'd been scuba diving with a group of friends for about a week, and it had been glorious: manta rays, whale sharks, penguins and, of course, hammerhead sharks.
Today's dive was particularly tricky.
The surge was terrible.
You had to have your camera rig tight in and your arm out, because the surge kept throwing you into the rocks while you're scanning up for that beautiful photograph.
It was going OK, until ...
not OK.
Something was terribly, terribly wrong.
I pulled my hand back, and I had long, black sea urchin spines all the way through my gloves, which meant all the way through my hand.
Now, this is bad.
I mean, obviously when you have something all the way through your hand, it's kind of bad anyway, but in this case, sea urchins have a venom on them that, if you've ever tangled with them, you know that a sea urchin spine in you gives you horrible, painful inflammation.
But that wasn't even topmost in my mind at this point.
This did not look real.
I could not believe that this was my hand.
Now, in a crisis, I tend to disassociate into, like, little scientists, and I start talking very analytically.
All analysis was gone, adrenaline brain kicked in, and I just yanked the spines out.
I don't remember doing it.
I just remember thinking, "I can't get my glove off with these in here."
I do remember taking the glove off and a big plume of black coming up in front of my face.
And biologist brain now shows up and starts freaking out.
"How could all that toxin have gotten into that wound already?"
Well, physicist brain then shows up and very calmly explains, "No, no, no, we're at 50 feet, red wavelengths are attenuated.
That's blood -- not black.
And sharks.
So what are you gonna do?"
Well, I cranked my cummerbund down really hard over my hand, and I simply swam away.
"Let's let that big old cloud of blood dissipate a bit before we have to surface through all of these sharks."
So when I did surface, my warm-blooded-mammal brain was in an absolute gibbering panic: "They don't feed when they're schooling. They don't feed when they're schooling.
All the way up."
And they didn't.
So apparently, they have read the same books that I have.
(Laughter) Now, it turns out, when you've been stabbed with sea urchin spines, and you're two days away from any medical help, the thing that you've got to do is, unfortunately, cook your hand.
So you put it in water as hot as you can stand, and you keep adding boiling water until you think you will go absolutely insane.
Now, it worked -- the hand itself did not work so well for several weeks after that, but eventually, fine motor skills returned.
All except for one spot, that stayed stiff and painful for weeks after the other things had gotten better.
So it turned out, I'd broken off a tip of the urchin spine in the joint itself, and that's why it wasn't getting better.
So the orthopedist says, "You know, we should get this out.
Nothing too urgent, not an emergency."
So we scheduled a small surgery for a few weeks out on a Monday.
And on the Friday before, I broke my pelvis in a horseback riding accident.
(Laughter) Yeah.
So we kind of postponed that surgery.
My broken pelvis and I were now facing six weeks on the couch, and I would have gone absolutely insane if it hadn't been for my friends.
Spontaneous parties broke out at my house every night for weeks.
I was fed. I was entertained.
It was great.
But that kind of enthusiasm is sort of hard to sustain over the long term, and eventually it petered down to just one friend, who would send me jokes during the day and come and keep me company in the evenings -- someone I got to know a whole lot better during this period of convalescence.
And when I was finally pronounced well enough to do weight-bearing activities, we loaded a telescope in the car and drove up into the mountains to look at the Hale–Bopp comet.
Yes, we are geeks.
And got caught in a landslide.
(Laughter) I know -- like, really?
No. Just kidding.
(Laughter) No more disasters. No. Just the opposite, in fact.
That was 21 years ago, and for 19 of those years, I have been married to that marvelous introvert who never in a million years would have approached me under other circumstances.
We have a wonderful 14-year-old daughter, who did all my illustrations.
(Cheers and applause) Yeah.
So, pro tip: apparently, nothing makes you sexier than needing a walker on your first date.
So this isn't a story about piercings or sharks or boilings or breakings.
It's a love story.
It's a love story with a funny little epilogue.
Now I was weight-bearing again, I could reschedule that surgery, get the spine out.
But I didn't need it anymore.
Turns out, when you break a bone, your body scavenges calcium from all the bones in your body -- and from the little sea urchin spine that you happen to have lodged in the joint of your finger.
So yes, my pelvis is now part sea urchin.
(Laughter) So to biology brain, physicist brain, adrenaline brain, warm-blooded-mammal brain, I get to add "urchin brain," with all of the superpowers that that confers.
You don't need to worry, though: that I am not fully human is one of the things that my family loves the most about me.
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
This summer I was back in Ohio for a family wedding, and when I was there, there was a meet and greet with Anna and Elsa from "Frozen."
Not the Anna and Elsa from "Frozen," as this was not a Disney-sanctioned event.
These two entrepreneurs had a business of running princess parties.
Your kid is turning five?
They'll come sing some songs, sprinkle some fairy dust, it's great.
And they were not about to miss out on the opportunity that was the phenomenon and that was "Frozen."
So they get hired by a local toy store, kids come in on a Saturday morning, buy some Disney swag, get their picture taken with the princesses, call it a day.
It's like Santa Claus without the seasonal restrictions.
(Laughter) And my three-and-a-half-year-old niece Samantha was in the thick of it.
She could care less that these two women were signing posters and coloring books as Snow Queen and Princess Ana with one N to avoid copyright lawsuits.
(Laughter) According to my niece and the 200-plus kids in the parking lot that day, this was the Anna and Elsa from "Frozen."
It is a blazing hot Saturday morning in August in Ohio.
We get there at 10 o'clock, the scheduled start time, and we are handed number 59.
By 11 o'clock they had called numbers 21 through 25; this was going to be a while, and there is no amount of free face painting or temporary tattoos that could prevent the meltdowns that were occurring outside of the store.
(Laughter) So, by 12:30 we get called: "56 to 63, please."
And as we walk in, it is a scene I can only describe you as saying it looked like Norway threw up.
(Laughter) There were cardboard cut-out snowflakes covering the floor, glitter on every flat surface, and icicles all over the walls.
And as we stood in line in an attempt to give my niece a better vantage point than the backside of the mother of number 58, I put her up on my shoulders, and she was instantly riveted by the sight of the princesses.
And as we moved forward, her excitement only grew, and as we finally got to the front of the line, and number 58 unfurled her poster to be signed by the princesses, I could literally feel the excitement running through her body.
And let's be honest, at that point, I was pretty excited too.
(Laughter) I mean, the Scandinavian decadence was mesmerizing.
(Laughter) So we get to the front of the line, and the haggard clerk turns to my niece and says, "Hi, honey. You're next!
Do you want to get down, or you're going to stay on your dad's shoulders for the picture?' (Laughter) And I was, for a lack of a better word, frozen.
(Laughter) It's amazing that in an unexpected instant we are faced with the question, who am I?
Am I an aunt? Or am I an advocate?
Millions of people have seen my video about how to have a hard conversation, and there one was, right in front of me.
At the same time, there's nothing more important to me than the kids in my life, so I found myself in a situation that we so often find ourselves in, torn between two things, two impossible choices.
Would I be an advocate?
Would I take my niece off my shoulders and turn to the clerk and explain to her that I was in fact her aunt, not her father, and that she should be more careful and not to jump to gender conclusions based on haircuts and shoulder rides -- (Laughter) -- and while doing that, miss out on what was, to this point, the greatest moment of my niece's life.
Or would I be an aunt?
Would I brush off that comment, take a million pictures, and not be distracted for an instant from the pure joy of that moment, and by doing that, walk out with the shame that comes up for not standing up for myself, especially in front of my niece.
Who was I?
Which one was more important? Which role was more worth it?
Was I an aunt? Or was I an advocate?
And I had a split second to decide.
We are taught right now that we are living in a world of constant and increasing polarity.
It's so black and white, so us and them, so right and wrong.
There is no middle, there is no gray, just polarity.
Polarity is a state in which two ideas or opinions are completely opposite from each other; a diametrical opposition.
Which side are you on?
Are you unequivocally and without question antiwar, pro-choice, anti-death penalty, pro-gun regulation, proponent of open borders and pro-union?
Or, are you absolutely and uncompromisingly pro-war, pro-life, pro-death penalty, a believer that the Second Amendment is absolute, anti-immigrant and pro-business?
It's all or none, you're with us or against us.
That is polarity.
The problem with polarity and absolutes is that it eliminates the individuality of our human experience and that makes it contradictory to our human nature.
But if we are pulled in these two directions, but it's not really where we exist -- polarity is not our actual reality -- where do we go from there?
What's at the other end of that spectrum?
I don't think it's an unattainable, harmonious utopia, I think the opposite of polarity is duality.
Duality is a state of having two parts, but not in diametrical opposition, in simultaneous existence.
Don't think it's possible?
Here are the people I know: I know Catholics who are pro-choice, and feminists who wear hijabs, and veterans who are antiwar, and NRA members who think I should be able to get married.
Those are the people I know, those are my friends and family, that is the majority of our society, that is you, that is me.
(Applause) Duality is the ability to hold both things.
But the question is: Can we own our duality?
Can we have the courage to hold both things?
I work at a restaurant in town, I became really good friends with the busser.
I was a server and we had a great relationship, we had a really great time together.
Her Spanish was great because she was from Mexico.
(Laughter) That line actually went the other way.
Her English was limited, but significantly better than my Spanish.
But we were united by our similarities, not separated by our differences.
And we were close, even though we came from very different worlds.
She was from Mexico, she left her family behind so she could come here and afford them a better life back home.
She was a devout conservative Catholic, a believer in traditional family values, stereotypical roles of men and women, and I was, well, me.
(Laughter) But the things that bonded us were when she asked about my girlfriend, or she shared pictures that she had from her family back home.
Those were the things that brought us together.
So one day, we were in the back, scarfing down food as quickly as we could, gathered around a small table, during a very rare lull, and a new guy from the kitchen came over -- who happened to be her cousin -- and sat down with all the bravado and machismo that his 20-year-old body could hold.
(Laughter) And he said to her, [in Spanish] "Does Ash have a boyfriend?"
And she said, [in Spanish] "No, she has a girlfriend."
And he said, [in Spanish] "A girlfriend?!?"
And she set down her fork, and locked eyes with him, and said, [in Spanish] "Yes, a girlfriend. That is all."
And his smug smile quickly dropped to one of maternal respect, grabbed his plate, walked off, went back to work.
She never made eye contact with me.
She left, did the same thing -- it was a 10-second conversation, such a short interaction.
And on paper, she had so much more in common with him: language, culture, history, family, her community was her lifeline here, but her moral compass trumped all of that.
And a little bit later, they were joking around in the kitchen in Spanish, that had nothing to do with me, and that is duality.
She didn't have to choose some P.C. stance on gayness over her heritage.
She didn't have to choose her family over our friendship.
It wasn't Jesus or Ash.
(Laughter) (Applause) Her individual morality was so strongly rooted that she had the courage to hold both things.
Our moral integrity is our responsibility and we must be prepared to defend it even when it's not convenient.
That's what it means to be an ally, and if you're going to be an ally, you have to be an active ally: Ask questions, act when you hear something inappropriate, actually engage.
I had a family friend who for years used to call my girlfriend my lover.
Really? Lover?
So overly sexual, so '70s gay porn.
(Laughter) But she was trying, and she asked.
She could have called her my friend, or my "friend," or my "special friend" -- (Laughter) -- or even worse, just not asked at all.
Believe me, we would rather have you ask.
I would rather have her say lover, than say nothing at all.
People often say to me, "Well, Ash, I don't care.
I don't see race or religion or sexuality.
It doesn't matter to me. I don't see it."
But I think the opposite of homophobia and racism and xenophobia is not love, it's apathy.
If you don't see my gayness, then you don't see me.
If it doesn't matter to you who I sleep with, then you cannot imagine what it feels like when I walk down the street late at night holding her hand, and approach a group of people and have to make the decision if I should hang on to it or if I should I drop it when all I want to do is squeeze it tighter.
And the small victory I feel when I make it by and don't have to let go.
And the incredible cowardice and disappointment I feel when I drop it.
If you do not see that struggle that is unique to my human experience because I am gay, then you don't see me.
If you are going to be an ally, I need you to see me.
As individuals, as allies, as humans, we need to be able to hold both things: both the good and the bad, the easy and the hard.
You don't learn how to hold two things just from the fluff, you learn it from the grit.
And what if duality is just the first step?
What if through compassion and empathy and human interaction we are able to learn to hold two things?
And if we can hold two things, we can hold four, and if we can hold four, we can hold eight, and if we can hold eight, we can hold hundreds.
We are complex individuals, swirls of contradiction.
You are all holding so many things right now.
What can you do to hold just a few more?
So, back to Toledo, Ohio.
I'm at the front of the line, niece on my shoulders, the frazzled clerk calls me Dad.
Have you ever been mistaken for the wrong gender?
Not even that.
Have you ever been called something you are not?
Here's what it feels like for me: I am instantly an internal storm of contrasting emotions.
I break out into a sweat that is a combination of rage and humiliation, I feel like the entire store is staring at me, and I simultaneously feel invisible.
I want to explode in a tirade of fury, and I want to crawl under a rock.
And top all of that off with the frustration that I'm wearing an out-of-character tight-fitting purple t-shirt, so this whole store can see my boobs, to make sure this exact same thing doesn't happen.
(Laughter) But, despite my best efforts to be seen as the gender I am, it still happens.
And I hope with every ounce of my body that no one heard -- not my sister, not my girlfriend, and certainly not my niece.
I am accustomed to this familiar hurt, but I will do whatever I need to do to protect the people I love from it.
But then I take my niece off my shoulders, and she runs to Elsa and Anna -- the thing she's been waiting so long for -- and all that stuff goes away.
All that matters is the smile on her face.
And as the 30 seconds we waited two and a half hours for comes to a close we gather up our things, and I lock eyes with the clerk again; and she gives me an apologetic smile and mouths, "I am so sorry!"
(Laughter) And her humanity, her willingness to admit her mistake disarms me immediately, then I give her a: "It's okay, it happens. But thanks."
And I realize in that moment that I don't have to be either an aunt or an advocate, I can be both.
I can live in duality, and I can hold two things.
And if I can hold two things in that environment, I can hold so many more things.
As my girlfriend and my niece hold hands and skip out the front of the door, I turn to my sister and say, "Was it worth it?"
And she said, "Are you kidding me?
Did you see the look on her face? This was the greatest day of her life!"
(Laughter) "It was worth the two and a half hours in the heat, it was worth the overpriced coloring book that we already had a copy of."
(Laughter) "It was even worth you getting called Dad."
(Laughter) And for the first time ever in my life, it actually was.
Thank you, Boulder. Have a good night.
(Applause)
An evolutionary biologist at Purdue University named William Muir studied chickens.
He was interested in productivity -- I think it's something that concerns all of us -- but it's easy to measure in chickens because you just count the eggs.
(Laughter) He wanted to know what could make his chickens more productive, so he devised a beautiful experiment.
Chickens live in groups, so first of all, he selected just an average flock, and he let it alone for six generations.
But then he created a second group of the individually most productive chickens -- you could call them superchickens -- and he put them together in a superflock, and each generation, he selected only the most productive for breeding.
After six generations had passed, what did he find?
Well, the first group, the average group, was doing just fine.
They were all plump and fully feathered and egg production had increased dramatically.
What about the second group?
Well, all but three were dead.
They'd pecked the rest to death.
(Laughter) The individually productive chickens had only achieved their success by suppressing the productivity of the rest.
Now, as I've gone around the world talking about this and telling this story in all sorts of organizations and companies, people have seen the relevance almost instantly, and they come up and they say things to me like, "That superflock, that's my company."
(Laughter) Or, "That's my country."
Or, "That's my life."
All my life I've been told that the way we have to get ahead is to compete: get into the right school, get into the right job, get to the top, and I've really never found it very inspiring.
I've started and run businesses because invention is a joy, and because working alongside brilliant, creative people is its own reward.
And I've never really felt very motivated by pecking orders or by superchickens or by superstars.
But for the past 50 years, we've run most organizations and some societies along the superchicken model.
We've thought that success is achieved by picking the superstars, the brightest men, or occasionally women, in the room, and giving them all the resources and all the power.
And the result has been just the same as in William Muir's experiment: aggression, dysfunction and waste.
If the only way the most productive can be successful is by suppressing the productivity of the rest, then we badly need to find a better way to work and a richer way to live.
(Applause) So what is it that makes some groups obviously more successful and more productive than others?
Well, that's the question a team at MIT took to research.
They brought in hundreds of volunteers, they put them into groups, and they gave them very hard problems to solve.
And what happened was exactly what you'd expect, that some groups were very much more successful than others, but what was really interesting was that the high-achieving groups were not those where they had one or two people with spectacularly high I.Q.
Nor were the most successful groups the ones that had the highest aggregate I.Q.
Instead, they had three characteristics, the really successful teams.
First of all, they showed high degrees of social sensitivity to each other.
This is measured by something called the Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test.
It's broadly considered a test for empathy, and the groups that scored highly on this did better.
Secondly, the successful groups gave roughly equal time to each other, so that no one voice dominated, but neither were there any passengers.
And thirdly, the more successful groups had more women in them.
(Applause) Now, was this because women typically score more highly on the Reading the Mind in the Eyes Test, so you're getting a doubling down on the empathy quotient?
Or was it because they brought a more diverse perspective?
We don't really know, but the striking thing about this experiment is that it showed what we know, which is some groups do better than others, but what's key to that is their social connectedness to each other.
So how does this play out in the real world?
Well, it means that what happens between people really counts, because in groups that are highly attuned and sensitive to each other, ideas can flow and grow.
People don't get stuck. They don't waste energy down dead ends.
An example: Arup is one of the world's most successful engineering firms, and it was commissioned to build the equestrian center for the Beijing Olympics.
Now, this building had to receive two and a half thousand really highly strung thoroughbred horses that were coming off long-haul flights, highly jet-lagged, not feeling their finest.
And the problem the engineer confronted was, what quantity of waste to cater for?
Now, you don't get taught this in engineering school -- (Laughter) -- and it's not really the kind of thing you want to get wrong, so he could have spent months talking to vets, doing the research, tweaking the spreadsheet.
Instead, he asked for help and he found someone who had designed the Jockey Club in New York.
The problem was solved in less than a day.
Arup believes that the culture of helpfulness is central to their success.
Now, helpfulness sounds really anemic, but it's absolutely core to successful teams, and it routinely outperforms individual intelligence.
Helpfulness means I don't have to know everything, I just have to work among people who are good at getting and giving help.
At SAP, they reckon that you can answer any question in 17 minutes.
But there isn't a single high-tech company I've worked with that imagines for a moment that this is a technology issue, because what drives helpfulness is people getting to know each other.
Now that sounds so obvious, and we think it'll just happen normally, but it doesn't.
When I was running my first software company, I realized that we were getting stuck.
There was a lot of friction, but not much else, and I gradually realized the brilliant, creative people that I'd hired didn't know each other.
They were so focused on their own individual work, they didn't even know who they were sitting next to, and it was only when I insisted that we stop working and invest time in getting to know each other that we achieved real momentum.
Now, that was 20 years ago, and now I visit companies that have banned coffee cups at desks because they want people to hang out around the coffee machines and talk to each other.
The Swedes even have a special term for this.
They call it fika, which means more than a coffee break.
It means collective restoration.
At Idexx, a company up in Maine, they've created vegetable gardens on campus so that people from different parts of the business can work together and get to know the whole business that way.
Have they all gone mad?
Quite the opposite -- they've figured out that when the going gets tough, and it always will get tough if you're doing breakthrough work that really matters, what people need is social support, and they need to know who to ask for help.
Companies don't have ideas; only people do.
And what motivates people are the bonds and loyalty and trust they develop between each other.
What matters is the mortar, not just the bricks.
Now, when you put all of this together, what you get is something called social capital.
Social capital is the reliance and interdependency that builds trust.
The term comes from sociologists who were studying communities that proved particularly resilient in times of stress.
Social capital is what gives companies momentum, and social capital is what makes companies robust.
What does this mean in practical terms?
It means that time is everything, because social capital compounds with time.
So teams that work together longer get better, because it takes time to develop the trust you need for real candor and openness.
And time is what builds value.
When Alex Pentland suggested to one company that they synchronize coffee breaks so that people would have time to talk to each other, profits went up 15 million dollars, and employee satisfaction went up 10 percent.
Not a bad return on social capital, which compounds even as you spend it.
Now, this isn't about chumminess, and it's no charter for slackers, because people who work this way tend to be kind of scratchy, impatient, absolutely determined to think for themselves because that's what their contribution is.
Conflict is frequent because candor is safe.
And that's how good ideas turn into great ideas, because no idea is born fully formed.
It emerges a little bit as a child is born, kind of messy and confused, but full of possibilities.
And it's only through the generous contribution, faith and challenge that they achieve their potential.
And that's what social capital supports.
Now, we aren't really used to talking about this, about talent, about creativity, in this way.
We're used to talking about stars.
So I started to wonder, well, if we start working this way, does that mean no more stars?
So I went and I sat in on the auditions at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London.
And what I saw there really surprised me, because the teachers weren't looking for individual pyrotechnics.
They were looking for what happened between the students, because that's where the drama is.
And when I talked to producers of hit albums, they said, "Oh sure, we have lots of superstars in music.
It's just, they don't last very long.
It's the outstanding collaborators who enjoy the long careers, because bringing out the best in others is how they found the best in themselves."
And when I went to visit companies that are renowned for their ingenuity and creativity, I couldn't even see any superstars, because everybody there really mattered.
And when I reflected on my own career, and the extraordinary people I've had the privilege to work with, I realized how much more we could give each other if we just stopped trying to be superchickens.
(Laughter) (Applause) Once you appreciate truly how social work is, a lot of things have to change.
Management by talent contest has routinely pitted employees against each other.
Now, rivalry has to be replaced by social capital.
For decades, we've tried to motivate people with money, even though we've got a vast amount of research that shows that money erodes social connectedness.
Now, we need to let people motivate each other.
And for years, we've thought that leaders were heroic soloists who were expected, all by themselves, to solve complex problems.
Now, we need to redefine leadership as an activity in which conditions are created in which everyone can do their most courageous thinking together.
We know that this works.
When the Montreal Protocol called for the phasing out of CFCs, the chlorofluorocarbons implicated in the hole in the ozone layer, the risks were immense.
CFCs were everywhere, and nobody knew if a substitute could be found.
But one team that rose to the challenge adopted three key principles.
The first was the head of engineering, Frank Maslen, said, there will be no stars in this team.
We need everybody.
Everybody has a valid perspective.
Second, we work to one standard only: the best imaginable.
And third, he told his boss, Geoff Tudhope, that he had to butt out, because he knew how disruptive power can be.
Now, this didn't mean Tudhope did nothing.
He gave the team air cover, and he listened to ensure that they honored their principles.
And it worked: Ahead of all the other companies tackling this hard problem, this group cracked it first.
And to date, the Montreal Protocol is the most successful international environmental agreement ever implemented.
There was a lot at stake then, and there's a lot at stake now, and we won't solve our problems if we expect it to be solved by a few supermen or superwomen.
Now we need everybody, because it is only when we accept that everybody has value that we will liberate the energy and imagination and momentum we need to create the best beyond measure.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am failing as a woman, I am failing as a feminist.
I have passionate opinions about gender equality, but I worry that to freely accept the label of "feminist," would not be fair to good feminists.
I'm a feminist, but I'm a rather bad one.
Oh, so I call myself a Bad Feminist.
Or at least, I wrote an essay, and then I wrote a book called "Bad Feminist," and then in interviews, people started calling me The Bad Feminist.
(Laughter) So, what started as a bit of an inside joke with myself and a willful provocation, has become a thing.
Let me take a step back.
When I was younger, mostly in my teens and 20s, I had strange ideas about feminists as hairy, angry, man-hating, sex-hating women -- as if those are bad things.
(Laughter) These days, I look at how women are treated the world over, and anger, in particular, seems like a perfectly reasonable response.
But back then, I worried about the tone people used when suggesting I might be a feminist.
The feminist label was an accusation, it was an "F" word, and not a nice one.
I was labeled a woman who doesn't play by the rules, who expects too much, who thinks far too highly of myself, by daring to believe I'm equal -- (Coughs) -- superior to a man.
You don't want to be that rebel woman, until you realize that you very much are that woman, and cannot imagine being anyone else.
As I got older, I began to accept that I am, indeed, a feminist, and a proud one.
I hold certain truths to be self-evident: Women are equal to men.
We deserve equal pay for equal work.
We have the right to move through the world as we choose, free from harassment or violence.
We have the right to easy, affordable access to birth control, and reproductive services.
We have the right to make choices about our bodies, free from legislative oversight or evangelical doctrine.
We have the right to respect.
There's more.
When we talk about the needs of women, we have to consider the other identities we inhabit.
We are not just women.
We are people with different bodies, gender expressions, faiths, sexualities, class backgrounds, abilities, and so much more.
We need to take into account these differences and how they affect us, as much as we account for what we have in common.
Without this kind of inclusion, our feminism is nothing.
I hold these truths to be self-evident, but let me be clear: I'm a mess.
I am full of contradictions.
There are many ways in which I'm doing feminism wrong.
I have another confession.
When I drive to work, I listen to thuggish rap at a very loud volume.
(Laughter) Even though the lyrics are degrading to women -- these lyrics offend me to my core -- the classic Yin Yang Twins song "Salt Shaker" -- it is amazing.
(Laughter) "Make it work with your wet t-shirt.
Bitch, you gotta shake it 'til your camel starts to hurt!"
(Laughter) Think about it.
(Laughter) Poetry, right?
I am utterly mortified by my music choices.
(Laughter) I firmly believe in man work, which is anything I don't want to do, including -- (Laughter) -- all domestic tasks, but also: bug killing, trash removal, lawn care and vehicle maintenance.
I want no part of any of that.
(Laughter) Pink is my favorite color.
I enjoy fashion magazines and pretty things.
I watch "The Bachelor" and romantic comedies, and I have absurd fantasies about fairy tales coming true.
Some of my transgressions are more flagrant.
If a woman wants to take her husband's name, that is her choice, and it is not my place to judge.
If a woman chooses to stay home to raise her children, I embrace that choice, too.
The problem is not that she makes herself economically vulnerable in that choice; the problem is that our society is set up to make women economically vulnerable when they choose.
Let's deal with that.
(Applause) I reject the mainstream feminism that has historically ignored or deflected the needs of women of color, working-class women, queer women and transgender women, in favor of supporting white, middle- and upper-class straight women.
Listen, if that's good feminism -- I am a very bad feminist.
(Laughter) There is also this: As a feminist, I feel a lot of pressure.
We have this tendency to put visible feminists on a pedestal.
We expect them to pose perfectly.
When they disappoint us, we gleefully knock them from the very pedestal we put them on.
Like I said, I am a mess -- consider me knocked off that pedestal before you ever try to put me up there.
(Laughter) Too many women, particularly groundbreaking women and industry leaders, are afraid to be labeled as feminists.
They're afraid to stand up and say, "Yes, I am a feminist," for fear of what that label means, for fear of being unable to live up to unrealistic expectations.
Take, for example, Beyoncé, or as I call her, The Goddess.
(Laughter) She has emerged, in recent years, as a visible feminist.
At the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards, she performed in front of the word "feminist" 10 feet high.
It was a glorious spectacle to see this pop star openly embracing feminism and letting young women and men know that being a feminist is something to celebrate.
As the moment faded, cultural critics began endlessly debating whether or not Beyoncé was, indeed, a feminist.
They graded her feminism, instead of simply taking a grown, accomplished woman at her word.
(Laughter) (Applause) We demand perfection from feminists, because we are still fighting for so much, we want so much, we need so damn much.
We go far beyond reasonable, constructive criticism, to dissecting any given woman's feminism, tearing it apart until there's nothing left.
We do not need to do that.
Bad feminism -- or really, more inclusive feminism -- is a starting point.
But what happens next?
We go from acknowledging our imperfections to accountability, or walking the walk, and being a little bit brave.
If I listen to degrading music, I am creating a demand for which artists are more than happy to contribute a limitless supply.
These artists are not going to change how they talk about women in their songs until we demand that change by affecting their bottom line.
Certainly, it is difficult.
Why must it be so catchy?
(Laughter) It's hard to make the better choice, and it is so easy to justify a lesser one.
But -- when I justify bad choices, I make it harder for women to achieve equality, the equality that we all deserve, and I need to own that.
I think of my nieces, ages three and four.
They are gorgeous and headstrong, brilliant girls, who are a whole lot of brave.
I want them to thrive in a world where they are valued for the powerful creatures they are.
I think of them, and suddenly, the better choice becomes far easier to make.
We can all make better choices.
We can change the channel when a television show treats sexual violence against women like sport, Game of Thrones.
We can change the radio station when we hear songs that treat women as nothing.
We can spend our box office dollars elsewhere when movies don't treat women as anything more than decorative objects.
We can stop supporting professional sports where the athletes treat their partners like punching bags.
(Applause) In other ways, men -- and especially straight white men -- can say, "No, I will not publish with your magazine, or participate in your project, or otherwise work with you, until you include a fair number of women, both as participants and decision makers.
I won't work with you until your publication, or your organization, is more inclusive of all kinds of difference."
Those of us who are underrepresented and invited to participate in such projects, can also decline to be included until more of us are invited through the glass ceiling, and we are tokens no more.
Without these efforts, without taking these stands, our accomplishments are going to mean very little.
We can commit these small acts of bravery and hope that our choices trickle upward to the people in power -- editors, movie and music producers, CEOs, lawmakers -- the people who can make bigger, braver choices to create lasting, meaningful change.
We can also boldly claim our feminism -- good, bad, or anywhere in between.
The last line of my book "Bad Feminist" says, "I would rather be a bad feminist than no feminist at all."
This is true for so many reasons, but first and foremost, I say this because once upon a time, my voice was stolen from me, and feminism helped me to get my voice back.
There was an incident.
I call it an incident so I can carry the burden of what happened.
Some boys broke me, when I was so young, I did not know what boys can do to break a girl.
They treated me like I was nothing.
I began to believe I was nothing.
They stole my voice, and in the after, I did not dare to believe that anything I might say could matter.
But -- I had writing.
And there, I wrote myself back together.
I wrote myself toward a stronger version of myself.
I read the words of women who might understand a story like mine, and women who looked like me, and understood what it was like to move through the world with brown skin.
I read the words of women who showed me I was not nothing.
I learned to write like them, and then I learned to write as myself.
I found my voice again, and I started to believe that my voice is powerful beyond measure.
Through writing and feminism, I also found that if I was a little bit brave, another woman might hear me and see me and recognize that none of us are the nothing the world tries to tell us we are.
In one hand, I hold the power to accomplish anything.
And in my other, I hold the humbling reality that I am just one woman.
I am a bad feminist, I am a good woman, I am trying to become better in how I think, and what I say, and what I do, without abandoning everything that makes me human.
I hope that we can all do the same.
I hope that we can all be a little bit brave, when we most need such bravery.
(Applause)
A few years ago, my mom developed rheumatoid arthritis.
Her wrists, knees and toes swelled up, causing crippling, chronic pain.
She had to file for disability.
She stopped attending our local mosque.
Some mornings it was too painful for her to brush her teeth.
I wanted to help.
But I didn't know how.
I'm not a doctor.
So, what I am is a historian of medicine.
So I started to research the history of chronic pain.
Turns out, UCLA has an entire history of pain collection in their archives.
And I found a story -- a fantastic story -- of a man who saved -- rescued -- millions of people from pain; people like my mom.
Yet, I had never heard of him.
There were no biographies of him, no Hollywood movies.
His name was John J. Bonica.
But when our story begins, he was better known as Johnny "Bull" Walker.
It was a summer day in 1941.
The circus had just arrived in the tiny town of Brookfield, New York.
Spectators flocked to see the wire-walkers, the tramp clowns -- if they were lucky, the human cannonball.
They also came to see the strongman, Johnny "Bull" Walker, a brawny bully who'd pin you for a dollar.
You know, on that particular day, a voice rang out over the circus P.A. system.
They needed a doctor urgently, in the live animal tent.
Something had gone wrong with the lion tamer.
The climax of his act had gone wrong, and his head was stuck inside the lion's mouth.
He was running out of air; the crowd watched in horror as he struggled and then passed out.
When the lion finally did relax its jaws, the lion tamer just slumped to the ground, motionless.
When he came to a few minutes later, he saw a familiar figure hunched over him.
It was Bull Walker.
The strongman had given the lion tamer mouth-to-mouth, and saved his life.
Now, the strongman hadn't told anyone, but he was actually a third-year medical student.
He toured with the circus during summers to pay tuition, but kept it a secret to protect his persona.
He was supposed to be a brute, a villain -- not a nerdy do-gooder.
His medical colleagues didn't know his secret, either.
As he put it, "If you were an athlete, you were a dumb dodo."
So he didn't tell them about the circus, or about how he wrestled professionally on evenings and weekends.
He used a pseudonym like Bull Walker, or later, the Masked Marvel.
He even kept it a secret that same year, when he was crowned the Light Heavyweight Champion of the world.
Over the years, John J. Bonica lived these parallel lives.
He was a wrestler; he was a doctor.
He was a heel; he was a hero.
He inflicted pain, and he treated it.
And he didn’t know it at the time, but over the next five decades, he'd draw on these dueling identities to forge a whole new way to think about pain.
It'd change modern medicine so much so, that decades later, Time magazine would call him pain relief's founding father.
But that all happened later.
In 1942, Bonica graduated medical school and married Emma, his sweetheart, whom he had met at one of his matches years before.
He still wrestled in secret -- he had to.
His internship at New York's St. Vincent's Hospital paid nothing.
With his championship belt, he wrestled in big-ticket venues, like Madison Square Garden, against big-time opponents, like Everett "The Blonde Bear" Marshall, or three-time world champion, Angelo Savoldi.
The matches took a toll on his body; he tore hip joints, fractured ribs.
One night, The Terrible Turk's big toe scratched a scar like Capone's down the side of his face.
The next morning at work, he had to wear a surgical mask to hide it.
Twice Bonica showed up to the O.R. with one eye so bruised, he couldn't see out of it.
But worst of all were his mangled cauliflower ears.
He said they felt like two baseballs on the sides of his head.
Pain just kept accumulating in his life.
Next, he watched his wife go into labor at his hospital.
She heaved and pushed, clearly in anguish.
Her obstetrician called out to the intern on duty to give her a few drops of ether to ease her pain.
But the intern was a young guy, just three weeks on the job -- he was jittery, and in applying the ether, irritated Emma's throat.
She vomited and choked, and started to turn blue.
Bonica, who was watching all this, pushed the intern out of the way, cleared her airway, and saved his wife and his unborn daughter.
At that moment, he decided to devote his life to anesthesiology.
Later, he'd even go on to help develop the epidural, for delivering mothers.
But before he could focus on obstetrics, Bonica had to report for basic training.
Right around D-Day, Bonica showed up to Madigan Army Medical Center, near Tacoma.
At 7,700 beds, it was one of the largest army hospitals in America.
Bonica was in charge of all pain control there.
He was only 27.
Treating so many patients, Bonica started noticing cases that contradicted everything he had learned.
Pain was supposed to be a kind of alarm bell -- in a good way -- a body's way of signaling an injury, like a broken arm.
But in some cases, like after a patient had a leg amputated, that patient might still complain of pain in that nonexistent leg.
But if the injury had been treated, why would the alarm bell keep ringing?
There were other cases in which there was no evidence of an injury whatsoever, and yet, still the patient hurt.
Bonica tracked down all the specialists at his hospital -- surgeons, neurologists, psychiatrists, others.
And he tried to get their opinions on his patients.
It took too long, so he started organizing group meetings over lunch.
It would be like a tag team of specialists going up against the patient's pain.
No one had ever focused on pain this way before.
After that, he hit the books.
He read every medical textbook he could get his hands on, carefully noting every mention of the word "pain."
Out of the 14,000 pages he read, the word "pain" was on 17 and a half of them.
Seventeen and a half.
For the most basic, most common, most frustrating part of being a patient.
Bonica was shocked -- I'm quoting him, he said, "What the hell kind of conclusion can you come to there?
The most important thing from the patient's perspective, they don't talk about."
So over the next eight years, Bonica would talk about it.
He'd write about it; he'd write those missing pages.
He wrote what would later be known as the Bible of Pain.
In it he proposed new strategies, new treatments using nerve-block injections.
He proposed a new institution, the Pain Clinic, based on those lunchtime meetings.
But the most important thing about his book was that it was kind of an emotional alarm bell for medicine.
A desperate plea to doctors to take pain seriously in patients' lives.
He recast the very purpose of medicine.
The goal wasn't to make patients better; it was to make patients feel better.
He pushed his pain agenda for decades, before it finally took hold in the mid-'70s.
Hundreds of pain clinics sprung up all over the world.
But as they did -- a tragic twist.
Bonica's years of wrestling caught up to him.
He had been out of the ring for over 20 years, but those 1,500 professional bouts had left a mark on his body.
Still in his mid-50s, he suffered severe osteoarthritis.
Over the next 20 years he'd have 22 surgeries, including four spine operations, and hip replacement after hip replacement.
He could barely raise his arm, turn his neck.
He needed aluminum crutches to walk.
His friends and former students became his doctors.
One recalled that he probably had more nerve-block injections than anyone else on the planet.
Already a workaholic, he worked even more -- 15- to 18-hour days.
Healing others became more than just his job, it was his own most effective form of relief.
"If I wasn't as busy as I am," he told a reporter at the time, "I would be a completely disabled guy."
On a business trip to Florida in the early 1980s, Bonica got a former student to drive him to the Hyde Park area in Tampa.
They drove past palm trees and pulled up to an old mansion, with giant silver howitzer cannons hidden in the garage.
The house belonged to the Zacchini family, who were something like American circus royalty.
Decades earlier, Bonica had watched them, clad in silver jumpsuits and goggles, doing the act they pioneered -- the Human Cannonball.
But now they were like him: retired.
That generation is all dead now, including Bonica, so there's no way to know exactly what they said that day.
But still, I love imagining it.
The strongman and the human cannonballs reunited, showing off old scars, and new ones.
Maybe Bonica gave them medical advice.
Maybe he told them what he later said in an oral history, which is that his time in the circus and wrestling deeply molded his life.
Bonica saw pain close up.
He felt it. He lived it.
And it made it impossible for him to ignore in others.
Out of that empathy, he spun a whole new field, played a major role in getting medicine to acknowledge pain in and of itself.
In that same oral history, Bonica claimed that pain is the most complex human experience.
That it involves your past life, your current life, your interactions, your family.
That was definitely true for Bonica.
But it was also true for my mom.
It's easy for doctors to see my mom as a kind of professional patient, a woman who just spends her days in waiting rooms.
Sometimes I get stuck seeing her that same way.
But as I saw Bonica's pain -- a testament to his fully lived life -- I started to remember all the things that my mom's pain holds.
Before they got swollen and arthritic, my mom's fingers clacked away in the hospital H.R. department where she worked.
They folded samosas for our entire mosque.
When I was a kid, they cut my hair, wiped my nose, tied my shoes.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Just after Christmas last year, 132 kids in California got the measles by either visiting Disneyland or being exposed to someone who'd been there.
The virus then hopped the Canadian border, infecting more than 100 children in Quebec.
One of the tragic things about this outbreak is that measles, which can be fatal to a child with a weakened immune system, is one of the most easily preventable diseases in the world.
An effective vaccine against it has been available for more than half a century, but many of the kids involved in the Disneyland outbreak had not been vaccinated because their parents were afraid of something allegedly even worse: autism.
But wait -- wasn't the paper that sparked the controversy about autism and vaccines debunked, retracted, and branded a deliberate fraud by the British Medical Journal?
Don't most science-savvy people know that the theory that vaccines cause autism is B.S.?
I think most of you do, but millions of parents worldwide continue to fear that vaccines put their kids at risk for autism.
Why?
Here's why.
This is a graph of autism prevalence estimates rising over time.
For most of the 20th century, autism was considered an incredibly rare condition.
The few psychologists and pediatricians who'd even heard of it figured they would get through their entire careers without seeing a single case.
For decades, the prevalence estimates remained stable at just three or four children in 10,000.
But then, in the 1990s, the numbers started to skyrocket.
Fundraising organizations like Autism Speaks routinely refer to autism as an epidemic, as if you could catch it from another kid at Disneyland.
So what's going on?
If it isn't vaccines, what is it?
If you ask the folks down at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta what's going on, they tend to rely on phrases like "broadened diagnostic criteria" and "better case finding" to explain these rising numbers.
But that kind of language doesn't do much to allay the fears of a young mother who is searching her two-year-old's face for eye contact.
If the diagnostic criteria had to be broadened, why were they so narrow in the first place?
Why were cases of autism so hard to find before the 1990s?
Five years ago, I decided to try to uncover the answers to these questions.
I learned that what happened has less to do with the slow and cautious progress of science than it does with the seductive power of storytelling.
For most of the 20th century, clinicians told one story about what autism is and how it was discovered, but that story turned out to be wrong, and the consequences of it are having a devastating impact on global public health.
There was a second, more accurate story of autism which had been lost and forgotten in obscure corners of the clinical literature.
This second story tells us everything about how we got here and where we need to go next.
The first story starts with a child psychiatrist at Johns Hopkins Hospital named Leo Kanner.
In 1943, Kanner published a paper describing 11 young patients who seemed to inhabit private worlds, ignoring the people around them, even their own parents.
They could amuse themselves for hours by flapping their hands in front of their faces, but they were panicked by little things like their favorite toy being moved from its usual place without their knowledge.
Based on the patients who were brought to his clinic, Kanner speculated that autism is very rare.
By the 1950s, as the world's leading authority on the subject, he declared that he had seen less than 150 true cases of his syndrome while fielding referrals from as far away as South Africa.
That's actually not surprising, because Kanner's criteria for diagnosing autism were incredibly selective.
For example, he discouraged giving the diagnosis to children who had seizures but now we know that epilepsy is very common in autism.
He once bragged that he had turned nine out of 10 kids referred to his office as autistic by other clinicians without giving them an autism diagnosis.
Kanner was a smart guy, but a number of his theories didn't pan out.
He classified autism as a form of infantile psychosis caused by cold and unaffectionate parents.
These children, he said, had been kept neatly in a refrigerator that didn't defrost.
At the same time, however, Kanner noticed that some of his young patients had special abilities that clustered in certain areas like music, math and memory.
One boy in his clinic could distinguish between 18 symphonies before he turned two.
When his mother put on one of his favorite records, he would correctly declare, "Beethoven!"
But Kanner took a dim view of these abilities, claiming that the kids were just regurgitating things they'd heard their pompous parents say, desperate to earn their approval.
As a result, autism became a source of shame and stigma for families, and two generations of autistic children were shipped off to institutions for their own good, becoming invisible to the world at large.
Amazingly, it wasn't until the 1970s that researchers began to test Kanner's theory that autism was rare.
Lorna Wing was a cognitive psychologist in London who thought that Kanner's theory of refrigerator parenting were "bloody stupid," as she told me.
She and her husband John were warm and affectionate people, and they had a profoundly autistic daughter named Susie.
Lorna and John knew how hard it was to raise a child like Susie without support services, special education, and the other resources that are out of reach without a diagnosis.
To make the case to the National Health Service that more resources were needed for autistic children and their families, Lorna and her colleague Judith Gould decided to do something that should have been done 30 years earlier.
They undertook a study of autism prevalence in the general population.
They pounded the pavement in a London suburb called Camberwell to try to find autistic children in the community.
What they saw made clear that Kanner's model was way too narrow, while the reality of autism was much more colorful and diverse.
Some kids couldn't talk at all, while others waxed on at length about their fascination with astrophysics, dinosaurs or the genealogy of royalty.
In other words, these children didn't fit into nice, neat boxes, as Judith put it, and they saw lots of them, way more than Kanner's monolithic model would have predicted.
At first, they were at a loss to make sense of their data.
How had no one noticed these children before?
But then Lorna came upon a reference to a paper that had been published in German in 1944, the year after Kanner's paper, and then forgotten, buried with the ashes of a terrible time that no one wanted to remember or think about.
Kanner knew about this competing paper, but scrupulously avoided mentioning it in his own work.
It had never even been translated into English, but luckily, Lorna's husband spoke German, and he translated it for her.
The paper offered an alternate story of autism.
Its author was a man named Hans Asperger, who ran a combination clinic and residential school in Vienna in the 1930s.
Asperger's ideas about teaching children with learning differences were progressive even by contemporary standards.
Mornings at his clinic began with exercise classes set to music, and the children put on plays on Sunday afternoons.
Instead of blaming parents for causing autism, Asperger framed it as a lifelong, polygenetic disability that requires compassionate forms of support and accommodations over the course of one's whole life.
Rather than treating the kids in his clinic like patients, Asperger called them his little professors, and enlisted their help in developing methods of education that were particularly suited to them.
Crucially, Asperger viewed autism as a diverse continuum that spans an astonishing range of giftedness and disability.
He believed that autism and autistic traits are common and always have been, seeing aspects of this continuum in familiar archetypes from pop culture like the socially awkward scientist and the absent-minded professor.
He went so far as to say, it seems that for success in science and art, a dash of autism is essential.
Lorna and Judith realized that Kanner had been as wrong about autism being rare as he had been about parents causing it.
Over the next several years, they quietly worked with the American Psychiatric Association to broaden the criteria for diagnosis to reflect the diversity of what they called "the autism spectrum."
In the late '80s and early 1990s, their changes went into effect, swapping out Kanner's narrow model for Asperger's broad and inclusive one.
These changes weren't happening in a vacuum.
By coincidence, as Lorna and Judith worked behind the scenes to reform the criteria, people all over the world were seeing an autistic adult for the first time.
Before "Rain Man" came out in 1988, only a tiny, ingrown circle of experts knew what autism looked like, but after Dustin Hoffman's unforgettable performance as Raymond Babbitt earned "Rain Man" four Academy Awards, pediatricians, psychologists, teachers and parents all over the world knew what autism looked like.
Coincidentally, at the same time, the first easy-to-use clinical tests for diagnosing autism were introduced.
You no longer had to have a connection to that tiny circle of experts to get your child evaluated.
The combination of "Rain Man," the changes to the criteria, and the introduction of these tests created a network effect, a perfect storm of autism awareness.
The number of diagnoses started to soar, just as Lorna and Judith predicted, indeed hoped, that it would, enabling autistic people and their families to finally get the support and services they deserved.
Then Andrew Wakefield came along to blame the spike in diagnoses on vaccines, a simple, powerful, and seductively believable story that was as wrong as Kanner's theory that autism was rare.
If the CDC's current estimate, that one in 68 kids in America are on the spectrum, is correct, autistics are one of the largest minority groups in the world.
In recent years, autistic people have come together on the Internet to reject the notion that they are puzzles to be solved by the next medical breakthrough, coining the term "neurodiversity" to celebrate the varieties of human cognition.
One way to understand neurodiversity is to think in terms of human operating systems.
Just because a P.C. is not running Windows doesn't mean that it's broken.
By autistic standards, the normal human brain is easily distractable, obsessively social, and suffers from a deficit of attention to detail.
To be sure, autistic people have a hard time living in a world not built for them.
[Seventy] years later, we're still catching up to Asperger, who believed that the "cure" for the most disabling aspects of autism is to be found in understanding teachers, accommodating employers, supportive communities, and parents who have faith in their children's potential.
An autistic [man] named Zosia Zaks once said, "We need all hands on deck to right the ship of humanity."
As we sail into an uncertain future, we need every form of human intelligence on the planet working together to tackle the challenges that we face as a society.
We can't afford to waste a brain.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Blah blah blah blah blah.
Blah blah blah blah, blah blah, blah blah blah blah blah blah.
Blah blah blah, blah.
So what the hell was that?
Well, you don't know because you couldn't understand it.
It wasn't clear.
But hopefully, it was said with enough conviction that it was at least alluringly mysterious.
Clarity or mystery?
I'm balancing these two things in my daily work as a graphic designer, as well as my daily life as a New Yorker every day, and there are two elements that absolutely fascinate me.
Here's an example.
Now, how many people know what this is?
Okay. Now how many people know what this is?
Okay. Thanks to two more deft strokes by the genius Charles M. Schulz, we now have seven deft strokes that in and of themselves create an entire emotional life, one that has enthralled hundreds of millions of fans for over 50 years.
This is actually a cover of a book that I designed about the work of Schulz and his art, which will be coming out this fall, and that is the entire cover.
There is no other typographic information or visual information on the front, and the name of the book is "Only What's Necessary."
So this is sort of symbolic about the decisions I have to make every day about the design that I'm perceiving, and the design I'm creating.
So clarity.
Clarity gets to the point.
It's blunt. It's honest. It's sincere.
We ask ourselves this. ["When should you be clear?"] Now, something like this, whether we can read it or not, needs to be really, really clear.
Is it?
This is a rather recent example of urban clarity that I just love, mainly because I'm always late and I am always in a hurry.
So when these meters started showing up a couple of years ago on street corners, I was thrilled, because now I finally knew how many seconds I had to get across the street before I got run over by a car.
Six? I can do that. (Laughter) So let's look at the yin to the clarity yang, and that is mystery.
Mystery is a lot more complicated by its very definition.
Mystery demands to be decoded, and when it's done right, we really, really want to.
["When should you be mysterious?"] In World War II, the Germans really, really wanted to decode this, and they couldn't.
Here's an example of a design that I've done recently for a novel by Haruki Murakami, who I've done design work for for over 20 years now, and this is a novel about a young man who has four dear friends who all of a sudden, after their freshman year of college, completely cut him off with no explanation, and he is devastated.
And the friends' names each have a connotation in Japanese to a color.
So there's Mr. Red, there's Mr. Blue, there's Ms. White, and Ms. Black.
Tsukuru Tazaki, his name does not correspond to a color, so his nickname is Colorless, and as he's looking back on their friendship, he recalls that they were like five fingers on a hand.
So I created this sort of abstract representation of this, but there's a lot more going on underneath the surface of the story, and there's more going on underneath the surface of the jacket.
The four fingers are now four train lines in the Tokyo subway system, which has significance within the story.
And then you have the colorless subway line intersecting with each of the other colors, which basically he does later on in the story.
He catches up with each of these people to find out why they treated him the way they did.
And so this is the three-dimensional finished product sitting on my desk in my office, and what I was hoping for here is that you'll simply be allured by the mystery of what this looks like, and will want to read it to decode and find out and make more clear why it looks the way it does.
["The Visual Vernacular."] This is a way to use a more familiar kind of mystery.
What does this mean?
This is what it means. ["Make it look like something else."] The visual vernacular is the way we are used to seeing a certain thing applied to something else so that we see it in a different way.
This is an approach I wanted to take to a book of essays by David Sedaris that had this title at the time. ["All the Beauty You Will Ever Need"] Now, the challenge here was that this title actually means nothing.
It's not connected to any of the essays in the book.
It came to the author's boyfriend in a dream.
Thank you very much, so -- (Laughter) -- so usually, I am creating a design that is in some way based on the text, but this is all the text there is.
So you've got this mysterious title that really doesn't mean anything, so I was trying to think: Where might I see a bit of mysterious text that seems to mean something but doesn't?
And sure enough, not long after, one evening after a Chinese meal, this arrived, and I thought, "Ah, bing, ideagasm!" (Laughter) I've always loved the hilariously mysterious tropes of fortune cookies that seem to mean something extremely deep but when you think about them -- if you think about them -- they really don't.
This says, "Hardly anyone knows how much is gained by ignoring the future."
Thank you. (Laughter) But we can take this visual vernacular and apply it to Mr. Sedaris, and we are so familiar with how fortune cookie fortunes look that we don't even need the bits of the cookie anymore.
We're just seeing this strange thing and we know we love David Sedaris, and so we're hoping that we're in for a good time.
["'Fraud' Essays by David Rakoff"] David Rakoff was a wonderful writer and he called his first book "Fraud" because he was getting sent on assignments by magazines to do things that he was not equipped to do.
So he was this skinny little urban guy and GQ magazine would send him down the Colorado River whitewater rafting to see if he would survive.
And then he would write about it, and he felt that he was a fraud and that he was misrepresenting himself.
And so I wanted the cover of this book to also misrepresent itself and then somehow show a reader reacting to it.
This led me to graffiti.
I'm fascinated by graffiti.
I think anybody who lives in an urban environment encounters graffiti all the time, and there's all different sorts of it.
This is a picture I took on the Lower East Side of just a transformer box on the sidewalk and it's been tagged like crazy.
Now whether you look at this and think, "Oh, that's a charming urban affectation," or you look at it and say, "That's illegal abuse of property," the one thing I think we can all agree on is that you cannot read it.
Right? There is no clear message here.
There is another kind of graffiti that I find far more interesting, which I call editorial graffiti.
This is a picture I took recently in the subway, and sometimes you see lots of prurient, stupid stuff, but I thought this was interesting, and this is a poster that is saying rah-rah Airbnb, and someone has taken a Magic Marker and has editorialized about what they think about it.
And it got my attention.
So I was thinking, how do we apply this to this book?
So I get the book by this person, and I start reading it, and I'm thinking, this guy is not who he says he is; he's a fraud.
And I get out a red Magic Marker, and out of frustration just scribble this across the front.
Design done. (Laughter) And they went for it! (Laughter) Author liked it, publisher liked it, and that is how the book went out into the world, and it was really fun to see people reading this on the subway and walking around with it and what have you, and they all sort of looked like they were crazy.
(Laughter) ["'Perfidia' a novel by James Ellroy"] Okay, James Ellroy, amazing crime writer, a good friend, I've worked with him for many years.
He is probably best known as the author of "The Black Dahlia" and "L.A. Confidential."
His most recent novel was called this, which is a very mysterious name that I'm sure a lot of people know what it means, but a lot of people don't.
And it's a story about a Japanese-American detective in Los Angeles in 1941 investigating a murder.
And then Pearl Harbor happens, and as if his life wasn't difficult enough, now the race relations have really ratcheted up, and then the Japanese-American internment camps are quickly created, and there's lots of tension and horrible stuff as he's still trying to solve this murder.
And so I did at first think very literally about this in terms of all right, we'll take Pearl Harbor and we'll add it to Los Angeles and we'll make this apocalyptic dawn on the horizon of the city.
And so that's a picture from Pearl Harbor just grafted onto Los Angeles.
My editor in chief said, "You know, it's interesting but I think you can do better and I think you can make it simpler."
And so I went back to the drawing board, as I often do.
But also, being alive to my surroundings, I work in a high-rise in Midtown, and every night, before I leave the office, I have to push this button to get out, and the big heavy glass doors open and I can get onto the elevator.
And one night, all of a sudden, I looked at this and I saw it in a way that I hadn't really noticed it before.
Big red circle, danger.
And I thought this was so obvious that it had to have been done a zillion times, and so I did a Google image search, and I couldn't find another book cover that looked quite like this, and so this is really what solved the problem, and graphically it's more interesting and creates a bigger tension between the idea of a certain kind of sunrise coming up over L.A. and America.
["'Gulp' A tour of the human digestive system by Mary Roach."] Mary Roach is an amazing writer who takes potentially mundane scientific subjects and makes them not mundane at all; she makes them really fun.
So in this particular case, it's about the human digestive system.
So I'm trying to figure out what is the cover of this book going to be.
This is a self-portrait. (Laughter) Every morning I look at myself in the medicine cabinet mirror to see if my tongue is black.
And if it's not, I'm good to go.
(Laughter) I recommend you all do this.
But I also started thinking, here's our introduction.
Right? Into the human digestive system.
But I think what we can all agree on is that actual photographs of human mouths, at least based on this, are off-putting. (Laughter) So for the cover, then, I had this illustration done which is literally more palatable and reminds us that it's best to approach the digestive system from this end.
(Laughter) I don't even have to complete the sentence. All right.
["Unuseful mystery"] What happens when clarity and mystery get mixed up?
And we see this all the time.
This is what I call unuseful mystery.
I go down into the subway -- I take the subway a lot -- and this piece of paper is taped to a girder.
Right? And now I'm thinking, uh-oh, and the train's about to come and I'm trying to figure out what this means, and thanks a lot.
Part of the problem here is that they've compartmentalized the information in a way they think is helpful, and frankly, I don't think it is at all.
So this is mystery we do not need.
What we need is useful clarity, so just for fun, I redesigned this.
This is using all the same elements.
(Applause) Thank you. I am still waiting for a call from the MTA. (Laughter) You know, I'm actually not even using more colors than they use.
They just didn't even bother to make the 4 and the 5 green, those idiots. (Laughter) So the first thing we see is that there is a service change, and then, in two complete sentences with a beginning, a middle and an end, it tells us what the change is and what's going to be happening.
Call me crazy! (Laughter) ["Useful mystery"] All right.
Now, here is a piece of mystery that I love: packaging.
This redesign of the Diet Coke can by Turner Duckworth is to me truly a piece of art.
It's a work of art. It's beautiful.
But part of what makes it so heartening to me as a designer is that he's taken the visual vernacular of Diet Coke -- the typefaces, the colors, the silver background -- and he's reduced them to their most essential parts, so it's like going back to the Charlie Brown face.
It's like, how can you give them just enough information so they know what it is but giving them the credit for the knowledge that they already have about this thing?
It looks great, and you would go into a delicatessen and all of a sudden see that on the shelf, and it's wonderful.
Which makes the next thing -- ["Unuseful clarity"] -- all the more disheartening, at least to me.
So okay, again, going back down into the subway, after this came out, these are pictures that I took.
Times Square subway station: Coca-Cola has bought out the entire thing for advertising. Okay?
And maybe some of you know where this is going.
Ahem.
"You moved to New York with the clothes on your back, the cash in your pocket, and your eyes on the prize.
You're on Coke." (Laughter) "You moved to New York with an MBA, one clean suit, and an extremely firm handshake.
You're on Coke." (Laughter) These are real! (Laughter) Not even the support beams were spared, except they switched into Yoda mode. (Laughter) "Coke you're on." (Laughter) ["Excuse me, I'm on WHAT??"] This campaign was a huge misstep.
It was pulled almost instantly due to consumer backlash and all sorts of unflattering parodies on the web -- (Laughter) -- and also that dot next to "You're on," that's not a period, that's a trademark.
So thanks a lot.
So to me, this was just so bizarre about how they could get the packaging so mysteriously beautiful and perfect and the message so unbearably, clearly wrong.
It was just incredible to me.
So I just hope that I've been able to share with you some of my insights on the uses of clarity and mystery in my work, and maybe how you might decide to be more clear in your life, or maybe to be a bit more mysterious and not so over-sharing.
(Laughter) And if there's just one thing that I leave you with from this talk, I hope it's this: Blih blih blih blah. Blah blah blih blih. ["'Judge This,' Chip Kidd"] Blih blih blah blah blah. Blah blah blah.
Blah blah.
(Applause)
Every group of female friends has the funny one, the one you go to when you need a good cry, the one who tells you to suck it up when you've had a hard day.
And this group was no different.
Except that this was a community of groundbreaking women who came together -- first to become teammates, then friends, and then family -- in the least likely of places: on the Special Operations battlefield.
This was a group of women whose friendship and valor was cemented not only by what they had seen and done at the tip of the spear, but by the fact that they were there at a time when women -- officially, at least -- remained banned from ground combat, and America had no idea they existed.
This story begins with Special Operations leaders, some of the most tested men in the United States military, saying, "We need women to help us wage this war."
"America would never kill its way to the end of its wars," it argued.
"Needed more knowledge and more understanding."
And as everyone knows, if you want to understand what's happening in a community and in a home, you talk to women, whether you're talking about Southern Afghanistan, or Southern California.
But in this case, men could not talk to women, because in a conservative and traditional society like Afghanistan, that would cause grave offense.
So you needed women soldiers out there.
That meant, at this time in the war, that the women who would be recruited to serve alongside Army Rangers and Navy SEALs, would be seeing the kind of combat experienced by less than five percent of the entire United States military.
Less than five percent.
So the call went out.
"Female soldiers: Become a part of history.
Join Special Operations on the battlefield in Afghanistan."
This is in 2011.
And from Alabama to Alaska, a group of women who had always wanted to do something that mattered alongside the best of the best, and to make a difference for their country, answered that call to serve.
And for them it was not about politics, it was about serving with purpose.
And so, the women who came to North Carolina to compete for a spot on these teams which would put women on the Special Operations front lines, landed and found very quickly a community, the likes of which they had never seen.
Full of women who were as fierce and as fit as they were, and as driven to make a difference.
They didn't have to apologize for who they were, and in fact, they could celebrate it.
And what they found when they were there was that all of a sudden, there were lots of people like them.
As one of them said, "It was like you looked around and realized there was more than one giraffe at the zoo."
Among this team of standouts was Cassie, a young woman who managed to be an ROTC cadet, a sorority sister and a Women's Studies minor, all in one person.
Tristan, a West Point track star, who always ran and road marched with no socks, and had shoes whose smell proved it.
(Laughter) Amber, a Heidi look-alike, who had always wanted to be in the infantry, and when she found out that women couldn't be, she decided to become an intel officer.
She served in Bosnia, and later helped the FBI to bust drug gangs in Pennsylvania.
And then there was Kate, who played high school football all four years, and actually wanted to drop out after the first, to go into the glee club, but when boys told her that girls couldn't play football, she decided to stay for all the little girls who would come after her.
For them, biology had shaped part of their destiny, and put, as Cassie once said, "everything noble out of reach for girls."
And yet, here was a chance to serve with the best of the best on a mission that mattered to their country, not despite the fact that they were female, but because of it.
This team of women, in many ways, was like women everywhere.
They wore makeup, and in fact, they would bond in the ladies' room over eyeliner and eye pencil.
They also wore body armor.
They would put 50 pounds of weight on their backs, and board the helicopter for an operation, and they would come back and watch a movie called "Bridesmaids."
(Laughter) They even wore a thing called Spanx, because, as they found very quickly, the uniforms made for men were big where they should be small, and small where they should be big.
So Lane, an Iraq War veteran -- you see her here on my left -- decided she was going to go on Amazon and order a pair of Spanx to her base, so that her pants would fit better when she went out on mission each night.
These women would get together over video conference from all around Afghanistan from their various bases, and they would talk about what it was like to be one of the only women doing what they were doing.
They would swap jokes, they would talk about what was working, what wasn't, what they had learned to do well, what they needed to do better.
And they would talk about some of the lighter moments of being women out on the Special Operations front lines, including the Shewee, which was a tool that let you pee like a guy, although it's said to have had only a 40 percent accuracy rate out there.
(Laughter) These women lived in the "and."
They proved you could be fierce and you could be feminine.
