One professor said, "Maybe I might be able to help you, kid."
So, I went in that direction.
(Laughter) As you can never say no to a kid.
And so then, three months later, I finally nailed down a harsh deadline with this guy, and I get into his lab, I get all excited, and then I sit down, I start opening my mouth and talking, and five seconds later, he calls in another Ph.D.
Ph.D.s just flock into this little room, and they're just firing these questions at me, and by the end, I kind of felt like I was in a clown car.
There were 20 Ph.D.s, plus me and the professor crammed into this tiny office space, with them firing these rapid-fire questions at me, trying to sink my procedure.
How unlikely is that? I mean, pshhh.
(Laughter) However, subjecting myself to that interrogation -- I answered all their questions, and I guessed on quite a few but I got them right -- and I finally landed the lab space I needed.
But it was shortly afterwards that I discovered my once brilliant procedure had something like a million holes in it, and over the course of seven months, I painstakingly filled each and every one of those holes.
The result?
One small paper sensor that costs three cents and takes five minutes to run.
This makes it 168 times faster, over 26,000 times less expensive, and over 400 times more sensitive than our current standard for pancreatic cancer detection.
(Applause) One of the best parts of the sensor, though, is that it has close to 100 percent accuracy, and can detect the cancer in the earliest stages, when someone has close to 100 percent chance of survival.
And so in the next two to five years, this sensor could potentially lift the pancreatic cancer survival rates from a dismal 5.5 percent to close to 100 percent, and it would do similar for ovarian and lung cancer.
But it wouldn't stop there.
By switching out that antibody, you can look at a different protein, thus, a different disease -- potentially any disease in the entire world.
So that ranges from heart disease, to malaria, HIV, AIDS, as well as other forms of cancer -- anything.
And so, hopefully one day, we can all have that one extra uncle, that one mother, that one brother, sister, we can have that one more family member to love.
And that our hearts will be rid of that one disease burden that comes from pancreatic, ovarian and lung cancer, and potentially any disease.
But through the Internet, anything is possible.
Theories can be shared, and you don't have to be a professor with multiple degrees to have your ideas valued.
It's a neutral space, where what you look like, age or gender -- it doesn't matter.
It's just your ideas that count.
For me, it's all about looking at the Internet in an entirely new way, to realize that there's so much more to it than just posting duck-face pictures of yourself online.
(Laughter) You could be changing the world.
So if a 15 year-old who didn't even know what a pancreas was could find a new way to detect pancreatic cancer -- just imagine what you could do.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Nature sounds) When I first began recording wild soundscapes 45 years ago, I had no idea that ants, insect larvae, sea anemones and viruses created a sound signature.
But they do.
And so does every wild habitat on the planet, like the Amazon rainforest you're hearing behind me.
In fact, temperate and tropical rainforests each produce a vibrant animal orchestra, that instantaneous and organized expression of insects, reptiles, amphibians, birds and mammals.
And every soundscape that springs from a wild habitat generates its own unique signature, one that contains incredible amounts of information, and it's some of that information I want to share with you today.
The soundscape is made up of three basic sources.
The first is the geophony, or the nonbiological sounds that occur in any given habitat, like wind in the trees, water in a stream, waves at the ocean shore, movement of the Earth.
The second of these is the biophony.
The biophony is all of the sound that's generated by organisms in a given habitat at one time and in one place.
And the third is all of the sound that we humans generate that's called anthrophony.
Some of it is controlled, like music or theater, but most of it is chaotic and incoherent, which some of us refer to as noise.
There was a time when I considered wild soundscapes to be a worthless artifact.
They were just there, but they had no significance.
Well, I was wrong. What I learned from these encounters was that careful listening gives us incredibly valuable tools by which to evaluate the health of a habitat across the entire spectrum of life.
When I began recording in the late '60s, the typical methods of recording were limited to the fragmented capture of individual species like birds mostly, in the beginning, but later animals like mammals and amphibians.
To me, this was a little like trying to understand the magnificence of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony by abstracting the sound of a single violin player out of the context of the orchestra and hearing just that one part.
Fortunately, more and more institutions are implementing the more holistic models that I and a few of my colleagues have introduced to the field of soundscape ecology.
When I began recording over four decades ago, I could record for 10 hours and capture one hour of usable material, good enough for an album or a film soundtrack or a museum installation.
Now, because of global warming, resource extraction, and human noise, among many other factors, it can take up to 1,000 hours or more to capture the same thing.
Fully 50 percent of my archive comes from habitats so radically altered that they're either altogether silent or can no longer be heard in any of their original form.
The usual methods of evaluating a habitat have been done by visually counting the numbers of species and the numbers of individuals within each species in a given area.
However, by comparing data that ties together both density and diversity from what we hear, I'm able to arrive at much more precise fitness outcomes.
And I want to show you some examples that typify the possibilities unlocked by diving into this universe.
This is Lincoln Meadow.
Lincoln Meadow's a three-and-a-half-hour drive east of San Francisco in the Sierra Nevada Mountains, at about 2,000 meters altitude, and I've been recording there for many years.
In 1988, a logging company convinced local residents that there would be absolutely no environmental impact from a new method they were trying called "selective logging," taking out a tree here and there rather than clear-cutting a whole area.
With permission granted to record both before and after the operation, I set up my gear and captured a large number of dawn choruses to very strict protocol and calibrated recordings, because I wanted a really good baseline.
This is an example of a spectrogram.
A spectrogram is a graphic illustration of sound with time from left to right across the page -- 15 seconds in this case is represented — and frequency from the bottom of the page to the top, lowest to highest.
And you can see that the signature of a stream is represented here in the bottom third or half of the page, while birds that were once in that meadow are represented in the signature across the top.
There were a lot of them.
And here's Lincoln Meadow before selective logging.
(Nature sounds) Well, a year later I returned, and using the same protocols and recording under the same conditions, I recorded a number of examples of the same dawn choruses, and now this is what we've got.
This is after selective logging.
You can see that the stream is still represented in the bottom third of the page, but notice what's missing in the top two thirds.
(Nature sounds) Coming up is the sound of a woodpecker.
Well, I've returned to Lincoln Meadow 15 times in the last 25 years, and I can tell you that the biophony, the density and diversity of that biophony, has not yet returned to anything like it was before the operation.
But here's a picture of Lincoln Meadow taken after, and you can see that from the perspective of the camera or the human eye, hardly a stick or a tree appears to be out of place, which would confirm the logging company's contention that there's nothing of environmental impact.
However, our ears tell us a very different story.
Young students are always asking me what these animals are saying, and really I've got no idea.
But I can tell you that they do express themselves.
Whether or not we understand it is a different story.
I was walking along the shore in Alaska, and I came across this tide pool filled with a colony of sea anemones, these wonderful eating machines, relatives of coral and jellyfish.
And curious to see if any of them made any noise, I dropped a hydrophone, an underwater microphone covered in rubber, down the mouth part, and immediately the critter began to absorb the microphone into its belly, and the tentacles were searching out of the surface for something of nutritional value.
The static-like sounds that are very low, that you're going to hear right now.
(Static sounds) Yeah, but watch. When it didn't find anything to eat -- (Honking sound) (Laughter) I think that's an expression that can be understood in any language.
(Laughter) At the end of its breeding cycle, the Great Basin Spadefoot toad digs itself down about a meter under the hard-panned desert soil of the American West, where it can stay for many seasons until conditions are just right for it to emerge again.
And when there's enough moisture in the soil in the spring, frogs will dig themselves to the surface and gather around these large, vernal pools in great numbers.
And they vocalize in a chorus that's absolutely in sync with one another.
And they do that for two reasons.
The first is competitive, because they're looking for mates, and the second is cooperative, because if they're all vocalizing in sync together, it makes it really difficult for predators like coyotes, foxes and owls to single out any individual for a meal.
This is a spectrogram of what the frog chorusing looks like when it's in a very healthy pattern.
(Frogs croaking) Mono Lake is just to the east of Yosemite National Park in California, and it's a favorite habitat of these toads, and it's also favored by U.S. Navy jet pilots, who train in their fighters flying them at speeds exceeding 1,100 kilometers an hour and altitudes only a couple hundred meters above ground level of the Mono Basin, very fast, very low, and so loud that the anthrophony, the human noise, even though it's six and a half kilometers from the frog pond you just heard a second ago, it masked the sound of the chorusing toads.
You can see in this spectrogram that all of the energy that was once in the first spectrogram is gone from the top end of the spectrogram, and that there's breaks in the chorusing at two and a half, four and a half, and six and a half seconds, and then the sound of the jet, the signature, is in yellow at the very bottom of the page.
(Frogs croaking) Now at the end of that flyby, it took the frogs fully 45 minutes to regain their chorusing synchronicity, during which time, and under a full moon, we watched as two coyotes and a great horned owl came in to pick off a few of their numbers.
The good news is that, with a little bit of habitat restoration and fewer flights, the frog populations, once diminishing during the 1980s and early '90s, have pretty much returned to normal.
I want to end with a story told by a beaver.
It's a very sad story, but it really illustrates how animals can sometimes show emotion, a very controversial subject among some older biologists.
A colleague of mine was recording in the American Midwest around this pond that had been formed maybe 16,000 years ago at the end of the last ice age.
It was also formed in part by a beaver dam at one end that held that whole ecosystem together in a very delicate balance.
And one afternoon, while he was recording, there suddenly appeared from out of nowhere a couple of game wardens, who for no apparent reason, walked over to the beaver dam, dropped a stick of dynamite down it, blowing it up, killing the female and her young babies.
Horrified, my colleagues remained behind to gather his thoughts and to record whatever he could the rest of the afternoon, and that evening, he captured a remarkable event: the lone surviving male beaver swimming in slow circles crying out inconsolably for its lost mate and offspring.
This is probably the saddest sound I've ever heard coming from any organism, human or other.
(Beaver crying) Yeah. Well.
There are many facets to soundscapes, among them the ways in which animals taught us to dance and sing, which I'll save for another time.
But you have heard how biophonies help clarify our understanding of the natural world.
You've heard the impact of resource extraction, human noise and habitat destruction.
And where environmental sciences have typically tried to understand the world from what we see, a much fuller understanding can be got from what we hear.
Biophonies and geophonies are the signature voices of the natural world, and as we hear them, we're endowed with a sense of place, the true story of the world we live in.
In a matter of seconds, a soundscape reveals much more information from many perspectives, from quantifiable data to cultural inspiration.
Visual capture implicitly frames a limited frontal perspective of a given spatial context, while soundscapes widen that scope to a full 360 degrees, completely enveloping us.
And while a picture may be worth 1,000 words, a soundscape is worth 1,000 pictures.
And our ears tell us that the whisper of every leaf and creature speaks to the natural sources of our lives, which indeed may hold the secrets of love for all things, especially our own humanity, and the last word goes to a jaguar from the Amazon.
(Growling) Thank you for listening.
(Applause)
Where do you come from?
It's such a simple question, but these days, of course, simple questions bring ever more complicated answers.
People are always asking me where I come from, and they're expecting me to say India, and they're absolutely right insofar as 100 percent of my blood and ancestry does come from India.
Except, I've never lived one day of my life there.
I can't speak even one word of its more than 22,000 dialects.
So I don't think I've really earned the right to call myself an Indian.
And if "Where do you come from?"
means "Where were you born and raised and educated?"
then I'm entirely of that funny little country known as England, except I left England as soon as I completed my undergraduate education, and all the time I was growing up, I was the only kid in all my classes who didn't begin to look like the classic English heroes represented in our textbooks.
And if "Where do you come from?"
means "Where do you pay your taxes?
Where do you see your doctor and your dentist?"
then I'm very much of the United States, and I have been for 48 years now, since I was a really small child.
Except, for many of those years, I've had to carry around this funny little pink card with green lines running through my face identifying me as a permanent alien.
I do actually feel more alien the longer I live there.
(Laughter) And if "Where do you come from?"
means "Which place goes deepest inside you and where do you try to spend most of your time?"
then I'm Japanese, because I've been living as much as I can for the last 25 years in Japan.
Except, all of those years I've been there on a tourist visa, and I'm fairly sure not many Japanese would want to consider me one of them.
And I say all this just to stress how very old-fashioned and straightforward my background is, because when I go to Hong Kong or Sydney or Vancouver, most of the kids I meet are much more international and multi-cultured than I am.
And they have one home associated with their parents, but another associated with their partners, a third connected maybe with the place where they happen to be, a fourth connected with the place they dream of being, and many more besides.
And their whole life will be spent taking pieces of many different places and putting them together into a stained glass whole.
Home for them is really a work in progress.
It's like a project on which they're constantly adding upgrades and improvements and corrections.
And for more and more of us, home has really less to do with a piece of soil than, you could say, with a piece of soul.
If somebody suddenly asks me, "Where's your home?"
I think about my sweetheart or my closest friends or the songs that travel with me wherever I happen to be.
And I'd always felt this way, but it really came home to me, as it were, some years ago when I was climbing up the stairs in my parents' house in California, and I looked through the living room windows and I saw that we were encircled by 70-foot flames, one of those wildfires that regularly tear through the hills of California and many other such places.
And three hours later, that fire had reduced my home and every last thing in it except for me to ash.
And when I woke up the next morning, I was sleeping on a friend's floor, the only thing I had in the world was a toothbrush I had just bought from an all-night supermarket.
Of course, if anybody asked me then, "Where is your home?"
I literally couldn't point to any physical construction.
My home would have to be whatever I carried around inside me.
And in so many ways, I think this is a terrific liberation.
Because when my grandparents were born, they pretty much had their sense of home, their sense of community, even their sense of enmity, assigned to them at birth, and didn't have much chance of stepping outside of that.
And nowadays, at least some of us can choose our sense of home, create our sense of community, fashion our sense of self, and in so doing maybe step a little beyond some of the black and white divisions of our grandparents' age.
No coincidence that the president of the strongest nation on Earth is half-Kenyan, partly raised in Indonesia, has a Chinese-Canadian brother-in-law.
The number of people living in countries not their own now comes to 220 million, and that's an almost unimaginable number, but it means that if you took the whole population of Canada and the whole population of Australia and then the whole population of Australia again and the whole population of Canada again and doubled that number, you would still have fewer people than belong to this great floating tribe.
And the number of us who live outside the old nation-state categories is increasing so quickly, by 64 million just in the last 12 years, that soon there will be more of us than there are Americans.
Already, we represent the fifth-largest nation on Earth.
And in fact, in Canada's largest city, Toronto, the average resident today is what used to be called a foreigner, somebody born in a very different country.
And I've always felt that the beauty of being surrounded by the foreign is that it slaps you awake.
You can't take anything for granted.
Travel, for me, is a little bit like being in love, because suddenly all your senses are at the setting marked "on."
Suddenly you're alert to the secret patterns of the world.
The real voyage of discovery, as Marcel Proust famously said, consists not in seeing new sights, but in looking with new eyes.
And of course, once you have new eyes, even the old sights, even your home become something different.
Many of the people living in countries not their own are refugees who never wanted to leave home and ache to go back home.
But for the fortunate among us, I think the age of movement brings exhilarating new possibilities.
Certainly when I'm traveling, especially to the major cities of the world, the typical person I meet today will be, let's say, a half-Korean, half-German young woman living in Paris.
And as soon as she meets a half-Thai, half-Canadian young guy from Edinburgh, she recognizes him as kin.
She realizes that she probably has much more in common with him than with anybody entirely of Korea or entirely of Germany.
So they become friends. They fall in love.
They move to New York City.
(Laughter) Or Edinburgh.
And the little girl who arises out of their union will of course be not Korean or German or French or Thai or Scotch or Canadian or even American, but a wonderful and constantly evolving mix of all those places.
And potentially, everything about the way that young woman dreams about the world, writes about the world, thinks about the world, could be something different, because it comes out of this almost unprecedented blend of cultures.
Where you come from now is much less important than where you're going.
More and more of us are rooted in the future or the present tense as much as in the past.
And home, we know, is not just the place where you happen to be born.
It's the place where you become yourself.
And yet, there is one great problem with movement, and that is that it's really hard to get your bearings when you're in midair.
Some years ago, I noticed that I had accumulated one million miles on United Airlines alone.
You all know that crazy system, six days in hell, you get the seventh day free.
(Laughter) And I began to think that really, movement was only as good as the sense of stillness that you could bring to it to put it into perspective.
And eight months after my house burned down, I ran into a friend who taught at a local high school, and he said, "I've got the perfect place for you."
"Really?" I said. I'm always a bit skeptical when people say things like that.
"No, honestly," he went on, "it's only three hours away by car, and it's not very expensive, and it's probably not like anywhere you've stayed before."
"Hmm." I was beginning to get slightly intrigued. "What is it?"
"Well —" Here my friend hemmed and hawed — "Well, actually it's a Catholic hermitage."
This was the wrong answer.
I had spent 15 years in Anglican schools, so I had had enough hymnals and crosses to last me a lifetime.
Several lifetimes, actually.
But my friend assured me that he wasn't Catholic, nor were most of his students, but he took his classes there every spring.
And as he had it, even the most restless, distractible, testosterone-addled 15-year-old Californian boy only had to spend three days in silence and something in him cooled down and cleared out.
He found himself.
And I thought, "Anything that works for a 15-year-old boy ought to work for me."
So I got in my car, and I drove three hours north along the coast, and the roads grew emptier and narrower, and then I turned onto an even narrower path, barely paved, that snaked for two miles up to the top of a mountain.
And when I got out of my car, the air was pulsing.
The whole place was absolutely silent, but the silence wasn't an absence of noise.
It was really a presence of a kind of energy or quickening.
And at my feet was the great, still blue plate of the Pacific Ocean.
All around me were 800 acres of wild dry brush.
And I went down to the room in which I was to be sleeping.
Small but eminently comfortable, it had a bed and a rocking chair and a long desk and even longer picture windows looking out on a small, private, walled garden, and then 1,200 feet of golden pampas grass running down to the sea.
And I sat down, and I began to write, and write, and write, even though I'd gone there really to get away from my desk.
And by the time I got up, four hours had passed.
Night had fallen, and I went out under this great overturned saltshaker of stars, and I could see the tail lights of cars disappearing around the headlands 12 miles to the south.
And it really seemed like my concerns of the previous day vanishing.
And the next day, when I woke up in the absence of telephones and TVs and laptops, the days seemed to stretch for a thousand hours.
It was really all the freedom I know when I'm traveling, but it also profoundly felt like coming home.
And I'm not a religious person, so I didn't go to the services.
I didn't consult the monks for guidance.
I just took walks along the monastery road and sent postcards to loved ones.
I looked at the clouds, and I did what is hardest of all for me to do usually, which is nothing at all.
And I started to go back to this place, and I noticed that I was doing my most important work there invisibly just by sitting still, and certainly coming to my most critical decisions the way I never could when I was racing from the last email to the next appointment.
And I began to think that something in me had really been crying out for stillness, but of course I couldn't hear it because I was running around so much.
I was like some crazy guy who puts on a blindfold and then complains that he can't see a thing.
And I thought back to that wonderful phrase I had learned as a boy from Seneca, in which he says, "That man is poor not who has little but who hankers after more."
And, of course, I'm not suggesting that anybody here go into a monastery.
That's not the point.
But I do think it's only by stopping movement that you can see where to go.
And it's only by stepping out of your life and the world that you can see what you most deeply care about and find a home.
And I've noticed so many people now take conscious measures to sit quietly for 30 minutes every morning just collecting themselves in one corner of the room without their devices, or go running every evening, or leave their cell phones behind when they go to have a long conversation with a friend.
Movement is a fantastic privilege, and it allows us to do so much that our grandparents could never have dreamed of doing.
But movement, ultimately, only has a meaning if you have a home to go back to.
And home, in the end, is of course not just the place where you sleep.
It's the place where you stand.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Applause) (Music) (Applause)
It is said that the grass is always greener on the other side of the fence, and I believe this is true, especially when I hear President Obama often talk about the Korean education system as a benchmark of success.
Well, I can tell you that, in the rigid structure and highly competitive nature of the Korean school system, also known as pressure cooker, not everyone can do well in that environment.
While many people responded in different ways about our education system, my response to the high-pressure environment was making bows with pieces of wood found near my apartment building.
Why bows?
I'm not quite sure.
Perhaps, in the face of constant pressure, my caveman instinct of survival has connected with the bows.
If you think about it, the bow has really helped drive human survival since prehistoric times.
The area within three kilometers of my home used to be a mulberry forest during the Joseon dynasty, where silkworms were fed with mulberry leaves.
In order to raise the historical awareness of this fact, the government has planted mulberry trees.
The seeds from these trees also have spread by birds here and there nearby the soundproof walls of the city expressway that has been built around the 1988 Olympics.
The area near these walls, which nobody bothers to pay attention to, had been left free from major intervention, and this is where I first found my treasures.
As I fell deeper into bow making, I began to search far and beyond my neighborhood.
When I went on school field trips, family vacations, or simply on my way home from extracurricular classes, I wandered around wooded areas and gathered tree branches with the tools that I sneaked inside my school bag.
And they would be somethings like saws, knives, sickles and axes that I covered up with a piece of towel.
I would bring the branches home, riding buses and subways, barely holding them in my hands.
And I did not bring the tools here to Long Beach.
Airport security.
(Laughter) In the privacy of my room, covered in sawdust, I would saw, trim and polish wood all night long until a bow took shape.
One day, I was changing the shape of a bamboo piece and ended up setting the place on fire.
Where? The rooftop of my apartment building, a place where 96 families call home.
A customer from a department store across from my building called 911, and I ran downstairs to tell my mom with half of my hair burned.
I want to take this opportunity to tell my mom, in the audience today: Mom, I was really sorry, and I will be more careful with open fire from now on.
My mother had to do a lot of explaining, telling people that her son did not commit a premeditated arson.
I also researched extensively on bows around the world.
In that process, I tried to combine the different bows from across time and places to create the most effective bow.
I also worked with many different types of wood, such as maple, yew and mulberry, and did many shooting experiments in the wooded area near the urban expressway that I mentioned before.
The most effective bow for me would be like this.
One: Curved tips can maximize the springiness when you draw and shoot the arrow.
Two: Belly is drawn inward for higher draw weight, which means more power.
Three: Sinew used in the outer layer of the limb for maximum tension storage.
And four: Horn used to store energy in compression.
After fixing, breaking, redesigning, mending, bending and amending, my ideal bow began to take shape, and when it was finally done, it looked like this.
I was so proud of myself for inventing a perfect bow on my own.
This is a picture of Korean traditional bows taken from a museum, and see how my bow resembles them.
Thanks to my ancestors for robbing me of my invention. (Laughter) Through bowmaking, I came in contact with part of my heritage.
Learning the information that has accumulated over time and reading the message left by my ancestors were better than any consolation therapy or piece of advice any living adults could give me.
You see, I searched far and wide, but never bothered to look close and near.
From this realization, I began to take interest in Korean history, which had never inspired me before.
In the end, the grass is often greener on my side of the fence, although we don't realize it.
Now, I am going to show you how my bow works.
And let's see how this one works.
This is a bamboo bow, with 45-pound draw weights.
(Noise of shooting arrow) (Applause) A bow may function in a simple mechanism, but in order to make a good bow, a great amount of sensitivity is required.
You need to console and communicate with the wood material.
Each fiber in the wood has its own reason and function for being, and only through cooperation and harmony among them comes a great bow.
I may be an [odd] student with unconventional interests, but I hope I am making a contribution by sharing my story with all of you.
My ideal world is a place where no one is left behind, where everyone is needed exactly where they are, like the fibers and the tendons in a bow, a place where the strong is flexible and the vulnerable is resilient.
The bow resembles me, and I resemble the bow.
Now, I am shooting a part of myself to you.
No, better yet, a part of my mind has just been shot over to your mind.
Did it strike you?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So here's the most important economic fact of our time.
We are living in an age of surging income inequality, particularly between those at the very top and everyone else.
This shift is the most striking in the U.S. and in the U.K., but it's a global phenomenon.
It's happening in communist China, in formerly communist Russia, it's happening in India, in my own native Canada.
We're even seeing it in cozy social democracies like Sweden, Finland and Germany.
Let me give you a few numbers to place what's happening.
In the 1970s, the One Percent accounted for about 10 percent of the national income in the United States.
Today, their share has more than doubled to above 20 percent.
But what's even more striking is what's happening at the very tippy top of the income distribution.
The 0.1 percent in the U.S.
today account for more than eight percent of the national income.
They are where the One Percent was 30 years ago.
Let me give you another number to put that in perspective, and this is a figure that was calculated in 2005 by Robert Reich, the Secretary of Labor in the Clinton administration.
Reich took the wealth of two admittedly very rich men, Bill Gates and Warren Buffett, and he found that it was equivalent to the wealth of the bottom 40 percent of the U.S. population, 120 million people.
Now, as it happens, Warren Buffett is not only himself a plutocrat, he is one of the most astute observers of that phenomenon, and he has his own favorite number.
Buffett likes to point out that in 1992, the combined wealth of the people on the Forbes 400 list -- and this is the list of the 400 richest Americans -- was 300 billion dollars.
Just think about it.
You didn't even need to be a billionaire to get on that list in 1992.
Well, today, that figure has more than quintupled to 1.7 trillion, and I probably don't need to tell you that we haven't seen anything similar happen to the middle class, whose wealth has stagnated if not actually decreased.
So we're living in the age of the global plutocracy, but we've been slow to notice it.
One of the reasons, I think, is a sort of boiled frog phenomenon.
Changes which are slow and gradual can be hard to notice even if their ultimate impact is quite dramatic.
Think about what happened, after all, to the poor frog.
But I think there's something else going on.
Talking about income inequality, even if you're not on the Forbes 400 list, can make us feel uncomfortable.
It feels less positive, less optimistic, to talk about how the pie is sliced than to think about how to make the pie bigger.
And if you do happen to be on the Forbes 400 list, talking about income distribution, and inevitably its cousin, income redistribution, can be downright threatening.
So we're living in the age of surging income inequality, especially at the top.
What's driving it, and what can we do about it?
One set of causes is political: lower taxes, deregulation, particularly of financial services, privatization, weaker legal protections for trade unions, all of these have contributed to more and more income going to the very, very top.
A lot of these political factors can be broadly lumped under the category of "crony capitalism," political changes that benefit a group of well-connected insiders but don't actually do much good for the rest of us.
In practice, getting rid of crony capitalism is incredibly difficult.
Think of all the years reformers of various stripes have tried to get rid of corruption in Russia, for instance, or how hard it is to re-regulate the banks even after the most profound financial crisis since the Great Depression, or even how difficult it is to get the big multinational companies, including those whose motto might be "don't do evil," to pay taxes at a rate even approaching that paid by the middle class.
But while getting rid of crony capitalism in practice is really, really hard, at least intellectually, it's an easy problem.
After all, no one is actually in favor of crony capitalism.
Indeed, this is one of those rare issues that unites the left and the right.
A critique of crony capitalism is as central to the Tea Party as it is to Occupy Wall Street.
But if crony capitalism is, intellectually at least, the easy part of the problem, things get trickier when you look at the economic drivers of surging income inequality.
In and of themselves, these aren't too mysterious.
Globalization and the technology revolution, the twin economic transformations which are changing our lives and transforming the global economy, are also powering the rise of the super-rich.
Just think about it.
For the first time in history, if you are an energetic entrepreneur with a brilliant new idea or a fantastic new product, you have almost instant, almost frictionless access to a global market of more than a billion people.
As a result, if you are very, very smart and very, very lucky, you can get very, very rich very, very quickly.
The latest poster boy for this phenomenon is David Karp.
The 26-year-old founder of Tumblr recently sold his company to Yahoo for 1.1 billion dollars.
Think about that for a minute: 1.1 billion dollars, 26 years old.
It's easiest to see how the technology revolution and globalization are creating this sort of superstar effect in highly visible fields, like sports and entertainment.
We can all watch how a fantastic athlete or a fantastic performer can today leverage his or her skills across the global economy as never before.
But today, that superstar effect is happening across the entire economy.
We have superstar technologists.
We have superstar bankers.
We have superstar lawyers and superstar architects.
There are superstar cooks and superstar farmers.
There are even, and this is my personal favorite example, superstar dentists, the most dazzling exemplar of whom is Bernard Touati, the Frenchman who ministers to the smiles of fellow superstars like Russian oligarch Roman Abramovich or European-born American fashion designer Diane von Furstenberg.
But while it's pretty easy to see how globalization and the technology revolution are creating this global plutocracy, what's a lot harder is figuring out what to think about it.
And that's because, in contrast with crony capitalism, so much of what globalization and the technology revolution have done is highly positive.
Let's start with technology.
I love the Internet. I love my mobile devices.
I love the fact that they mean that whoever chooses to will be able to watch this talk far beyond this auditorium.
I'm even more of a fan of globalization.
This is the transformation which has lifted hundreds of millions of the world's poorest people out of poverty and into the middle class, and if you happen to live in the rich part of the world, it's made many new products affordable -- who do you think built your iPhone? — and things that we've relied on for a long time much cheaper.
Think of your dishwasher or your t-shirt.
So what's not to like?
Well, a few things.
One of the things that worries me is how easily what you might call meritocratic plutocracy can become crony plutocracy.
Imagine you're a brilliant entrepreneur who has successfully sold that idea or that product to the global billions and become a billionaire in the process.
It gets tempting at that point to use your economic nous to manipulate the rules of the global political economy in your own favor.
And that's no mere hypothetical example.
Think about Amazon, Apple, Google, Starbucks.
These are among the world's most admired, most beloved, most innovative companies.
They also happen to be particularly adept at working the international tax system so as to lower their tax bill very, very significantly.
And why stop at just playing the global political and economic system as it exists to your own maximum advantage?
Once you have the tremendous economic power that we're seeing at the very, very top of the income distribution and the political power that inevitably entails, it becomes tempting as well to start trying to change the rules of the game in your own favor.
Again, this is no mere hypothetical.
It's what the Russian oligarchs did in creating the sale-of-the-century privatization of Russia's natural resources.
It's one way of describing what happened with deregulation of the financial services in the U.S. and the U.K.
A second thing that worries me is how easily meritocratic plutocracy can become aristocracy.
One way of describing the plutocrats is as alpha geeks, and they are people who are acutely aware of how important highly sophisticated analytical and quantitative skills are in today's economy.
That's why they are spending unprecedented time and resources educating their own children.
The middle class is spending more on schooling too, but in the global educational arms race that starts at nursery school and ends at Harvard, Stanford or MIT, the 99 percent is increasingly outgunned by the One Percent.
The result is something that economists Alan Krueger and Miles Corak call the Great Gatsby Curve.
As income inequality increases, social mobility decreases.
The plutocracy may be a meritocracy, but increasingly you have to be born on the top rung of the ladder to even take part in that race.
The third thing, and this is what worries me the most, is the extent to which those same largely positive forces which are driving the rise of the global plutocracy also happen to be hollowing out the middle class in Western industrialized economies.
Let's start with technology.
Those same forces that are creating billionaires are also devouring many traditional middle-class jobs.
When's the last time you used a travel agent?
And in contrast with the industrial revolution, the titans of our new economy aren't creating that many new jobs.
At its zenith, G.M. employed hundreds of thousands, Facebook fewer than 10,000.
The same is true of globalization.
For all that it is raising hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in the emerging markets, it's also outsourcing a lot of jobs from the developed Western economies.
The terrifying reality is that there is no economic rule which automatically translates increased economic growth into widely shared prosperity.
That's shown in what I consider to be the most scary economic statistic of our time.
Since the late 1990s, increases in productivity have been decoupled from increases in wages and employment.
That means that our countries are getting richer, our companies are getting more efficient, but we're not creating more jobs and we're not paying people, as a whole, more.
One scary conclusion you could draw from all of this is to worry about structural unemployment.
What worries me more is a different nightmare scenario.
After all, in a totally free labor market, we could find jobs for pretty much everyone.
The dystopia that worries me is a universe in which a few geniuses invent Google and its ilk and the rest of us are employed giving them massages.
So when I get really depressed about all of this, I comfort myself in thinking about the Industrial Revolution.
After all, for all its grim, satanic mills, it worked out pretty well, didn't it?
After all, all of us here are richer, healthier, taller -- well, there are a few exceptions — and live longer than our ancestors in the early 19th century.
But it's important to remember that before we learned how to share the fruits of the Industrial Revolution with the broad swathes of society, we had to go through two depressions, the Great Depression of the 1930s, the Long Depression of the 1870s, two world wars, communist revolutions in Russia and in China, and an era of tremendous social and political upheaval in the West.
We also, not coincidentally, went through an era of tremendous social and political inventions.
We created the modern welfare state.
We created public education.
We created public health care.
We created public pensions.
We created unions.
Today, we are living through an era of economic transformation comparable in its scale and its scope to the Industrial Revolution.
To be sure that this new economy benefits us all and not just the plutocrats, we need to embark on an era of comparably ambitious social and political change.
We need a new New Deal.
(Applause)
My name is Tom, and I've come here today to come clean about what I do for money.
Basically, I use my mouth in strange ways in exchange for cash.
(Laughter) I usually do this kind of thing in seedy downtown bars and on street corners, so this mightn't be the most appropriate setting, but I'd like to give you guys a bit of a demonstration about what I do.
(Beatboxing) And now, for my next number, I'd like to return to the classics.
(Applause) We're going to take it back, way back, back into time.
(Beatboxing: "Billie Jean") ♫ Billie Jean is not my lover ♫ ♫ She's just a girl who claims that I am the one ♫ ♫ But the kid is not my son ♫ (Applause) All right.
Wassup.
Thank you very much, TEDx.
If you guys haven't figured it out already, my name's Tom Thum, and I'm a beatboxer, which means all the sounds that you just heard were made entirely using just my voice, and the only thing was my voice.
And I can assure you there are absolutely no effects on this microphone whatsoever.
And I'm very, very stoked — (Applause) You guys are just applauding for everything. It's great.
Look at this, Mom! I made it!
I'm very, very stoked to be here today, representing my kinfolk and all those that haven't managed to make a career out of an innate ability for inhuman noisemaking.
Because it is a bit of a niche market, and there's not much work going on, especially where I'm from.
You know, I'm from Brisbane, which is a great city to live in.
Yeah! All right! Most of Brisbane's here. That's good.
(Laughter) You know, I'm from Brizzy, which is a great city to live in, but let's be honest -- it's not exactly the cultural hub of the Southern Hemisphere.
So I do a lot of my work outside Brisbane and outside Australia, and so the pursuit of this crazy passion of mine has enabled me to see so many amazing places in the world.
So I'd like to share with you, if I may, my experiences.
So ladies and gentlemen, I would like to take you on a journey throughout the continents and throughout sound itself.
We start our journey in the central deserts.
(Didgeridoo) (Airplane) India.
(Beatboxing) (Sitar) China.
(Guzheng) (Beatboxing) Germany.
(Beatboxing) Party, party, yeah.
(Laughter) And before we reach our final destination, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to share with you some technology that I brought all the way from the thriving metropolis of Brisbane.
These things in front of me here are called Kaoss Pads, and they allow me to do a whole lot of different things with my voice.
For example, the one on the left here allows me to add a little bit of reverb to my sound, which gives me that -- (Trumpet) -- flavor.
(Laughter) And the other ones here, I can use them in unison to mimic the effect of a drum machine or something like that.
I can sample in my own sounds and I can play it back just by hitting the pads here.
(Noises) TEDx.
(Music) (Applause) I got way too much time on my hands.
And last but not least, the one on my right here allows me to loop loop loop loop loop loop loop loop my voice.
So with all that in mind, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to take you on a journey to a completely separate part of Earth as I transform the Sydney Opera House into a smoky downtown jazz bar.
All right boys, take it away.
(Music) Ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to introduce you to a very special friend of mine, one of the greatest double bassists I know.
Mr. Smokey Jefferson, let's take it for a walk. Come on, baby.
(Music) All right, ladies and gentlemen, I'd like to introduce you to the star of the show, one of the greatest jazz legends of our time.
Music lovers and jazz lovers alike, please give a warm hand of applause for the one and only Mr. Peeping Tom. Take it away.
(Music) (Applause) Thank you. Thank you very much.
(Applause)
We're at a critical moment.
Our leaders, some of our great institutions are failing us.
Why?
In some cases, it's because they're bad or unethical, but often, they've taken us to the wrong objectives.
And this is unacceptable.
This has to stop.
How are we going to correct these wrongs?
How are we going to choose the right course?
It's not going to be easy.
For years, I've worked with talented teams and they've chosen the right objectives and the wrong objectives.
Many have succeeded, others of them have failed.
And today I'm going to share with you what really makes a difference -- that's what's crucial, how and why they set meaningful and audacious goals, the right goals for the right reasons.
Let's go back to 1975.
Yep, this is me.
I've got a lot to learn, I'm a computer engineer, I've got long hair, but I'm working under Andy Grove, who's been called the greatest manager of his or any other era.
Andy was a superb leader and also a teacher, and he said to me, "John, it almost doesn't matter what you know.
And so Andy invented a system called "Objectives and Key Results."
It kind of rolls off the tongue, doesn't it?
And it's all about excellent execution.
So here's a classic video from the 1970s of professor Andy Grove.
(Video) Andy Grove: The two key phrases of the management by objective systems are the objectives and the key results, and they match the two purposes.
The objective is the direction.
The key results have to be measured, but at the end you can look and without any argument say, "Did I do that, or did I not do that?" Yes. No. Simple.
John Doerr: That's Andy.
Yes. No. Simple.
Objectives and Key Results, or OKRs, are a simple goal-setting system and they work for organizations, they work for teams, they even work for individuals.
The objectives are what you want to have accomplished.
The key results are how I'm going to get that done.
Objectives. Key results.
What and how.
But here's the truth: many of us are setting goals wrong, and most of us are not setting goals at all.
A lot of organizations set objectives and meet them.
They ship their sales, they introduce their new products, they make their numbers, but they lack a sense of purpose to inspire their teams.
So how do you set these goals the right way?
First, you must answer the question, "Why?"
Why?
Because truly transformational teams combine their ambitions to their passion and to their purpose, and they develop a clear and compelling sense of why.
I want to tell you a story.
I work with a remarkable entrepreneur.
Her name is Jini Kim.
She runs a company called Nuna.
Nuna is a health care data company.
And when Nuna was founded, they used data to serve the health needs of lots of workers at large companies.
And then two years into the company's life, the federal government issued a proposal to build the first ever cloud database for Medicaid.
Now, you'll remember that Medicaid is that program that serves 70 million Americans, our poor, our children and people with disabilities.
Nuna at the time was just 15 people and this database had to be built in one year, and they had a whole set of commitments that they had to honor, and frankly, they weren't going to make very much money on the project.
This was a bet-your-company moment, and Jini seized it.
She jumped at the opportunity. She did not flinch.
Why?
Well, it's a personal why.
Jini's younger brother Kimong has autism.
And when he was seven, he had his first grand mal seizure at Disneyland.
He fell to the ground. He stopped breathing.
Jini's parents are Korean immigrants.
They came to the country with limited resources speaking little English, so it was up to Jini to enroll her family in Medicaid.
She was nine years old.
That moment defined her mission, and that mission became her company, and that company bid on, won and delivered on that contract.
Here's Jini to tell you why.
(Video) Jini Kim: Medicaid saved my family from bankruptcy, and today it provides for Kimong's health and for millions of others.
Nuna is my love letter to Medicaid.
Every row of data is a life whose story deserves to be told with dignity.
JD: And Jini's story tells us that a compelling sense of why can be the launchpad for our objectives.
Remember, that's what we want to have accomplished.
And objectives are significant, they're action-oriented, they are inspiring, and they're a kind of vaccine against fuzzy thinking.
You think a rockstar would be an unlikely user of Objectives and Key Results, but for years, Bono has used OKRs to wage a global war against poverty and disease, and his ONE organization has focused on two really gorgeous, audacious objectives.
The first is debt relief for the poorest countries in the world.
The next is universal access to anti-HIV drugs.
Now, why are these good objectives?
Let's go back to our checklist.
Significant? Check. Concrete? Yes.
Action-oriented? Yes.
Inspirational?
Well, let's just listen to Bono.
(Video) Bono: So you're passionate?
How passionate?
What actions does your passion lead you to do?
If the heart doesn't find a perfect rhyme with the head, then your passion means nothing.
The OKR framework cultivates the madness, the chemistry contained inside it.
It gives us an environment for risk, for trust, where failing is not a fireable offense.
And when you have that sort of structure and environment and the right people, magic is around the corner.
JD: I love that.
OKRs cultivate the madness, and magic is right around the corner.
This is perfect.
So with Jini we've covered the whys, with Bono the whats of goal-setting.
Let's turn our attention to the hows.
Remember, the hows are the key results.
That's how we meet our objectives.
And good results are specific and time-bound.
They're aggressive but realistic.
They're measurable, and they're verifiable.
Those are good key results.
In 1999, I introduced OKRs to Google's cofounders, Larry and Sergey.
Here they are, 24 years old in their garage.
And Sergey enthusiastically said he'd adopt them.
Well, not quite.
What he really said was, "We don't have any other way to manage this company, so we'll give it a go."
(Laughter) And I took that as a kind of endorsement.
But every quarter since then, every Googler has written down her objectives and her key results.
They've graded them, and they've published them for everyone to see.
And these are not used for bonuses or for promotions.
They're set aside.
They're used for a higher purpose, and that's to get collective commitment to truly stretch goals.
In 2008, a Googler, Sundar Pichai, took on an objective which was to build the next generation client platform for the future of web applications -- in other words, build the best browser.
He was very thoughtful about how he chose his key results.
How do you measure the best browser?
It could be ad clicks or engagement.
No. He said: numbers of users, because users are going to decide if Chrome is a great browser or not.
So he had this one three-year-long objective: build the best browser.
And then every year he stuck to the same key results, numbers of users, but he upped the ante.
In the first year, his goal was 20 million users and he missed it.
He got less than 10.
Second year, he raised the bar to 50 million.
He got to 37 million users.
Somewhat better.
In the third year, he upped the ante once more to a hundred million.
He launched an aggressive marketing campaign, broader distribution, improved the technology, and kaboom!
He got 111 million users.
Here's why I like this story, not so much for the happy ending, but it shows someone carefully choosing the right objective and then sticking to it year after year after year.
It's a perfect story for a nerd like me.
Now, I think of OKRs as transparent vessels that are made from the whats and hows of our ambitions.
What really matters is the why that we pour into those vessels.
That's why we do our work.
OKRs are not a silver bullet.
They're not going to be a substitute for a strong culture or for stronger leadership, but when those fundamentals are in place, they can take you to the mountaintop.
I want you to think about your life for a moment.
Do you have the right metrics?
Take time to write down your values, your objectives and your key results.
Do it today.
If you'd like some feedback on them, you can send them to me.
I'm john@whatmatters.com.
If we think of the world-changing goals of an Intel, of a Nuna, of Bono, of Google, they're remarkable: ubiquitous computing, affordable health care, high-quality for everyone, ending global poverty, access to all the world's information.
Here's the deal: every one of those goals is powered today by OKRs.
Now, I've been called the Johnny Appleseed of OKRs for spreading the good gospel according to Andy Grove, but I want you to join me in this movement.
Let's fight for what it is that really matters, because we can take OKRs beyond our businesses.
We can take them to our families, to our schools, even to our governments.
We can hold those governments accountable.
We can transform those informations.
We can get back on the right track if we can and do measure what really matters.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What keeps you up at night?
Pondering deep questions?
Excitement about a big trip?
Or is it stress about unfinished work, an upcoming test, or a dreaded family gathering?
For many people, this stress is temporary, as its cause is quickly resolved.
But what if the very thing keeping you awake was stress about losing sleep?
This seemingly unsolvable loop is at the heart of insomnia, the world’s most common sleep disorder.
Almost anything can cause the occasional restless night - a snoring partner, physical pain, or emotional distress.
And extreme sleep deprivation like jetlag can throw off your biological clock, wreaking havoc on your sleep schedule.
But in most cases, sleep deprivation is short-term.
Eventually, exhaustion catches up with all of us.
However, some long-term conditions like respiratory disorders, gastrointestinal problems, and many others can overpower fatigue.
And as sleepless nights pile up, the bedroom can start to carry associations of restless nights wracked with anxiety.
Come bedtime, insomniacs are stressed.
So stressed their brains hijack the stress response system, flooding the body with fight-flight-or-freeze chemicals.
Cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormones course through the bloodstream, increasing heart rate and blood pressure, and jolting the body into hyperarousal.
In this condition, the brain is hunting for potential threats, making it impossible to ignore any slight discomfort or nighttime noise.
And when insomniacs finally do fall asleep, the quality of their rest is compromised.
Our brain’s primary source of energy is cerebral glucose, and in healthy sleep, our metabolism slows to conserve this glucose for waking hours.
But PET studies show the adrenaline that prevents sleep for insomniacs also speeds up their metabolisms.
While they sleep, their bodies are working overtime, burning through the brain’s supply of energy-giving glucose.
This symptom of poor sleep leaves insomniacs waking in a state of exhaustion, confusion, and stress, which starts the process all over again.
When these cycles of stress and restlessness last several months, they’re diagnosed as chronic insomnia.
And while insomnia rarely leads to death, its chemical mechanisms are similar to anxiety attacks found in those experiencing depression and anxiety.
So suffering from any one of these conditions increases your risk of experiencing the other two.
Fortunately, there are ways to break the cycle of sleeplessness.
Managing the stress that leads to hyperarousal is one of our best-understood treatments for insomnia, and good sleep practices can help rebuild your relationship with bedtime.
Make sure your bedroom is dark and comfortably cool to minimize “threats” during hyperarousal.
Only use your bed for sleeping, and if you’re restless, leave the room and tire yourself out with relaxing activities like reading, meditating, or journaling.
Regulate your metabolism by setting consistent resting and waking times to help orient your body’s biological clock.
This clock, or circadian rhythm, is also sensitive to light, so avoid bright lights at night to help tell your body that it’s time for sleep.
In addition to these practices, some doctors prescribe medication to aid sleep, but there aren’t reliable medications that help in all cases.
And over-the-counter sleeping pills can be highly addictive, leading to withdrawal that worsens symptoms.
But before seeking any treatment, make sure your sleeplessness is actually due to insomnia.
Approximately 8% of patients diagnosed with chronic insomnia are actually suffering from a less common genetic problem called delayed sleep phase disorder, or DSPD.
People with DSPD have a circadian rhythm significantly longer than 24 hours, putting their sleeping habits out of sync with traditional sleeping hours.
So while they have difficulty falling asleep at a typical bedtime, it’s not due to increased stress.
And given the opportunity, they can sleep comfortably on their own delayed schedule.
Our sleeping and waking cycle is a delicate balance, and one that’s vital to maintain for our physical and mental wellbeing.
For all these reasons, it’s worth putting in some time and effort to sustain a stable bedtime routine, but try not to lose any sleep over it.
I love paper, and I love technology, and what I do is I make paper interactive.
And that's what I say when people ask me what I do, but it really confuses most people, so really, the best way for me to convey it is to take the technology and be creative and create experiences.
So I tried to think what I could use for here, and a couple of weeks ago I had a crazy idea that I wanted to print two DJ decks and to try and mix some music.
And I'm going to try and show that at the end, and the suspense will be as much mine if it works.
And I'm not a DJ, and I'm not a musician, so I'm a little bit scared of that.
So I think, I found the best way to describe my journey is just to mention a few little things that have happened to me throughout my life.
There's three particular things that I've done, and I'll just describe those first, and then talk about some of my work.
So when I was a kid, I was obsessed with wires, and I used to thread them under my carpet and thread them behind the walls and have little switches and little speakers, and I wanted to make my bedroom be interactive but kind of all hidden away.
And I was also really interested in wireless as well.
So I bought one of those little kits that you could get to make a radio transmitter, and I got an old book and I carved out the inside and I hid it inside there, and then I placed it next to my dad and snuck back to my bedroom and tuned in on the radio so I could eavesdrop.
I was not at all interested in what he was saying.
It's more that I just liked the idea of an everyday object having something inside and doing something different.
Several year later, I managed to successfully fail all of my exams and didn't really leave school with much to show for at all, and my parents, maybe as a reward, bought me what turned out to be a one-way ticket to Australia, and I came back home about four years later.
I ended up on a farm in the middle of nowhere.
It was in far western New South Wales.
And this farm was 120,000 acres.
There were 22,000 sheep, and it was about 40 degrees, or 100 or so Fahrenheit.
And on this farm there was the farmer, his wife, and there was the four-year-old daughter.
And they kind of took me into the farm and showed me what it was like to live and work.
Obviously, one of the most important things was the sheep, and so my job was, well, pretty much to do everything, but it was about bringing the sheep back to the homestead.
And we'd do that by building fences, using motorbikes and horses, and the sheep would make their way all the way back to the shearing shed for the different seasons.
And what I learned was, although at the time, like everyone else, I thought sheep were pretty stupid because they didn't do what we wanted them to do, what I realize now, probably only just in the last few weeks looking back, is the sheep weren't stupid at all.
We'd put them in an environment where they didn't want to be, and they didn't want to do what we wanted them to do.
So the challenge was to try and get them to do what we wanted them to do by listening to the weather, the lay of the land, and creating things that would let the sheep flow and go where we wanted them to go.
Another bunch of years later, I ended up at Cambridge University at the Cavendish Laboratory in the U.K.
doing a Ph.D. in physics.
My Ph.D. was to move electrons around, one at a time.
And I realize — again, it's kind of these realizations looking back as to what I did — I realize now that it was pretty much the same as moving sheep around.
It really is.
It's just you do it by changing an environment.
And that's kind of been a big lesson to me, that you can't act on any object.
You change its environment, and the object will flow.
So we made it very small, so things were about 30 nanometers in size; making it very cold, so at liquid helium temperatures; and changing environment by changing the voltage, and the electrons could make flow around a loop one at a time, on and off, a little memory node.
And I wanted to go one step further, and I wanted to move one electron on and one electron off.
And I was told that I wouldn't be able to do this, which, you know, as we've heard from other people, that's the thing that makes you do it.
And I was determined, and I managed to show that I could do that.
And a lot of that learning, I think, came from being on that farm, because when I was working on the farm, we'd have to use what was around us, we'd have to use the environment, and there was no such thing as something can't be done, because you're in an environment where, if you can't do what you need to do, you can die, and, you know, I had seen that sort of thing happen.
So now my obsession is printing, and I'm really fascinated by the idea of using conventional printing processes, so the types of print that are used to create many of the things around us to make paper and card interactive.
When I spoke to some printers when I started doing this and told them what I wanted to do, which was to print conductive inks onto paper, they told me it couldn't be done, again, that kind of favorite thing.
So I got about 10 credit cards and loans and got myself very close to bankruptcy, really, and bought myself this huge printing press, which I had no idea how to use at all.
It was about five meters long, and I covered myself and the floor with ink and made a massive mess, but I learned to print.
And then I took it back to the printers and showed them what I've done, and they were like, "Of course you can do that.
Why didn't you come here in the first place?"
That's always the case.
So what we do is we take conventional printing presses, we make conductive inks, and run those through a press, and basically just letting hundreds of thousands of electrons flow through pieces of paper so we can make that paper interactive.
And it's pretty simple, really.
It's just a collection of things that have been done before, but bringing them together in a different way.
So we have a piece of paper with conductive ink on, and then add onto that a small circuit board with a couple of chips, one to run some capacitive touch software, so we know where we've touched it, and the other to run, quite often, some wireless software so the piece of paper can connect.
So I'll just describe a couple of things that we've created.
There's lots of different things we've created.
This is one of them, because I love cake.
And this one, it's a large poster, and you touch it and it has a little speaker behind it, and the poster talks to you when you touch it and asks you a series of questions, and it works out your perfect cake.
But it doesn't tell you the cake there and then.
It uploads a picture, and the reason why it chose that cake for you, to our Facebook page and to Twitter.
So we're trying to create that connection between the physical and the digital, but have it not looking on a screen, and just looking like a regular poster.
We've worked with a bunch of universities on a project looking at interactive newsprint.
So for example, we've created a newspaper, a regular newspaper.
You can wear a pair of headphones that are connected to it wirelessly, and when you touch it, you can hear the music that's described on the top, which is something you can't read.
You can hear a press conference as well as reading what the editor has determined that press conference was about.
And you can press a Facebook "like" button or you can vote on something as well.
Something else that we created, and this was an idea that I had a couple of years ago, and so we've done a project on this.
It was for funding from the government for user-centered design for energy-efficient buildings, difficult to say, and something I had no idea what it was when I went into the workshop, but quickly learned.
And we wanted to try and encourage people to use energy better.
And I really liked the idea that, instead of looking at dials and reading things to say -- looking at your energy usage, I wanted to create a poster that was wirelessly connected and had color-changing inks on it, and so if your energy usage was trending better, than the leaves would appear and the rabbits would appear and all would be good.
And if it wasn't, then there'd be graffiti and the leaves would fall off the trees.
So it was trying to make you look after something in your immediate environment, which you don't want to see not looking so good, rather than expecting people to do things in the local environment because of the effect that it has a long way off.
And I think, kind of like going back to the farm, it's about how to let people do what you want them to do rather than making people do what you want them to do.
Okay.
So this is the bit I'm really scared of.
So a couple of things I've created are, there's a poster over here that you can play drums on.
And I am not a musician. It seemed like a good idea at the time.
If anyone wants to try and play drums, then they can.
I'll just describe how this works.
This poster is wirelessly connected to my cell phone, and when you touch it, it connects to the app.
(Drums) And it has really good response time.
It's using Bluetooth 4, so it's pretty instantaneous.
Okay. Thanks.
(Applause) And there's a couple of other things.
So this one is like a sound board, so you can touch it, and I just love these horrible noises.
(Sirens, explosions, breaking glass) Okay, and this is a D.J. turntable.
So it's wirelessly linked to my iPad, and this is a software that's running on the iPad.
Oh, yes. I just love doing that.
I'm not a D.J., though, but I just always wanted to do that.
(Scratching) So I have a crossfader, and I have the two decks.
So I've made some new technology, and I love things being creative, and I love working with creative people.
So my 15-year-old niece, she's amazing, and she's called Charlotte, and I asked her to record something, and I worked with a friend called Elliot to put some beats together.
So this is my niece, Charlotte.
(Music) Yay!
(Applause) So that's pretty much what I do.
I just love bringing technology together, having a lot of fun, being creative.
But it's not about the technology.
It's just about, I want to create some great experiences.
So thank you very much.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk about consciousness.
Why consciousness?
Well, it's a curiously neglected subject, both in our scientific and our philosophical culture.
Now why is that curious?
Well, it is the most important aspect of our lives for a very simple, logical reason, namely, it's a necessary condition on anything being important in our lives that we're conscious.
You care about science, philosophy, music, art, whatever -- it's no good if you're a zombie or in a coma, right?
So consciousness is number one.
The second reason is that when people do get interested in it, as I think they should, they tend to say the most appalling things.
And then, even when they're not saying appalling things and they're really trying to do serious research, well, it's been slow. Progress has been slow.
When I first got interested in this, I thought, well, it's a straightforward problem in biology.
Let's get these brain stabbers to get busy and figure out how it works in the brain.
So I went over to UCSF and I talked to all the heavy-duty neurobiologists there, and they showed some impatience, as scientists often do when you ask them embarrassing questions.
But the thing that struck me is, one guy said in exasperation, a very famous neurobiologist, he said, "Look, in my discipline it's okay to be interested in consciousness, but get tenure first. Get tenure first."
Now I've been working on this for a long time.
I think now you might actually get tenure by working on consciousness.
If so, that's a real step forward.
Okay, now why then is this curious reluctance and curious hostility to consciousness?
Well, I think it's a combination of two features of our intellectual culture that like to think they're opposing each other but in fact they share a common set of assumptions.
One feature is the tradition of religious dualism: Consciousness is not a part of the physical world.
It's a part of the spiritual world.
It belongs to the soul, and the soul is not a part of the physical world.
That's the tradition of God, the soul and immortality.
There's another tradition that thinks it's opposed to this but accepts the worst assumption.
That tradition thinks that we are heavy-duty scientific materialists: Consciousness is not a part of the physical world.
Either it doesn't exist at all, or it's something else, a computer program or some damn fool thing, but in any case it's not part of science.
And I used to get in an argument that really gave me a stomachache.
Here's how it went.
Science is objective, consciousness is subjective, therefore there cannot be a science of consciousness.
Okay, so these twin traditions are paralyzing us.
It's very hard to get out of these twin traditions.
And I have only one real message in this lecture, and that is, consciousness is a biological phenomenon like photosynthesis, digestion, mitosis -- you know all the biological phenomena -- and once you accept that, most, though not all, of the hard problems about consciousness simply evaporate.
And I'm going to go through some of them.
Okay, now I promised you to tell you some of the outrageous things said about consciousness.
One: Consciousness does not exist.
It's an illusion, like sunsets.
Science has shown sunsets and rainbows are illusions.
So consciousness is an illusion.
Two: Well, maybe it exists, but it's really something else.
It's a computer program running in the brain.
Three: No, the only thing that exists is really behavior.
It's embarrassing how influential behaviorism was, but I'll get back to that.
And four: Maybe consciousness exists, but it can't make any difference to the world.
How could spirituality move anything?
Now, whenever somebody tells me that, I think, you want to see spirituality move something?
Watch. I decide consciously to raise my arm, and the damn thing goes up. (Laughter) Furthermore, notice this: We do not say, "Well, it's a bit like the weather in Geneva.
Some days it goes up and some days it doesn't go up."
No. It goes up whenever I damn well want it to.
Okay. I'm going to tell you how that's possible.
Now, I haven't yet given you a definition.
You can't do this if you don't give a definition.
People always say consciousness is very hard to define.
I think it's rather easy to define if you're not trying to give a scientific definition.
We're not ready for a scientific definition, but here's a common-sense definition.
Consciousness consists of all those states of feeling or sentience or awareness.
It begins in the morning when you wake up from a dreamless sleep, and it goes on all day until you fall asleep or die or otherwise become unconscious.
Dreams are a form of consciousness on this definition.
Now, that's the common-sense definition. That's our target.
If you're not talking about that, you're not talking about consciousness.
But they think, "Well, if that's it, that's an awful problem.
How can such a thing exist as part of the real world?"
And this, if you've ever had a philosophy course, this is known as the famous mind-body problem.
I think that has a simple solution too. I'm going to give it to you.
And here it is: All of our conscious states, without exception, are caused by lower-level neurobiological processes in the brain, and they are realized in the brain as higher-level or system features.
It's about as mysterious as the liquidity of water.
Right? The liquidity is not an extra juice squirted out by the H2O molecules.
It's a condition that the system is in.
And just as the jar full of water can go from liquid to solid depending on the behavior of the molecules, so your brain can go from a state of being conscious to a state of being unconscious, depending on the behavior of the molecules.
The famous mind-body problem is that simple.
All right? But now we get into some harder questions.
Let's specify the exact features of consciousness, so that we can then answer those four objections that I made to it.
Well, the first feature is, it's real and irreducible.
You can't get rid of it.
You see, the distinction between reality and illusion is the distinction between how things consciously seem to us and how they really are.
It consciously seems like there's -- I like the French "arc-en-ciel" — it seems like there's an arch in the sky, or it seems like the sun is setting over the mountains.
It consciously seems to us, but that's not really happening.
But for that distinction between how things consciously seem and how they really are, you can't make that distinction for the very existence of consciousness, because where the very existence of consciousness is concerned, if it consciously seems to you that you are conscious, you are conscious.
I mean, if a bunch of experts come to me and say, "We are heavy-duty neurobiologists and we've done a study of you, Searle, and we're convinced you are not conscious, you are a very cleverly constructed robot," I don't think, "Well, maybe these guys are right, you know?"
I don't think that for a moment, because, I mean, Descartes may have made a lot of mistakes, but he was right about this.
You cannot doubt the existence of your own consciousness.
Okay, that's the first feature of consciousness.
It's real and irreducible.
You cannot get rid of it by showing that it's an illusion in a way that you can with other standard illusions.
Okay, the second feature is this one that has been such a source of trouble to us, and that is, all of our conscious states have this qualitative character to them.
There's something that it feels like to drink beer which is not what it feels like to do your income tax or listen to music, and this qualitative feel automatically generates a third feature, namely, conscious states are by definition subjective in the sense that they only exist as experienced by some human or animal subject, some self that experiences them.
Maybe we'll be able to build a conscious machine.
Since we don't know how our brains do it, we're not in a position, so far, to build a conscious machine.
Okay. Another feature of consciousness is that it comes in unified conscious fields.
So I don't just have the sight of the people in front of me and the sound of my voice and the weight of my shoes against the floor, but they occur to me as part of one single great conscious field that stretches forward and backward.
That is the key to understanding the enormous power of consciousness.
And we have not been able to do that in a robot.
The disappointment of robotics derives from the fact that we don't know how to make a conscious robot, so we don't have a machine that can do this kind of thing.
Okay, the next feature of consciousness, after this marvelous unified conscious field, is that it functions causally in our behavior.
I gave you a scientific demonstration by raising my hand, but how is that possible?
How can it be that this thought in my brain can move material objects?
Well, I'll tell you the answer.
I mean, we don't know the detailed answer, but we know the basic part of the answer, and that is, there is a sequence of neuron firings, and they terminate where the acetylcholine is secreted at the axon end-plates of the motor neurons.
Sorry to use philosophical terminology here, but when it's secreted at the axon end-plates of the motor neurons, a whole lot of wonderful things happen in the ion channels and the damned arm goes up.
Now, think of what I told you.
One and the same event, my conscious decision to raise my arm has a level of description where it has all of these touchy-feely spiritual qualities.
It's a thought in my brain, but at the same time, it's busy secreting acetylcholine and doing all sorts of other things as it makes its way from the motor cortex down through the nerve fibers in the arm.
Now, what that tells us is that our traditional vocabularies for discussing these issues are totally obsolete.
One and the same event has a level of description where it's neurobiological, and another level of description where it's mental, and that's a single event, and that's how nature works. That's how it's possible for consciousness to function causally.
Okay, now with that in mind, with going through these various features of consciousness, let's go back and answer some of those early objections.
Well, the first one I said was, consciousness doesn't exist, it's an illusion. Well, I've already answered that.
I don't think we need to worry about that.
But the second one had an incredible influence, and may still be around, and that is, "Well, if consciousness exists, it's really something else.
It's really a digital computer program running in your brain and that's what we need to do to create consciousness is get the right program.
Yeah, forget about the hardware. Any hardware will do provided it's rich enough and stable enough to carry the program."
Now, we know that that's wrong.
I mean, anybody who's thought about computers at all can see that that's wrong, because computation is defined as symbol manipulation, usually thought of as zeros as ones, but any symbols will do.
You get an algorithm that you can program in a binary code, and that's the defining trait of the computer program.
But we know that that's purely syntactical. That's symbolic.
We know that actual human consciousness has something more than that.
It's got a content in addition to the syntax.
It's got a semantics.
Now that argument, I made that argument 30 -- oh my God, I don't want to think about it — more than 30 years ago, but there's a deeper argument implicit in what I've told you, and I want to tell you that argument briefly, and that is, consciousness creates an observer-independent reality.
It creates a reality of money, property, government, marriage, CERN conferences, cocktail parties and summer vacations, and all of those are creations of consciousness.
Their existence is observer-relative.
It's only relative to conscious agents that a piece of paper is money or that a bunch of buildings is a university.
Now, ask yourself about computation.
Is that absolute, like force and mass and gravitational attraction?
Or is it observer-relative?
Well, some computations are intrinsic.
I add two plus two to get four.
That's going on no matter what anybody thinks.
But when I haul out my pocket calculator and do the calculation, the only intrinsic phenomenon is the electronic circuit and its behavior.
That's the only absolute phenomenon.
All the rest is interpreted by us.
Computation only exists relative to consciousness.
Either a conscious agent is carrying out the computation, or he's got a piece of machinery that admits of a computational interpretation.
Now that doesn't mean computation is arbitrary.
I spent a lot of money on this hardware.
But we have this persistent confusion between objectivity and subjectivity as features of reality and objectivity and subjectivity as features of claims.
And the bottom line of this part of my talk is this: You can have a completely objective science, a science where you make objectively true claims, about a domain whose existence is subjective, whose existence is in the human brain consisting of subjective states of sentience or feeling or awareness.
So the objection that you can't have an objective science of consciousness because it's subjective and science is objective, that's a pun.
That's a bad pun on objectivity and subjectivity.
You can make objective claims about a domain that is subjective in its mode of existence, and indeed that's what neurologists do.
I mean, you have patients that actually suffer pains, and you try to get an objective science of that.
Okay, I promised to refute all these guys, and I don't have an awful lot of time left, but let me refute a couple more of them.
I said that behaviorism ought to be one of the great embarrassments of our intellectual culture, because it's refuted the moment you think about it.
Your mental states are identical with your behavior?
Well, think about the distinction between feeling a pain and engaging in pain behavior.
I won't demonstrate pain behavior, but I can tell you I'm not having any pains right now.
So it's an obvious mistake. Why did they make the mistake?
The mistake was — and you can go back and read the literature on this, you can see this over and over — they think if you accept the irreducible existence of consciousness, you're giving up on science.
You're giving up on 300 years of human progress and human hope and all the rest of it.
And the message I want to leave you with is, consciousness has to become accepted as a genuine biological phenomenon, as much subject to scientific analysis as any other phenomenon in biology, or, for that matter, the rest of science.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So if I was to ask you what the connection between a bottle of Tide detergent and sweat was, you'd probably think that's the easiest question that you're going to be asked in Edinburgh all week.
But if I was to say that they're both examples of alternative or new forms of currency in a hyperconnected, data-driven global economy, you'd probably think I was a little bit bonkers.
But trust me, I work in advertising.
(Laughter) And I am going to tell you the answer, but obviously after this short break.
So a more challenging question is one that I was asked, actually, by one of our writers a couple of weeks ago, and I didn't know the answer: What's the world's best performing currency?
It's actually Bitcoin.
Now, for those of you who may not be familiar, Bitcoin is a crypto-currency, a virtual currency, synthetic currency.
It was founded in 2008 by this anonymous programmer using a pseudonym Satoshi Nakamoto.
No one knows who or what he is.
He's almost like the Banksy of the Internet.
And I'm probably not going to do it proper service here, but my interpretation of how it works is that Bitcoins are released through this process of mining.
So there's a network of computers that are challenged to solve a very complex mathematical problem and the person that manages to solve it first gets the Bitcoins.
And the Bitcoins are released, they're put into a public ledger called the Blockchain, and then they float, so they become a currency, and completely decentralized, that's the sort of scary thing about this, which is why it's so popular.
So it's not run by the authorities or the state.
It's actually managed by the network.
And the reason that it's proved very successful is it's private, it's anonymous, it's fast, and it's cheap.
And you do get to the point where there's some wild fluctuations with Bitcoin.
So in one level it went from something like 13 dollars to 266, literally in the space of four months, and then crashed and lost half of its value in six hours.
And it's currently around that kind of 110 dollar mark in value.
But what it does show is that it's sort of gaining ground, it's gaining respectability.
You get services, like Reddit and Wordpress are actually accepting Bitcoin as a payment currency now.
And that's showing you that people are actually placing trust in technology, and it's started to trump and disrupt and interrogate traditional institutions and how we think about currencies and money.
And that's not surprising, if you think about the basket case that is the E.U.
I think there was a Gallup survey out recently that said something like, in America, trust in banks is at an all-time low, it's something like 21 percent.
And you can see here some photographs from London where Barclays sponsored the city bike scheme, and some activists have done some nice piece of guerrilla marketing here and doctored the slogans.
"Sub-prime pedaling." "Barclays takes you for a ride."
These are the more polite ones I could share with you today.
But you get the gist, so people have really started to sort of lose faith in institutions.
There's a P.R. company called Edelman, they do this very interesting survey every year precisely around trust and what people are thinking.
And this is a global survey, so these numbers are global.
And what's interesting is that you can see that hierarchy is having a bit of a wobble, and it's all about heterarchical now, so people trust people like themselves more than they trust corporations and governments.
And if you look at these figures for the more developed markets like U.K., Germany, and so on, they're actually much lower.
And I find that sort of scary.
People are actually trusting businesspeople more than they're trusting governments and leaders.
So what's starting to happen, if you think about money, if you sort of boil money down to an essence, it is literally just an expression of value, an agreed value.
So what's happening now, in the digital age, is that we can quantify value in lots of different ways and do it more easily, and sometimes the way that we quantify those values, it makes it much easier to create new forms and valid forms of currency.
In that context, you can see that networks like Bitcoin suddenly start to make a bit more sense.
So if you think we're starting to question and disrupt and interrogate what money means, what our relationship with it is, what defines money, then the ultimate extension of that is, is there a reason for the government to be in charge of money anymore?
So obviously I'm looking at this through a marketing prism, so from a brand perspective, brands literally stand or fall on their reputations.
And if you think about it, reputation has now become a currency.
You know, reputations are built on trust, consistency, transparency.
So if you've actually decided that you trust a brand, you want a relationship, you want to engage with the brand, you're already kind of participating in lots of new forms of currency.
So you think about loyalty.
Loyalty essentially is a micro-economy.
You think about rewards schemes, air miles.
The Economist said a few years ago that there are actually more unredeemed air miles in the world than there are dollar bills in circulation.
You know, when you are standing in line in Starbucks, 30 percent of transactions in Starbucks on any one day are actually being made with Starbucks Star points.
So that's a sort of Starbucks currency staying within its ecosystem.
And what I find interesting is that Amazon has recently launched Amazon coins.
So admittedly it's a currency at the moment that's purely for the Kindle.
So you can buy apps and make purchases within those apps, but you think about Amazon, you look at the trust barometer that I showed you where people are starting to trust businesses, especially businesses that they believe in and trust more than governments.
So suddenly, you start thinking, well Amazon potentially could push this.
It could become a natural extension, that as well as buying stuff -- take it out of the Kindle -- you could buy books, music, real-life products, appliances and goods and so on.
And suddenly you're getting Amazon, as a brand, is going head to head with the Federal Reserve in terms of how you want to spend your money, what money is, what constitutes money.
And I'll get you back to Tide, the detergent now, as I promised.
This is a fantastic article I came across in New York Magazine, where it was saying that drug users across America are actually purchasing drugs with bottles of Tide detergent.
So they're going into convenience stores, stealing Tide, and a $20 bottle of Tide is equal to 10 dollars of crack cocaine or weed.
And what they're saying, so some criminologists have looked at this and they're saying, well, okay, Tide as a product sells at a premium.
It's 50 percent above the category average.
It's infused with a very complex cocktail of chemicals, so it smells very luxurious and very distinctive, and, being a Procter and Gamble brand, it's been supported by a lot of mass media advertising.
So what they're saying is that drug users are consumers too, so they have this in their neural pathways.
When they spot Tide, there's a shortcut.
They say, that is trust. I trust that. That's quality.
So it becomes this unit of currency, which the New York Magazine described as a very oddly loyal crime wave, brand-loyal crime wave, and criminals are actually calling Tide "liquid gold."
Now, what I thought was funny was the reaction from the P&amp;G spokesperson.
They said, obviously tried to dissociate themselves from drugs, but said, "It reminds me of one thing and that's the value of the brand has stayed consistent." (Laughter) Which backs up my point and shows he didn't even break a sweat when he said that.
So that brings me back to the connection with sweat.
In Mexico, Nike has run a campaign recently called, literally, Bid Your Sweat.
So you think about, these Nike shoes have got sensors in them, or you're using a Nike FuelBand that basically tracks your movement, your energy, your calorie consumption.
And what's happening here, this is where you've actually elected to join that Nike community. You've bought into it.
They're not advertising loud messages at you, and that's where advertising has started to shift now is into things like services, tools and applications.
So Nike is literally acting as a well-being partner, a health and fitness partner and service provider.
So what happens with this is they're saying, "Right, you have a data dashboard. We know how far you've run, how far you've moved, what your calorie intake, all that sort of stuff.
What you can do is, the more you run, the more points you get, and we have an auction where you can buy Nike stuff but only by proving that you've actually used the product to do stuff."
And you can't come into this. This is purely for the community that are sweating using Nike products. You can't buy stuff with pesos.
This is literally a closed environment, a closed auction space.
In Africa, you know, airtime has become literally a currency in its own right.
People are used to, because mobile is king, they're very, very used to transferring money, making payments via mobile.
And one of my favorite examples from a brand perspective going on is Vodafone, where, in Egypt, lots of people make purchases in markets and very small independent stores.
Loose change, small change is a real problem, and what tends to happen is you buy a bunch of stuff, you're due, say, 10 cents, 20 cents in change.
The shopkeepers tend to give you things like an onion or an aspirin, or a piece of gum, because they don't have small change.
So when Vodafone came in and saw this problem, this consumer pain point, they created some small change which they call Fakka, which literally sits and is given by the shopkeepers to people, and it's credit that goes straight onto their mobile phone.
So this currency becomes credit, which again, is really, really interesting.
And we did a survey that backs up the fact that, you know, 45 percent of people in this very crucial demographic in the U.S.
were saying that they're comfortable using an independent or branded currency.
So that's getting really interesting here, a really interesting dynamic going on.
And you think, corporations should start taking their assets and thinking of them in a different way and trading them.
And you think, is it much of a leap?
It seems farfetched, but when you think about it, in America in 1860, there were 1,600 corporations issuing banknotes.
There were 8,000 kinds of notes in America.
And the only thing that stopped that, the government controlled four percent of the supply, and the only thing that stopped it was the Civil War breaking out, and the government suddenly wanted to take control of the money.
So government, money, war, nothing changes there, then.
So what I'm going to ask is, basically, is history repeating itself?
Is technology making paper money feel outmoded?
Are we decoupling money from the government?
You know, you think about, brands are starting to fill the gaps.
Corporations are filling gaps that governments can't afford to fill.
So I think, you know, will we be standing on stage buying a coffee -- organic, fair trade coffee -- next year using TED florins or TED shillings?
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
Francesca Fedeli: Ciao.
So he's Mario. He's our son.
He was born two and a half years ago, and I had a pretty tough pregnancy because I had to stay still in a bed for, like, eight months.
But in the end everything seemed to be under control.
So he got the right weight at birth.
He got the right Apgar index.
So we were pretty reassured by this.
But at the end, 10 days later after he was born, we discovered that he had a stroke.
As you might know, a stroke is a brain injury.
A perinatal stroke could be something that can happen during the nine months of pregnancy or just suddenly after the birth, and in his case, as you can see, the right part of his brain has gone.
So the effect that this stroke could have on Mario's body could be the fact that he couldn't be able to control the left side of his body.
Just imagine, if you have a computer and a printer and you want to transmit, to input to print out a document, but the printer doesn't have the right drives, so the same is for Mario.
It's just like, he would like to move his left side of his body, but he's not able to transmit the right input to move his left arm and left leg.
So life had to change.
We needed to change our schedule.
We needed to change the impact that this birth had on our life.
Roberto D'Angelo: As you may imagine, unfortunately, we were not ready.
Nobody taught us how to deal with such kinds of disabilities, and as many questions as possible started to come to our minds.
And that has been really a tough time.
Questions, some basics, like, you know, why did this happen to us?
And what went wrong?
Some more tough, like, really, what will be the impact on Mario's life?
I mean, at the end, will he be able to work?
Will he be able to be normal?
And, you know, as a parent, especially for the first time, why is he not going to be better than us?
And this, indeed, really is tough to say, but a few months later, we realized that we were really feeling like a failure.
I mean, the only real product of our life, at the end, was a failure.
And you know, it was not a failure for ourselves in itself, but it was a failure that will impact his full life.
Honestly, we went down.
I mean we went really down, but at the end, we started to look at him, and we said, we have to react.
So immediately, as Francesca said, we changed our life.
We started physiotherapy, we started the rehabilitation, and one of the paths that we were following in terms of rehabilitation is the mirror neurons pilot.
Basically, we spent months doing this with Mario.
You have an object, and we showed him how to grab the object.
Now, the theory of mirror neurons simply says that in your brains, exactly now, as you watch me doing this, you are activating exactly the same neurons as if you do the actions.
It looks like this is the leading edge in terms of rehabilitation.
But one day we found that Mario was not looking at our hand.
He was looking at us.
We were his mirror.
And the problem, as you might feel, is that we were down, we were depressed, we were looking at him as a problem, not as a son, not from a positive perspective.
And that day really changed our perspective.
We realized that we had to become a better mirror for Mario.
We restarted from our strengths, and at the same time we restarted from his strengths.
We stopped looking at him as a problem, and we started to look at him as an opportunity to improve.
And really, this was the change, and from our side, we said, "What are our strengths that we really can bring to Mario?"
And we started from our passions.
I mean, at the end, my wife and myself are quite different, but we have many things in common.
We love to travel, we love music, we love to be in places like this, and we started to bring Mario with us just to show to him the best things that we can show to him.
This short video is from last week.
I am not saying -- (Applause) — I am not saying it's a miracle. That's not the message, because we are just at the beginning of the path.
But we want to share what was the key learning, the key learning that Mario drove to us, and it is to consider what you have as a gift and not only what you miss, and to consider what you miss just as an opportunity.
And this is the message that we want to share with you.
This is why we are here.
Mario!
And this is why -- (Applause) — And this is why we decided to share the best mirror in the world with him.
And we thank you so much, all of you.
FF: Thank you. RD: Thank you. Bye.
(Applause) FF: Thank you. (Applause)
I'm five years old, and I am very proud.
My father has just built the best outhouse in our little village in Ukraine.
Inside, it's a smelly, gaping hole in the ground, but outside, it's pearly white formica and it literally gleams in the sun.
This makes me feel so proud, so important, that I appoint myself the leader of my little group of friends and I devise missions for us.
So we prowl from house to house looking for flies captured in spider webs and we set them free.
Four years earlier, when I was one, after the Chernobyl accident, the rain came down black, and my sister's hair fell out in clumps, and I spent nine months in the hospital.
There were no visitors allowed, so my mother bribed a hospital worker.
She acquired a nurse's uniform, and she snuck in every night to sit by my side.
Five years later, an unexpected silver lining.
Thanks to Chernobyl, we get asylum in the U.S.
I am six years old, and I don't cry when we leave home and we come to America, because I expect it to be a place filled with rare and wonderful things like bananas and chocolate and Bazooka bubble gum, Bazooka bubble gum with the little cartoon wrappers inside, Bazooka that we'd get once a year in Ukraine and we'd have to chew one piece for an entire week.
So the first day we get to New York, my grandmother and I find a penny in the floor of the homeless shelter that my family's staying in.
Only, we don't know that it's a homeless shelter.
We think that it's a hotel, a hotel with lots of rats.
So we find this penny kind of fossilized in the floor, and we think that a very wealthy man must have left it there because regular people don't just lose money.
And I hold this penny in the palm of my hand, and it's sticky and rusty, but it feels like I'm holding a fortune.
I decide that I'm going to get my very own piece of Bazooka bubble gum.
And in that moment, I feel like a millionaire.
About a year later, I get to feel that way again when we find a bag full of stuffed animals in the trash, and suddenly I have more toys than I've ever had in my whole life.
And again, I get that feeling when we get a knock on the door of our apartment in Brooklyn, and my sister and I find a deliveryman with a box of pizza that we didn't order.
So we take the pizza, our very first pizza, and we devour slice after slice as the deliveryman stands there and stares at us from the doorway.
And he tells us to pay, but we don't speak English.
My mother comes out, and he asks her for money, but she doesn't have enough.
She walks 50 blocks to and from work every day just to avoid spending money on bus fare.
Then our neighbor pops her head in, and she turns red with rage when she realizes that those immigrants from downstairs have somehow gotten their hands on her pizza.
Everyone's upset.
But the pizza is delicious.
It doesn't hit me until years later just how little we had.
On our 10 year anniversary of being in the U.S., we decided to celebrate by reserving a room at the hotel that we first stayed in when we got to the U.S.
The man at the front desk laughs, and he says, "You can't reserve a room here. This is a homeless shelter."
And we were shocked.
My husband Brian was also homeless as a kid.
His family lost everything, and at age 11, he had to live in motels with his dad, motels that would round up all of their food and keep it hostage until they were able to pay the bill.
And one time, when he finally got his box of Frosted Flakes back, it was crawling with roaches.
But he did have one thing.
He had this shoebox that he carried with him everywhere containing nine comic books, two G.I. Joes painted to look like Spider-Man and five Gobots. And this was his treasure.
This was his own assembly of heroes that kept him from drugs and gangs and from giving up on his dreams.
I'm going to tell you about one more formerly homeless member of our family.
This is Scarlett.
Once upon a time, Scarlet was used as bait in dog fights.
She was tied up and thrown into the ring for other dogs to attack so they'd get more aggressive before the fight.
And now, these days, she eats organic food and she sleeps on an orthopedic bed with her name on it, but when we pour water for her in her bowl, she still looks up and she wags her tail in gratitude.
Sometimes Brian and I walk through the park with Scarlett, and she rolls through the grass, and we just look at her and then we look at each other and we feel gratitude.
We forget about all of our new middle-class frustrations and disappointments, and we feel like millionaires.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What do we know about the future?
Difficult question, simple answer: nothing.
We cannot predict the future.
We only can create a vision of the future, how it might be, a vision which reveals disruptive ideas, which is inspiring, and this is the most important reason which breaks the chains of common thinking.
There are a lot of people who created their own vision about the future, for instance, this vision here from the early 20th century.
It says here that this is the ocean plane of the future.
It takes only one and a half days to cross the Atlantic Ocean.
Today, we know that this future vision didn't come true.
So this is our largest airplane which we have, the Airbus A380, and it's quite huge, so a lot of people fit in there and it's technically completely different than the vision I've shown to you.
I'm working in a team with Airbus, and we have created our vision about a more sustainable future of aviation.
So sustainability is quite important for us, which should incorporate social but as well as environmental and economic values.
So we have created a very disruptive structure which mimics the design of bone, or a skeleton, which occurs in nature.
So that's why it looks maybe a little bit weird, especially to the people who deal with structures in general.
But at least it's just a kind of artwork to explore our ideas about a different future.
What are the main customers of the future?
So, we have the old, we have the young, we have the uprising power of women, and there's one mega-trend which affects all of us.
These are the future anthropometrics.
So our children are getting larger, but at the same time we are growing into different directions.
So what we need is space inside the aircraft, inside a very dense area.
These people have different needs.
So we see a clear need of active health promotion, especially in the case of the old people.
We want to be treated as individuals.
We like to be productive throughout the entire travel chain, and what we are doing in the future is we want to use the latest man-machine interface, and we want to integrate this and show this in one product.
So we combined these needs with technology's themes.
So for instance, we are asking ourselves, how can we create more light?
How can we bring more natural light into the airplane?
So this airplane has no windows anymore, for example.
What about the data and communication software which we need in the future?
My belief is that the airplane of the future will get its own consciousness.
It will be more like a living organism than just a collection of very complex technology.
This will be very different in the future.
It will communicate directly with the passenger in its environment.
And then we are talking also about materials, synthetic biology, for example.
And my belief is that we will get more and more new materials which we can put into structure later on, because structure is one of the key issues in aircraft design.
So let's compare the old world with the new world.
I just want to show you here what we are doing today.
So this is a bracket of an A380 crew rest compartment.
It takes a lot of weight, and it follows the classical design rules.
This here is an equal bracket for the same purpose.
It follows the design of bone.
The design process is completely different.
At the one hand, we have 1.2 kilos, and at the other hand 0.6 kilos.
So this technology, 3D printing, and new design rules really help us to reduce the weight, which is the biggest issue in aircraft design, because it's directly linked to greenhouse gas emissions.
Push this idea a little bit forward.
So how does nature build its components and structures?
So nature is very clever. It puts all the information into these small building blocks, which we call DNA.
And nature builds large skeletons out of it.
So we see a bottom-up approach here, because all the information, as I said, are inside the DNA.
And this is combined with a top-down approach, because what we are doing in our daily life is we train our muscles, we train our skeleton, and it's getting stronger.
And the same approach can be applied to technology as well.
So our building block is carbon nanotubes, for example, to create a large, rivet-less skeleton at the end of the day.
How this looks in particular, you can show it here.
So imagine you have carbon nanotubes growing inside a 3D printer, and they are embedded inside a matrix of plastic, and follow the forces which occur in your component.
And you've got trillions of them.
So you really align them to wood, and you take this wood and make morphological optimization, so you make structures, sub-structures, which allows you to transmit electrical energy or data.
And now we take this material, combine this with a top-down approach, and build bigger and bigger components.
So how might the airplane of the future look?
So we have very different seats which adapt to the shape of the future passenger, with the different anthropometrics.
We have social areas inside the aircraft which might turn into a place where you can play virtual golf.
And finally, this bionic structure, which is covered by a transparent biopolymer membrane, will really change radically how we look at aircrafts in the future.
So as Jason Silva said, if we can imagine it, why not make it so?
See you in the future. Thank you.
(Applause)
This is an ambucycle.
This is the fastest way to reach any medical emergency.
It has everything an ambulance has except for a bed.
You see the defibrillator. You see the equipment.
We all saw the tragedy that happened in Boston.
When I was looking at these pictures, it brought me back many years to my past when I was a child.
I grew up in a small neighborhood in Jerusalem.
When I was six years old, I was walking back from school on a Friday afternoon with my older brother.
We were passing by a bus stop.
We saw a bus blow up in front of our eyes.
The bus was on fire, and many people were hurt and killed.
I remembered an old man yelling to us and crying to help us get him up.
He just needed someone helping him.
We were so scared and we just ran away.
Growing up, I decided I wanted to become a doctor and save lives.
Maybe that was because of what I saw when I was a child.
When I was 15, I took an EMT course, and I went to volunteer on an ambulance.
For two years, I volunteered on an ambulance in Jerusalem.
I helped many people, but whenever someone really needed help, I never got there in time. We never got there.
The traffic is so bad. The distance, and everything.
We never got there when somebody really needed us.
One day, we received a call about a seven-year-old child choking from a hot dog.
Traffic was horrific, and we were coming from the other side of town in the north part of Jerusalem.
When we got there, 20 minutes later, we started CPR on the kid.
A doctor comes in from a block away, stop us, checks the kid, and tells us to stop CPR.
That second he declared this child dead.
At that moment, I understood that this child died for nothing.
If this doctor, who lived one block away from there, would have come 20 minutes earlier, not have to wait until that siren he heard before coming from the ambulance, if he would have heard about it way before, he would have saved this child.
He could have run from a block away.
He could have saved this child.
I said to myself, there must be a better way.
Together with 15 of my friends -- we were all EMTs — we decided, let's protect our neighborhood, so when something like that happens again, we will be there running to the scene a lot before the ambulance.
So I went over to the manager of the ambulance company and I told him, "Please, whenever you have a call coming into our neighborhood, we have 15 great guys who are willing to stop everything they're doing and run and save lives.
Just alert us by beeper.
We'll buy these beepers, just tell your dispatch to send us the beeper, and we will run and save lives."
Well, he was laughing. I was 17 years old. I was a kid.
And he said to me — I remember this like yesterday — he was a great guy, but he said to me, "Kid, go to school, or go open a falafel stand.
We're not really interested in these kinds of new adventures.
We're not interested in your help." And he threw me out of the room.
"I don't need your help," he said.
I was a very stubborn kid.
As you see now, I'm walking around like crazy, meshugenah.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I decided to use the Israeli very famous technique you've probably all heard of, chutzpah. (Laughter) And the next day, I went and I bought two police scanners, and I said, "The hell with you, if you don't want to give me information, I'll get the information myself."
And we did turns, who's going to listen to the radio scanners.
The next day, while I was listening to the scanners, I heard about a call coming in of a 70-year-old man hurt by a car only one block away from me on the main street of my neighborhood.
I ran there by foot. I had no medical equipment.
When I got there, the 70-year-old man was lying on the floor, blood was gushing out of his neck.
He was on Coumadin.
I knew I had to stop his bleeding or else he would die.
I took off my yarmulke, because I had no medical equipment, and with a lot of pressure, I stopped his bleeding.
He was bleeding from his neck.
When the ambulance arrived 15 minutes later, I gave them over a patient who was alive.
(Applause) When I went to visit him two days later, he gave me a hug and was crying and thanking me for saving his life.
At that moment, when I realized this is the first person I ever saved in my life after two years volunteering in an ambulance, I knew this is my life's mission.
So today, 22 years later, we have United Hatzalah.
(Applause) "Hatzalah" means "rescue," for all of you who don't know Hebrew.
I forgot I'm not in Israel.
So we have thousands of volunteers who are passionate about saving lives, and they're spread all around, so whenever a call comes in, they just stop everything and go and run and save a life.
Our average response time today went down to less than three minutes in Israel.
(Applause) I'm talking about heart attacks, I'm talking about car accidents, God forbid bomb attacks, shootings, whatever it is, even a woman 3 o'clock in the morning falling in her home and needs someone to help her.
Three minutes, we'll have a guy with his pajamas running to her house and helping her get up.
The reasons why we're so successful are because of three things.
Thousands of passionate volunteers who will leave everything they do and run to help people they don't even know.
We're not there to replace ambulances.
We're just there to get the gap between the ambulance call until they arrive.
And we save people that otherwise would not be saved.
The second reason is because of our technology.
You know, Israelis are good in technology.
Every one of us has on his phone, no matter what kind of phone, a GPS technology done by NowForce, and whenever a call comes in, the closest five volunteers get the call, and they actually get there really quick, and navigated by a traffic navigator to get there and not waste time.
And this is a great technology we use all over the country and reduce the response time.
And the third thing are these ambucycles.
These ambucycles are an ambulance on two wheels.
We don't transfer people, but we stabilize them, and we save their lives.
They never get stuck in traffic. They could even go on a sidewalk.
They never, literally, get stuck in traffic.
That's why we get there so fast.
A few years after I started this organization, in a Jewish community, two Muslims from east Jerusalem called me up.
They ask me to meet. They wanted to meet with me.
Muhammad Asli and Murad Alyan.
When Muhammad told me his personal story, how his father, 55 years old, collapsed at home, had a cardiac arrest, and it took over an hour for an ambulance arrive, and he saw his father die in front of his eyes, he asked me, "Please start this in east Jerusalem."
I said to myself, I saw so much tragedy, so much hate, and it's not about saving Jews. It's not about saving Muslims.
It's not about saving Christians. It's about saving people.
So I went ahead, full force -- (Applause) — and I started United Hatzalah in east Jerusalem, and that's why the names United and Hatzalah match so well.
We started hand in hand saving Jews and Arabs.
Arabs were saving Jews. Jews were saving Arabs.
Something special happened.
Arabs and Jews, they don't always get along together, but here in this situation, the communities, literally, it's an unbelievable situation that happened, the diversities, all of a sudden they had a common interest: Let's save lives together.
Settlers were saving Arabs and Arabs were saving settlers.
It's an unbelievable concept that could work only when you have such a great cause.
And these are all volunteers.
No one is getting money.
They're all doing it for the purpose of saving lives.
When my own father collapsed a few years ago from a cardiac arrest, one of the first volunteers to arrive to save my father was one of these Muslim volunteers from east Jerusalem who was in the first course to join Hatzalah.
And he saved my father.
Could you imagine how I felt in that moment?
When I started this organization, I was 17 years old.
I never imagined that one day I'd be speaking at TEDMED.
I never even knew what TEDMED was then.
I don't think it existed, but I never imagined, I never imagined that it's going to go all around, it's going to spread around, and this last year we started in Panama and Brazil.
All I need is a partner who is a little meshugenah like me, passionate about saving lives, and willing to do it.
And I'm actually starting it in India very soon with a friend who I met in Harvard just a while back.
Hatzalah actually started in Brooklyn by a Hasidic Jew years before us in Williamsburg, and now it's all over the Jewish community in New York, even Australia and Mexico and many other Jewish communities.
But it could spread everywhere.
It's very easy to adopt.
You even saw these volunteers in New York saving lives in the World Trade Center.
Last year alone, we treated in Israel 207,000 people.
Forty-two thousand of them were life-threatening situations.
And we made a difference.
I guess you could call this a lifesaving flash mob, and it works.
When I look all around here, I see lots of people who would go an extra mile, run an extra mile to save other people, no matter who they are, no matter what religion, no matter who, where they come from.
We all want to be heroes.
We just need a good idea, motivation and lots of chutzpah, and we could save millions of people that otherwise would not be saved.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You hear the gentle lap of waves, the distant cawing of a seagull.
But then an annoying whine interrupts the peace, getting closer, and closer, and closer.
Until...whack!
You dispatch the offending mosquito, and calm is restored.
How did you detect that noise from afar and target its maker with such precision?
The ability to recognize sounds and identify their location is possible thanks to the auditory system.
That’s comprised of two main parts: the ear and the brain.
The ear’s task is to convert sound energy into neural signals; the brain’s is to receive and process the information those signals contain.
To understand how that works, we can follow a sound on its journey into the ear.
The source of a sound creates vibrations that travel as waves of pressure through particles in air, liquids, or solids.
But our inner ear, called the cochlea, is actually filled with saltwater-like fluids.
So, the first problem to solve is how to convert those sound waves, wherever they’re coming from, into waves in the fluid.
The solution is the eardrum, or tympanic membrane, and the tiny bones of the middle ear.
Those convert the large movements of the eardrum into pressure waves in the fluid of the cochlea.
When sound enters the ear canal, it hits the eardrum and makes it vibrate like the head of a drum.
The vibrating eardrum jerks a bone called the hammer, which hits the anvil and moves the third bone called the stapes.
Its motion pushes the fluid within the long chambers of the cochlea.
Once there, the sound vibrations have finally been converted into vibrations of a fluid, and they travel like a wave from one end of the cochlea to the other.
A surface called the basilar membrane runs the length of the cochlea.
It’s lined with hair cells that have specialized components called stereocilia, which move with the vibrations of the cochlear fluid and the basilar membrane.
This movement triggers a signal that travels through the hair cell, into the auditory nerve, then onward to the brain, which interprets it as a specific sound.
When a sound makes the basilar membrane vibrate, not every hair cell moves - only selected ones, depending on the frequency of the sound.
This comes down to some fine engineering.
At one end, the basilar membrane is stiff, vibrating only in response to short wavelength, high-frequency sounds.
The other is more flexible, vibrating only in the presence of longer wavelength, low-frequency sounds.
So, the noises made by the seagull and mosquito vibrate different locations on the basilar membrane, like playing different keys on a piano.
But that’s not all that’s going on.
The brain still has another important task to fulfill: identifying where a sound is coming from.
For that, it compares the sounds coming into the two ears to locate the source in space.
A sound from directly in front of you will reach both your ears at the same time.
You’ll also hear it at the same intensity in each ear.
However, a low-frequency sound coming from one side will reach the near ear microseconds before the far one.
And high-frequency sounds will sound more intense to the near ear because they’re blocked from the far ear by your head.
These strands of information reach special parts of the brainstem that analyze time and intensity differences between your ears.
They send the results of their analysis up to the auditory cortex.
Now, the brain has all the information it needs: the patterns of activity that tell us what the sound is, and information about where it is in space.
Not everyone has normal hearing.
Hearing loss is the third most common chronic disease in the world.
Exposure to loud noises and some drugs can kill hair cells, preventing signals from traveling from the ear to the brain.
Diseases like osteosclerosis freeze the tiny bones in the ear so they no longer vibrate.
And with tinnitus, the brain does strange things to make us think there’s a sound when there isn’t one.
But when it does work, our hearing is an incredible, elegant system.
Our ears enclose a fine-tuned piece of biological machinery that converts the cacophony of vibrations in the air around us into precisely tuned electrical impulses that distinguish claps, taps, sighs, and flies.
It is a thrill to be here at a conference that's devoted to "Inspired by Nature" -- you can imagine.
And I'm also thrilled to be in the foreplay section.
Did you notice this section is foreplay?
Because I get to talk about one of my favorite critters, which is the Western Grebe. You haven't lived until you've seen these guys do their courtship dance.
I was on Bowman Lake in Glacier National Park, which is a long, skinny lake with sort of mountains upside down in it, and my partner and I have a rowing shell.
And so we were rowing, and one of these Western Grebes came along.
And what they do for their courtship dance is, they go together, the two of them, the two mates, and they begin to run underwater.
They paddle faster, and faster, and faster, until they're going so fast that they literally lift up out of the water, and they're standing upright, sort of paddling the top of the water.
And one of these Grebes came along while we were rowing.
And so we're in a skull, and we're moving really, really quickly.
And this Grebe, I think, sort of, mistaked us for a prospect, and started to run along the water next to us, in a courtship dance -- for miles.
It would stop, and then start, and then stop, and then start.
Now that is foreplay.
(Laughter) I came this close to changing species at that moment.
Obviously, life can teach us something in the entertainment section. Life has a lot to teach us.
But what I'd like to talk about today is what life might teach us in technology and in design.
What's happened since the book came out -- the book was mainly about research in biomimicry -- and what's happened since then is architects, designers, engineers -- people who make our world -- have started to call and say, we want a biologist to sit at the design table to help us, in real time, become inspired.
Or -- and this is the fun part for me -- we want you to take us out into the natural world. We'll come with a design challenge and we find the champion adapters in the natural world, who might inspire us.
So this is a picture from a Galapagos trip that we took with some wastewater treatment engineers; they purify wastewater.
And some of them were very resistant, actually, to being there.
What they said to us at first was, you know, we already do biomimicry.
We use bacteria to clean our water. And we said, well, that's not exactly being inspired by nature.
That's bioprocessing, you know; that's bio-assisted technology: using an organism to do your wastewater treatment is an old, old technology called "domestication."
This is learning something, learning an idea, from an organism and then applying it.
And so they still weren't getting it.
So we went for a walk on the beach and I said, well, give me one of your big problems. Give me a design challenge, sustainability speed bump, that's keeping you from being sustainable.
And they said scaling, which is the build-up of minerals inside of pipes.
And they said, you know what happens is, mineral -- just like at your house -- mineral builds up.
And then the aperture closes, and we have to flush the pipes with toxins, or we have to dig them up.
So if we had some way to stop this scaling -- and so I picked up some shells on the beach. And I asked them, what is scaling? What's inside your pipes?
And they said, calcium carbonate.
And I said, that's what this is; this is calcium carbonate.
And they didn't know that.
They didn't know that what a seashell is, it's templated by proteins, and then ions from the seawater crystallize in place to create a shell.
So the same sort of a process, without the proteins, is happening on the inside of their pipes. They didn't know.
This is not for lack of information; it's a lack of integration.
You know, it's a silo, people in silos. They didn't know that the same thing was happening. So one of them thought about it and said, OK, well, if this is just crystallization that happens automatically out of seawater -- self-assembly -- then why aren't shells infinite in size? What stops the scaling?
Why don't they just keep on going?
And I said, well, in the same way that they exude a protein and it starts the crystallization -- and then they all sort of leaned in -- they let go of a protein that stops the crystallization.
It literally adheres to the growing face of the crystal.
And, in fact, there is a product called TPA that's mimicked that protein -- that stop-protein -- and it's an environmentally friendly way to stop scaling in pipes.
That changed everything. From then on, you could not get these engineers back in the boat.
The first day they would take a hike, and it was, click, click, click, click. Five minutes later they were back in the boat.
We're done. You know, I've seen that island.
After this, they were crawling all over. They would snorkel for as long as we would let them snorkel.
What had happened was that they realized that there were organisms out there that had already solved the problems that they had spent their careers trying to solve.
Learning about the natural world is one thing; learning from the natural world -- that's the switch.
That's the profound switch.
What they realized was that the answers to their questions are everywhere; they just needed to change the lenses with which they saw the world.
3.8 billion years of field-testing.
10 to 30 -- Craig Venter will probably tell you; I think there's a lot more than 30 million -- well-adapted solutions.
The important thing for me is that these are solutions solved in context.
And the context is the Earth -- the same context that we're trying to solve our problems in.
So it's the conscious emulation of life's genius.
It's not slavishly mimicking -- although Al is trying to get the hairdo going -- it's not a slavish mimicry; it's taking the design principles, the genius of the natural world, and learning something from it.
Now, in a group with so many IT people, I do have to mention what I'm not going to talk about, and that is that your field is one that has learned an enormous amount from living things, on the software side. So there's computers that protect themselves, like an immune system, and we're learning from gene regulation and biological development. And we're learning from neural nets, genetic algorithms, evolutionary computing.
That's on the software side. But what's interesting to me is that we haven't looked at this, as much. I mean, these machines are really not very high tech in my estimation in the sense that there's dozens and dozens of carcinogens in the water in Silicon Valley.
So the hardware is not at all up to snuff in terms of what life would call a success.
So what can we learn about making -- not just computers, but everything?
The plane you came in, cars, the seats that you're sitting on.
How do we redesign the world that we make, the human-made world?
More importantly, what should we ask in the next 10 years?
And there's a lot of cool technologies out there that life has.
What's the syllabus?
Three questions, for me, are key.
How does life make things?
This is the opposite; this is how we make things.
It's called heat, beat and treat -- that's what material scientists call it.
And it's carving things down from the top, with 96 percent waste left over and only 4 percent product. You heat it up; you beat it with high pressures; you use chemicals. OK. Heat, beat and treat.
Life can't afford to do that. How does life make things?
How does life make the most of things?
That's a geranium pollen.
And its shape is what gives it the function of being able to tumble through air so easily. Look at that shape.
Life adds information to matter.
In other words: structure.
It gives it information. By adding information to matter, it gives it a function that's different than without that structure.
And thirdly, how does life make things disappear into systems?
Because life doesn't really deal in things; there are no things in the natural world divorced from their systems.
Really quick syllabus.
As I'm reading more and more now, and following the story, there are some amazing things coming up in the biological sciences.
And at the same time, I'm listening to a lot of businesses and finding what their sort of grand challenges are.
The two groups are not talking to each other.
At all.
What in the world of biology might be helpful at this juncture, to get us through this sort of evolutionary knothole that we're in?
I'm going to try to go through 12, really quickly.
One that's exciting to me is self-assembly.
Now, you've heard about this in terms of nanotechnology.
Back to that shell: the shell is a self-assembling material.
On the lower left there is a picture of mother of pearl forming out of seawater. It's a layered structure that's mineral and then polymer, and it makes it very, very tough.
It's twice as tough as our high-tech ceramics.
But what's really interesting: unlike our ceramics that are in kilns, it happens in seawater. It happens near, in and near, the organism's body.
This is Sandia National Labs.
A guy named Jeff Brinker has found a way to have a self-assembling coding process.
Imagine being able to make ceramics at room temperature by simply dipping something into a liquid, lifting it out of the liquid, and having evaporation force the molecules in the liquid together, so that they jigsaw together in the same way as this crystallization works.
Imagine making all of our hard materials that way.
Imagine spraying the precursors to a PV cell, to a solar cell, onto a roof, and having it self-assemble into a layered structure that harvests light.
Here's an interesting one for the IT world: bio-silicon. This is a diatom, which is made of silicates.
And so silicon, which we make right now -- it's part of our carcinogenic problem in the manufacture of our chips -- this is a bio-mineralization process that's now being mimicked.
This is at UC Santa Barbara. Look at these diatoms.
This is from Ernst Haeckel's work.
Imagine being able to -- and, again, it's a templated process, and it solidifies out of a liquid process -- imagine being able to have that sort of structure coming out at room temperature.
Imagine being able to make perfect lenses.
On the left, this is a brittle star; it's covered with lenses that the people at Lucent Technologies have found have no distortion whatsoever.
It's one of the most distortion-free lenses we know of.
And there's many of them, all over its entire body.
What's interesting, again, is that it self-assembles.
A woman named Joanna Aizenberg, at Lucent, is now learning to do this in a low-temperature process to create these sort of lenses. She's also looking at fiber optics.
That's a sea sponge that has a fiber optic.
Down at the very base of it, there's fiber optics that work better than ours, actually, to move light, but you can tie them in a knot; they're incredibly flexible.
Here's another big idea: CO2 as a feedstock.
A guy named Geoff Coates, at Cornell, said to himself, you know, plants do not see CO2 as the biggest poison of our time.
We see it that way. Plants are busy making long chains of starches and glucose, right, out of CO2. He's found a way -- he's found a catalyst -- and he's found a way to take CO2 and make it into polycarbonates. Biodegradable plastics out of CO2 -- how plant-like.
Solar transformations: the most exciting one.
There are people who are mimicking the energy-harvesting device inside of purple bacterium, the people at ASU. Even more interesting, lately, in the last couple of weeks, people have seen that there's an enzyme called hydrogenase that's able to evolve hydrogen from proton and electrons, and is able to take hydrogen up -- basically what's happening in a fuel cell, in the anode of a fuel cell and in a reversible fuel cell.
In our fuel cells, we do it with platinum; life does it with a very, very common iron.
And a team has now just been able to mimic that hydrogen-juggling hydrogenase.
That's very exciting for fuel cells -- to be able to do that without platinum.
Power of shape: here's a whale. We've seen that the fins of this whale have tubercles on them. And those little bumps actually increase efficiency in, for instance, the edge of an airplane -- increase efficiency by about 32 percent.
Which is an amazing fossil fuel savings, if we were to just put that on the edge of a wing.
Color without pigments: this peacock is creating color with shape.
Light comes through, it bounces back off the layers; it's called thin-film interference. Imagine being able to self-assemble products with the last few layers playing with light to create color.
Imagine being able to create a shape on the outside of a surface, so that it's self-cleaning with just water. That's what a leaf does.
See that up-close picture?
That's a ball of water, and those are dirt particles.
And that's an up-close picture of a lotus leaf.
There's a company making a product called Lotusan, which mimics -- when the building facade paint dries, it mimics the bumps in a self-cleaning leaf, and rainwater cleans the building.
Water is going to be our big, grand challenge: quenching thirst.
Here are two organisms that pull water.
The one on the left is the Namibian beetle pulling water out of fog.
The one on the right is a pill bug -- pulls water out of air, does not drink fresh water.
Pulling water out of Monterey fog and out of the sweaty air in Atlanta, before it gets into a building, are key technologies.
Separation technologies are going to be extremely important.
What if we were to say, no more hard rock mining?
What if we were to separate out metals from waste streams, small amounts of metals in water? That's what microbes do; they chelate metals out of water.
There's a company here in San Francisco called MR3 that is embedding mimics of the microbes' molecules on filters to mine waste streams.
Green chemistry is chemistry in water.
We do chemistry in organic solvents.
This is a picture of the spinnerets coming out of a spider and the silk being formed from a spider. Isn't that beautiful?
Green chemistry is replacing our industrial chemistry with nature's recipe book.
It's not easy, because life uses only a subset of the elements in the periodic table.
And we use all of them, even the toxic ones.
To figure out the elegant recipes that would take the small subset of the periodic table, and create miracle materials like that cell, is the task of green chemistry.
Timed degradation: packaging that is good until you don't want it to be good anymore, and dissolves on cue.
That's a mussel you can find in the waters out here, and the threads holding it to a rock are timed; at exactly two years, they begin to dissolve.
Healing: this is a good one.
That little guy over there is a tardigrade.
There is a problem with vaccines around the world not getting to patients. And the reason is that the refrigeration somehow gets broken; what's called the "cold chain" gets broken.
A guy named Bruce Rosner looked at the tardigrade -- which dries out completely, and yet stays alive for months and months and months, and is able to regenerate itself.
And he found a way to dry out vaccines -- encase them in the same sort of sugar capsules as the tardigrade has within its cells -- meaning that vaccines no longer need to be refrigerated.
They can be put in a glove compartment, OK.
Learning from organisms. This is a session about water -- learning about organisms that can do without water, in order to create a vaccine that lasts and lasts and lasts without refrigeration.
I'm not going to get to 12.
But what I am going to do is tell you that the most important thing, besides all of these adaptations, is the fact that these organisms have figured out a way to do the amazing things they do while taking care of the place that's going to take care of their offspring.
When they're involved in foreplay, they're thinking about something very, very important -- and that's having their genetic material remain, 10,000 generations from now.
And that means finding a way to do what they do without destroying the place that'll take care of their offspring.
That's the biggest design challenge.
Luckily, there are millions and millions of geniuses willing to gift us with their best ideas.
Good luck having a conversation with them.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Talk about foreplay, I -- we need to get to 12, but really quickly.
Janine Benyus: Oh really?
CA: Yeah. Just like, you know, like the 10-second version of 10, 11 and 12. Because we just -- your slides are so gorgeous, and the ideas are so big, I can't stand to let you go down without seeing 10, 11 and 12.
JB: OK, put this -- OK, I'll just hold this thing. OK, great.
OK, so that's the healing one.
Sensing and responding: feedback is a huge thing.
This is a locust. There can be 80 million of them in a square kilometer, and yet they don't collide with one another.
And yet we have 3.6 million car collisions a year.
(Laughter) Right. There's a person at Newcastle who has figured out that it's a very large neuron.
And she's actually figuring out how to make a collision-avoidance circuitry based on this very large neuron in the locust.
This is a huge and important one, number 11.
And that's the growing fertility.
That means, you know, net fertility farming.
We should be growing fertility. And, oh yes -- we get food, too.
Because we have to grow the capacity of this planet to create more and more opportunities for life.
And really, that's what other organisms do as well.
In ensemble, that's what whole ecosystems do: they create more and more opportunities for life.
Our farming has done the opposite.
So, farming based on how a prairie builds soil, ranching based on how a native ungulate herd actually increases the health of the range, even wastewater treatment based on how a marsh not only cleans the water, but creates incredibly sparkling productivity.
This is the simple design brief. I mean, it looks simple because the system, over 3.8 billion years, has worked this out.
That is, those organisms that have not been able to figure out how to enhance or sweeten their places, are not around to tell us about it.
That's the twelfth one.
Life -- and this is the secret trick; this is the magic trick -- life creates conditions conducive to life.
It builds soil; it cleans air; it cleans water; it mixes the cocktail of gases that you and I need to live.
And it does that in the middle of having great foreplay and meeting their needs. So it's not mutually exclusive.
We have to find a way to meet our needs, while making of this place an Eden.
CA: Janine, thank you so much.
(Applause)
The day I left home for the first time to go to university was a bright day brimming with hope and optimism.
I'd done well at school. Expectations for me were high, and I gleefully entered the student life of lectures, parties and traffic cone theft.
Now appearances, of course, can be deceptive, and to an extent, this feisty, energetic persona of lecture-going and traffic cone stealing was a veneer, albeit a very well-crafted and convincing one.
Underneath, I was actually deeply unhappy, insecure and fundamentally frightened -- frightened of other people, of the future, of failure and of the emptiness that I felt was within me.
But I was skilled at hiding it, and from the outside appeared to be someone with everything to hope for and aspire to.
This fantasy of invulnerability was so complete that I even deceived myself, and as the first semester ended and the second began, there was no way that anyone could have predicted what was just about to happen.
I was leaving a seminar when it started, humming to myself, fumbling with my bag just as I'd done a hundred times before, when suddenly I heard a voice calmly observe, "She is leaving the room."
I looked around, and there was no one there, but the clarity and decisiveness of the comment was unmistakable.
Shaken, I left my books on the stairs and hurried home, and there it was again.
"She is opening the door."
This was the beginning. The voice had arrived.
And the voice persisted, days and then weeks of it, on and on, narrating everything I did in the third person.
"She is going to the library."
"She is going to a lecture."
It was neutral, impassive and even, after a while, strangely companionate and reassuring, although I did notice that its calm exterior sometimes slipped and that it occasionally mirrored my own unexpressed emotion.
So, for example, if I was angry and had to hide it, which I often did, being very adept at concealing how I really felt, then the voice would sound frustrated.
Otherwise, it was neither sinister nor disturbing, although even at that point it was clear that it had something to communicate to me about my emotions, particularly emotions which were remote and inaccessible.
Now it was then that I made a fatal mistake, in that I told a friend about the voice, and she was horrified.
A subtle conditioning process had begun, the implication that normal people don't hear voices and the fact that I did meant that something was very seriously wrong.
Such fear and mistrust was infectious.
Suddenly the voice didn't seem quite so benign anymore, and when she insisted that I seek medical attention, I duly complied, and which proved to be mistake number two.
I spent some time telling the college G.P.
about what I perceived to be the real problem: anxiety, low self-worth, fears about the future, and was met with bored indifference until I mentioned the voice, upon which he dropped his pen, swung round and began to question me with a show of real interest.
And to be fair, I was desperate for interest and help, and I began to tell him about my strange commentator.
And I always wish, at this point, the voice had said, "She is digging her own grave."
I was referred to a psychiatrist, who likewise took a grim view of the voice's presence, subsequently interpreting everything I said through a lens of latent insanity.
For example, I was part of a student TV station that broadcast news bulletins around the campus, and during an appointment which was running very late, I said, "I'm sorry, doctor, I've got to go.
I'm reading the news at six."
Now it's down on my medical records that Eleanor has delusions that she's a television news broadcaster.
It was at this point that events began to rapidly overtake me.
A hospital admission followed, the first of many, a diagnosis of schizophrenia came next, and then, worst of all, a toxic, tormenting sense of hopelessness, humiliation and despair about myself and my prospects.
But having been encouraged to see the voice not as an experience but as a symptom, my fear and resistance towards it intensified.
Now essentially, this represented taking an aggressive stance towards my own mind, a kind of psychic civil war, and in turn this caused the number of voices to increase and grow progressively hostile and menacing.
Helplessly and hopelessly, I began to retreat into this nightmarish inner world in which the voices were destined to become both my persecutors and my only perceived companions.
They told me, for example, that if I proved myself worthy of their help, then they could change my life back to how it had been, and a series of increasingly bizarre tasks was set, a kind of labor of Hercules.
It started off quite small, for example, pull out three strands of hair, but gradually it grew more extreme, culminating in commands to harm myself, and a particularly dramatic instruction: "You see that tutor over there?
You see that glass of water?
Well, you have to go over and pour it over him in front of the other students."
Which I actually did, and which needless to say did not endear me to the faculty.
In effect, a vicious cycle of fear, avoidance, mistrust and misunderstanding had been established, and this was a battle in which I felt powerless and incapable of establishing any kind of peace or reconciliation.
Two years later, and the deterioration was dramatic.
By now, I had the whole frenzied repertoire: terrifying voices, grotesque visions, bizarre, intractable delusions.
My mental health status had been a catalyst for discrimination, verbal abuse, and physical and sexual assault, and I'd been told by my psychiatrist, "Eleanor, you'd be better off with cancer, because cancer is easier to cure than schizophrenia."
I'd been diagnosed, drugged and discarded, and was by now so tormented by the voices that I attempted to drill a hole in my head in order to get them out.
Now looking back on the wreckage and despair of those years, it seems to me now as if someone died in that place, and yet, someone else was saved.
A broken and haunted person began that journey, but the person who emerged was a survivor and would ultimately grow into the person I was destined to be.
Many people have harmed me in my life, and I remember them all, but the memories grow pale and faint in comparison with the people who've helped me.
The fellow survivors, the fellow voice-hearers, the comrades and collaborators; the mother who never gave up on me, who knew that one day I would come back to her and was willing to wait for me for as long as it took; the doctor who only worked with me for a brief time but who reinforced his belief that recovery was not only possible but inevitable, and during a devastating period of relapse told my terrified family, "Don't give up hope.
I believe that Eleanor can get through this.
Sometimes, you know, it snows as late as May, but summer always comes eventually."
Fourteen minutes is not enough time to fully credit those good and generous people who fought with me and for me and who waited to welcome me back from that agonized, lonely place.
But together, they forged a blend of courage, creativity, integrity, and an unshakeable belief that my shattered self could become healed and whole.
I used to say that these people saved me, but what I now know is they did something even more important in that they empowered me to save myself, and crucially, they helped me to understand something which I'd always suspected: that my voices were a meaningful response to traumatic life events, particularly childhood events, and as such were not my enemies but a source of insight into solvable emotional problems.
Now, at first, this was very difficult to believe, not least because the voices appeared so hostile and menacing, so in this respect, a vital first step was learning to separate out a metaphorical meaning from what I'd previously interpreted to be a literal truth.
So for example, voices which threatened to attack my home I learned to interpret as my own sense of fear and insecurity in the world, rather than an actual, objective danger.
Now at first, I would have believed them.
I remember, for example, sitting up one night on guard outside my parents' room to protect them from what I thought was a genuine threat from the voices.
Because I'd had such a bad problem with self-injury that most of the cutlery in the house had been hidden, so I ended up arming myself with a plastic fork, kind of like picnic ware, and sort of sat outside the room clutching it and waiting to spring into action should anything happen.
It was like, "Don't mess with me.
I've got a plastic fork, don't you know?"
Strategic.
But a later response, and much more useful, would be to try and deconstruct the message behind the words, so when the voices warned me not to leave the house, then I would thank them for drawing my attention to how unsafe I felt -- because if I was aware of it, then I could do something positive about it -- but go on to reassure both them and myself that we were safe and didn't need to feel frightened anymore.
I would set boundaries for the voices, and try to interact with them in a way that was assertive yet respectful, establishing a slow process of communication and collaboration in which we could learn to work together and support one another.
Throughout all of this, what I would ultimately realize was that each voice was closely related to aspects of myself, and that each of them carried overwhelming emotions that I'd never had an opportunity to process or resolve, memories of sexual trauma and abuse, of anger, shame, guilt, low self-worth.
The voices took the place of this pain and gave words to it, and possibly one of the greatest revelations was when I realized that the most hostile and aggressive voices actually represented the parts of me that had been hurt most profoundly, and as such, it was these voices that needed to be shown the greatest compassion and care.
It was armed with this knowledge that ultimately I would gather together my shattered self, each fragment represented by a different voice, gradually withdraw from all my medication, and return to psychiatry, only this time from the other side.
Ten years after the voice first came, I finally graduated, this time with the highest degree in psychology the university had ever given, and one year later, the highest masters, which shall we say isn't bad for a madwoman.
In fact, one of the voices actually dictated the answers during the exam, which technically possibly counts as cheating.
(Laughter) And to be honest, sometimes I quite enjoyed their attention as well.
As Oscar Wilde has said, the only thing worse than being talked about is not being talked about.
It also makes you very good at eavesdropping, because you can listen to two conversations simultaneously.
So it's not all bad.
I worked in mental health services, I spoke at conferences, I published book chapters and academic articles, and I argued, and continue to do so, the relevance of the following concept: that an important question in psychiatry shouldn't be what's wrong with you but rather what's happened to you.
And all the while, I listened to my voices, with whom I'd finally learned to live with peace and respect and which in turn reflected a growing sense of compassion, acceptance and respect towards myself.
And I remember the most moving and extraordinary moment when supporting another young woman who was terrorized by her voices, and becoming fully aware, for the very first time, that I no longer felt that way myself but was finally able to help someone else who was.
I'm now very proud to be a part of Intervoice, the organizational body of the International Hearing Voices Movement, an initiative inspired by the work of Professor Marius Romme and Dr. Sandra Escher, which locates voice hearing as a survival strategy, a sane reaction to insane circumstances, not as an aberrant symptom of schizophrenia to be endured, but a complex, significant and meaningful experience to be explored.
Together, we envisage and enact a society that understands and respects voice hearing, supports the needs of individuals who hear voices, and which values them as full citizens.
This type of society is not only possible, it's already on its way.
To paraphrase Chavez, once social change begins, it cannot be reversed.
You cannot humiliate the person who feels pride.
You cannot oppress the people who are not afraid anymore.
For me, the achievements of the Hearing Voices Movement are a reminder that empathy, fellowship, justice and respect are more than words; they are convictions and beliefs, and that beliefs can change the world.
In the last 20 years, the Hearing Voices Movement has established hearing voices networks in 26 countries across five continents, working together to promote dignity, solidarity and empowerment for individuals in mental distress, to create a new language and practice of hope, which, at its very center, lies an unshakable belief in the power of the individual.
As Peter Levine has said, the human animal is a unique being endowed with an instinctual capacity to heal and the intellectual spirit to harness this innate capacity.
In this respect, for members of society, there is no greater honor or privilege than facilitating that process of healing for someone, to bear witness, to reach out a hand, to share the burden of someone's suffering, and to hold the hope for their recovery.
And likewise, for survivors of distress and adversity, that we remember we don't have to live our lives forever defined by the damaging things that have happened to us.
We are unique. We are irreplaceable.
What lies within us can never be truly colonized, contorted, or taken away.
The light never goes out.
As a very wonderful doctor once said to me, "Don't tell me what other people have told you about yourself.
Tell me about you."
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) ["Oedipus Rex"] ["The Lion King"] ["Titus"] ["Frida"] ["The Magic Flute"] ["Across The Universe"] (Applause) Julie Taymor: Thank you. Thank you very much.
That's a few samples of the theater, opera and films that I have done over the last 20 years.
But what I'd like to begin with right now is to take you back to a moment that I went through in Indonesia, which is a seminal moment in my life and, like all myths, these stories need to be retold and told, lest we forget them.
And when I'm in the turbulent times, as we know, that I am right now, through the crucible and the fire of transformation, which is what all of you do, actually.
Anybody who creates knows there's that point where it hasn't quite become the phoenix or the burnt char.
(Laughter) And I am right there on the edge, which I'll tell you about, another story.
I want to go back to Indonesia where I was about 21, 22 years, a long time ago, on a fellowship.
And I found myself, after two years there and performing and learning, on the island of Bali, on the edge of a crater, Gunung Batur.
And I was in a village where there was an initiation ceremony for the young men, a rite of passage.
Little did I know that it was mine as well.
And as I sat in this temple square under this gigantic beringin banyan tree, in the dark, there was no electricity, just the full moon, down in this empty square, and I heard the most beautiful sounds, like a Charles Ives concert as I listened to the gamelan music from all the different villagers that came for this once-every-five-years ceremony.
And I thought I was alone in the dark under this tree.
And all of a sudden, out of the dark, from the other end of the square, I saw the glint of mirrors lit by the moon.
And these 20 old men who I'd seen before all of a sudden stood up in these full warrior costumes with the headdress and the spears, and no one was in the square, and I was hidden in the shadows.
No one was there, and they came out, and they did this incredible dance.
"Huhuhuhuhuhuhuhahahahaha."
And they moved their bodies and they came forward, and the lights bounced off these costumes.
And I've been in theater since I was 11 years old, and performing, creating, and I went, "Who are they performing for with these elaborate costumes, these extraordinary headdresses?"
And I realized that they were performing for God, whatever that means.
But somehow, it didn't matter about the publicity.
There was no money involved.
It wasn't going to be written down. It was no news.
And there were these incredible artists that felt for me like an eternity as they performed.
The next moment, as soon as they finished and disappeared into the shadows, a young man with a propane lantern came on, hung it up on a tree, set up a curtain.
The village square was filled with hundreds of people.
And they put on an opera all night long.
Human beings needed the light.
They needed the light to see.
So what I gained and gathered from this incredible, seminal moment in my life as a young artist was that you must be true to what you believe as an artist all the way through, but you also have to be aware that the audience is out there in our lives at this time, and they also need the light.
And it's this incredible balance that I think that we walk when we are creating something that is breaking ground, that's trying to do something you've never seen before, that imaginary world where you actually don't know where you're going to end up, that's the fine line on the edge of a crater that I have walked my whole life.
What I would like to do now is to tell you a little bit about how I work. Let's take "The Lion King."
You saw many examples of my work up there, but it's one that people know.
I start with the notion of the ideograph.
An ideograph is like a brush painting, a Japanese brush painting.
Three strokes, you get the whole bamboo forest.
I go to the concept of "The Lion King" and I say, "What is the essence of it?
What is the abstraction?
If I were to reduce this entire story into one image, what would it be?"
The circle. The circle. It's so obvious.
The circle of life. The circle of Mufasa's mask.
The circle that, when we come to Act II and there's a drought, how do you express drought?
It's a circle of silk on the floor that disappears into the hole in the stage floor.
The circle of life comes in the wheels of the gazelles that leap.
And you see the mechanics.
And being a theater person, what I know and love about the theater is that when the audience comes in and they suspend their disbelief, when you see men walking or women walking with a platter of grass on their heads, you know it's the savanna.
You don't question that.
I love the apparent truth of theater.
I love that people are willing to fill in the blanks.
The audience is willing to say, "Oh, I know that's not a real sun.
You took pieces of sticks.
You added silk to the bottom.
You suspended these pieces. You let it fall flat on the floor.
And as it rises with the strings, I see that it's a sun.
But the beauty of it is that it's just silk and sticks.
And in a way, that is what makes it spiritual.
That's what moves you.
It's not the actual literal sunrise that's coming.
It's the art of it.
So in the theater, as much as the story is critical and the book and the language, the telling of the story, how it's told, the mechanics, the methods that you use, is equal to the story itself.
And I'm one who loves high tech and low tech.
So I could go from -- For instance, I'll show you some "Spider-Man" later, these incredible machines that move people along.
But the fact is, without the dancer who knows how to use his body and swing on those wires, it's nothing.
So now I'm going to show you some clips from the other big project of my life this year, "The Tempest."
It's a movie. I did "The Tempest" on a stage three times in the theater since 1984, '86, and I love the play.
I did it always with a male Prospero.
And all of a sudden, I thought, "Well, who am I gonna get to play Prospero?
Why not Helen Mirren? She's a great actor. Why not?"
And this material really did work for a woman equally as well.
So now, let's take a look at some of the images from "The Tempest."
(Music) (Video) Prospera: Hast thou, spirit, performed to the point the tempest that I bade thee?
Ariel: I boarded the king's ship. In every cabin, I flamed amazement.
Prospera: At first sight, they have changed eyes.
Miranda: Do you love me?
Ferdinand: Beyond all limit.
HM: They are both in either's powers.
Trinculo: Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows.
(Music) Looking for business, governor?
Caliban: Hast thou not dropped from heaven?
Stephano: Out of the moon, I do assure thee.
Prospera: Caliban!
Caliban: This island is mine.
Prospera: For this, be sure, tonight thou shalt have cramps.
Antonio: Here lies your brother no better than the earth he lies upon.
Sebastian: Draw thy sword.
And I, the king, shall love thee.
Prospera: I will plague them all, even to roaring.
Ariel: I have made you mad.
Prospera: We are such stuff as dreams are made on.
and our little life is rounded with a sleep.
(Music) JT: Okay.
(Applause) So I went from theater, doing "The Tempest" on the stage in a very low-budget production many years ago, and I love the play, and I also think it's Shakespeare's last play, and it really lends itself, as you can see, to cinema.
But I'm just going to give you a little example about how one stages it in theater and then how one takes that same idea or story and moves it into cinema.
The ideograph that I talked to you about before, what is it for "The Tempest"?
What, if I were to boil it down, would be the one image that I could hang my hat on for this?
And it was the sand castle, the idea of nurture versus nature, that we build these civilizations -- she speaks about it at the end, Helen Mirren's Prospera -- we build them, but under nature, under the grand tempest, these cloud-capped towers, these gorgeous palaces will fade and there will -- leave not a rack behind.
So in the theater, I started the play, it was a black sand rake, white cyc, and there was a little girl, Miranda, on the horizon, building a drip castle, a sand castle.
And as she was there on the edge of that stage, two stagehands all in black with watering cans ran along the top and started to pour water on the sand castle, and the sand castle started to drip and sink, but before it did, the audience saw the black-clad stagehands.
The medium was apparent. It was banal. We saw it.
But as they started to pour the water, the light changed from showing you the black-clad stagehands to focusing, this rough magic that we do in theater, it focused right on the water itself.
And all of a sudden, the audience's perspective changes.
It becomes something magically large.
It becomes the rainstorm.
The masked actors, the puppeteers, they disappear, and the audience makes that leap into this world, into this imaginary world of "The Tempest" actually happening.
Now the difference when I went and did it in the cinema, I started the actual movie with a close-up of a sand castle, a black sand castle, and what cinema can do is, by using camera, perspective, and also long shots and close-ups, it started on a close-up of the sand castle, and as it pulled away, you saw that it was a miniature sitting in the palm of the girl's hands.
And so I could play with the medium, and why I move from one medium to another is to be able to do this.
Now I'm going to take you to "Spider-Man."
(Music) (Video) Peter Parker: ♪ Standing on the precipice, I can soar away from this. ♪ JT: We're trying to do everything in live theater that you can't do in two dimensions in film and television.
PP: ♪ Rise above yourself and take control. ♪ George Tsypin: We're looking at New York from a Spider-Man point of view.
Spider Man is not bound by gravity.
Manhattan in the show is not bound by gravity either.
PP: ♪ Be yourself and rise above it all. ♪ Ensemble: ♪ Sock! Pow! ♪ ♪ Slam! Scratch! ♪ Danny Ezralow: I don't want you to even think there's a choreographer.
It's real, what's happening.
I prefer you to see people moving, and you're going, "Whoa, what was that?"
(Music) JT: If I give enough movement in the sculpture, and the actor moves their head, you feel like it's alive.
It's really comic book live. It's a comic book coming alive.
(Music) Bono: They're mythologies.
They're modern myths, these comic book heroes.
PP: ♪ They believe. ♪ (Screams) (Music) (Applause) JT: Ohhhh. What was that?
Circus, rock 'n' roll, drama.
What the hell are we doing up there on that stage?
Well, one last story, very quickly.
After I was in that village, I crossed the lake, and I saw that the volcano was erupting on the other side, Gunung Batur, and there was a dead volcano next to the live volcano.
I didn't think I'd be swallowed by the volcano, and I am here.
But it's very easy to climb up, is it not?
You hold on to the roots, you put your foot in the little rocks and climb up there, and you get to the top, and I was with a good friend who was an actor, and we said, "Let's go up there.
Let's see if we can come close to the edge of that live volcano."
And we climbed up and we got to the very top, and we're on the edge, on this precipice, Roland disappears into the sulfur smoke at the volcano at the other end, and I'm up there alone on this incredible precipice.
Did you hear the lyrics?
I'm on the precipice looking down into a dead volcano to my left.
To my right is sheer shale. It's coming off.
I'm in thongs and sarongs. It was many years ago.
And no hiking boots.
And he's disappeared, this mad French gypsy actor, off in the smoke, and I realize, I can't go back the way that I've come. I can't.
So I throw away my camera. I throw away my thongs, and I looked at the line straight in front of me, and I got down on all fours like a cat, and I held with my knees to either side of this line in front of me, for 30 yards or 30 feet, I don't know.
The wind was massively blowing, and the only way I could get to the other side was to look at the line straight in front of me.
I know you've all been there.
I'm in the crucible right now.
It's my trial by fire.
It's my company's trials by fire.
We survive because our theme song is "Rise Above."
Boy falls from the sky, rise above.
It's right there in the palm of both of our hands, of all of my company's hands.
I have beautiful collaborators, and we as creators only get there all together.
I know you understand that.
And you just stay going forward, and then you see this extraordinary thing in front of your eyes.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Motor racing is a funny old business.
We make a new car every year, and then we spend the rest of the season trying to understand what it is we've built to make it better, to make it faster.
And then the next year, we start again.
Now, the car you see in front of you is quite complicated.
The chassis is made up of about 11,000 components, the engine another 6,000, the electronics about eight and a half thousand.
So there's about 25,000 things there that can go wrong.
So motor racing is very much about attention to detail.
The other thing about Formula 1 in particular is we're always changing the car.
We're always trying to make it faster.
So every two weeks, we will be making about 5,000 new components to fit to the car.
Five to 10 percent of the race car will be different every two weeks of the year.
So how do we do that?
Well, we start our life with the racing car.
We have a lot of sensors on the car to measure things.
On the race car in front of you here there are about 120 sensors when it goes into a race.
It's measuring all sorts of things around the car.
That data is logged. We're logging about 500 different parameters within the data systems, about 13,000 health parameters and events to say when things are not working the way they should do, and we're sending that data back to the garage using telemetry at a rate of two to four megabits per second.
So during a two-hour race, each car will be sending 750 million numbers.
That's twice as many numbers as words that each of us speaks in a lifetime.
It's a huge amount of data.
But it's not enough just to have data and measure it.
You need to be able to do something with it.
So we've spent a lot of time and effort in turning the data into stories to be able to tell, what's the state of the engine, how are the tires degrading, what's the situation with fuel consumption?
So all of this is taking data and turning it into knowledge that we can act upon.
Okay, so let's have a look at a little bit of data.
Let's pick a bit of data from another three-month-old patient.
This is a child, and what you're seeing here is real data, and on the far right-hand side, where everything starts getting a little bit catastrophic, that is the patient going into cardiac arrest.
It was deemed to be an unpredictable event.
This was a heart attack that no one could see coming.
But when we look at the information there, we can see that things are starting to become a little fuzzy about five minutes or so before the cardiac arrest.
We can see small changes in things like the heart rate moving.
These were all undetected by normal thresholds which would be applied to data.
So the question is, why couldn't we see it?
Was this a predictable event?
Can we look more at the patterns in the data to be able to do things better?
So this is a child, about the same age as the racing car on stage, three months old.
It's a patient with a heart problem.
Now, when you look at some of the data on the screen above, things like heart rate, pulse, oxygen, respiration rates, they're all unusual for a normal child, but they're quite normal for the child there, and so one of the challenges you have in health care is, how can I look at the patient in front of me, have something which is specific for her, and be able to detect when things start to change, when things start to deteriorate?
Because like a racing car, any patient, when things start to go bad, you have a short time to make a difference.
So what we did is we took a data system which we run every two weeks of the year in Formula 1 and we installed it on the hospital computers at Birmingham Children's Hospital.
We streamed data from the bedside instruments in their pediatric intensive care so that we could both look at the data in real time and, more importantly, to store the data so that we could start to learn from it.
And then, we applied an application on top which would allow us to tease out the patterns in the data in real time so we could see what was happening, so we could determine when things started to change.
Now, in motor racing, we're all a little bit ambitious, audacious, a little bit arrogant sometimes, so we decided we would also look at the children as they were being transported to intensive care.
Why should we wait until they arrived in the hospital before we started to look?
And so we installed a real-time link between the ambulance and the hospital, just using normal 3G telephony to send that data so that the ambulance became an extra bed in intensive care.
And then we started looking at the data.
So the wiggly lines at the top, all the colors, this is the normal sort of data you would see on a monitor -- heart rate, pulse, oxygen within the blood, and respiration.
The lines on the bottom, the blue and the red, these are the interesting ones.
The red line is showing an automated version of the early warning score that Birmingham Children's Hospital were already running.
They'd been running that since 2008, and already have stopped cardiac arrests and distress within the hospital.
The blue line is an indication of when patterns start to change, and immediately, before we even started putting in clinical interpretation, we can see that the data is speaking to us.
It's telling us that something is going wrong.
The plot with the red and the green blobs, this is plotting different components of the data against each other.
The green is us learning what is normal for that child.
We call it the cloud of normality.
And when things start to change, when conditions start to deteriorate, we move into the red line.
There's no rocket science here.
It is displaying data that exists already in a different way, to amplify it, to provide cues to the doctors, to the nurses, so they can see what's happening.
In the same way that a good racing driver relies on cues to decide when to apply the brakes, when to turn into a corner, we need to help our physicians and our nurses to see when things are starting to go wrong.
So we have a very ambitious program.
We think that the race is on to do something differently.
We are thinking big. It's the right thing to do.
We have an approach which, if it's successful, there's no reason why it should stay within a hospital.
It can go beyond the walls.
With wireless connectivity these days, there is no reason why patients, doctors and nurses always have to be in the same place at the same time.
And meanwhile, we'll take our little three-month-old baby, keep taking it to the track, keeping it safe, and making it faster and better.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Good morning!
Are you awake?
They took my name tag, but I wanted to ask you, did anyone here write their name on the tag in Arabic?
Anyone! No one? All right, no problem.
Once upon a time, not long ago, I was sitting in a restaurant with my friend, ordering food.
So I looked at the waiter and said, "Do you have a menu (Arabic)?"
He looked at me strangely, thinking that he misheard.
He said, "Sorry? (English)."
I said, "The menu (Arabic), please."
He replied, "Don't you know what they call it?"
"I do."
He said, "No! It's called "menu" (English), or "menu" (French)."
Is the French pronunciation correct?
"Come, come, take care of this one!" said the waiter.
He was disgusted when talking to me, as if he was saying to himself, "If this was the last girl on Earth, I wouldn't look at her!"
What's the meaning of saying "menu" in Arabic?
Two words made a Lebanese young man judge a girl as being backward and ignorant.
How could she speak that way?
At that moment, I started thinking.
It made me mad.
It definitely hurts!
I'm denied the right to speak my own language in my own country?
Where could this happen?
How did we get here?
Well, while we are here, there are many people like me, who would reach a stage in their lives, where they involuntarily give up everything that has happened to them in the past, just so they can say that they're modern and civilized.
Should I forget all my culture, thoughts, intellect and all my memories?
Childhood stories might be the best memories we have of the war!
Should I forget everything I learned in Arabic, just to conform?
To be one of them?
Where's the logic in that?
Despite all that, I tried to understand him.
I didn't want to judge him with the same cruelty that he judged me.
The Arabic language doesn't satisfy today's needs.
It's not a language for science, research, a language we're used to in universities, a language we use in the workplace, a language we rely on if we were to perform an advanced research project, and it definitely isn't a language we use at the airport.
If we did so, they'd strip us of our clothes.
Where can I use it, then? We could all ask this question!
So, you want us to use Arabic. Where are we to do so?
This is one reality.
But we have another more important reality that we ought to think about.
Arabic is the mother tongue.
Research says that mastery of other languages demands mastery of the mother tongue.
Mastery of the mother tongue is a prerequisite for creative expression in other languages.
How?
Gibran Khalil Gibran, when he first started writing, he used Arabic.
All his ideas, imagination and philosophy were inspired by this little boy in the village where he grew up, smelling a specific smell, hearing a specific voice, and thinking a specific thought.
So, when he started writing in English, he had enough baggage.
Even when he wrote in English, when you read his writings in English, you smell the same smell, sense the same feeling.
You can imagine that that's him writing in English, the same boy who came from the mountain. From a village on Mount Lebanon.
So, this is an example no one can argue with.
Second, it's often said that if you want to kill a nation, the only way to kill a nation, is to kill its language.
This is a reality that developed societies are aware of.
The Germans, French, Japanese and Chinese, all these nations are aware of this.
That's why they legislate to protect their language.
They make it sacred.
That's why they use it in production, they pay a lot of money to develop it.
Do we know better than them?
All right, we aren't from the developed world, this advanced thinking hasn't reached us yet, and we would like to catch up with the civilized world.
Countries that were once like us, but decided to strive for development, do research, and catch up with those countries, such as Turkey, Malaysia and others, they carried their language with them as they were climbing the ladder, protected it like a diamond.
They kept it close to them.
Because if you get any product from Turkey or elsewhere and it's not labeled in Turkish, then it isn't a local product.
You wouldn't believe it's a local product.
They'd go back to being consumers, clueless consumers, like we are most of the time.
So, in order for them to innovate and produce, they had to protect their language.
If I say, "Freedom, sovereignty, independence (Arabic)," what does this remind you of?
It doesn't ring a bell, does it?
Regardless of the who, how and why.
Language isn't just for conversing, just words coming out of our mouths.
Language represents specific stages in our lives, and terminology that is linked to our emotions.
So when we say, "Freedom, sovereignty, independence," each one of you draws a specific image in their own mind, there are specific feelings of a specific day in a specific historical period.
Language isn't one, two or three words or letters put together.
It's an idea inside that relates to how we think, and how we see each other and how others see us.
What is our intellect?
How do you say whether this guy understands or not?
So, if I say, "Freedom, sovereignty, independence (English)," or if your son came up to you and said, "Dad, have you lived through the period of the freedom (English) slogan?"
How would you feel?
If you don't see a problem, then I'd better leave, and stop talking in vain.
The idea is that these expressions remind us of a specific thing.
I have a francophone friend who's married to a French man.
I asked her once how things were going.
She said, "Everything is fine, but once, I spent a whole night asking and trying to translate the meaning of the word 'toqborni' for him."
(Laughter) (Applause) The poor woman had mistakenly told him "toqborni," and then spent the whole night trying to explain it to him.
He was puzzled by the thought: "How could anyone be this cruel?
Does she want to commit suicide?
'Bury me?' (English)" This is one of the few examples.
It made us feel that she's unable to tell that word to her husband, since he won't understand, and he's right not to; his way of thinking is different.
She said to me, "He listens to Fairuz with me, and one night, I tried to translate for him so he can feel what I feel when I listen to Fairuz."
The poor woman tried to translate this for him: "From them I extended my hands and stole you --" (Laughter) And here's the pickle: "And because you belong to them, I returned my hands and left you."
(Laughter) Translate that for me.
(Applause) So, what have we done to protect the Arabic language?
We turned this into a concern of the civil society, and we launched a campaign to preserve the Arabic language.
Even though many people told me, "Why do you bother?
Forget about this headache and go have fun."
No problem!
The campaign to preserve Arabic launched a slogan that says, "I talk to you from the East, but you reply from the West."
We didn't say, "No! We do not accept this or that."
We didn't adopt this style because that way, we wouldn't be understood.
And when someone talks to me that way, I hate the Arabic language.
We say-- (Applause) We want to change our reality, and be convinced in a way that reflects our dreams, aspirations and day-to-day life.
In a way that dresses like us and thinks like we do.
So, "I talk to you from the East, but you reply from the West" has hit the spot.
Something very easy, yet creative and persuasive.
After that, we launched another campaign with scenes of letters on the ground.
You've seen an example of it outside, a scene of a letter surrounded by black and yellow tape with "Don't kill your language!" written on it.
Why? Seriously, don't kill your language.
We really shouldn't kill our language.
If we were to kill the language, we'd have to find an identity.
We'd have to find an existence.
We'd go back to the beginning.
This is beyond just missing our chance of being modern and civilized.
After that we released photos of guys and girls wearing the Arabic letter.
Photos of "cool" guys and girls.
We are very cool!
And to whoever might say, "Ha! You used an English word!"
I say, "No! I adopt the word 'cool.'" Let them object however they want, but give me a word that's nicer and matches the reality better.
I will keep on saying "Internet" I wouldn't say: "I'm going to the world wide web" (Laughs) Because it doesn't fit! We shouldn't kid ourselves.
But to reach this point, we all have to be convinced that we shouldn't allow anyone who is bigger or thinks they have any authority over us when it comes to language, to control us or make us think and feel what they want.
Creativity is the idea.
So, if we can't reach space or build a rocket and so on, we can be creative.
At this moment, every one of you is a creative project.
Creativity in your mother tongue is the path.
Let's start from this moment.
Let's write a novel or produce a short film.
A single novel could make us global again.
It could bring the Arabic language back to being number one.
So, it's not true that there's no solution; there is a solution!
But we have to know that, and be convinced that a solution exists, that we have a duty to be part of that solution.
In conclusion, what can you do today?
Now, tweets, who's tweeting?
Please, I beg of you, even though my time has finished, either Arabic, English, French or Chinese.
But don't write Arabic with Latin characters mixed with numbers!
(Applause) It's a disaster! That's not a language.
You'd be entering a virtual world with a virtual language.
It's not easy to come back from such a place and rise.
That's the first thing we can do.
Second, there are many other things that we can do.
We're not here today to convince each other.
We're here to bring attention to the necessity of preserving this language.
Now I will tell you a secret.
A baby first identifies its father through language.
When my daughter is born, I'll tell her, "This is your father, honey (Arabic)."
I wouldn't say, "This is your dad, honey (English)."
And in the supermarket, I promise my daughter Noor, that if she says to me, "Thanks (Arabic)," I won't say, "Dis, 'Merci, Maman,'" and hope no one has heard her.
(Applause) Let's get rid of this cultural cringe.
(Applause)
I'd like you all to ask yourselves a question which you may never have asked yourselves before: What is possible with the human voice?
What is possible with the human voice?
(Beatboxing) ♪ Ooh baby ♪ ♪ baby ♪ ♪ baby ♪ ♪ baby ♪ (Baby crying) ♪ baby ♪ (Baby crying) ♪ baby ♪ (Cat meowing) (Dog barking) Yeah.
(Applause) (Boomerang noises) It was coming straight for me. I had to. It was, yeah.
As you can probably well imagine, I was a strange child.
(Laughter) Because the thing is, I was constantly trying to extend my repertoire of noises to be the very maximum that it could be.
I was constantly experimenting with these noises.
And I'm still on that mission.
I'm still trying to find every noise that I can possibly make.
And the thing is, I'm a bit older and wiser now, and I know that there's some noises I'll never be able to make because I'm hemmed in by my physical body, and there's things it can't do.
And there's things that no one's voice can do.
For example, no one can do two notes at the same time.
You can do two-tone singing, which monks can do, which is like...
(Two-tone singing) But that's cheating.
And it hurts your throat.
So there's things you can't do, and these limitations on the human voice have always really annoyed me, because beatbox is the best way of getting musical ideas out of your head and into the world, but they're sketches at best, which is what's annoyed me.
If only, if only there was a way for these ideas to come out unimpeded by the restrictions which my body gives it.
So I've been working with these guys, and we've made a machine.
We've made a system which is basically a live production machine, a real-time music production machine, and it enables me to, using nothing but my voice, create music in real time as I hear it in my head unimpeded by any physical restrictions that my body might place on me.
And I'm going to show you what it can do.
And before I start making noises with it, and using it to manipulate my voice, I want to reiterate that everything that you're about to hear is being made by my voice.
This system has -- thank you, beautiful assistant -- this system has no sounds in it itself until I start putting sounds in it, so there's no prerecorded samples of any kind.
So once this thing really gets going, and it really starts to mangle the audio I'm putting into it, it becomes not obvious that it is the human voice, but it is, so I'm going to take you through it bit by bit and start nice and simple.
So the polyphony problem: I've only got one voice.
How do I get around the problem of really wanting to have as many different voices going on at the same time.
The simplest way to do it is something like this.
(Beatboxing) By dancing. It's like this.
(Music) Thanks.
(Applause) So that's probably the easiest way.
But if you want to do something a little bit more immediate, something that you can't achieve with live looping, there's other ways to layer your voice up.
There's things like pitch-shifting, which are awesome, and I'm going to show you now what that sounds like.
So I'm going to start another beat for you, like this.
(Beatboxing) There's always got to be a bit of a dance at the start, because it's just fun, so you can clap along if you want.
You don't have to. It's fine. Check it out.
I'm going to lay down a bass sound now.
(Music) And now, a rockabilly guitar.
Which is nice. But what if I want to make, say, a -- (Applause) -- Thanks. What if I want to make, say, a rock organ?
Is that possible? Yes, it is, by recording myself like this.
(Organ sound) And now I have that, I have that recorded.
Assign it to a keyboard.
(Music) So that's cool.
(Applause) But what if I wanted to sound like the whole of Pink Floyd?
Impossible, you say. No.
It is possible, and you can do it very simply using this machine. It's really fantastic. Check it out.
(Music) So every noise you can hear there is my voice.
I didn't just trigger something which sounds like that.
There's no samples. There's no synthesizers.
That is literally all my voice being manipulated, and when you get to that point, you have to ask, don't you, what's the point?
Why do this? (Laughter) Because it's cheaper than hiring the whole of Pink Floyd, I suppose, is the easy answer.
But in actual fact, I haven't made this machine so that I can emulate things that already exist.
I've made this so that I can make any noise that I can imagine.
So with your permission, I'm going to do some things that are in my mind, and I hope you enjoy them, because they're rather unusual, especially when you're doing things which are as unusual as this, it can be hard to believe that it is all my voice, you see.
(Voice effects) (Music) Like this.
(Music) So, loosely defined, that is what's possible with the human voice.
Thank you very much, ladies and gentlemen.
(Applause)
My name is Dan Cohen and I am an academic, as he said.
And what that means is that I argue.
It's an important part of my life.
And I'm not just an academic, I'm a philosopher, so I like to think that I'm actually pretty good at arguing.
But I also like to think a lot about arguing.
And in thinking about arguing, I've come across some puzzles.
And one of the puzzles is that, as I've been thinking about arguing over the years -- and it's been decades now -- I've gotten better at arguing.
But the more that I argue and the better I get at arguing, the more that I lose.
And the other puzzle is that I'm actually okay with that.
Why is it that I'm okay with losing and why is it that I think good arguers are actually better at losing?
Well, there are some other puzzles.
One is: why do we argue?
When I think about arguments, I'm talking about -- let's call them academic arguments or cognitive arguments -- where something cognitive is at stake: Is this proposition true? Is this theory a good theory?
Is this a viable interpretation of the data or the text? And so on.
I'm not interested really in arguments about whose turn it is to do the dishes or who has to take out the garbage.
Yeah, we have those arguments, too.
I tend to win those arguments, because I know the tricks.
But those aren't the important arguments.
I'm interested in academic arguments, and here are the things that puzzle me.
What do I win if I convince you that utilitarianism isn't really the right framework for thinking about ethical theories?
Even before that, what does it matter to me whether you have this idea that Kant's theory works or Mill is the right ethicist to follow?
It's no skin off my back whether you think functionalism is a viable theory of mind.
So why do we even try to argue?
Why do we try to convince other people to believe things they don't want to believe, and is that even a nice thing to do?
Is that a nice way to treat another human being, try and make them think something they don't want to think?
Well, my answer is going to make reference to three models for arguments.
The first model -- let's call it the dialectical model -- is we think of arguments as war; you know what that's like -- a lot of screaming and shouting and winning and losing.
That's not a very helpful model for arguing, but it's a pretty common and entrenched model for arguing.
But there's a second model for arguing: arguments as proofs.
Think of a mathematician's argument.
Here's my argument. Does it work? Is it any good?
Are the premises warranted? Are the inferences valid?
Does the conclusion follow from the premises?
No opposition, no adversariality -- not necessarily any arguing in the adversarial sense.
But there's a third model to keep in mind that I think is going to be very helpful, and that is arguments as performances, arguments in front of an audience.
We can think of a politician trying to present a position, trying to convince the audience of something.
But there's another twist on this model that I really think is important; namely, that when we argue before an audience, sometimes the audience has a more participatory role in the argument; that is, arguments are also [performances] in front of juries, who make a judgment and decide the case.
Let's call this the rhetorical model, where you have to tailor your argument to the audience at hand.
You know, presenting a sound, well-argued, tight argument in English before a francophone audience just isn't going to work.
So we have these models -- argument as war, argument as proof and argument as performance.
Of those three, the argument as war is the dominant one.
It dominates how we talk about arguments, it dominates how we think about arguments, and because of that, it shapes how we argue, our actual conduct in arguments.
Now, when we talk about arguments, we talk in a very militaristic language.
We want strong arguments, arguments that have a lot of punch, arguments that are right on target.
We want to have our defenses up and our strategies all in order.
We want killer arguments.
That's the kind of argument we want.
It is the dominant way of thinking about arguments.
When I'm talking about arguments, that's probably what you thought of, the adversarial model.
But the war metaphor, the war paradigm or model for thinking about arguments, has, I think, deforming effects on how we argue.
First, it elevates tactics over substance.
You can take a class in logic, argumentation.
You learn all about the subterfuges that people use to try and win arguments -- the false steps.
It magnifies the us-versus them aspect of it.
It makes it adversarial; it's polarizing.
And the only foreseeable outcomes are triumph -- glorious triumph -- or abject, ignominious defeat.
I think those are deforming effects, and worst of all, it seems to prevent things like negotiation or deliberation or compromise or collaboration.
Think about that one -- have you ever entered an argument thinking, "Let's see if we can hash something out, rather than fight it out.
What can we work out together?"
I think the argument-as-war metaphor inhibits those other kinds of resolutions to argumentation.
And finally -- this is really the worst thing -- arguments don't seem to get us anywhere; they're dead ends.
They are like roundabouts or traffic jams or gridlock in conversation.
We don't get anywhere.
And one more thing.
And as an educator, this is the one that really bothers me: If argument is war, then there's an implicit equation of learning with losing.
And let me explain what I mean.
Suppose you and I have an argument.
You believe a proposition, P, and I don't.
And I say, "Well, why do you believe P?"
And you give me your reasons.
And I object and say, "Well, what about ...?"
And you answer my objection.
And I have a question: "Well, what do you mean?
How does it apply over here?"
Now, suppose at the end of the day, I've objected, I've questioned, I've raised all sorts of counter counter-considerations and in every case you've responded to my satisfaction.
And so at the end of the day, I say, "You know what? I guess you're right: P."
So, I have a new belief.
And it's not just any belief; it's well-articulated, examined -- it's a battle-tested belief.
Great cognitive gain.
Well, the war metaphor seems to force us into saying you won, even though I'm the only one who made any cognitive gain.
What did you gain, cognitively, from convincing me?
Sure, you got some pleasure out of it, maybe your ego stroked, maybe you get some professional status in the field -- "This guy's a good arguer."
But just from a cognitive point of view, who was the winner?
The war metaphor forces us into thinking that you're the winner and I lost, even though I gained.
And there's something wrong with that picture.
And that's the picture I really want to change if we can.
So, how can we find ways to make arguments yield something positive?
What we need is new exit strategies for arguments.
But we're not going to have new exit strategies for arguments until we have new entry approaches to arguments.
We need to think of new kinds of arguments.
In order to do that, well -- I don't know how to do that.
That's the bad news.
The argument-as-war metaphor is just ... it's a monster.
It's just taken up habitation in our mind, and there's no magic bullet that's going to kill it.
There's no magic wand that's going to make it disappear.
I don't have an answer.
But I have some suggestions.
Here's my suggestion: If we want to think of new kinds of arguments, what we need to do is think of new kinds of arguers.
So try this: Think of all the roles that people play in arguments.
There's the proponent and the opponent in an adversarial, dialectical argument.
There's the audience in rhetorical arguments.
There's the reasoner in arguments as proofs.
All these different roles.
Now, can you imagine an argument in which you are the arguer, but you're also in the audience, watching yourself argue?
Can you imagine yourself watching yourself argue, losing the argument, and yet still, at the end of the argument, saying, "Wow, that was a good argument!"
Can you do that?
I think you can, and I think if you can imagine that kind of argument, where the loser says to the winner and the audience and the jury can say, "Yeah, that was a good argument," then you have imagined a good argument.
And more than that, I think you've imagined a good arguer, an arguer that's worthy of the kind of arguer you should try to be.
Now, I lose a lot of arguments.
It takes practice to become a good arguer, in the sense of being able to benefit from losing, but fortunately, I've had many, many colleagues who have been willing to step up and provide that practice for me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In an age of global strife and climate change, I'm here to answer the all important question: Why is sex so damn good?
If you're laughing, you know what I mean.
Now, before we get to that answer, let me tell you about Chris Hosmer.
Chris is a great friend of mine from my university days, but secretly, I hate him.
Here's why. Back in university, we had a quick project to design some solar-powered clocks.
Here's my clock.
It uses something called the dwarf sunflower, which grows to about 12 inches in height.
Now, as you know, sunflowers track the sun during the course of the day.
So in the morning, you see which direction the sunflower is facing, and you mark it on the blank area in the base.
At noon, you mark the changed position of the sunflower, and in the evening again, and that's your clock.
Now, I know my clock doesn't tell you the exact time, but it does give you a general idea using a flower.
So, in my completely unbiased, subjective opinion, it's brilliant.
However, here's Chris's clock.
It's five magnifying glasses with a shot glass under each one.
In each shot glass is a different scented oil.
In the morning, the sunlight will shine down on the first magnifying glass, focusing a beam of light on the shot glass underneath.
This will warm up the scented oil inside, and a particular smell will be emitted.
A couple of hours later, the sun will shine on the next magnifying glass, and a different smell will be emitted.
So during the course of the day, five different smells are dispersed throughout that environment.
Anyone living in that house can tell the time just by the smell.
You can see why I hate Chris.
I thought my idea was pretty good, but his idea is genius, and at the time, I knew his idea was better than mine, but I just couldn't explain why.
One thing you have to know about me is I hate to lose.
This problem's been bugging me for well over a decade.
All right, let's get back to the question of why sex is so good.
Many years after the solar powered clocks project, a young lady I knew suggested maybe sex is so good because of the five senses.
And when she said this, I had an epiphany.
So I decided to evaluate different experiences I had in my life from the point of view of the five senses.
To do this, I devised something called the five senses graph.
Along the y-axis, you have a scale from zero to 10, and along the x-axis, you have, of course, the five senses.
Anytime I had a memorable experience in my life, I would record it on this graph like a five senses diary.
Here's a quick video to show you how it works.
(Video) Jinsop Lee: Hey, my name's Jinsop, and today, I'm going to show you what riding motorbikes is like from the point of view of the five senses. Hey!
Bike designer: This is [unclear], custom bike designer.
(Motorcyle revving) [Sound] [Touch] [Sight] [Smell] [Taste] JL: And that's how the five senses graph works.
Now, for a period of three years, I gathered data, not just me but also some of my friends, and I used to teach in university, so I forced my -- I mean, I asked my students to do this as well.
So here are some other results.
The first is for instant noodles.
Now obviously, taste and smell are quite high, but notice sound is at three.
Many people told me a big part of the noodle-eating experience is the slurping noise.
You know. (Slurps) Needless to say, I no longer dine with these people.
OK, next, clubbing.
OK, here what I found interesting was that taste is at four, and many respondents told me it's because of the taste of drinks, but also, in some cases, kissing is a big part of the clubbing experience.
These people I still do hang out with.
All right, and smoking.
Here I found touch is at [six], and one of the reasons is that smokers told me the sensation of holding a cigarette and bringing it up to your lips is a big part of the smoking experience, which shows, it's kind of scary to think how well cigarettes are designed by the manufacturers.
OK. Now, what would the perfect experience look like on the five senses graph?
It would, of course, be a horizontal line along the top.
Now you can see, not even as intense an experience as riding a motorbike comes close.
In fact, in the years that I gathered data, only one experience came close to being the perfect one.
That is, of course, sex. Great sex.
Respondents said that great sex hits all of the five senses at an extreme level.
Here I'll quote one of my students who said, "Sex is so good, it's good even when it's bad."
So the five senses theory does help explain why sex is so good.
Now in the middle of all this five senses work, I suddenly remembered the solar-powered clocks project from my youth.
And I realized this theory also explains why Chris's clock is so much better than mine.
You see, my clock only focuses on sight, and a little bit of touch.
Here's Chris's clock.
It's the first clock ever that uses smell to tell the time.
In fact, in terms of the five senses, Chris's clock is a revolution.
And that's what this theory taught me about my field.
You see, up till now, us designers, we've mainly focused on making things look very pretty, and a little bit of touch, which means we've ignored the other three senses.
Chris's clock shows us that even raising just one of those other senses can make for a brilliant product.
So what if we started using the five senses theory in all of our designs?
Here's three quick ideas I came up with.
This is an iron, you know, for your clothes, to which I added a spraying mechanism, so you fill up the vial with your favorite scent, and your clothes will smell nicer, but hopefully it should also make the ironing experience more enjoyable.
We could call this "the perfumator."
All right, next.
So I brush my teeth twice a day, and what if we had a toothbrush that tastes like candy, and when the taste of candy ran out, you'd know it's time to change your toothbrush?
Finally, I have a thing for the keys on a flute or a clarinet.
It's not just the way they look, but I love the way they feel when you press down on them.
Now, I don't play the flute or the clarinet, so I decided to combine these keys with an instrument I do play: the television remote control.
Now, when we look at these three ideas together, you'll notice that the five senses theory doesn't only change the way we use these products but also the way they look.
So in conclusion, I've found the five senses theory to be a very useful tool in evaluating different experiences in my life, and then taking those best experiences and hopefully incorporating them into my designs.
Now, I realize the five senses isn't the only thing that makes life interesting.
There's also the six emotions and that elusive x-factor.
Maybe that could be the topic of my next talk.
Until then, please have fun using the five senses in your own lives and your own designs.
Oh, one last thing before I leave.
Here's the experience you all had while listening to the TED Talks.
However, it would be better if we could boost up a couple of the other senses like smell and taste.
And the best way to do that is with free candy.
You guys ready?
All right.
(Applause)
I moved back home 15 years ago after a 20-year stay in the United States, and Africa called me back.
And I founded my country's first graphic design and new media college.
And I called it the Zimbabwe Institute of Vigital Arts.
The idea, the dream, was really for a sort of Bauhaus sort of school where new ideas were interrogated and investigated, the creation of a new visual language based on the African creative heritage.
We offer a two-year diploma to talented students who have successfully completed their high school education.
And typography's a very important part of the curriculum and we encourage our students to look inward for influence.
Here's a poster designed by one of the students under the theme "Education is a right."
Some logos designed by my students.
Africa has had a long tradition of writing, but this is not such a well-known fact, and I wrote the book "Afrikan Alphabets" to address that.
The different types of writing in Africa, first was proto-writing, as illustrated by Nsibidi, which is the writing system of a secret society of the Ejagham people in southern Nigeria.
So it's a special-interest writing system.
The Akan of people of Ghana and [Cote d'Ivoire] developed Adinkra symbols some 400 years ago, and these are proverbs, historical sayings, objects, animals, plants, and my favorite Adinkra system is the first one at the top on the left.
It's called Sankofa.
It means, "Return and get it." Learn from the past.
This pictograph by the Jokwe people of Angola tells the story of the creation of the world.
At the top is God, at the bottom is man, mankind, and on the left is the sun, on the right is the moon.
All the paths lead to and from God.
These secret societies of the Yoruba, Kongo and Palo religions in Nigeria, Congo and Angola respectively, developed this intricate writing system which is alive and well today in the New World in Cuba, Brazil and Trinidad and Haiti.
In the rainforests of the Democratic Republic of Congo, in the Ituri society, the men pound out a cloth out of a special tree, and the women, who are also the praise singers, paint interweaving patterns that are the same in structure as the polyphonic structures that they use in their singing -- a sort of a musical score, if you may.
In South Africa, Ndebele women use these symbols and other geometric patterns to paint their homes in bright colors, and the Zulu women use the symbols in the beads that they weave into bracelets and necklaces.
Ethiopia has had the longest tradition of writing, with the Ethiopic script that was developed in the fourth century A.D.
and is used to write Amharic, which is spoken by over 24 million people.
King Ibrahim Njoya of the Bamum Kingdom of Cameroon developed Shü-mom at the age of 25.
Shü-mom is a writing system.
It's a syllabary. It's not exactly an alphabet.
And here we see three stages of development that it went through in 30 years.
The Vai people of Liberia had a long tradition of literacy before their first contact with Europeans in the 1800s.
It's a syllabary and reads from left to right.
Next door, in Sierra Leone, the Mende also developed a syllabary, but theirs reads from right to left.
Africa has had a long tradition of design, a well-defined design sensibility, but the problem in Africa has been that, especially today, designers in Africa struggle with all forms of design because they are more apt to look outward for influence and inspiration.
The creative spirit in Africa, the creative tradition, is as potent as it has always been, if only designers could look within.
This Ethiopic cross illustrates what Dr. Ron Eglash has established: that Africa has a lot to contribute to computing and mathematics through their intuitive grasp of fractals.
Africans of antiquity created civilization, and their monuments, which still stand today, are a true testimony of their greatness.
Most probably, one of humanity's greatest achievements is the invention of the alphabet, and that has been attributed to Mesopotamia with their invention of cuneiform in 1600 BC, followed by hieroglyphics in Egypt, and that story has been cast in stone as historical fact.
That is, until 1998, when one Yale professor John Coleman Darnell discovered these inscriptions in the Thebes desert on the limestone cliffs in western Egypt, and these have been dated at between 1800 and 1900 B.C., centuries before Mesopotamia.
Called Wadi el-Hol because of the place that they were discovered, these inscriptions -- research is still going on, a few of them have been deciphered, but there is consensus among scholars that this is really humanity's first alphabet.
Over here, you see a paleographic chart that shows what has been deciphered so far, starting with the letter A, "ālep," at the top, and "bêt," in the middle, and so forth.
It is time that students of design in Africa read the works of titans like Cheikh Anta Diop, Senegal's Cheikh Anta Diop, whose seminal work on Egypt is vindicated by this discovery.
The last word goes to the great Jamaican leader Marcus Mosiah Garvey and the Akan people of Ghana with their Adinkra symbol Sankofa, which encourages us to go to the past so as to inform our present and build on a future for us and our children.
It is also time that designers in Africa stop looking outside.
They've been looking outward for a long time, yet what they were looking for has been right there within grasp, right within them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Adam Ockelford: I promise there won't be too much of me talking, and a lot of Derek playing, but I thought it would just be nice to recap on how Derek got to where he is today.
It's amazing now, because he's so much bigger than me, but when Derek was born, he could have fitted on the palm of your hand.
He was born three and a half months premature, and really it was a fantastic fight for him to survive.
He had to have a lot of oxygen, and that affected your eyes, Derek, and also the way you understand language and the way you understand the world.
But that was the end of the bad news, because when Derek came home from the hospital, his family decided to employ the redoubtable nanny who was going to look after you, Derek, really for the rest of your childhood.
And Nanny's great insight, really, was to think, here's a child who can't see.
Music must be the thing for Derek.
And sure enough, she sang, or as Derek called it, warbled, to him for his first few years of life.
And I think it was that excitement with hearing her voice hour after hour every day that made him think maybe, you know, in his brain something was stirring, some sort of musical gift.
Here's a little picture of Derek going up now, when you were with your nanny.
Now Nanny's great other insight was to think, perhaps we should get Derek something to play, and sure enough, she dragged this little keyboard out of the loft, never thinking really that anything much would come of it.
But Derek, your tiny hand must have gone out to that thing and actually bashed it, bashed it so hard they thought it was going to break.
But out of all the bashing, after a few months, emerged the most fantastic music, and I think there was just a miracle moment, really, Derek, when you realized that all the sounds you hear in the world out there is something that you can copy on the keyboard.
That was the great eureka moment.
Now, not being able to see meant, of course, that you taught yourself.
Derek Paravicini: I taught myself to play.
AO: You did teach yourself to play, and as a consequence, playing the piano for you, Derek, was a lot of knuckles and karate chops, and even a bit of nose going on in there.
And now, here's what Nanny did also do was to press the record button on one of those little early tape recorders that they had, and this is a wonderful tape, now, of Derek playing when you were four years old.
DP: "Molly Malone (Cockles and Mussels)."
AO: It wasn't actually "Cockles and Mussels."
This one is "English Country Garden."
DP: "English Country Garden."
(Music: "English Country Garden") AO: There you are.
(Applause) I think that's just fantastic.
You know, there's this little child who can't see, can't really understand much about the world, has no one in the family who plays an instrument, and yet he taught himself to play that.
And as you can see from the picture, there was quite a lot of body action going on while you were playing, Derek.
Now, along -- Derek and I met when he was four and a half years old, and at first, Derek, I thought you were mad, to be honest, because when you played the piano, you seemed to want to play every single note on the keyboard, and also you had this little habit of hitting me out of the way.
So as soon as I tried to get near the piano, I was firmly shoved off.
And having said to your dad, Nic, that I would try to teach you, I was then slightly confused as to how I might go about that if I wasn't allowed near the piano.
But after a while, I thought, well, the only way is to just pick you up, shove Derek over to the other side of the room, and in the 10 seconds that I got before Derek came back, I could just play something very quickly for him to learn.
And in the end, Derek, I think you agreed that we could actually have some fun playing the piano together.
As you can see, there's me in my early, pre-marriage days with a brown beard, and little Derek concentrating there.
I just realized this is going to be recorded, isn't it? Right. Okay.
(Laughter) Now then, by the age of 10, Derek really had taken the world by storm.
This is a photo of you, Derek, playing at the Barbican with the Royal Philharmonic Pops.
Basically it was just an exciting journey, really.
And in those days, Derek, you didn't speak very much, and so there was always a moment of tension as to whether you'd actually understood what it was we were going to play and whether you'd play the right piece in the right key, and all that kind of thing.
But the orchestra were wowed as well, and the press of the world were fascinated by your ability to play these fantastic pieces.
Now the question is, how do you do it, Derek?
And hopefully we can show the audience now how it is you do what you do.
I think that one of the first things that happened when you were very little, Derek, was that by the time you were two, your musical ear had already outstripped that of most adults.
And so whenever you heard any note at all -- if I just play a random note -- (Piano notes) -- you knew instantly what it was, and you'd got the ability as well to find that note on the piano.
Now that's called perfect pitch, and some people have perfect pitch for a few white notes in the middle of the piano.
(Piano notes) You can see how -- you get a sense of playing with Derek.
(Applause) But Derek, your ear is so much more than that.
If I just put the microphone down for a bit, I'm going to play a cluster of notes.
Those of you who can see will know how many notes, but Derek, of course, can't.
Not only can you say how many notes, it's being able to play them all at the same time. Here we are.
(Chords) Well, forget the terminology, Derek. Fantastic.
And it's that ability, that ability to hear simultaneous sounds, not only just single sounds, but when a whole orchestra is playing, Derek, you can hear every note, and instantly, through all those hours and hours of practice, reproduce those on the keyboard, that makes you, I think, is the basis of all your ability.
Now then.
It's no use having that kind of raw ability without the technique, and luckily, Derek, you decided that, once we did start learning, you'd let me help you learn all the scale fingerings.
So for example using your thumb under with C major.
(Piano notes) Etc.
And in the end, you got so quick, that things like "Flight of the Bumblebee" were no problem, were they?
DP: No.
AO: Right. So here, by the age of 11, Derek was playing things like this.
DP: This.
(Music: "Flight of the Bumblebee") (Applause) AO: Derek, let's have a bow.
Well done.
Now the truly amazing thing was, with all those scales, Derek, you could not only play "Flight of the Bumblebee" in the usual key, but any note I play, Derek can play it on.
So if I just choose a note at random, like that one.
(Piano notes) Can you play "Flight of the Bumblebee" on that note?
DP: "Flight of the Bumblebee" on that note.
(Music: "Flight of the Bumblebee") AO: Or another one? How about in G minor?
DP: G minor.
(Music: "Flight of the Bumblebee") AO: Fantastic. Well done, Derek.
So you see, in your brain, Derek, is this amazing musical computer that can instantly recalibrate, recalculate, all the pieces in the world that are out there.
Most pianists would have a heart attack if you said, "Sorry, do you mind playing 'Flight of the Bumblebee' in B minor instead of A minor?" as we went on.
In fact, the first time, Derek, you played that with an orchestra, you'd learned the version that you'd learned, and then the orchestra, in fact, did have a different version, so while we were waiting in the two hours before the rehearsal and the concert, Derek listened to the different version and learned it quickly and then was able to play it with the orchestra.
Fantastic chap.
The other wonderful thing about you is memory.
DP: Memory. AO: Your memory is truly amazing, and every concert we do, we ask the audience to participate, of course, by suggesting a piece Derek might like to play.
And people say, "Well, that's terribly brave because what happens if Derek doesn't know it?"
And I say, "No, it's not brave at all, because if you ask for something that Derek doesn't know, you're invited to come and sing it first, and then he'll pick it up." (Laughter) So just be thoughtful before you suggest something too outlandish.
But seriously, would anyone like to choose a piece?
DP: Choose a piece. Choose, choose, would you like to choose? AO: Because it's quite dark. You'll just have to shout out.
Would you like to hear me play?
(Audience: "Theme of Paganini.") AO: Paganini. DP: "The Theme of Paganini."
(Laughter) (Music: "Theme of Paganini") (Applause) AO: Well done.
Derek's going to L.A. soon, and it's a milestone, because it means that Derek and I will have spent over 100 hours on long-haul flights together, which is quite interesting, isn't it Derek?
DP: Very interesting, Adam, yes. Long-haul flights. Yes.
AO: You may think 13 hours is a long time to keep talking, but Derek does it effortlessly. Now then.
(Laughter) But in America, they've coined this term, "the human iPod" for Derek, which I think is just missing the point, really, because Derek, you're so much more than an iPod.
You're a fantastic, creative musician, and I think that was nowhere clearer to see, really, than when we went to Slovenia, and someone -- in a longer concert we tend to get people joining in, and this person, very, very nervously came onto the stage.
DP: He played "Chopsticks." AO: And played "Chopsticks."
DP: "Chopsticks."
AO: A bit like this. DP: Like this. Yes.
(Piano notes) AO: I should really get Derek's manager to come and play it.
He's sitting there.
DP: Somebody played "Chopsticks" like this. AO: Just teasing, right? Here we go.
(Music: "Chopsticks") DP: Let Derek play it.
AO: What did you do with it, Derek?
DP: I got to improvise with it, Adam.
AO: This is Derek the musician.
(Music: "Chopsticks" improvisation) (Applause) (Music) (Clapping) Keep up with Derek.
(Music) (Applause) The TED people will kill me, but perhaps there's time for one encore.
DP: For one encore. AO: One encore, yes.
So this is one of Derek's heroes.
It's the great Art Tatum -- DP: Art Tatum.
AO: -- who also was a pianist who couldn't see, and also, I think, like Derek, thought that all the world was a piano, so whenever Art Tatum plays something, it sounds like there's three pianos in the room.
And here is Derek's take on Art Tatum's take on "Tiger Rag."
DP: "Tiger Rag."
(Music: "Tiger Rag") (Applause)
Hi. I am an architect.
I am the only architect in the world making buildings out of paper like this cardboard tube, and this exhibition is the first one I did using paper tubes.
1986, much, much longer before people started talking about ecological issues and environmental issues, I just started testing the paper tube in order to use this as a building structure.
It's very complicated to test the new material for the building, but this is much stronger than I expected, and also it's very easy to waterproof, and also, because it's industrial material, it's also possible to fireproof.
Then I built the temporary structure, 1990.
This is the first temporary building made out of paper.
There are 330 tubes, diameter 55 [centimeters], there are only 12 tubes with a diameter of 120 centimeters, or four feet, wide.
As you see it in the photo, inside is the toilet.
In case you're finished with toilet paper, you can tear off the inside of the wall. (Laughter) So it's very useful.
Year 2000, there was a big expo in Germany.
I was asked to design the building, because the theme of the expo was environmental issues.
So I was chosen to build the pavilion out of paper tubes, recyclable paper.
My goal of the design is not when it's completed.
My goal was when the building was demolished, because each country makes a lot of pavilions but after half a year, we create a lot of industrial waste, so my building has to be reused or recycled.
After, the building was recycled.
So that was the goal of my design.
Then I was very lucky to win the competition to build the second Pompidou Center in France in the city of Metz.
Because I was so poor, I wanted to rent an office in Paris, but I couldn't afford it, so I decided to bring my students to Paris to build our office on top of the Pompidou Center in Paris by ourselves.
So we brought the paper tubes and the wooden joints to complete the 35-meter-long office.
We stayed there for six years without paying any rent.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you. I had one big problem.
Because we were part of the exhibition, even if my friend wanted to see me, they had to buy a ticket to see me.
That was the problem.
Then I completed the Pompidou Center in Metz.
It's a very popular museum now, and I created a big monument for the government.
But then I was very disappointed at my profession as an architect, because we are not helping, we are not working for society, but we are working for privileged people, rich people, government, developers.
They have money and power.
Those are invisible.
So they hire us to visualize their power and money by making monumental architecture.
That is our profession, even historically it's the same, even now we are doing the same.
So I was very disappointed that we are not working for society, even though there are so many people who lost their houses by natural disasters.
But I must say they are no longer natural disasters.
For example, earthquakes never kill people, but collapse of the buildings kill people.
That's the responsibility of architects.
Then people need some temporary housing, but there are no architects working there because we are too busy working for privileged people.
So I thought, even as architects, we can be involved in the reconstruction of temporary housing.
We can make it better.
So that is why I started working in disaster areas.
1994, there was a big disaster in Rwanda, Africa.
Two tribes, Hutu and Tutsi, fought each other.
Over two million people became refugees.
But I was so surprised to see the shelter, refugee camp organized by the U.N.
They're so poor, and they are freezing with blankets during the rainy season, In the shelters built by the U.N., they were just providing a plastic sheet, and the refugees had to cut the trees, and just like this.
But over two million people cut trees.
It just became big, heavy deforestation and an environmental problem.
That is why they started providing aluminum pipes, aluminum barracks.
Very expensive, they throw them out for money, then cutting trees again.
So I proposed my idea to improve the situation using these recycled paper tubes because this is so cheap and also so strong, but my budget is only 50 U.S. dollars per unit.
We built 50 units to do that as a monitoring test for the durability and moisture and termites, so on.
And then, year afterward, 1995, in Kobe, Japan, we had a big earthquake.
Nearly 7,000 people were killed, and the city like this Nagata district, all the city was burned in a fire after the earthquake.
And also I found out there's many Vietnamese refugees suffering and gathering at a Catholic church -- all the building was totally destroyed.
So I went there and also I proposed to the priests, "Why don't we rebuild the church out of paper tubes?"
And he said, "Oh God, are you crazy?
After a fire, what are you proposing?"
So he never trusted me, but I didn't give up.
I started commuting to Kobe, and I met the society of Vietnamese people.
They were living like this with very poor plastic sheets in the park.
So I proposed to rebuild. I raised -- did fundraising.
I made a paper tube shelter for them, and in order to make it easy to be built by students and also easy to demolish, I used beer crates as a foundation.
I asked the Kirin beer company to propose, because at that time, the Asahi beer company made their plastic beer crates red, which doesn't go with the color of the paper tubes.
The color coordination is very important.
And also I still remember, we were expecting to have a beer inside the plastic beer crate, but it came empty. (Laughter) So I remember it was so disappointing.
So during the summer with my students, we built over 50 units of the shelters.
Finally the priest, finally he trusted me to rebuild.
He said, "As long as you collect money by yourself, bring your students to build, you can do it."
So we spent five weeks rebuilding the church.
It was meant to stay there for three years, but actually it stayed there 10 years because people loved it.
Then, in Taiwan, they had a big earthquake, and we proposed to donate this church, so we dismantled them, we sent them over to be built by volunteer people.
It stayed there in Taiwan as a permanent church even now.
So this building became a permanent building.
Then I wonder, what is a permanent and what is a temporary building?
Even a building made in paper can be permanent as long as people love it.
Even a concrete building can be very temporary if that is made to make money.
In 1999, in Turkey, the big earthquake, I went there to use the local material to build a shelter.
2001, in West India, I built also a shelter.
In 2004, in Sri Lanka, after the Sumatra earthquake and tsunami, I rebuilt Islamic fishermen's villages.
And in 2008, in Chengdu, Sichuan area in China, nearly 70,000 people were killed, and also especially many of the schools were destroyed because of the corruption between the authority and the contractor.
I was asked to rebuild the temporary church.
I brought my Japanese students to work with the Chinese students.
In one month, we completed nine classrooms, over 500 square meters.
It's still used, even after the current earthquake in China.
In 2009, in Italy, L'Aquila, also they had a big earthquake.
And this is a very interesting photo: former Prime Minister Berlusconi and Japanese former former former former Prime Minister Mr. Aso -- you know, because we have to change the prime minister ever year.
And they are very kind, affording my model.
I proposed a big rebuilding, a temporary music hall, because L'Aquila is very famous for music and all the concert halls were destroyed, so musicians were moving out.
So I proposed to the mayor, I'd like to rebuild the temporary auditorium.
He said, "As long as you bring your money, you can do it."
And I was very lucky.
Mr. Berlusconi brought G8 summit, and our former prime minister came, so they helped us to collect money, and I got half a million euros from the Japanese government to rebuild this temporary auditorium.
Year 2010 in Haiti, there was a big earthquake, but it's impossible to fly over, so I went to Santo Domingo, next-door country, to drive six hours to get to Haiti with the local students in Santo Domingo to build 50 units of shelter out of local paper tubes.
This is what happened in Japan two years ago, in northern Japan.
After the earthquake and tsunami, people had to be evacuated in a big room like a gymnasium.
But look at this. There's no privacy.
People suffer mentally and physically.
So we went there to build partitions with all the student volunteers with paper tubes, just a very simple shelter out of the tube frame and the curtain.
However, some of the facility authority doesn't want us to do it, because, they said, simply, it's become more difficult to control them.
But it's really necessary to do it.
They don't have enough flat area to build standard government single-story housing like this one.
Look at this. Even civil government is doing such poor construction of the temporary housing, so dense and so messy because there is no storage, nothing, water is leaking, so I thought, we have to make multi-story building because there's no land and also it's not very comfortable.
So I proposed to the mayor while I was making partitions.
Finally I met a very nice mayor in Onagawa village in Miyagi.
He asked me to build three-story housing on baseball [fields].
I used the shipping container and also the students helped us to make all the building furniture to make them comfortable, within the budget of the government but also the area of the house is exactly the same, but much more comfortable.
Many of the people want to stay here forever.
I was very happy to hear that.
Now I am working in New Zealand, Christchurch.
About 20 days before the Japanese earthquake happened, also they had a big earthquake, and many Japanese students were also killed, and the most important cathedral of the city, the symbol of Christchurch, was totally destroyed.
And I was asked to come to rebuild the temporary cathedral.
So this is under construction.
And I'd like to keep building monuments that are beloved by people.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause) Thank you very much. (Applause)
If we evolved from monkeys, why are there still monkeys?
(Laughter) Well, because we're not monkeys, we're fish.
(Laughter) Now, knowing you're a fish and not a monkey is actually really important to understanding where we came from.
I teach one of the largest evolutionary biology classes in the US, and when my students finally understand why I call them fish all the time, then I know I'm getting my job done.
But I always have to start my classes by dispelling some hardwired myths, because without really knowing it, many of us were taught evolution wrong.
For instance, we're taught to say "the theory of evolution."
There are actually many theories, and just like the process itself, the ones that best fit the data are the ones that survive to this day.
The one we know best is Darwinian natural selection.
That's the process by which organisms that best fit an environment survive and get to reproduce, while those that are less fit slowly die off.
And that's it.
Evolution is as simple as that, and it's a fact.
Evolution is a fact as much as the "theory of gravity."
You can prove it just as easily.
You just need to look at your bellybutton that you share with other placental mammals, or your backbone that you share with other vertebrates, or your DNA that you share with all other life on earth.
Those traits didn't pop up in humans.
They were passed down from different ancestors to all their descendants, not just us.
But that's not really how we learn biology early on, is it?
We learn plants and bacteria are primitive things, and fish give rise to amphibians followed by reptiles and mammals, and then you get you, this perfectly evolved creature at the end of the line.
But life doesn't evolve in a line, and it doesn't end with us.
But we're always shown evolution portrayed something like this, a monkey and a chimpanzee, some extinct humans, all on a forward and steady march to becoming us.
But they don't become us any more than we would become them.
We're also not the goal of evolution.
But why does it matter?
Why do we need to understand evolution the right way?
Well, misunderstanding evolution has led to many problems, but you can't ask that age-old question, "Where are we from?"
without understanding evolution the right way.
Misunderstanding it has led to many convoluted and corrupted views of how we should treat other life on earth, and how we should treat each other in terms of race and gender.
So let's go back four billion years.
This is the single-celled organism we all came from.
At first, it gave rise to other single-celled life, but these are still evolving to this day, and some would say the Archaea and Bacteria that make up most of this group is the most successful on the planet.
They are certainly going to be here well after us.
About three billion years ago, multicellularity evolved.
This includes your fungi and your plants and your animals.
The first animals to develop a backbone were fishes.
So technically, all vertebrates are fishes, so technically, you and I are fish.
So don't say I didn't warn you.
One fish lineage came onto land and gave rise to, among other things, the mammals and reptiles.
Some reptiles become birds, some mammals become primates, some primates become monkeys with tails, and others become the great apes, including a variety of human species.
So you see, we didn't evolve from monkeys, but we do share a common ancestor with them.
All the while, life around us kept evolving: more bacteria, more fungi, lots of fish, fish, fish.
If you couldn't tell -- yes, they're my favorite group.
(Laughter) As life evolves, it also goes extinct.
Most species just last for a few million years.
So you see, most life on earth that we see around us today are about the same age as our species.
So it's hubris, it's self-centered to think, "Oh, plants and bacteria are primitive, and we've been here for an evolutionary minute, so we're somehow special."
Think of life as being this book, an unfinished book for sure.
We're just seeing the last few pages of each chapter.
If you look out on the eight million species that we share this planet with, think of them all being four billion years of evolution.
Think of us all as young leaves on this ancient and gigantic tree of life, all of us connected by invisible branches not just to each other, but to our extinct relatives and our evolutionary ancestors.
As a biologist, I'm still trying to learn, with others, how everyone's related to each other, who is related to whom.
Perhaps it's better still to think of us as a little fish out of water.
Yes, one that learned to walk and talk, but one that still has a lot of learning to do about who we are and where we came from.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Welcome to TED.
Richard Branson: Thank you very much. The first TED has been great.
CA: Have you met anyone interesting?
RB: Well, the nice thing about TED is everybody's interesting.
I was very glad to see Goldie Hawn, because I had an apology to make to her.
I'd had dinner with her about two years ago and I'd -- she had this big wedding ring and I put it on my finger and I couldn't get it off.
And I went home to my wife that night and she wanted to know why I had another woman's big, massive, big wedding ring on my finger.
And, anyway, the next morning we had to go along to the jeweler and get it cut off.
So -- (Laughter) -- so apologies to Goldie.
CA: That's pretty good.
So, we're going to put up some slides of some of your companies here.
You've started one or two in your time.
So, you know, Virgin Atlantic, Virgin Records -- I guess it all started with a magazine called Student.
And then, yes, all these other ones as well. I mean, how do you do this?
RB: I read all these sort of TED instructions: you must not talk about your own business, and this, and now you ask me.
So I suppose you're not going to be able to kick me off the stage, since you asked the question.
(Laughter) CA: It depends what the answer is though.
RB: No, I mean, I think I learned early on that if you can run one company, you can really run any companies.
I mean, companies are all about finding the right people, inspiring those people, you know, drawing out the best in people.
And I just love learning and I'm incredibly inquisitive and I love taking on, you know, the status quo and trying to turn it upside down.
So I've seen life as one long learning process.
And if I see -- you know, if I fly on somebody else's airline and find the experience is not a pleasant one, which it wasn't, 21 years ago, then I'd think, well, you know, maybe I can create the kind of airline that I'd like to fly on.
And so, you know, so got one secondhand 747 from Boeing and gave it a go.
CA: Well, that was a bizarre thing, because you made this move that a lot of people advised you was crazy.
And in fact, in a way, it almost took down your empire at one point.
I had a conversation with one of the investment bankers who, at the time when you basically sold Virgin Records and invested heavily in Virgin Atlantic, and his view was that you were trading, you know, the world's fourth biggest record company for the twenty-fifth biggest airline and that you were out of your mind.
Why did you do that?
RB: Well, I think that there's a very thin dividing line between success and failure.
And I think if you start a business without financial backing, you're likely to go the wrong side of that dividing line.
We had -- we were being attacked by British Airways.
They were trying to put our airline out of business, and they launched what's become known as the dirty tricks campaign.
And I realized that the whole empire was likely to come crashing down unless I chipped in a chip.
And in order to protect the jobs of the people who worked for the airline, and protect the jobs of the people who worked for the record company, I had to sell the family jewelry to protect the airline.
CA: Post-Napster, you're looking like a bit of a genius, actually, for that as well.
RB: Yeah, as it turned out, it proved to be the right move.
But, yeah, it was sad at the time, but we moved on.
CA: Now, you use the Virgin brand a lot and it seems like you're getting synergy from one thing to the other.
What does the brand stand for in your head?
RB: Well, I like to think it stands for quality, that you know, if somebody comes across a Virgin company, they -- CA: They are quality, Richard. Come on now, everyone says quality. Spirit?
RB: No, but I was going to move on this.
We have a lot of fun and I think the people who work for it enjoy it.
As I say, we go in and shake up other industries, and I think, you know, we do it differently and I think that industries are not quite the same as a result of Virgin attacking the market.
CA: I mean, there are a few launches you've done where the brand maybe hasn't worked quite as well.
I mean, Virgin Brides -- what happened there?
(Laughter) RB: We couldn't find any customers.
(Laughter) (Applause) CA: I was actually also curious why -- I think you missed an opportunity with your condoms launch. You called it Mates.
I mean, couldn't you have used the Virgin brand for that as well?
Ain't virgin no longer, or something.
RB: Again, we may have had problems finding customers.
I mean, we had -- often, when you launch a company and you get customer complaints, you know, you can deal with them.
But about three months after the launch of the condom company, I had a letter, a complaint, and I sat down and wrote a long letter back to this lady apologizing profusely.
But obviously, there wasn't a lot I could do about it.
And then six months later, or nine months after the problem had taken, I got this delightful letter with a picture of the baby asking if I'd be godfather, which I became.
So, it all worked out well.
CA: Really? You should have brought a picture. That's wonderful.
RB: I should have.
CA: So, just help us with some of the numbers.
I mean, what are the numbers on this?
I mean, how big is the group overall?
How much -- what's the total revenue?
RB: It's about 25 billion dollars now, in total.
CA: And how many employees?
RB: About 55,000.
CA: So, you've been photographed in various ways at various times and never worrying about putting your dignity on the line or anything like that.
What was that? Was that real?
RB: Yeah. We were launching a megastore in Los Angeles, I think.
No, I mean, I think -- CA: But is that your hair?
RB: No.
CA: What was that one?
RB: Dropping in for tea.
CA: OK.
(Laughter) RB: Ah, that was quite fun. That was a wonderful car-boat in which -- CA: Oh, that car that we -- actually we -- it was a TEDster event there, I think.
Is that -- could you still pause on that one actually, for a minute?
(Laughter) RB: It's a tough job, isn't it?
CA: I mean, it is a tough job.
(Laughter) When I first came to America, I used to try this with employees as well and they kind of -- they have these different rules over here, it's very strange.
RB: I know, I have -- the lawyers say you mustn't do things like that, but -- CA: I mean, speaking of which, tell us about -- RB: "Pammy" we launched, you know -- mistakenly thought we could take on Coca-Cola, and we launched a cola bottle called "The Pammy" and it was shaped a bit like Pamela Anderson.
But the trouble is, it kept on tipping over, but -- (Laughter) CA: Designed by Philippe Starck perhaps?
RB: Of course.
CA: So, we'll just run a couple more pictures here. Virgin Brides. Very nice.
And, OK, so stop there. This was -- you had some award I think?
RB: Yeah, well, 25 years earlier, we'd launched the Sex Pistols' "God Save The Queen," and I'd certainly never expected that 25 years later -- that she'd actually knight us.
But somehow, she must have had a forgetful memory, I think.
CA: Well, God saved her and you got your just reward.
Do you like to be called Sir Richard, or how?
RB: Nobody's ever called me Sir Richard.
Occasionally in America, I hear people saying Sir Richard and think there's some Shakespearean play taking place.
But nowhere else anyway.
CA: OK. So can you use your knighthood for anything or is it just ...
RB: No. I suppose if you're having problems getting a booking in a restaurant or something, that might be worth using it.
CA: You know, it's not Richard Branson. It's Sir Richard Branson.
RB: I'll go get the secretary to use it.
CA: OK. So let's look at the space thing.
I think, with us, we've got a video that shows what you're up to, and Virgin Galactic up in the air. (Video) So that's the Bert Rutan designed spaceship?
RB: Yeah, it'll be ready in -- well, ready in 12 months and then we do 12 months extensive testing.
And then 24 months from now, people will be able to take a ride into space.
CA: So this interior is Philippe Starcke designed?
RB: Philippe has done the -- yeah, quite a bit of it: the logos and he's building the space station in New Mexico.
And basically, he's just taken an eye and the space station will be one giant eye, so when you're in space, you ought to be able to see this massive eye looking up at you.
And when you land, you'll be able to go back into this giant eye.
But he's an absolute genius when it comes to design.
CA: But you didn't have him design the engine?
RB: Philippe is quite erratic, so I think that he wouldn't be the best person to design the engine, no.
CA: He gave a wonderful talk here two days ago.
RB: Yeah? No, he is a -- CA: Well, some people found it wonderful, some people found it completely bizarre.
But, I personally found it wonderful.
RB: He's a wonderful enthusiast, which is why I love him. But ...
CA: So, now, you've always had this exploration bug in you.
Have you ever regretted that?
RB: Many times.
I mean, I think with the ballooning and boating expeditions we've done in the past.
Well, I got pulled out of the sea I think six times by helicopters, so -- and each time, I didn't expect to come home to tell the tale.
So in those moments, you certainly wonder what you're doing up there or -- CA: What was the closest you got to -- when did you think, this is it, I might be on my way out?
RB: Well, I think the balloon adventures were -- each one was, each one, actually, I think we came close.
And, I mean, first of all we -- nobody had actually crossed the Atlantic in a hot air balloon before, so we had to build a hot air balloon that was capable of flying in the jet stream, and we weren't quite sure, when a balloon actually got into the jet stream, whether it would actually survive the 200, 220 miles an hour winds that you can find up there.
And so, just the initial lift off from Sugarloaf to cross the Atlantic, as we were pushing into the jet stream, this enormous balloon -- the top of the balloon ended up going at a couple of hundred miles an hour, the capsule that we were in at the bottom was going at maybe two miles an hour, and it just took off.
And it was like holding onto a thousand horses.
And we were just crossing every finger, praying that the balloon would hold together, which, fortunately, it did.
But the ends of all those balloon trips were, you know -- something seemed to go wrong every time, and on that particular occasion, the more experienced balloonist who was with me jumped, and left me holding on for dear life.
(Laughter) CA: Did he tell you to jump, or he just said, "I'm out of here!" and ...
RB: No, he told me jump, but once his weight had gone, the balloon just shot up to 12,000 feet and I ...
CA: And you inspired an Ian McEwan novel I think with that.
RB: Yeah. No, I put on my oxygen mask and stood on top of the balloon, with my parachute, looking at the swirling clouds below, trying to pluck up my courage to jump into the North Sea, which -- and it was a very, very, very lonely few moments.
But, anyway, we managed to survive it.
CA: Did you jump? Or it came down in the end?
RB: Well, I knew I had about half an hour's fuel left, and I also knew that the chances were that if I jumped, I would only have a couple of minutes of life left.
So I climbed back into the capsule and just desperately tried to make sure that I was making the right decision.
And wrote some notes to my family. And then climbed back up again, looked down at those clouds again, climbed back into the capsule again.
And then finally, just thought, there's a better way.
I've got, you know, this enormous balloon above me, it's the biggest parachute ever, why not use it?
And so I managed to fly the balloon down through the clouds, and about 50 feet, before I hit the sea, threw myself over.
And the balloon hit the sea and went shooting back up to 10,000 feet without me.
But it was a wonderful feeling being in that water and -- CA: What did you write to your family?
RB: Just what you would do in a situation like that: just I love you very much. And I'd already written them a letter before going on this trip, which -- just in case anything had happened.
But fortunately, they never had to use it.
CA: Your companies have had incredible PR value out of these heroics.
The years -- and until I stopped looking at the polls, you were sort of regarded as this great hero in the U.K. and elsewhere.
And cynics might say, you know, this is just a smart business guy doing what it takes to execute his particular style of marketing.
How much was the PR value part of this?
RB: Well, of course, the PR experts said that as an airline owner, the last thing you should be doing is heading off in balloons and boats, and crashing into the seas.
(Laughter) CA: They have a point, Richard.
RB: In fact, I think our airline took a full page ad at the time saying, you know, come on, Richard, there are better ways of crossing the Atlantic.
(Laughter) CA: To do all this, you must have been a genius from the get-go, right?
RB: Well, I won't contradict that.
(Laughter) CA: OK, this isn't exactly hardball. OK.
Didn't -- weren't you just terrible at school?
RB: I was dyslexic. I had no understanding of schoolwork whatsoever.
I certainly would have failed IQ tests.
And it was one of the reasons I left school when I was 15 years old.
And if I -- if I'm not interested in something, I don't grasp it.
As somebody who's dyslexic, you also have some quite bizarre situations.
I mean, for instance, I've had to -- you know, I've been running the largest group of private companies in Europe, but haven't been able to know the difference between net and gross.
And so the board meetings have been fascinating.
(Laughter) And so, it's like, good news or bad news?
And generally, the people would say, oh, well that's bad news.
CA: But just to clarify, the 25 billion dollars is gross, right? That's gross?
(Laughter) RB: Well, I hope it's net actually, having -- (Laughter) -- I've got it right.
CA: No, trust me, it's gross.
(Laughter) RB: So, when I turned 50, somebody took me outside the boardroom and said, "Look Richard, here's a -- let me draw on a diagram.
Here's a net in the sea, and the fish have been pulled from the sea into this net.
And that's the profits you've got left over in this little net, everything else is eaten."
And I finally worked it all out.
(Laughter) (Applause) CA: But, I mean, at school -- so as well as being, you know, doing pretty miserably academically, but you were also the captain of the cricket and football teams.
So you were kind of a -- you were a natural leader, but just a bit of a ... Were you a rebel then, or how would you ...
RB: Yeah, I think I was a bit of a maverick and -- but I ... And I was, yeah, I was fortunately good at sport, and so at least I had something to excel at, at school.
CA: And some bizarre things happened just earlier in your life.
I mean, there's the story about your mother allegedly dumping you in a field, aged four, and saying "OK, walk home."
Did this really happen?
RB: She was, you know, she felt that we needed to stand on our own two feet from an early age.
So she did things to us, which now she'd be arrested for, such as pushing us out of the car, and telling us to find our own way to Granny's, about five miles before we actually got there.
And making us go on wonderful, long bike rides.
And we were never allowed to watch television and the like.
CA: But is there a risk here?
I mean, there's a lot of people in the room who are wealthy, and they've got kids, and we've got this dilemma about how you bring them up.
Do you look at the current generation of kids coming up and think they're too coddled, they don't know what they've got, we're going to raise a generation of privileged ...
RB: No, I think if you're bringing up kids, you just want to smother them with love and praise and enthusiasm.
So I don't think you can mollycoddle your kids too much really.
CA: You didn't turn out too bad, I have to say, I'm ...
Your headmaster said to you -- I mean he found you kind of an enigma at your school -- he said, you're either going to be a millionaire or go to prison, and I'm not sure which.
Which of those happened first?
(Laughter) RB: Well, I've done both. I think I went to prison first.
I was actually prosecuted under two quite ancient acts in the U.K.
I was prosecuted under the 1889 Venereal Diseases Act and the 1916 Indecent Advertisements Act.
On the first occasion, for mentioning the word venereal disease in public, which -- we had a center where we would help young people who had problems.
And one of the problems young people have is venereal disease.
And there's an ancient law that says you can't actually mention the word venereal disease or print it in public.
So the police knocked on the door, and told us they were going to arrest us if we carried on mentioning the word venereal disease.
We changed it to social diseases and people came along with acne and spots, but nobody came with VD any more.
So, we put it back to VD and promptly got arrested.
And then subsequently, "Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols," the word bollocks, the police decided was a rude word and so we were arrested for using the word bollocks on the Sex Pistols' album.
And John Mortimer, the playwright, defended us.
And he asked if I could find a linguistics expert to come up with a different definition of the word bollocks.
And so I rang up Nottingham University, and I asked to talk to the professor of linguistics.
And he said, "Look, bollocks is not a -- has nothing to do with balls whatsoever.
It's actually a nickname given to priests in the eighteenth century."
(Laughter) And he went, "Furthermore, I'm a priest myself."
And so I said, "Would you mind coming to the court?"
And he said he'd be delighted. And I said -- and he said, "Would you like me to wear my dog collar?"
And I said, "Yes, definitely. Please."
(Laughter) CA: That's great.
RB: So our key witness argued that it was actually "Never Mind the Priest, Here's the Sex Pistols."
(Laughter) And the judge found us -- reluctantly found us not guilty, so ...
(Laughter) CA: That is outrageous.
(Applause) So seriously, is there a dark side?
A lot of people would say there's no way that someone could put together this incredible collection of businesses without knifing a few people in the back, you know, doing some ugly things.
You've been accused of being ruthless.
There was a nasty biography written about you by someone.
Is any of it true? Is there an element of truth in it?
RB: I don't actually think that the stereotype of a businessperson treading all over people to get to the top, generally speaking, works.
I think if you treat people well, people will come back and come back for more.
And I think all you have in life is your reputation and it's a very small world.
And I actually think that the best way of becoming a successful business leader is dealing with people fairly and well, and I like to think that's how we run Virgin.
CA: And what about the people who love you and who see you spending -- you keep getting caught up in these new projects, but it almost feels like you're addicted to launching new stuff.
You get excited by an idea and, kapow!
I mean, do you think about life balance?
How do your family feel about each time you step into something big and new?
RB: I also believe that being a father's incredibly important, so from the time the kids were very young, you know, when they go on holiday, I go on holiday with them.
And so we spend a very good sort of three months away together.
Yes, I'll, you know, be in touch. We're very lucky, we have this tiny little island in the Caribbean and we can -- so I can take them there and we can bring friends, and we can play together, but I can also keep in touch with what's going on.
CA: You started talking in recent years about this term capitalist philanthropy.
What is that?
RB: Capitalism has been proven to be a system that works.
You know, the alternative, communism, has not worked.
But the problem with capitalism is extreme wealth ends up in the hands of a few people, and therefore extreme responsibility, I think, goes with that wealth.
And I think it's important that the individuals, who are in that fortunate position, do not end up competing for bigger and bigger boats, and bigger and bigger cars, but, you know, use that money to either create new jobs or to tackle issues around the world.
CA: And what are the issues that you worry about most, care most about, want to turn your resources toward?
RB: Well, there's -- I mean there's a lot of issues.
I mean global warming certainly is a massive threat to mankind and we are putting a lot of time and energy into, A, trying to come up with alternative fuels and, B, you know, we just launched this prize, which is really a prize in case we don't get an answer on alternative fuels, in case we don't actually manage to get the carbon emissions cut down quickly, and in case we go through the tipping point.
We need to try to encourage people to come up with a way of extracting carbon out of the Earth's atmosphere.
And we just -- you know, there weren't really people working on that before, so we wanted people to try to -- all the best brains in the world to start thinking about that, and also to try to extract the methane out of the Earth's atmosphere as well.
And actually, we've had about 15,000 people fill in the forms saying they want to give it a go.
And so we only need one, so we're hopeful.
CA: And you're also working in Africa on a couple of projects?
RB: Yes, I mean, we've got -- we're setting up something called the war room, which is maybe the wrong word.
We're trying to -- maybe we'll change it -- but anyway, it's a war room to try to coordinate all the attack that's going on in Africa, all the different social problems in Africa, and try to look at best practices.
So, for instance, there's a doctor in Africa that's found that if you give a mother antiretroviral drugs at 24 weeks, when she's pregnant, that the baby will not have HIV when it's born.
And so disseminating that information to around the rest of Africa is important.
CA: The war room sounds, it sounds powerful and dramatic.
And is there a risk that the kind of the business heroes of the West get so excited about -- I mean, they're used to having an idea, getting stuff done, and they believe profoundly in their ability to make a difference in the world.
Is there a risk that we go to places like Africa and say, we've got to fix this problem and we can do it, I've got all these billions of dollars, you know, da, da, da -- here's the big idea. And kind of take a much more complex situation and actually end up making a mess of it. Do you worry about that?
RB: Well, first of all, on this particular situation, we're actually -- we're working with the government on it.
I mean, Thabo Mbeki's had his problems with accepting HIV and AIDS are related, but this is a way, I think, of him tackling this problem and instead of the world criticizing him, it's a way of working with him, with his government.
It's important that if people do go to Africa and do try to help, they don't just go in there and then leave after a few years.
It's got to be consistent.
But I think business leaders can bring their entrepreneurial know-how and help governments approach things slightly differently.
For instance, we're setting up clinics in Africa where we're going to be giving free antiretroviral drugs, free TB treatment and free malaria treatment.
But we're also trying to make them self-sustaining clinics, so that people pay for some other aspects.
CA: I mean a lot of cynics say about someone like yourself, or Bill Gates, or whatever, that this is really being -- it's almost driven by some sort of desire again, you know, for the right image, for guilt avoidance and not like a real philanthropic instinct.
What would you say to them?
RB: Well, I think that everybody -- people do things for a whole variety of different reasons and I think that, you know, when I'm on me deathbed, I will want to feel that I've made a difference to other people's lives.
And that may be a selfish thing to think, but it's the way I've been brought up.
I think if I'm in a position to radically change other people's lives for the better, I should do so.
CA: How old are you?
RB: I'm 56.
CA: I mean, the psychologist Erik Erikson says that -- as I understand him and I'm a total amateur -- but that during 30s, 40s people are driven by this desire to grow and that's where they get their fulfillment.
50s, 60s, the mode of operation shifts more to the quest for wisdom and a search for legacy.
I mean, it seems like you're still a little bit in the growth phases, you're still doing these incredible new plans.
How much do you think about legacy, and what would you like your legacy to be?
RB: I don't think I think too much about legacy.
I mean, I like to -- you know, my grandmother lived to 101, so hopefully I've got another 30 or 40 years to go.
No, I just want to live life to its full.
You know, if I can make a difference, I hope to be able to make a difference.
And I think one of the positive things at the moment is you've got Sergey and Larry from Google, for instance, who are good friends.
And, thank God, you've got two people who genuinely care about the world and with that kind of wealth.
If they had that kind of wealth and they didn't care about the world, it would be very worrying.
And you know they're going to make a hell of a difference to the world.
And I think it's important that people in that kind of position do make a difference.
CA: Well, Richard, when I was starting off in business, I knew nothing about it and I also was sort of -- I thought that business people were supposed to just be ruthless and that that was the only way you could have a chance of succeeding.
And you actually did inspire me. I looked at you, I thought, well, he's made it. Maybe there is a different way.
So I would like to thank you for that inspiration, and for coming to TED today. Thank you.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
What I'd like to do today is talk about one of my favorite subjects, and that is the neuroscience of sleep.
Now, there is a sound -- (Alarm clock) Ah, it worked!
A sound that is desperately familiar to most of us, and of course it's the sound of the alarm clock.
And what that truly ghastly, awful sound does is stop the single most important behavioral experience that we have, and that's sleep.
If you're an average sort of person, 36 percent of your life will be spent asleep, which means that if you live to 90, then 32 years will have been spent entirely asleep.
Now what that 32 years is telling us is that sleep at some level is important.
And yet, for most of us, we don't give sleep a second thought.
We throw it away.
We really just don't think about sleep.
And so what I'd like to do today is change your views, change your ideas and your thoughts about sleep.
And the journey that I want to take you on, we need to start by going back in time.
"Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber."
Any ideas who said that?
Shakespeare's Julius Caesar.
Yes, let me give you a few more quotes.
"O sleep, O gentle sleep, nature's soft nurse, how have I frighted thee?"
Shakespeare again, from -- I won't say it -- the Scottish play.
(Laughter) From the same time: "Sleep is the golden chain that ties health and our bodies together."
Extremely prophetic, by Thomas Dekker, another Elizabethan dramatist.
But if we jump forward 400 years, the tone about sleep changes somewhat.
This is from Thomas Edison, from the beginning of the 20th century: "Sleep is a criminal waste of time and a heritage from our cave days."
(Laughter) And if we also jump into the 1980s, some of you may remember that Margaret Thatcher was reported to have said, "Sleep is for wimps."
And of course the infamous -- what was his name? -- the infamous Gordon Gekko from "Wall Street" said, "Money never sleeps."
What do we do in the 20th century about sleep?
Well, of course, we use Thomas Edison's light bulb to invade the night, and we occupied the dark, and in the process of this occupation, we've treated sleep as an illness, almost.
We've treated it as an enemy.
At most now, I suppose, we tolerate the need for sleep, and at worst perhaps many of us think of sleep as an illness that needs some sort of a cure.
And our ignorance about sleep is really quite profound.
Why is it? Why do we abandon sleep in our thoughts?
Well, it's because you don't do anything much while you're asleep, it seems.
You don't eat. You don't drink.
And you don't have sex.
Well, most of us anyway.
And so, therefore it's -- Sorry.
Actually, sleep is an incredibly important part of our biology, and neuroscientists are beginning to explain why it's so very important.
So let's move to the brain.
Now, here we have a brain.
This is donated by a social scientist, and they said they didn't know what it was or indeed, how to use it, so -- (Laughter) Sorry.
So I borrowed it.
(Laughter) The point I'm trying to make is that when you're asleep, this thing doesn't shut down.
In fact, some areas of the brain are actually more active during the sleep state than during the wake state.
The other thing that's really important about sleep is that it doesn't arise from a single structure within the brain, but is to some extent a network property.
If we flip the brain on its back -- I love this little bit of spinal cord here -- this bit here is the hypothalamus, and right under there is a whole raft of interesting structures, not least the biological clock.
The biological clock tells us when it's good to be up, when it's good to be asleep, and what that structure does is interact with a whole raft of other areas within the hypothalamus, the lateral hypothalamus, the ventrolateral preoptic nuclei.
All of those combine, and they send projections down to the brain stem here.
The brain stem then projects forward and bathes the cortex, this wonderfully wrinkly bit over here, with neurotransmitters that keep us awake and essentially provide us with our consciousness.
So sleep arises from a whole raft of different interactions within the brain, and essentially, sleep is turned on and off as a result of a range of interactions in here.
OK. So where have we got to?
We've said that sleep is complicated and it takes 32 years of our life.
But what I haven't explained is what sleep is about.
So why do we sleep?
And it won't surprise any of you that, of course, as scientists, we don't have a consensus.
There are dozens of different ideas about why we sleep, and I'm going to outline three of those.
The first is sort of the restoration idea, and it's somewhat intuitive.
Essentially, all the stuff we've burned up during the day, we restore, we replace, we rebuild during the night.
And indeed, as an explanation, it goes back to Aristotle, so that's what -- 2,300 years ago.
It's gone in and out of fashion.
It's fashionable at the moment because what's been shown is that within the brain, a whole raft of genes have been shown to be turned on only during sleep, and those genes are associated with restoration and metabolic pathways.
So there's good evidence for the whole restoration hypothesis.
What about energy conservation?
Again, perhaps intuitive.
You essentially sleep to save calories.
Now, when you do the sums, though, it doesn't really pan out.
If you compare an individual who has slept at night, or stayed awake and hasn't moved very much, the energy saving of sleeping is about 110 calories a night.
Now, that's the equivalent of a hot dog bun.
Now, I would say that a hot dog bun is kind of a meager return for such a complicated and demanding behavior as sleep.
So I'm less convinced by the energy conservation idea.
But the third idea I'm quite attracted to, which is brain processing and memory consolidation.
What we know is that, if after you've tried to learn a task, and you sleep-deprive individuals, the ability to learn that task is smashed.
It's really hugely attenuated.
So sleep and memory consolidation is also very important.
However, it's not just the laying down of memory and recalling it.
What's turned out to be really exciting is that our ability to come up with novel solutions to complex problems is hugely enhanced by a night of sleep.
In fact, it's been estimated to give us a threefold advantage.
Sleeping at night enhances our creativity.
And what seems to be going on is that, in the brain, those neural connections that are important, those synaptic connections that are important, are linked and strengthened, while those that are less important tend to fade away and be less important.
OK.
So we've had three explanations for why we might sleep, and I think the important thing to realize is that the details will vary, and it's probable we sleep for multiple different reasons.
But sleep is not an indulgence.
It's not some sort of thing that we can take on board rather casually.
I think that sleep was once likened to an upgrade from economy to business class, you know, the equivalent of.
It's not even an upgrade from economy to first class.
The critical thing to realize is that if you don't sleep, you don't fly.
Essentially, you never get there.
And what's extraordinary about much of our society these days is that we are desperately sleep-deprived.
So let's now look at sleep deprivation.
Huge sectors of society are sleep-deprived, and let's look at our sleep-o-meter.
So in the 1950s, good data suggests that most of us were getting around eight hours of sleep a night.
Nowadays, we sleep one and a half to two hours less every night, so we're in the six-and-a-half-hours every-night league.
For teenagers, it's worse, much worse.
They need nine hours for full brain performance, and many of them, on a school night, are only getting five hours of sleep.
It's simply not enough.
If we think about other sectors of society -- the aged; if you are aged, then your ability to sleep in a single block is somewhat disrupted, and many sleep, again, less than five hours a night.
Shift work.
Shift work is extraordinary, perhaps 20 percent of the working population, and the body clock does not shift to the demands of working at night.
It's locked onto the same light-dark cycle as the rest of us.
So when the poor old shift worker is going home to try and sleep during the day, desperately tired, the body clock is saying, "Wake up. This is the time to be awake."
So the quality of sleep that you get as a night shift worker is usually very poor, again in that sort of five-hour region.
And then, of course, tens of millions of people suffer from jet lag.
So who here has jet lag?
Well, my goodness gracious.
Well, thank you very much indeed for not falling asleep, because that's what your brain is craving.
One of the things that the brain does is indulge in micro-sleeps, this involuntary falling asleep, and you have essentially no control over it.
Now, micro-sleeps can be sort of somewhat embarrassing, but they can also be deadly.
It's been estimated that 31 percent of drivers will fall asleep at the wheel at least once in their life, and in the US, the statistics are pretty good: 100,000 accidents on the freeway have been associated with tiredness, loss of vigilance, and falling asleep -- a hundred thousand a year.
At another level of terror, we dip into the tragic accidents at Chernobyl and indeed the space shuttle Challenger, which was so tragically lost.
And in the investigations that followed those disasters, poor judgment as a result of extended shift work and loss of vigilance and tiredness was attributed to a big chunk of those disasters.
When you're tired and you lack sleep, you have poor memory, you have poor creativity, you have increased impulsiveness, and you have overall poor judgment.
But my friends, it's so much worse than that.
(Laughter) If you are a tired brain, the brain is craving things to wake it up.
So drugs, stimulants.
Caffeine represents the stimulant of choice across much of the Western world.
Much of the day is fueled by caffeine, and if you're a really naughty tired brain, nicotine.
Of course, you're fueling the waking state with these stimulants, and then, of course, it gets to 11 o'clock at night, and the brain says to itself, "Actually, I need to be asleep fairly shortly.
What do we do about that when I'm feeling completely wired?"
Well, of course, you then resort to alcohol.
Now alcohol, short-term, you know, once or twice, to use to mildly sedate you, can be very useful.
It can actually ease the sleep transition.
But what you must be so aware of is that alcohol doesn't provide sleep.
A biological mimic for sleep, it sedates you.
So it actually harms some of the neural processing that's going on during memory consolidation and memory recall.
So it's a short-term acute measure, but for goodness sake, don't become addicted to alcohol as a way of getting to sleep every night.
Another connection between loss of sleep is weight gain.
If you sleep around about five hours or less every night, then you have a 50 percent likelihood of being obese.
What's the connection here?
Well, sleep loss seems to give rise to the release of the hormone ghrelin, the hunger hormone.
Ghrelin is released.
The brain says, "I need carbohydrates," and what it does is seek out carbohydrates and particularly sugars.
So there's a link between tiredness and the metabolic predisposition for weight gain: stress.
Tired people are massively stressed.
And one of the things of stress, of course, is loss of memory, which is what I sort of just then had a little lapse of.
But stress is so much more.
So, if you're acutely stressed, not a great problem, but it's sustained stress associated with sleep loss that's the problem.
Sustained stress leads to suppressed immunity.
And so, tired people tend to have higher rates of overall infection, and there's some very good studies showing that shift workers, for example, have higher rates of cancer.
Increased levels of stress throw glucose into the circulation.
Glucose becomes a dominant part of the vasculature and essentially you become glucose intolerant.
Therefore, diabetes 2.
Stress increases cardiovascular disease as a result of raising blood pressure.
So there's a whole raft of things associated with sleep loss that are more than just a mildly impaired brain, which is where I think most people think that sleep loss resides.
So at this point in the talk, this is a nice time to think, "Well, do you think on the whole I'm getting enough sleep?"
So a quick show of hands.
Who feels that they're getting enough sleep here?
Oh. Well, that's pretty impressive.
Good. We'll talk more about that later, about what are your tips.
So most of us, of course, ask the question, "How do I know whether I'm getting enough sleep?"
Well, it's not rocket science.
If you need an alarm clock to get you out of bed in the morning, if you are taking a long time to get up, if you need lots of stimulants, if you're grumpy, if you're irritable, if you're told by your work colleagues that you're looking tired and irritable, chances are you are sleep-deprived.
Listen to them. Listen to yourself.
What do you do?
Well -- and this is slightly offensive -- sleep for dummies.
(Laughter) Make your bedroom a haven for sleep.
The first critical thing is make it as dark as you possibly can, and also make it slightly cool.
Actually, reduce your amount of light exposure at least half an hour before you go to bed.
Light increases levels of alertness and will delay sleep.
What's the last thing that most of us do before we go to bed?
We stand in a massively lit bathroom, looking into the mirror cleaning our teeth.
It's the worst thing we can possibly do before we go to sleep.
Turn off those mobile phones. Turn off those computers.
Turn off all of those things that are also going to excite the brain.
Try not to drink caffeine too late in the day, ideally not after lunch.
Now, we've set about reducing light exposure before you go to bed, but light exposure in the morning is very good at setting the biological clock to the light-dark cycle.
So seek out morning light.
Basically, listen to yourself.
Wind down.
Do those sorts of things that you know are going to ease you off into the honey-heavy dew of slumber.
OK.
Teenagers are lazy.
They have a biological predisposition to go to bed late and get up late, so give them a break.
We need eight hours of sleep a night.
That's an average.
And what you need to do is listen to your body.
Do you need that much or do you need more?
Simple as that.
Old people need less sleep.
The sleep demands of the aged do not go down.
Essentially, sleep fragments and becomes less robust, but sleep requirements do not go down.
And the fourth myth is early to bed, early to rise makes a man healthy, wealthy and wise.
Well, that's wrong at so many different levels.
(Laughter) There is no evidence that getting up early and going to bed early gives you more wealth at all.
There's no difference in socioeconomic status.
In my experience, the only difference between morning people and evening people is that those people that get up in the morning early are just horribly smug.
(Laughter) (Applause) OK.
So for the last few minutes, what I want to do is change gears and talk about some really new, breaking areas of neuroscience, which is the association between mental health, mental illness and sleep disruption.
We've known for 130 years that in severe mental illness, there is always, always sleep disruption, but it's been largely ignored.
In the 1970s, when people started to think about this again, they said, "Yes, well, of course you have sleep disruption in schizophrenia, because they're on antipsychotics.
It's the antipsychotics causing the sleep problems," ignoring the fact that for a hundred years previously, sleep disruption had been reported before antipsychotics.
So what's going on?
Several groups are studying conditions like depression, schizophrenia and bipolar and what's going on in terms of sleep disruption.
We have a big study which we published last year on schizophrenia, and the data were quite extraordinary.
In those individuals with schizophrenia, much of the time, they were awake during the night phase and then they were asleep during the day.
Other groups showed no 24-hour patterns whatsoever -- their sleep was absolutely smashed.
And some had no ability to regulate their sleep by the light-dark cycle.
They were getting up later and later and later and later each night.
So what's going on?
And the really exciting news is that mental illness and sleep are not simply associated, but they are physically linked within the brain.
The neural networks that predispose you to normal sleep, give you normal sleep, and those that give you normal mental health, are overlapping.
And what's the evidence for that?
Well, genes that have been shown to be very important in the generation of normal sleep, when mutated, when changed, also predispose individuals to mental health problems.
And last year, we published a study which showed that a gene that's been linked to schizophrenia, when mutated, also smashes the sleep.
So we have evidence of a genuine mechanistic overlap between these two important systems.
Other work flowed from these studies.
The first was that sleep disruption actually precedes certain types of mental illness, and we've shown that in those young individuals who are at high risk of developing bipolar disorder, they already have a sleep abnormality prior to any clinical diagnosis of bipolar.
The other bit of data was that sleep disruption may actually exacerbate, make worse, the mental illness state.
My colleague Dan Freeman has used a range of agents which have stabilized sleep and reduced levels of paranoia in those individuals by 50 percent.
So what have we got?
We've got, in these connections, some really exciting things.
In terms of the neuroscience, by understanding these two systems, we're really beginning to understand how both sleep and mental illness are generated and regulated within the brain.
The second area is that if we can use sleep and sleep disruption as an early warning signal, then we have the chance of going in.
If we know these individuals are vulnerable, early intervention then becomes possible.
And the third, which I think is the most exciting, is that we can think of the sleep centers within the brain as a new therapeutic target.
Stabilize sleep in those individuals who are vulnerable, we can certainly make them healthier, but also alleviate some of the appalling symptoms of mental illness.
So let me just finish.
What I started by saying is: Take sleep seriously.
Our attitudes toward sleep are so very different from a pre-industrial age, when we were almost wrapped in a duvet.
We used to understand intuitively the importance of sleep.
And this isn't some sort of crystal-waving nonsense.
This is a pragmatic response to good health.
If you have good sleep, it increases your concentration, attention, decision-making, creativity, social skills, health.
If you get sleep, it reduces your mood changes, your stress, your levels of anger, your impulsivity, and your tendency to drink and take drugs.
And we finished by saying that an understanding of the neuroscience of sleep is really informing the way we think about some of the causes of mental illness, and indeed is providing us new ways to treat these incredibly debilitating conditions.
Jim Butcher, the fantasy writer, said, "Sleep is God. Go worship."
And I can only recommend that you do the same.
Thank you for your attention.
Ah yes, those university days, a heady mix of Ph.D-level pure mathematics and world debating championships, or, as I like to say, "Hello, ladies. Oh yeah."
Didn't get much sexier than the Spence at university, let me tell you.
It is such a thrill for a humble breakfast radio announcer from Sydney, Australia, to be here on the TED stage literally on the other side of the world.
And I wanted to let you know, a lot of the things you've heard about Australians are true.
From the youngest of ages, we display a prodigious sporting talent.
On the field of battle, we are brave and noble warriors.
What you've heard is true.
Australians, we don't mind a bit of a drink, sometimes to excess, leading to embarrassing social situations. (Laughter) This is my father's work Christmas party, December 1973.
I'm almost five years old. Fair to say, I'm enjoying the day a lot more than Santa was.
But I stand before you today not as a breakfast radio host, not as a comedian, but as someone who was, is, and always will be a mathematician.
And anyone who's been bitten by the numbers bug knows that it bites early and it bites deep.
I cast my mind back when I was in second grade at a beautiful little government-run school called Boronia Park in the suburbs of Sydney, and as we came up towards lunchtime, our teacher, Ms. Russell, said to the class, "Hey, year two. What do you want to do after lunch?
I've got no plans."
It was an exercise in democratic schooling, and I am all for democratic schooling, but we were only seven.
So some of the suggestions we made as to what we might want to do after lunch were a little bit impractical, and after a while, someone made a particularly silly suggestion and Ms. Russell patted them down with that gentle aphorism, "That wouldn't work.
That'd be like trying to put a square peg through a round hole."
Now I wasn't trying to be smart.
I wasn't trying to be funny.
I just politely raised my hand, and when Ms. Russell acknowledged me, I said, in front of my year two classmates, and I quote, "But Miss, surely if the diagonal of the square is less than the diameter of the circle, well, the square peg will pass quite easily through the round hole."
(Laughter) "It'd be like putting a piece of toast through a basketball hoop, wouldn't it?"
And there was that same awkward silence from most of my classmates, until sitting next to me, one of my friends, one of the cool kids in class, Steven, leaned across and punched me really hard in the head.
(Laughter) Now what Steven was saying was, "Look, Adam, you are at a critical juncture in your life here, my friend.
You can keep sitting here with us.
Any more of that sort of talk, you've got to go and sit over there with them."
I thought about it for a nanosecond.
I took one look at the road map of life, and I ran off down the street marked "Geek" as fast as my chubby, asthmatic little legs would carry me.
I fell in love with mathematics from the earliest of ages.
I explained it to all my friends. Maths is beautiful.
It's natural. It's everywhere.
Numbers are the musical notes with which the symphony of the universe is written.
The great Descartes said something quite similar.
The universe "is written in the mathematical language."
And today, I want to show you one of those musical notes, a number so beautiful, so massive, I think it will blow your mind.
Today we're going to talk about prime numbers.
Most of you I'm sure remember that six is not prime because it's 2 x 3.
Seven is prime because it's 1 x 7, but we can't break it down into any smaller chunks, or as we call them, factors.
Now a few things you might like to know about prime numbers.
One is not prime.
The proof of that is a great party trick that admittedly only works at certain parties.
(Laughter) Another thing about primes, there is no final biggest prime number.
They keep going on forever.
We know there are an infinite number of primes due to the brilliant mathematician Euclid.
Over thousands of years ago, he proved that for us.
But the third thing about prime numbers, mathematicians have always wondered, well at any given moment in time, what is the biggest prime that we know about?
Today we're going to hunt for that massive prime.
Don't freak out.
All you need to know, of all the mathematics you've ever learned, unlearned, crammed, forgotten, never understood in the first place, all you need to know is this: When I say 2 ^ 5, I'm talking about five little number twos next to each other all multiplied together, 2 x 2 x 2 x 2 x 2.
So 2 ^ 5 is 2 x 2 = 4, 8, 16, 32.
If you've got that, you're with me for the entire journey. Okay?
So 2 ^ 5, those five little twos multiplied together.
(2 ^ 5) - 1 = 31.
31 is a prime number, and that five in the power is also a prime number.
And the vast bulk of massive primes we've ever found are of that form: two to a prime number, take away one.
I won't go into great detail as to why, because most of your eyes will bleed out of your head if I do, but suffice to say, a number of that form is fairly easy to test for primacy.
A random odd number is a lot harder to test.
But as soon as we go hunting for massive primes, we realize it's not enough just to put in any prime number in the power.
(2 ^ 11) - 1 = 2,047, and you don't need me to tell you that's 23 x 89.
(Laughter) But (2 ^ 13) - 1, (2 ^ 17) - 1 (2 ^ 19) - 1, are all prime numbers.
After that point, they thin out a lot.
And one of the things about the search for massive primes that I love so much is some of the great mathematical minds of all time have gone on this search.
This is the great Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler.
In the 1700s, other mathematicians said he is simply the master of us all.
He was so respected, they put him on European currency back when that was a compliment.
(Laughter) Euler discovered at the time the world's biggest prime: (2 ^ 31) - 1.
It's over two billion.
He proved it was prime with nothing more than a quill, ink, paper and his mind.
You think that's big.
We know that (2 ^ 127) - 1 is a prime number.
It's an absolute brute.
Look at it here: 39 digits long, proven to be prime in 1876 by a mathematician called Lucas.
Word up, L-Dog.
(Laughter) But one of the great things about the search for massive primes, it's not just finding the primes.
Sometimes proving another number not to be prime is just as exciting.
Lucas again, in 1876, showed us (2 ^ 67) - 1, 21 digits long, was not prime.
But he didn't know what the factors were.
We knew it was like six, but we didn't know what are the 2 x 3 that multiply together to give us that massive number.
We didn't know for almost 40 years until Frank Nelson Cole came along.
And at a gathering of prestigious American mathematicians, he walked to the board, took up a piece of chalk, and started writing out the powers of two: two, four, eight, 16 -- come on, join in with me, you know how it goes -- 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1,024, 2,048.
I'm in geek heaven. We'll stop it there for a second.
Frank Nelson Cole did not stop there.
He went on and on and calculated 67 powers of two.
He took away one and wrote that number on the board.
A frisson of excitement went around the room.
It got even more exciting when he then wrote down these two large prime numbers in your standard multiplication format -- and for the rest of the hour of his talk Frank Nelson Cole busted that out.
He had found the prime factors of (2 ^ 67) - 1.
The room went berserk -- (Laughter) -- as Frank Nelson Cole sat down, having delivered the only talk in the history of mathematics with no words.
He admitted afterwards it wasn't that hard to do.
It took focus. It took dedication.
It took him, by his estimate, "three years of Sundays."
But then in the field of mathematics, as in so many of the fields that we've heard from in this TED, the age of the computer goes along and things explode.
These are the largest prime numbers we knew decade by decade, each one dwarfing the one before as computers took over and our power to calculate just grew and grew.
This is the largest prime number we knew in 1996, a very emotional year for me.
It was the year I left university.
I was torn between mathematics and media.
It was a tough decision. I loved university.
My arts degree was the best nine and a half years of my life.
(Laughter) But I came to a realization about my own ability.
Put simply, in a room full of randomly selected people, I'm a maths genius.
In a roomful of maths Ph.Ds, I'm as dumb as a box of hammers.
My skill is not in the mathematics.
It is in telling the story of the mathematics.
And during that time, since I've left university, these numbers have got bigger and bigger, each one dwarfing the last, until along came this man, Dr. Curtis Cooper, who a few years ago held the record for the largest ever prime, only to see it snatched away by a rival university.
And then Curtis Cooper got it back.
Not years ago, not months ago, days ago.
In an amazing moment of serendipity, I had to send TED a new slide to show you what this guy had done.
I still remember -- (Applause) -- I still remember when it happened.
I was doing my breakfast radio show.
I looked down on Twitter. There was a tweet: "Adam, have you seen the new largest prime number?"
I shivered -- (Laughter) -- contacted the women who produced my radio show out in the other room, and said "Girls, hold the front page.
We're not talking politics today.
We're not talking sport today.
They found another megaprime."
The girls just shook their heads, put them in their hands, and let me go my own way.
It's because of Curtis Cooper that we know, currently the largest prime number we know, is 2 ^ 57,885,161.
Don't forget to subtract the one.
This number is almost 17 and a half million digits long.
If you typed it out on a computer and saved it as a text file, that's 22 meg.
For the slightly less geeky of you, think about the Harry Potter novels, okay?
This is the first Harry Potter novel.
This is all seven Harry Potter novels, because she did tend to faff on a bit near the end.
(Laughter) Written out as a book, this number would run the length of the Harry Potter novels and half again.
Here's a slide of the first 1,000 digits of this prime.
If, when TED had begun, at 11 o'clock on Tuesday, we'd walked out and simply hit one slide every second, it would have taken five hours to show you that number.
I was keen to do it, could not convince Bono.
That's the way it goes.
This number is 17 and a half thousand slides long, and we know it is prime as confidently as we know the number seven is prime.
That fills me with almost sexual excitement.
And who am I kidding when I say almost?
(Laughter) I know what you're thinking: Adam, we're happy that you're happy, but why should we care?
Let me give you just three reasons why this is so beautiful.
First of all, as I explained, to ask a computer "Is that number prime?" to type it in its abbreviated form, and then only about six lines of code is the test for primacy, is a remarkably simple question to ask.
It's got a remarkably clear yes/no answer, and just requires phenomenal grunt.
Large prime numbers are a great way of testing the speed and accuracy of computer chips.
But secondly, as Curtis Cooper was looking for that monster prime, he wasn't the only guy searching.
My laptop at home was looking through four potential candidate primes myself as part of a networked computer hunt around the world for these large numbers.
The discovery of that prime is similar to the work people are doing in unraveling RNA sequences, in searching through data from SETI and other astronomical projects.
We live in an age where some of the great breakthroughs are not going to happen in the labs or the halls of academia but on laptops, desktops, in the palms of people's hands who are simply helping out for the search.
But for me it's amazing because it's a metaphor for the time in which we live, when human minds and machines can conquer together.
We've heard a lot about robots in this TED.
We've heard a lot about what they can and can't do.
It is true, you can now download onto your smartphone an app that would beat most grandmasters at chess.
You think that's cool.
Here's a machine doing something cool.
This is the CubeStormer II.
It can take a randomly shuffled Rubik's Cube.
Using the power of the smartphone, it can examine the cube and solve the cube in five seconds.
(Applause) That scares some people. That excites me.
How lucky are we to live in this age when mind and machine can work together?
I was asked in an interview last year in my capacity as a lower-case "c" celebrity in Australia, "What was your highlight of 2012?"
People were expecting me to talk about my beloved Sydney Swans football team.
In our beautiful, indigenous sport of Australian football, they won the equivalent of the Super Bowl.
I was there. It was the most emotional, exciting day.
It wasn't my highlight of 2012.
People thought it might have been an interview I'd done on my show.
It might have been a politician. It might have been a breakthrough.
It might have been a book I read, the arts. No, no, no.
It might have been something my two gorgeous daughters had done.
No, it wasn't. The highlight of 2012, so clearly, was the discovery of the Higgs boson.
Give it up for the fundamental particle that bequeaths all other fundamental particles their mass.
(Applause) And what was so gorgeous about this discovery was 50 years ago Peter Higgs and his team considered one of the deepest of all questions: How is it that the things that make us up have no mass?
I've clearly got mass. Where does it come from?
And he postulated a suggestion that there's this infinite, incredibly small field stretching throughout the universe, and as other particles go through those particles and interact, that's where they get their mass.
The rest of the scientific community said, "Great idea, Higgsy.
We've got no idea if we could ever prove it.
It's beyond our reach."
And within just 50 years, in his lifetime, with him sitting in the audience, we had designed the greatest machine ever to prove this incredible idea that originated just in a human mind.
That's what is so exciting for me about this prime number.
We thought it might be there, and we went and found it.
That is the essence of being human.
That is what we are all about.
Or as my friend Descartes might put it, we think, therefore we are.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I come from Lebanon, and I believe that running can change the world.
I know what I have just said is simply not obvious.
You know, Lebanon as a country has been once destroyed by a long and bloody civil war.
Honestly, I don't know why they call it civil war when there is nothing civil about it.
With Syria to the north, Israel and Palestine to the south, and our government even up till this moment is still fragmented and unstable.
For years, the country has been divided between politics and religion.
However, for one day a year, we truly stand united, and that's when the marathon takes place.
I used to be a marathon runner.
Long distance running was not only good for my well-being but it helped me meditate and dream big.
So the longer distances I ran, the bigger my dreams became.
Until one fateful morning, and while training, I was hit by a bus.
I nearly died, was in a coma, stayed at the hospital for two years, and underwent 36 surgeries to be able to walk again.
As soon as I came out of my coma, I realized that I was no longer the same runner I used to be, so I decided, if I couldn't run myself, I wanted to make sure that others could.
So out of my hospital bed, I asked my husband to start taking notes, and a few months later, the marathon was born.
Organizing a marathon as a reaction to an accident may sound strange, but at that time, even during my most vulnerable condition, I needed to dream big.
I needed something to take me out of my pain, an objective to look forward to.
I didn't want to pity myself, nor to be pitied, and I thought by organizing such a marathon, I'll be able to pay back to my community, build bridges with the outside world, and invite runners to come to Lebanon and run under the umbrella of peace.
Organizing a marathon in Lebanon is definitely not like organizing one in New York.
How do you introduce the concept of running to a nation that is constantly at the brink of war?
How do you ask those who were once fighting and killing each other to come together and run next to each other?
More than that, how do you convince people to run a distance of 26.2 miles at a time they were not even familiar with the word "marathon"?
So we had to start from scratch.
For almost two years, we went all over the country and even visited remote villages.
I personally met with people from all walks of life -- mayors, NGOs, schoolchildren, politicians, militiamen, people from mosques, churches, the president of the country, even housewives.
I learned one thing: When you walk the talk, people believe you.
Many were touched by my personal story, and they shared their stories in return.
It was honesty and transparency that brought us together.
We spoke one common language to each other, and that was from one human to another.
Once that trust was built, everybody wanted to be part of the marathon to show the world the true colors of Lebanon and the Lebanese and their desire to live in peace and harmony.
In October 2003, over 6,000 runners from 49 different nationalities came to the start line, all determined, and when the gunfire went off, this time it was a signal to run in harmony, for a change.
The marathon grew.
So did our political problems.
But for every disaster we had, the marathon found ways to bring people together.
In 2005, our prime minister was assassinated, and the country came to a complete standstill, so we organized a five-kilometer United We Run campaign.
Over 60,000 people came to the start line, all wearing white T-shirts with no political slogans.
That was a turning point for the marathon, where people started looking at it as a platform for peace and unity.
Between 2006 up to 2009, our country, Lebanon, went through unstable years, invasions, and more assassinations that brought us close to a civil war.
The country was divided again, so much that our parliament resigned, we had no president for a year, and no prime minister.
But we did have a marathon.
(Applause) So through the marathon, we learned that political problems can be overcome.
When the opposition party decided to shut down part of the city center, we negotiated alternative routes.
Government protesters became sideline cheerleaders.
They even hosted juice stations.
(Laughter) You know, the marathon has really become one of its kind.
It gained credibility from both the Lebanese and the international community.
Last November 2012, over 33,000 runners from 85 different nationalities came to the start line, but this time, they challenged a very stormy and rainy weather.
The streets were flooded, but people didn't want to miss out on the opportunity of being part of such a national day.
BMA has expanded.
We include everyone: the young, the elderly, the disabled, the mentally challenged, the blind, the elite, the amateur runners, even moms with their babies.
Themes have included runs for the environment, breast cancer, for the love of Lebanon, for peace, or just simply to run.
The first annual all-women-and-girls race for empowerment, which is one of its kind in the region, has just taken place only a few weeks ago, with 4,512 women, including the first lady, and this is only the beginning.
Thank you.
(Applause) BMA has supported charities and volunteers who have helped reshape Lebanon, raising funds for their causes and encouraging others to give.
The culture of giving and doing good has become contagious.
Stereotypes have been broken.
Change-makers and future leaders have been created.
I believe these are the building blocks for future peace.
BMA has become such a respected event in the region that government officials in the region, like Iraq, Egypt and Syria, have asked the organization to help them structure a similar sporting event.
We are now one of the largest running events in the Middle East, but most importantly, it is a platform for hope and cooperation in an ever-fragile and unstable part of the world.
From Boston to Beirut, we stand as one.
(Applause) After 10 years in Lebanon, from national marathons or from national events to smaller regional races, we've seen that people want to run for a better future.
After all, peacemaking is not a sprint.
It is more of a marathon.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Steve Ramirez: My first year of grad school, I found myself in my bedroom eating lots of Ben &amp; Jerry's watching some trashy TV and maybe, maybe listening to Taylor Swift.
I had just gone through a breakup.
(Laughter) So for the longest time, all I would do is recall the memory of this person over and over again, wishing that I could get rid of that gut-wrenching, visceral "blah" feeling.
Now, as it turns out, I'm a neuroscientist, so I knew that the memory of that person and the awful, emotional undertones that color in that memory, are largely mediated by separate brain systems.
And so I thought, what if we could go into the brain and edit out that nauseating feeling but while keeping the memory of that person intact?
Then I realized, maybe that's a little bit lofty for now.
So what if we could start off by going into the brain and just finding a single memory to begin with?
Could we jump-start that memory back to life, maybe even play with the contents of that memory?
All that said, there is one person in the entire world right now that I really hope is not watching this talk.
(Laughter) So there is a catch. There is a catch.
These ideas probably remind you of "Total Recall," "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind," or of "Inception."
But the movie stars that we work with are the celebrities of the lab.
Xu Liu: Test mice.
(Laughter) As neuroscientists, we work in the lab with mice trying to understand how memory works.
And today, we hope to convince you that now we are actually able to activate a memory in the brain at the speed of light.
To do this, there's only two simple steps to follow.
First, you find and label a memory in the brain, and then you activate it with a switch.
As simple as that.
(Laughter) SR: Are you convinced?
So, turns out finding a memory in the brain isn't all that easy.
XL: Indeed. This is way more difficult than, let's say, finding a needle in a haystack, because at least, you know, the needle is still something you can physically put your fingers on.
But memory is not.
And also, there's way more cells in your brain than the number of straws in a typical haystack.
So yeah, this task does seem to be daunting.
But luckily, we got help from the brain itself.
It turned out that all we need to do is basically to let the brain form a memory, and then the brain will tell us which cells are involved in that particular memory.
SR: So what was going on in my brain while I was recalling the memory of an ex?
If you were to just completely ignore human ethics for a second and slice up my brain right now, you would see that there was an amazing number of brain regions that were active while recalling that memory.
Now one brain region that would be robustly active in particular is called the hippocampus, which for decades has been implicated in processing the kinds of memories that we hold near and dear, which also makes it an ideal target to go into and to try and find and maybe reactivate a memory.
XL: When you zoom in into the hippocampus, of course you will see lots of cells, but we are able to find which cells are involved in a particular memory, because whenever a cell is active, like when it's forming a memory, it will also leave a footprint that will later allow us to know these cells are recently active.
SR: So the same way that building lights at night let you know that somebody's probably working there at any given moment, in a very real sense, there are biological sensors within a cell that are turned on only when that cell was just working.
They're sort of biological windows that light up to let us know that that cell was just active.
XL: So we clipped part of this sensor, and attached that to a switch to control the cells, and we packed this switch into an engineered virus and injected that into the brain of the mice.
So whenever a memory is being formed, any active cells for that memory will also have this switch installed.
SR: So here is what the hippocampus looks like after forming a fear memory, for example.
The sea of blue that you see here are densely packed brain cells, but the green brain cells, the green brain cells are the ones that are holding on to a specific fear memory.
So you are looking at the crystallization of the fleeting formation of fear.
You're actually looking at the cross-section of a memory right now.
XL: Now, for the switch we have been talking about, ideally, the switch has to act really fast.
It shouldn't take minutes or hours to work.
It should act at the speed of the brain, in milliseconds.
SR: So what do you think, Xu?
Could we use, let's say, pharmacological drugs to activate or inactivate brain cells?
XL: Nah. Drugs are pretty messy. They spread everywhere.
And also it takes them forever to act on cells.
So it will not allow us to control a memory in real time.
So Steve, how about let's zap the brain with electricity?
SR: So electricity is pretty fast, but we probably wouldn't be able to target it to just the specific cells that hold onto a memory, and we'd probably fry the brain.
XL: Oh. That's true. So it looks like, hmm, indeed we need to find a better way to impact the brain at the speed of light.
SR: So it just so happens that light travels at the speed of light.
So maybe we could activate or inactive memories by just using light -- XL: That's pretty fast.
SR: -- and because normally brain cells don't respond to pulses of light, so those that would respond to pulses of light are those that contain a light-sensitive switch.
Now to do that, first we need to trick brain cells to respond to laser beams.
XL: Yep. You heard it right.
We are trying to shoot lasers into the brain.
(Laughter) SR: And the technique that lets us do that is optogenetics.
Optogenetics gave us this light switch that we can use to turn brain cells on or off, and the name of that switch is channelrhodopsin, seen here as these green dots attached to this brain cell.
You can think of channelrhodopsin as a sort of light-sensitive switch that can be artificially installed in brain cells so that now we can use that switch to activate or inactivate the brain cell simply by clicking it, and in this case we click it on with pulses of light.
XL: So we attach this light-sensitive switch of channelrhodopsin to the sensor we've been talking about and inject this into the brain.
So whenever a memory is being formed, any active cell for that particular memory will also have this light-sensitive switch installed in it so that we can control these cells by the flipping of a laser just like this one you see.
SR: So let's put all of this to the test now.
What we can do is we can take our mice and then we can put them in a box that looks exactly like this box here, and then we can give them a very mild foot shock so that they form a fear memory of this box.
They learn that something bad happened here.
Now with our system, the cells that are active in the hippocampus in the making of this memory, only those cells will now contain channelrhodopsin.
XL: When you are as small as a mouse, it feels as if the whole world is trying to get you.
So your best response of defense is trying to be undetected.
Whenever a mouse is in fear, it will show this very typical behavior by staying at one corner of the box, trying to not move any part of its body, and this posture is called freezing.
So if a mouse remembers that something bad happened in this box, and when we put them back into the same box, it will basically show freezing because it doesn't want to be detected by any potential threats in this box.
SR: So you can think of freezing as, you're walking down the street minding your own business, and then out of nowhere you almost run into an ex-girlfriend or ex-boyfriend, and now those terrifying two seconds where you start thinking, "What do I do? Do I say hi?
Do I shake their hand? Do I turn around and run away?
Do I sit here and pretend like I don't exist?"
Those kinds of fleeting thoughts that physically incapacitate you, that temporarily give you that deer-in-headlights look.
XL: However, if you put the mouse in a completely different new box, like the next one, it will not be afraid of this box because there's no reason that it will be afraid of this new environment.
But what if we put the mouse in this new box but at the same time, we activate the fear memory using lasers just like we did before?
Are we going to bring back the fear memory for the first box into this completely new environment?
SR: All right, and here's the million-dollar experiment.
Now to bring back to life the memory of that day, I remember that the Red Sox had just won, it was a green spring day, perfect for going up and down the river and then maybe going to the North End to get some cannolis, #justsaying.
Now Xu and I, on the other hand, were in a completely windowless black room not making any ocular movement that even remotely resembles an eye blink because our eyes were fixed onto a computer screen.
We were looking at this mouse here trying to activate a memory for the first time using our technique.
XL: And this is what we saw.
When we first put the mouse into this box, it's exploring, sniffing around, walking around, minding its own business, because actually by nature, mice are pretty curious animals.
They want to know, what's going on in this new box?
It's interesting.
But the moment we turned on the laser, like you see now, all of a sudden the mouse entered this freezing mode.
It stayed here and tried not to move any part of its body.
Clearly it's freezing.
So indeed, it looks like we are able to bring back the fear memory for the first box in this completely new environment.
While watching this, Steve and I are as shocked as the mouse itself.
(Laughter) So after the experiment, the two of us just left the room without saying anything.
After a kind of long, awkward period of time, Steve broke the silence.
SR: "Did that just work?"
XL: "Yes," I said. "Indeed it worked!"
We're really excited about this.
And then we published our findings in the journal Nature.
Ever since the publication of our work, we've been receiving numerous comments from all over the Internet.
Maybe we can take a look at some of those.
["OMGGGGG FINALLY... so much more to come, virtual reality, neural manipulation, visual dream emulation... neural coding, 'writing and re-writing of memories', mental illnesses. Ahhh the future is awesome"] SR: So the first thing that you'll notice is that people have really strong opinions about this kind of work.
Now I happen to completely agree with the optimism of this first quote, because on a scale of zero to Morgan Freeman's voice, it happens to be one of the most evocative accolades that I've heard come our way.
(Laughter) But as you'll see, it's not the only opinion that's out there.
["This scares the hell out of me... What if they could do that easily in humans in a couple of years?! OH MY GOD WE'RE DOOMED"] XL: Indeed, if we take a look at the second one, I think we can all agree that it's, meh, probably not as positive.
But this also reminds us that, although we are still working with mice, it's probably a good idea to start thinking and discussing about the possible ethical ramifications of memory control.
SR: Now, in the spirit of the third quote, we want to tell you about a recent project that we've been working on in lab that we've called Project Inception.
["They should make a movie about this. Where they plant ideas into peoples minds, so they can control them for their own personal gain. We'll call it: Inception."] So we reasoned that now that we can reactivate a memory, what if we do so but then begin to tinker with that memory?
Could we possibly even turn it into a false memory?
XL: So all memory is sophisticated and dynamic, but if just for simplicity, let's imagine memory as a movie clip.
So far what we've told you is basically we can control this "play" button of the clip so that we can play this video clip any time, anywhere.
But is there a possibility that we can actually get inside the brain and edit this movie clip so that we can make it different from the original?
Yes we can.
Turned out that all we need to do is basically reactivate a memory using lasers just like we did before, but at the same time, if we present new information and allow this new information to incorporate into this old memory, this will change the memory.
It's sort of like making a remix tape.
SR: So how do we do this?
Rather than finding a fear memory in the brain, we can start by taking our animals, and let's say we put them in a blue box like this blue box here and we find the brain cells that represent that blue box and we trick them to respond to pulses of light exactly like we had said before.
Now the next day, we can take our animals and place them in a red box that they've never experienced before.
We can shoot light into the brain to reactivate the memory of the blue box.
So what would happen here if, while the animal is recalling the memory of the blue box, we gave it a couple of mild foot shocks?
So here we're trying to artificially make an association between the memory of the blue box and the foot shocks themselves.
We're just trying to connect the two.
So to test if we had done so, we can take our animals once again and place them back in the blue box.
Again, we had just reactivated the memory of the blue box while the animal got a couple of mild foot shocks, and now the animal suddenly freezes.
It's as though it's recalling being mildly shocked in this environment even though that never actually happened.
So it formed a false memory, because it's falsely fearing an environment where, technically speaking, nothing bad actually happened to it.
XL: So, so far we are only talking about this light-controlled "on" switch.
In fact, we also have a light-controlled "off" switch, and it's very easy to imagine that by installing this light-controlled "off" switch, we can also turn off a memory, any time, anywhere.
So everything we've been talking about today is based on this philosophically charged principle of neuroscience that the mind, with its seemingly mysterious properties, is actually made of physical stuff that we can tinker with.
SR: And for me personally, I see a world where we can reactivate any kind of memory that we'd like.
I also see a world where we can erase unwanted memories.
Now, I even see a world where editing memories is something of a reality, because we're living in a time where it's possible to pluck questions from the tree of science fiction and to ground them in experimental reality.
XL: Nowadays, people in the lab and people in other groups all over the world are using similar methods to activate or edit memories, whether that's old or new, positive or negative, all sorts of memories so that we can understand how memory works.
SR: For example, one group in our lab was able to find the brain cells that make up a fear memory and converted them into a pleasurable memory, just like that.
That's exactly what I mean about editing these kinds of processes.
Now one dude in lab was even able to reactivate memories of female mice in male mice, which rumor has it is a pleasurable experience.
XL: Indeed, we are living in a very exciting moment where science doesn't have any arbitrary speed limits but is only bound by our own imagination.
SR: And finally, what do we make of all this?
How do we push this technology forward?
These are the questions that should not remain just inside the lab, and so one goal of today's talk was to bring everybody up to speed with the kind of stuff that's possible in modern neuroscience, but now, just as importantly, to actively engage everybody in this conversation.
So let's think together as a team about what this all means and where we can and should go from here, because Xu and I think we all have some really big decisions ahead of us.
Thank you. XL: Thank you.
(Applause)
You may want to take a closer look.
There's more to this painting than meets the eye.
And yes, it's an acrylic painting of a man, but I didn't paint it on canvas.
I painted it directly on top of the man.
What I do in my art is I skip the canvas altogether, and if I want to paint your portrait, I'm painting it on you, physically on you.
That also means you're probably going to end up with an earful of paint, because I need to paint your ear on your ear.
Everything in this scene, the person, the clothes, chairs, wall, gets covered in a mask of paint that mimics what's directly below it, and in this way, I'm able to take a three-dimensional scene and make it look like a two-dimensional painting.
I can photograph it from any angle, and it will still look 2D.
There's no Photoshop here.
This is just a photo of one of my three-dimensional paintings.
You might be wondering how I came up with this idea of turning people into paintings.
But originally, this had nothing to do with either people or paint.
It was about shadows.
I was fascinated with the absence of light, and I wanted to find a way that I could give it materiality and pin it down before it changed.
I came up with the idea of painting shadows.
I loved that I could hide within this shadow my own painted version, and it would be almost invisible until the light changed, and all of a sudden my shadow would be brought to the light.
I wanted to think about what else I could put shadows on, and I thought of my friend Bernie.
But I didn't just want to paint the shadows.
I also wanted to paint the highlights and create a mapping on his body in greyscale.
I had a very specific vision of what this would look like, and as I was painting him, I made sure to follow that very closely.
But something kept on flickering before my eyes.
I wasn't quite sure what I was looking at.
And then when I took that moment to take a step back, magic.
I had turned my friend into a painting.
I couldn't have foreseen that when I wanted to paint a shadow, I would pull out this whole other dimension, that I would collapse it, that I would take a painting and make it my friend and then bring him back to a painting.
I was a little conflicted though, because I was so excited about what I'd found, but I was just about to graduate from college with a degree in political science, and I'd always had this dream of going to Washington, D.C., and sitting at a desk and working in government.
(Laughter) Why did this have to get in the way of all that?
I made the tough decision of going home after graduation and not going up to Capitol Hill, but going down to my parents' basement and making it my job to learn how to paint.
I had no idea where to begin.
The last time I'd painted, I was 16 years old at summer camp, and I didn't want to teach myself how to paint by copying the old masters or stretching a canvas and practicing over and over again on that surface, because that's not what this project was about for me.
It was about space and light.
My early canvases ended up being things that you wouldn't expect to be used as canvas, like fried food.
It's nearly impossible to get paint to stick to the grease in an egg.
(Laughter) Even harder was getting paint to stick to the acid in a grapefruit.
It just would erase my brush strokes like invisible ink.
I'd put something down, and instantly it would be gone.
And if I wanted to paint on people, well, I was a little bit embarrassed to bring people down into my studio and show them that I spent my days in a basement putting paint on toast.
It just seemed like it made more sense to practice by painting on myself.
One of my favorite models actually ended up being a retired old man who not only didn't mind sitting still and getting the paint in his ears, but he also didn't really have much embarrassment about being taken out into very public places for exhibition, like the Metro.
I was having so much fun with this process.
I was teaching myself how to paint in all these different styles, and I wanted to see what else I could do with it.
I came together with a collaborator, Sheila Vand, and we had the idea of creating paintings in a more unusual surface, and that was milk.
We got a pool. We filled it with milk.
We filled it with Sheila. And I began painting.
And the images were always completely unexpected in the end, because I could have a very specific image about how it would turn out, I could paint it to match that, but the moment that Sheila laid back into the milk, everything would change.
It was in constant flux, and we had to, rather than fight it, embrace it, see where the milk would take us and compensate to make it even better.
Sometimes, when Sheila would lay down in the milk, it would wash all the paint off of her arms, and it might seem a little bit clumsy, but our solution would be, okay, hide your arms.
And one time, she got so much milk in her hair that it just smeared all the paint off of her face.
All right, well, hide your face.
And we ended up with something far more elegant than we could have imagined, even though this is essentially the same solution that a frustrated kid uses when he can't draw hands, just hiding them in the pockets.
When we started out on the milk project, and when I started out, I couldn't have foreseen that I would go from pursuing my dream in politics and working at a desk to tripping over a shadow and then turning people into paintings and painting on people in a pool of milk.
But then again, I guess it's also not unforeseeable that you can find the strange in the familiar, as long as you're willing to look beyond what's already been brought to light, that you can see what's below the surface, hiding in the shadows, and recognize that there can be more there than meets the eye.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I have a confession to make.
But first, I want you to make a little confession to me.
In the past year, I want you to just raise your hand if you've experienced relatively little stress.
Anyone?
How about a moderate amount of stress?
Who has experienced a lot of stress?
Yeah. Me too.
But that is not my confession.
My confession is this: I am a health psychologist, and my mission is to help people be happier and healthier.
But I fear that something I've been teaching for the last 10 years is doing more harm than good, and it has to do with stress.
For years I've been telling people, stress makes you sick.
It increases the risk of everything from the common cold to cardiovascular disease.
Basically, I've turned stress into the enemy.
But I have changed my mind about stress, and today, I want to change yours.
Let me start with the study that made me rethink my whole approach to stress.
This study tracked 30,000 adults in the United States for eight years, and they started by asking people, "How much stress have you experienced in the last year?"
They also asked, "Do you believe that stress is harmful for your health?"
And then they used public death records to find out who died.
(Laughter) Okay.
People who experienced a lot of stress in the previous year had a 43 percent increased risk of dying.
But that was only true for the people who also believed that stress is harmful for your health.
(Laughter) People who experienced a lot of stress but did not view stress as harmful were no more likely to die.
In fact, they had the lowest risk of dying of anyone in the study, including people who had relatively little stress.
Now the researchers estimated that over the eight years they were tracking deaths, 182,000 Americans died prematurely, not from stress, but from the belief that stress is bad for you.
(Laughter) That is over 20,000 deaths a year.
Now, if that estimate is correct, that would make believing stress is bad for you the 15th largest cause of death in the United States last year, killing more people than skin cancer, HIV/AIDS and homicide.
(Laughter) You can see why this study freaked me out.
Here I've been spending so much energy telling people stress is bad for your health.
So this study got me wondering: Can changing how you think about stress make you healthier?
And here the science says yes.
When you change your mind about stress, you can change your body's response to stress.
Now to explain how this works, I want you all to pretend that you are participants in a study designed to stress you out.
It's called the social stress test.
You come into the laboratory, and you're told you have to give a five-minute impromptu speech on your personal weaknesses to a panel of expert evaluators sitting right in front of you, and to make sure you feel the pressure, there are bright lights and a camera in your face, kind of like this.
(Laughter) And the evaluators have been trained to give you discouraging, non-verbal feedback, like this.
(Exhales) (Laughter) Now that you're sufficiently demoralized, time for part two: a math test.
And unbeknownst to you, the experimenter has been trained to harass you during it.
Now we're going to all do this together.
It's going to be fun.
For me.
Okay.
(Laughter) I want you all to count backwards from 996 in increments of seven.
You're going to do this out loud, as fast as you can, starting with 996.
Go!
(Audience counting) Go faster. Faster please.
You're going too slow.
(Audience counting) Stop. Stop, stop, stop.
That guy made a mistake.
We are going to have to start all over again.
(Laughter) You're not very good at this, are you?
Okay, so you get the idea.
If you were actually in this study, you'd probably be a little stressed out.
Your heart might be pounding, you might be breathing faster, maybe breaking out into a sweat.
And normally, we interpret these physical changes as anxiety or signs that we aren't coping very well with the pressure.
But what if you viewed them instead as signs that your body was energized, was preparing you to meet this challenge?
Now that is exactly what participants were told in a study conducted at Harvard University.
Before they went through the social stress test, they were taught to rethink their stress response as helpful.
That pounding heart is preparing you for action.
If you're breathing faster, it's no problem.
It's getting more oxygen to your brain.
And participants who learned to view the stress response as helpful for their performance, well, they were less stressed out, less anxious, more confident, but the most fascinating finding to me was how their physical stress response changed.
Now, in a typical stress response, your heart rate goes up, and your blood vessels constrict like this.
And this is one of the reasons that chronic stress is sometimes associated with cardiovascular disease.
It's not really healthy to be in this state all the time.
But in the study, when participants viewed their stress response as helpful, their blood vessels stayed relaxed like this.
Their heart was still pounding, but this is a much healthier cardiovascular profile.
It actually looks a lot like what happens in moments of joy and courage.
Over a lifetime of stressful experiences, this one biological change could be the difference between a stress-induced heart attack at age 50 and living well into your 90s.
And this is really what the new science of stress reveals, that how you think about stress matters.
So my goal as a health psychologist has changed.
I no longer want to get rid of your stress.
I want to make you better at stress.
And we just did a little intervention.
If you raised your hand and said you'd had a lot of stress in the last year, we could have saved your life, because hopefully the next time your heart is pounding from stress, you're going to remember this talk and you're going to think to yourself, this is my body helping me rise to this challenge.
And when you view stress in that way, your body believes you, and your stress response becomes healthier.
Now I said I have over a decade of demonizing stress to redeem myself from, so we are going to do one more intervention.
I want to tell you about one of the most under-appreciated aspects of the stress response, and the idea is this: Stress makes you social.
To understand this side of stress, we need to talk about a hormone, oxytocin, and I know oxytocin has already gotten as much hype as a hormone can get.
It even has its own cute nickname, the cuddle hormone, because it's released when you hug someone.
But this is a very small part of what oxytocin is involved in.
Oxytocin is a neuro-hormone.
It fine-tunes your brain's social instincts.
It primes you to do things that strengthen close relationships.
Oxytocin makes you crave physical contact with your friends and family.
It enhances your empathy.
It even makes you more willing to help and support the people you care about.
Some people have even suggested we should snort oxytocin...
to become more compassionate and caring.
But here's what most people don't understand about oxytocin.
It's a stress hormone.
Your pituitary gland pumps this stuff out as part of the stress response.
It's as much a part of your stress response as the adrenaline that makes your heart pound.
And when oxytocin is released in the stress response, it is motivating you to seek support.
Your biological stress response is nudging you to tell someone how you feel, instead of bottling it up.
Your stress response wants to make sure you notice when someone else in your life is struggling so that you can support each other.
When life is difficult, your stress response wants you to be surrounded by people who care about you.
Okay, so how is knowing this side of stress going to make you healthier?
Well, oxytocin doesn't only act on your brain.
It also acts on your body, and one of its main roles in your body is to protect your cardiovascular system from the effects of stress.
It's a natural anti-inflammatory.
It also helps your blood vessels stay relaxed during stress.
But my favorite effect on the body is actually on the heart.
Your heart has receptors for this hormone, and oxytocin helps heart cells regenerate and heal from any stress-induced damage.
This stress hormone strengthens your heart.
And the cool thing is that all of these physical benefits of oxytocin are enhanced by social contact and social support.
So when you reach out to others under stress, either to seek support or to help someone else, you release more of this hormone, your stress response becomes healthier, and you actually recover faster from stress.
I find this amazing, that your stress response has a built-in mechanism for stress resilience, and that mechanism is human connection.
I want to finish by telling you about one more study.
And listen up, because this study could also save a life.
This study tracked about 1,000 adults in the United States, and they ranged in age from 34 to 93, and they started the study by asking, "How much stress have you experienced in the last year?"
They also asked, "How much time have you spent helping out friends, neighbors, people in your community?"
And then they used public records for the next five years to find out who died.
Okay, so the bad news first: For every major stressful life experience, like financial difficulties or family crisis, that increased the risk of dying by 30 percent.
But -- and I hope you are expecting a "but" by now -- but that wasn't true for everyone.
People who spent time caring for others showed absolutely no stress-related increase in dying.
Caring created resilience.
And so we see once again that the harmful effects of stress on your health are not inevitable.
How you think and how you act can transform your experience of stress.
When you choose to view your stress response as helpful, you create the biology of courage.
And when you choose to connect with others under stress, you can create resilience.
Now I wouldn't necessarily ask for more stressful experiences in my life, but this science has given me a whole new appreciation for stress.
Stress gives us access to our hearts.
The compassionate heart that finds joy and meaning in connecting with others, and yes, your pounding physical heart, working so hard to give you strength and energy.
And when you choose to view stress in this way, you're not just getting better at stress, you're actually making a pretty profound statement.
You're saying that you can trust yourself to handle life's challenges.
And you're remembering that you don't have to face them alone.
Thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: This is kind of amazing, what you're telling us.
It seems amazing to me that a belief about stress can make so much difference to someone's life expectancy.
How would that extend to advice, like, if someone is making a lifestyle choice between, say, a stressful job and a non-stressful job, does it matter which way they go?
It's equally wise to go for the stressful job so long as you believe that you can handle it, in some sense?
KM: Yeah, and one thing we know for certain is that chasing meaning is better for your health than trying to avoid discomfort.
And so I would say that's really the best way to make decisions, is go after what it is that creates meaning in your life and then trust yourself to handle the stress that follows.
CA: Thank you so much, Kelly. It's pretty cool.
(Applause)
When I was a young man, I spent six years of wild adventure in the tropics working as an investigative journalist in some of the most bewitching parts of the world.
I was as reckless and foolish as only young men can be.
This is why wars get fought.
But I also felt more alive than I've ever done since.
And when I came home, I found the scope of my existence gradually diminishing until loading the dishwasher seemed like an interesting challenge.
And I found myself sort of scratching at the walls of life, as if I was trying to find a way out into a wider space beyond.
I was, I believe, ecologically bored.
Now, we evolved in rather more challenging times than these, in a world of horns and tusks and fangs and claws.
And we still possess the fear and the courage and the aggression required to navigate those times.
But in our comfortable, safe, crowded lands, we have few opportunities to exercise them without harming other people.
And this was the sort of constraint that I found myself bumping up against.
To conquer uncertainty, to know what comes next, that's almost been the dominant aim of industrialized societies, and having got there, or almost got there, we have just encountered a new set of unmet needs.
We've privileged safety over experience and we've gained a lot in doing so, but I think we've lost something too.
Now, I don't romanticize evolutionary time.
I'm already beyond the lifespan of most hunter-gatherers, and the outcome of a mortal combat between me myopically stumbling around with a stone-tipped spear and an enraged giant aurochs isn't very hard to predict.
Nor was it authenticity that I was looking for.
I don't find that a useful or even intelligible concept.
I just wanted a richer and rawer life than I've been able to lead in Britain, or, indeed, that we can lead in most parts of the industrialized world.
And it was only when I stumbled across an unfamiliar word that I began to understand what I was looking for.
And as soon as I found that word, I realized that I wanted to devote much of the rest of my life to it.
The word is "rewilding," and even though rewilding is a young word, it already has several definitions.
But there are two in particular that fascinate me.
The first one is the mass restoration of ecosystems.
One of the most exciting scientific findings of the past half century has been the discovery of widespread trophic cascades.
A trophic cascade is an ecological process which starts at the top of the food chain and tumbles all the way down to the bottom, and the classic example is what happened in the Yellowstone National Park in the United States when wolves were reintroduced in 1995.
Now, we all know that wolves kill various species of animals, but perhaps we're slightly less aware that they give life to many others.
It sounds strange, but just follow me for a while.
Before the wolves turned up, they'd been absent for 70 years.
The numbers of deer, because there was nothing to hunt them, had built up and built up in the Yellowstone Park, and despite efforts by humans to control them, they'd managed to reduce much of the vegetation there to almost nothing, they'd just grazed it away.
But as soon as the wolves arrived, even though they were few in number, they started to have the most remarkable effects.
First, of course, they killed some of the deer, but that wasn't the major thing.
Much more significantly, they radically changed the behavior of the deer.
The deer started avoiding certain parts of the park, the places where they could be trapped most easily, particularly the valleys and the gorges, and immediately those places started to regenerate.
In some areas, the height of the trees quintupled in just six years.
Bare valley sides quickly became forests of aspen and willow and cottonwood.
And as soon as that happened, the birds started moving in.
The number of songbirds, of migratory birds, started to increase greatly.
The number of beavers started to increase, because beavers like to eat the trees.
And beavers, like wolves, are ecosystem engineers.
They create niches for other species.
And the dams they built in the rivers provided habitats for otters and muskrats and ducks and fish and reptiles and amphibians.
The wolves killed coyotes, and as a result of that, the number of rabbits and mice began to rise, which meant more hawks, more weasels, more foxes, more badgers.
Ravens and bald eagles came down to feed on the carrion that the wolves had left.
Bears fed on it too, and their population began to rise as well, partly also because there were more berries growing on the regenerating shrubs, and the bears reinforced the impact of the wolves by killing some of the calves of the deer.
But here's where it gets really interesting.
The wolves changed the behavior of the rivers.
They began to meander less.
There was less erosion. The channels narrowed.
More pools formed, more riffle sections, all of which were great for wildlife habitats.
The rivers changed in response to the wolves, and the reason was that the regenerating forests stabilized the banks so that they collapsed less often, so that the rivers became more fixed in their course.
Similarly, by driving the deer out of some places and the vegetation recovering on the valley sides, there was less soil erosion, because the vegetation stabilized that as well.
So the wolves, small in number, transformed not just the ecosystem of the Yellowstone National Park, this huge area of land, but also its physical geography.
Whales in the southern oceans have similarly wide-ranging effects.
One of the many post-rational excuses made by the Japanese government for killing whales is that they said, "Well, the number of fish and krill will rise and then there'll be more for people to eat."
Well, it's a stupid excuse, but it sort of kind of makes sense, doesn't it, because you'd think that whales eat huge amounts of fish and krill, so obviously take the whales away, there'll be more fish and krill.
But the opposite happened.
You take the whales away, and the number of krill collapses.
Why would that possibly have happened?
Well, it now turns out that the whales are crucial to sustaining that entire ecosystem, and one of the reasons for this is that they often feed at depth and then they come up to the surface and produce what biologists politely call large fecal plumes, huge explosions of poop right across the surface waters, up in the photic zone, where there's enough light to allow photosynthesis to take place, and those great plumes of fertilizer stimulate the growth of phytoplankton, the plant plankton at the bottom of the food chain, which stimulate the growth of zooplankton, which feed the fish and the krill and all the rest of it.
The other thing that whales do is that, as they're plunging up and down through the water column, they're kicking the phytoplankton back up towards the surface where it can continue to survive and reproduce.
And interestingly, well, we know that plant plankton in the oceans absorb carbon from the atmosphere -- the more plant plankton there are, the more carbon they absorb -- and eventually they filter down into the abyss and remove that carbon from the atmospheric system.
Well, it seems that when whales were at their historic populations, they were probably responsible for sequestering some tens of millions of tons of carbon every year from the atmosphere.
And when you look at it like that, you think, wait a minute, here are the wolves changing the physical geography of the Yellowstone National Park.
Here are the whales changing the composition of the atmosphere.
You begin to see that possibly, the evidence supporting James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis, which conceives of the world as a coherent, self-regulating organism, is beginning, at the ecosystem level, to accumulate.
Trophic cascades tell us that the natural world is even more fascinating and complex than we thought it was.
They tell us that when you take away the large animals, you are left with a radically different ecosystem to one which retains its large animals.
And they make, in my view, a powerful case for the reintroduction of missing species.
Rewilding, to me, means bringing back some of the missing plants and animals.
It means taking down the fences, it means blocking the drainage ditches, it means preventing commercial fishing in some large areas of sea, but otherwise stepping back.
It has no view as to what a right ecosystem or a right assemblage of species looks like.
It doesn't try to produce a heath or a meadow or a rain forest or a kelp garden or a coral reef.
It lets nature decide, and nature, by and large, is pretty good at deciding.
Now, I mentioned that there are two definitions of rewilding that interest me.
The other one is the rewilding of human life.
And I don't see this as an alternative to civilization.
I believe we can enjoy the benefits of advanced technology, as we're doing now, but at the same time, if we choose, have access to a richer and wilder life of adventure when we want to because there would be wonderful, rewilded habitats.
And the opportunities for this are developing more rapidly than you might think possible.
There's one estimate which suggests that in the United States, two thirds of the land which was once forested and then cleared has become reforested as loggers and farmers have retreated, particularly from the eastern half of the country.
There's another one which suggests that 30 million hectares of land in Europe, an area the size of Poland, will be vacated by farmers between 2000 and 2030.
Now, faced with opportunities like that, does it not seem a little unambitious to be thinking only of bringing back wolves, lynx, bears, beavers, bison, boar, moose, and all the other species which are already beginning to move quite rapidly across Europe?
Perhaps we should also start thinking about the return of some of our lost megafauna.
What megafauna, you say?
Well, every continent had one, apart from Antarctica.
When Trafalgar Square in London was excavated, the river gravels there were found to be stuffed with the bones of hippopotamus, rhinos, elephants, hyenas, lions.
Yes, ladies and gentlemen, there were lions in Trafalgar Square long before Nelson's Column was built.
All these species lived here in the last interglacial period, when temperatures were pretty similar to our own.
It's not climate, largely, which has got rid of the world's megafaunas.
It's pressure from the human population hunting and destroying their habitats which has done so.
And even so, you can still see the shadows of these great beasts in our current ecosystems.
Why is it that so many deciduous trees are able to sprout from whatever point the trunk is broken?
Why is it that they can withstand the loss of so much of their bark?
Why do understory trees, which are subject to lower sheer forces from the wind and have to carry less weight than the big canopy trees, why are they so much tougher and harder to break than the canopy trees are?
Elephants.
They are elephant-adapted.
In Europe, for example, they evolved to resist the straight-tusked elephant, elephas antiquus, which was a great beast.
It was related to the Asian elephant, but it was a temperate animal, a temperate forest creature.
It was a lot bigger than the Asian elephant.
But why is it that some of our common shrubs have spines which seem to be over-engineered to resist browsing by deer?
Perhaps because they evolved to resist browsing by rhinoceros.
Isn't it an amazing thought that every time you wander into a park or down an avenue or through a leafy street, you can see the shadows of these great beasts?
Paleoecology, the study of past ecosystems, crucial to an understanding of our own, feels like a portal through which you may pass into an enchanted kingdom.
And if we really are looking at areas of land of the sort of sizes I've been talking about becoming available, why not reintroduce some of our lost megafauna, or at least species closely related to those which have become extinct everywhere?
Why shouldn't all of us have a Serengeti on our doorsteps?
And perhaps this is the most important thing that rewilding offers us, the most important thing that's missing from our lives: hope.
In motivating people to love and defend the natural world, an ounce of hope is worth a ton of despair.
The story rewilding tells us is that ecological change need not always proceed in one direction.
It offers us the hope that our silent spring could be replaced by a raucous summer.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is Charley Williams.
He was 94 when this photograph was taken.
In the 1930s, Roosevelt put thousands and thousands of Americans back to work by building bridges and infrastructure and tunnels, but he also did something interesting, which was to hire a few hundred writers to scour America to capture the stories of ordinary Americans.
Charley Williams, a poor sharecropper, wouldn't ordinarily be the subject of a big interview, but Charley had actually been a slave until he was 22 years old.
And the stories that were captured of his life make up one of the crown jewels of histories, of human-lived experiences filled with ex-slaves.
Anna Deavere Smith famously said that there's a literature inside of each of us, and three generations later, I was part of a project called StoryCorps, which set out to capture the stories of ordinary Americans by setting up a soundproof booth in public spaces.
The idea is very, very simple.
You go into these booths, you interview your grandmother or relative, you leave with a copy of the interview and an interview goes into the Library of Congress.
It's essentially a way to make a national oral histories archive one conversation at a time.
And the question is, who do you want to remember -- if you had just 45 minutes with your grandmother?
What's interesting, in conversations with the founder, Dave Isay, we always actually talked about this as a little bit of a subversive project, because when you think about it, it's actually not really about the stories that are being told, it's about listening, and it's about the questions that you get to ask, questions that you may not have permission to on any other day.
I'm going to play you just a couple of quick excerpts from the project.
[Jesus Melendez talking about poet Pedro Pietri's final moments] Jesus Melendez: We took off, and as we were ascending, before we had leveled off, our level-off point was 45,000 feet, so before we had leveled off, Pedro began leaving us, and the beauty about it is that I believe that there's something after life.
You can see it in Pedro.
[Danny Perasa to his wife Annie Perasa married 26 years] Danny Perasa: See, the thing of it is, I always feel guilty when I say "I love you" to you, and I say it so often. I say it to remind you that as dumpy as I am, it's coming from me, it's like hearing a beautiful song from a busted old radio, and it's nice of you to keep the radio around the house.
(Laughter) [Michael Wolmetz with his girlfriend Debora Brakarz] Michael Wolmetz: So this is the ring that my father gave to my mother, and we can leave it there.
And he saved up and he purchased this, and he proposed to my mother with this, and so I thought that I would give it to you so that he could be with us for this also.
So I'm going to share a mic with you right now, Debora.
Where's the right finger?
Debora Brakarz: (Crying) MW: Debora, will you please marry me?
DB: Yes. Of course. I love you.
(Kissing) MW: So kids, this is how your mother and I got married, in a booth in Grand Central Station with my father's ring.
My grandfather was a cab driver for 40 years.
He used to pick people up here every day.
So it seems right.
Jake Barton: So I have to say I did not actually choose those individual samples to make you cry because they all make you cry.
The entire project is predicated on this act of love which is listening itself.
And that motion of building an institution out of a moment of conversation and listening is actually a lot of what my firm, Local Projects, is doing with our engagements in general.
So we're a media design firm, and we're working with a broad array of different institutions building media installations for museums and public spaces.
Our latest engagement is the Cleveland Museum of Art, which we've created an engagement called Gallery One for.
And Gallery One is an interesting project because it started with this massive, $350 million expansion for the Cleveland Museum of Art, and we actually brought in this piece specifically to grow new capacity, new audiences, at the same time that the museum itself is growing.
Glenn Lowry, the head of MoMA, put it best when he said, "We want visitors to actually cease being visitors.
Visitors are transient. We want people who live here, people who have ownership."
And so what we're doing is making a broad array of different ways for people to actually engage with the material inside of these galleries, so you can still have a traditional gallery experience, but if you're interested, you can actually engage with any individual artwork and see the original context from where it's from, or manipulate the work itself.
So, for example, you can click on this individual lion head, and this is where it originated from, 1300 B.C.
Or this individual piece here, you can see the actual bedroom. It really changes the way you think about this type of a tempera painting.
This is one of my favorites because you see the studio itself.
This is Rodin's bust. You get the sense of this incredible factory for creativity.
And it makes you think about literally the hundreds or thousands of years of human creativity and how each individual artwork stands in for part of that story.
This is Picasso, of course embodying so much of it from the 20th century.
And so our next interface, which I'll show you, actually leverages that idea of this lineage of creativity.
It's an algorithm that actually allows you to browse the actual museum's collection using facial recognition.
So this person's making different faces, and it's actually drawing forth different objects from the collection that connect with exactly how she's looking.
And so you can imagine that, as people are performing inside of the museum itself, you get this sense of this emotional connection, this way in which our face connects with the thousands and tens of thousands of years.
This is an interface that actually allows you to draw and then draws forth objects using those same shapes.
So more and more we're trying to find ways for people to actually author things inside of the museums themselves, to be creative even as they're looking at other people's creativity and understanding them.
So in this wall, the collections wall, you can actually see all 3,000 artworks all at the same time, and you can actually author your own individual walking tours of the museum, so you can share them, and someone can take a tour with the museum director or a tour with their little cousin.
But all the while that we've been working on this engagement for Cleveland, we've also been working in the background on really our largest engagement to date, and that's the 9/11 Memorial and Museum.
So we started in 2006 as part of a team with Thinc Design to create the original master plan for the museum, and then we've done all the media design both for the museum and the memorial and then the media production.
So the memorial opened in 2011, and the museum's going to open next year in 2014.
And you can see from these images, the site is so raw and almost archaeological.
And of course the event itself is so recent, somewhere between history and current events, it was a huge challenge to imagine how do you actually live up to a space like this, an event like this, to actually tell that story.
And so what we started with was really a new way of thinking about building an institution, through a project called Make History, which we launched in 2009.
So it's estimated that a third of the world watched 9/11 live, and a third of the world heard about it within 24 hours, making it really by nature of when it happened, this unprecedented moment of global awareness.
And so we launched this to capture the stories from all around the world, through video, through photos, through written history, and so people's experiences on that day, which was, in fact, this huge risk for the institution to make its first move this open platform.
But that was coupled together with this oral histories booth, really the simplest we've ever made, where you locate yourself on a map.
It's in six languages, and you can tell your own story about what happened to you on that day.
And when we started seeing the incredible images and stories that came forth from all around the world -- this is obviously part of the landing gear -- we really started to understand that there was this amazing symmetry between the event itself, between the way that people were telling the stories of the event, and how we ourselves needed to tell that story.
This image in particular really captured our attention at the time, because it so much sums up that event.
This is a shot from the Brooklyn-Battery Tunnel.
There's a firefighter that's stuck, actually, in traffic, and so the firefighters themselves are running a mile and a half to the site itself with upwards of 70 pounds of gear on their back.
And we got this amazing email that said, "While viewing the thousands of photos on the site, I unexpectedly found a photo of my son.
It was a shock emotionally, yet a blessing to find this photo," and he was writing because he said, "I'd like to personally thank the photographer for posting the photo, as it meant more than words can describe to me to have access to what is probably the last photo ever taken of my son."
And it really made us recognize what this institution needed to be in order to actually tell that story.
We can't have just a historian or a curator narrating objectively in the third person about an event like that, when you have the witnesses to history who are going to make their way through the actual museum itself.
And so we started imagining the museum, along with the creative team at the museum and the curators, thinking about how the first voice that you would hear inside the museum would actually be of other visitors.
And so we created this idea of an opening gallery called We Remember.
And I'll just play you part of a mockup of it, but you get a sense of what it's like to actually enter into that moment in time and be transported back in history.
(Video) Voice 1: I was in Honolulu, Hawaii. Voice 2: I was in Cairo, Egypt.
Voice 3: Sur les Champs-Élysées, à Paris. Voice 4: In college, at U.C. Berkeley.
Voice 5: I was in Times Square. Voice 6: São Paolo, Brazil.
(Multiple voices) Voice 7: It was probably about 11 o'clock at night.
Voice 8: I was driving to work at 5:45 local time in the morning.
Voice 9: We were actually in a meeting when someone barged in and said, "Oh my God, a plane has just crashed into the World Trade Center."
Voice 10: Trying to frantically get to a radio.
Voice 11: When I heard it over the radio -- Voice 12: Heard it on the radio.
(Multiple voices) Voice 13: I got a call from my father. Voice 14: The phone rang, it woke me up.
My business partner told me to turn on the television.
Voice 15: So I switched on the television.
Voice 16: All channels in Italy were displaying the same thing.
Voice 17: The Twin Towers. Voice 18: The Twin Towers.
JB: And you move from there into that open, cavernous space.
This is the so-called slurry wall.
It's the original, excavated wall at the base of the World Trade Center that withstood the actual pressure from the Hudson River for a full year after the event itself.
And so we thought about carrying that sense of authenticity, of presence of that moment into the actual exhibition itself.
And we tell the stories of being inside the towers through that same audio collage, so you're hearing people literally talking about seeing the planes as they make their way into the building, or making their way down the stairwells.
And as you make your way into the exhibition where it talks about the recovery, we actually project directly onto these moments of twisted steel all of the experiences from people who literally excavated on top of the pile itself.
And so you can hear oral histories -- so people who were actually working the so-called bucket brigades as you're seeing literally the thousands of experiences from that moment.
And as you leave that storytelling moment understanding about 9/11, we then turn the museum back into a moment of listening and actually talk to the individual visitors and ask them their own experiences about 9/11.
And we ask them questions that are actually not really answerable, the types of questions that 9/11 itself draws forth for all of us.
And so these are questions like, "How can a democracy balance freedom and security?"
"How could 9/11 have happened?"
"And how did the world change after 9/11?"
And so these oral histories, which we've actually been capturing already for years, are then mixed together with interviews that we're doing with people like Donald Rumsfeld, Bill Clinton, Rudy Giuliani, and you mix together these different players and these different experiences, these different reflection points about 9/11.
And suddenly the institution, once again, turns into a listening experience.
So I'll play you just a short excerpt of a mockup that we made of a couple of these voices, but you really get a sense of the poetry of everyone's reflection on the event.
(Video) Voice 1: 9/11 was not just a New York experience.
Voice 2: It's something that we shared, and it's something that united us.
Voice 3: And I knew when I saw that, people who were there that day who immediately went to help people known and unknown to them was something that would pull us through.
Voice 4: All the outpouring of affection and emotion that came from our country was something really that will forever, ever stay with me.
Voice 5: Still today I pray and think about those who lost their lives, and those who gave their lives to help others, but I'm also reminded of the fabric of this country, the love, the compassIon, the strength, and I watched a nation come together in the middle of a terrible tragedy.
JB: And so as people make their way out of the museum, reflecting on the experience, reflecting on their own thoughts of it, they then move into the actual space of the memorial itself, because they've gone back up to grade, and we actually got involved in the memorial after we'd done the museum for a few years.
The original designer of the memorial, Michael Arad, had this image in his mind of all the names appearing undifferentiated, almost random, really a poetic reflection on top of the nature of a terrorism event itself, but it was a huge challenge for the families, for the foundation, certainly for the first responders, and there was a negotiation that went forth and a solution was found to actually create not an order in terms of chronology, or in terms of alphabetical, but through what's called meaningful adjacency.
So these are groupings of the names themselves which appear undifferentiated but actually have an order, and we, along with Jer Thorp, created an algorithm to take massive amounts of data to actually start to connect together all these different names themselves.
So this is an image of the actual algorithm itself with the names scrambled for privacy, but you can see that these blocks of color are actually the four different flights, the two different towers, the first responders, and you can actually see within that different floors, and then the green lines are the interpersonal connections that were requested by the families themselves.
And so when you go to the memorial, you can actually see the overarching organization inside of the individual pools themselves.
You can see the way that the geography of the event is reflected inside of the memorial, and you can search for an individual name, or in this case an employer, Cantor Fitzgerald, and see the way in which all of those names, those hundreds of names, are actually organized onto the memorial itself, and use that to navigate the memorial.
And more importantly, when you're actually at the site of the memorial, you can see those connections.
You can see the relationships between the different names themselves.
So suddenly what is this undifferentiated, anonymous group of names springs into reality as an individual life.
In this case, Harry Ramos, who was the head trader at an investment bank, who stopped to aid Victor Wald on the 55th floor of the South Tower.
And Ramos told Wald, according to witnesses, "I'm not going to leave you."
And Wald's widow requested that they be listed next to each other.
Three generations ago, we had to actually get people to go out and capture the stories for common people.
Today, of course, there's an unprecedented amount of stories for all of us that are being captured for future generations.
And this is our hope, that's there's poetry inside of each of our stories.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When I was about three or four years old, I remember my mum reading a story to me and my two big brothers, and I remember putting up my hands to feel the page of the book, to feel the picture they were discussing.
And my mum said, "Darling, remember that you can't see and you can't feel the picture and you can't feel the print on the page."
And I thought to myself, "But that's what I want to do.
I love stories. I want to read."
Little did I know that I would be part of a technological revolution that would make that dream come true.
I was born premature by about 10 weeks, which resulted in my blindness, some 64 years ago.
The condition is known as retrolental fibroplasia, and it's now very rare in the developed world.
Little did I know, lying curled up in my prim baby humidicrib in 1948 that I'd been born at the right place and the right time, that I was in a country where I could participate in the technological revolution.
There are 37 million totally blind people on our planet, but those of us who've shared in the technological changes mainly come from North America, Europe, Japan and other developed parts of the world.
Computers have changed the lives of us all in this room and around the world, but I think they've changed the lives of we blind people more than any other group.
And so I want to tell you about the interaction between computer-based adaptive technology and the many volunteers who helped me over the years to become the person I am today.
It's an interaction between volunteers, passionate inventors and technology, and it's a story that many other blind people could tell.
But let me tell you a bit about it today.
When I was five, I went to school and I learned braille.
It's an ingenious system of six dots that are punched into paper, and I can feel them with my fingers.
In fact, I think they're putting up my grade six report.
I don't know where Julian Morrow got that from.
(Laughter) I was pretty good in reading, but religion and musical appreciation needed more work.
(Laughter) When you leave the opera house, you'll find there's braille signage in the lifts.
Look for it. Have you noticed it?
I do. I look for it all the time.
(Laughter) When I was at school, the books were transcribed by transcribers, voluntary people who punched one dot at a time so I'd have volumes to read, and that had been going on, mainly by women, since the late 19th century in this country, but it was the only way I could read.
When I was in high school, I got my first Philips reel-to-reel tape recorder, and tape recorders became my sort of pre-computer medium of learning.
I could have family and friends read me material, and I could then read it back as many times as I needed.
And it brought me into contact with volunteers and helpers.
For example, when I studied at graduate school at Queen's University in Canada, the prisoners at the Collins Bay jail agreed to help me.
I gave them a tape recorder, and they read into it.
As one of them said to me, "Ron, we ain't going anywhere at the moment."
(Laughter) But think of it. These men, who hadn't had the educational opportunities I'd had, helped me gain post-graduate qualifications in law by their dedicated help.
Well, I went back and became an academic at Melbourne's Monash University, and for those 25 years, tape recorders were everything to me.
In fact, in my office in 1990, I had 18 miles of tape.
Students, family and friends all read me material.
Mrs. Lois Doery, whom I later came to call my surrogate mum, read me many thousands of hours onto tape.
One of the reasons I agreed to give this talk today was that I was hoping that Lois would be here so I could introduce you to her and publicly thank her.
But sadly, her health hasn't permitted her to come today.
But I thank you here, Lois, from this platform.
(Applause) I saw my first Apple computer in 1984, and I thought to myself, "This thing's got a glass screen, not much use to me."
How very wrong I was.
In 1987, in the month our eldest son Gerard was born, I got my first blind computer, and it's actually here.
See it up there?
And you see it has no, what do you call it, no screen.
(Laughter) It's a blind computer.
(Laughter) It's a Keynote Gold 84k, and the 84k stands for it had 84 kilobytes of memory.
(Laughter) Don't laugh, it cost me 4,000 dollars at the time. (Laughter) I think there's more memory in my watch.
It was invented by Russell Smith, a passionate inventor in New Zealand who was trying to help blind people.
Sadly, he died in a light plane crash in 2005, but his memory lives on in my heart.
It meant, for the first time, I could read back what I had typed into it.
It had a speech synthesizer.
I'd written my first coauthored labor law book on a typewriter in 1979 purely from memory.
This now allowed me to read back what I'd written and to enter the computer world, even with its 84k of memory.
In 1974, the great Ray Kurzweil, the American inventor, worked on building a machine that would scan books and read them out in synthetic speech.
Optical character recognition units then only operated usually on one font, but by using charge-coupled device flatbed scanners and speech synthesizers, he developed a machine that could read any font.
And his machine, which was as big as a washing machine, was launched on the 13th of January, 1976.
I saw my first commercially available Kurzweil in March 1989, and it blew me away, and in September 1989, the month that my associate professorship at Monash University was announced, the law school got one, and I could use it.
For the first time, I could read what I wanted to read by putting a book on the scanner.
I didn't have to be nice to people!
(Laughter) I no longer would be censored.
For example, I was too shy then, and I'm actually too shy now, to ask anybody to read me out loud sexually explicit material.
(Laughter) But, you know, I could pop a book on in the middle of the night, and -- (Laughter) (Applause) Now, the Kurzweil reader is simply a program on my laptop.
That's what it's shrunk to.
And now I can scan the latest novel and not wait to get it into talking book libraries.
I can keep up with my friends.
There are many people who have helped me in my life, and many that I haven't met.
One is another American inventor Ted Henter.
Ted was a motorcycle racer, but in 1978 he had a car accident and lost his sight, which is devastating if you're trying to ride motorbikes.
He then turned to being a waterskier and was a champion disabled waterskier.
But in 1989, he teamed up with Bill Joyce to develop a program that would read out what was on the computer screen from the Net or from what was on the computer.
It's called JAWS, Job Access With Speech, and it sounds like this.
(JAWS speaking) Ron McCallum: Isn't that slow?
(Laughter) You see, if I read like that, I'd fall asleep.
I slowed it down for you.
I'm going to ask that we play it at the speed I read it.
Can we play that one?
(JAWS speaking) (Laughter) RM: You know, when you're marking student essays, you want to get through them fairly quickly.
(Laughter) (Applause) This technology that fascinated me in 1987 is now on my iPhone and on yours as well.
But, you know, I find reading with machines a very lonely process.
I grew up with family, friends, reading to me, and I loved the warmth and the breath and the closeness of people reading.
Do you love being read to?
And one of my most enduring memories is in 1999, Mary reading to me and the children down near Manly Beach "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone."
Isn't that a great book?
I still love being close to someone reading to me.
But I wouldn't give up the technology, because it's allowed me to lead a great life.
Of course, talking books for the blind predated all this technology.
After all, the long-playing record was developed in the early 1930s, and now we put talking books on CDs using the digital access system known as DAISY.
But when I'm reading with synthetic voices, I love to come home and read a racy novel with a real voice.
Now there are still barriers in front of we people with disabilities.
Many websites we can't read using JAWS and the other technologies.
Websites are often very visual, and there are all these sorts of graphs that aren't labeled and buttons that aren't labeled, and that's why the World Wide Web Consortium 3, known as W3C, has developed worldwide standards for the Internet.
And we want all Internet users or Internet site owners to make their sites compatible so that we persons without vision can have a level playing field.
There are other barriers brought about by our laws.
For example, Australia, like about one third of the world's countries, has copyright exceptions which allow books to be brailled or read for we blind persons.
But those books can't travel across borders.
For example, in Spain, there are a 100,000 accessible books in Spanish.
In Argentina, there are 50,000.
In no other Latin American country are there more than a couple of thousand.
But it's not legal to transport the books from Spain to Latin America.
There are hundreds of thousands of accessible books in the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia, etc., but they can't be transported to the 60 countries in our world where English is the first and the second language.
And remember I was telling you about Harry Potter.
Well, because we can't transport books across borders, there had to be separate versions read in all the different English-speaking countries: Britain, United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand all had to have separate readings of Harry Potter.
And that's why, next month in Morocco, a meeting is taking place between all the countries.
It's something that a group of countries and the World Blind Union are advocating, a cross-border treaty so that if books are available under a copyright exception and the other country has a copyright exception, we can transport those books across borders and give life to people, particularly in developing countries, blind people who don't have the books to read.
I want that to happen.
(Applause) My life has been extraordinarily blessed with marriage and children and certainly interesting work to do, whether it be at the University of Sydney Law School, where I served a term as dean, or now as I sit on the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, in Geneva.
I've indeed been a very fortunate human being.
I wonder what the future will hold.
The technology will advance even further, but I can still remember my mum saying, 60 years ago, "Remember, darling, you'll never be able to read the print with your fingers."
I'm so glad that the interaction between braille transcribers, volunteer readers and passionate inventors, has allowed this dream of reading to come true for me and for blind people throughout the world.
I'd like to thank my researcher Hannah Martin, who is my slide clicker, who clicks the slides, and my wife, Professor Mary Crock, who's the light of my life, is coming on to collect me.
I want to thank her too.
I think I have to say goodbye now.
Bless you. Thank you very much.
(Applause) Yay! (Applause) Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. Okay. (Applause)
So over the long course of human history, the infectious disease that's killed more humans than any other is malaria.
It's carried in the bites of infected mosquitos, and it's probably our oldest scourge.
We may have had malaria since we evolved from the apes.
And to this day, malaria takes a huge toll on our species.
We've got 300 million cases a year and over half a million deaths.
Now this really makes no sense.
We've known how to cure malaria since the 1600s.
That's when Jesuit missionaries in Peru discovered the bark of the cinchona tree, and inside that bark was quinine, still an effective cure for malaria to this day.
So we've known how to cure malaria for centuries.
We've known how to prevent malaria since 1897.
That's when the British army surgeon Ronald Ross discovered that it was mosquitos that carried malaria, not bad air or miasmas, as was previously thought.
So malaria should be a relatively simple disease to solve, and yet to this day, hundreds of thousands of people are going to die from the bite of a mosquito.
Why is that?
This is a question that's personally intrigued me for a long time.
I grew up as the daughter of Indian immigrants visiting my cousins in India every summer, and because I had no immunity to the local malarias, I was made to sleep under this hot, sweaty mosquito net every night while my cousins, they were allowed to sleep out on the terrace and have this nice, cool night breeze wafting over them.
And I really hated the mosquitos for that.
But at the same time, I come from a Jain family, and Jainism is a religion that espouses a very extreme form of nonviolence.
So Jains are not supposed to eat meat.
We're not supposed to walk on grass, because you could, you know, inadvertently kill some insects when you walk on grass.
We're certainly not supposed to swat mosquitos.
So the fearsome power of this little insect was apparent to me from a very young age, and it's one reason why I spent five years as a journalist trying to understand, why has malaria been such a horrible scourge for all of us for so very long?
And I think there's three main reasons why.
Those three reasons add up to the fourth reason, which is probably the biggest reason of all.
The first reason is certainly scientific.
This little parasite that causes malaria, it's probably one of the most complex and wily pathogens known to humankind.
It lives half its life inside the cold-blooded mosquito and half its life inside the warm-blooded human.
These two environments are totally different, but not only that, they're both utterly hostile.
So the insect is continually trying to fight off the parasite, and so is the human body continually trying to fight it off.
This little creature survives under siege like that, but not only does it survive, it has thrived.
It has spread. It has more ways to evade attack than we know.
It's a shape-shifter, for one thing.
Just as a caterpillar turns into a butterfly, the malaria parasite transforms itself like that seven times in its life cycle.
And each of those life stages not only looks totally different from each other, they have totally different physiology.
So say you came up with some great drug that worked against one stage of the parasite's life cycle.
It might do nothing at all to any of the other stages.
It can hide in our bodies, undetected, unbeknownst to us, for days, for weeks, for months, for years, in some cases even decades.
So the parasite is a very big scientific challenge to tackle, but so is the mosquito that carries the parasite.
Only about 12 species of mosquitos carry most of the world's malaria, and we know quite a bit about the kinds of watery habitats that they specialize in.
So you might think, then, well, why don't we just avoid the places where the killer mosquitos live? Right?
We could avoid the places where the killer grizzly bears live and we avoid the places where the killer crocodiles live.
But say you live in the tropics and you walk outside your hut one day and you leave some footprints in the soft dirt around your home.
Or say your cow does, or say your pig does, and then, say, it rains, and that footprint fills up with a little bit of water.
That's it. You've created the perfect malarial mosquito habitat that's right outside your door.
So it's not easy for us to extricate ourselves from these insects.
We kind of create places that they love to live just by living our own lives.
So there's a huge scientific challenge, but there's a huge economic challenge too.
Malaria occurs in some of the poorest and most remote places on Earth, and there's a reason for that.
If you're poor, you're more likely to get malaria.
If you're poor, you're more likely to live in rudimentary housing on marginal land that's poorly drained.
These are places where mosquitos breed.
You're less likely to have door screens or window screens.
You're less likely to have electricity and all the indoor activities that electricity makes possible, so you're outside more.
You're getting bitten by mosquitos more.
So poverty causes malaria, but what we also know now is that malaria itself causes poverty.
For one thing, it strikes hardest during harvest season, so exactly when farmers need to be out in the fields collecting their crops, they're home sick with a fever.
But it also predisposes people to death from all other causes.
So this has happened historically.
We've been able to take malaria out of a society.
Everything else stays the same, so we still have bad food, bad water, bad sanitation, all the things that make people sick.
But just if you take malaria out, deaths from everything else go down.
And the economist Jeff Sachs has actually quantified what this means for a society.
What it means is, if you have malaria in your society, your economic growth is depressed by 1.3 percent every year, year after year after year, just this one disease alone.
So this poses a huge economic challenge, because say you do come up with your great drug or your great vaccine -- how do you deliver it in a place where there's no roads, there's no infrastructure, there's no electricity for refrigeration to keep things cold, there's no clinics, there's no clinicians to deliver these things where they're needed?
So there's a huge economic challenge in taming malaria.
But along with the scientific challenge and the economic challenge, there's also a cultural challenge, and this is probably the part about malaria that people don't like to talk about.
And it's the paradox that the people who have the most malaria in the world tend to care about it the least.
This has been the finding of medical anthropologists again and again.
They ask people in malarious parts of the world, "What do you think about malaria?"
And they don't say, "It's a killer disease. We're scared of it."
They say, "Malaria is a normal problem of life."
And that was certainly my personal experience.
When I told my relatives in India that I was writing a book about malaria, they kind of looked at me like I told them I was writing a book about warts or something.
Like, why would you write about something so boring, so ordinary? You know?
And it's simple risk perception, really.
A child in Malawi, for example, she might have 12 episodes of malaria before the age of two, but if she survives, she'll continue to get malaria throughout her life, but she's much less likely to die of it.
And so in her lived experience, malaria is something that comes and goes.
And that's actually true for most of the world's malaria.
Most of the world's malaria comes and goes on its own.
It's just, there's so much malaria that this tiny fraction of cases that end in death add up to this big, huge number.
So I think people in malarious parts of the world must think of malaria the way those of us who live in the temperate world think of cold and flu. Right?
Cold and flu have a huge burden on our societies and on our own lives, but we don't really even take the most rudimentary precautions against it because we consider it normal to get cold and flu during cold and flu season.
And so this poses a huge cultural challenge in taming malaria, because if people think it's normal to have malaria, then how do you get them to run to the doctor to get diagnosed, to pick up their prescription, to get it filled, to take the drugs, to put on the repellents, to tuck in the bed nets?
This is a huge cultural challenge in taming this disease.
So take all that together.
We've got a disease. It's scientifically complicated, it's economically challenging to deal with, and it's one for which the people who stand to benefit the most care about it the least.
And that adds up to the biggest problem of all, which, of course, is the political problem.
How do you get a political leader to do anything about a problem like this?
And the answer is, historically, you don't.
Most malarious societies throughout history have simply lived with the disease.
So the main attacks on malaria have come from outside of malarious societies, from people who aren't constrained by these rather paralyzing politics.
But this, I think, introduces a whole host of other kinds of difficulties.
The first concerted attack against malaria started in the 1950s.
It was the brainchild of the U.S. State Department.
And this effort well understood the economic challenge.
They knew they had to focus on cheap, easy-to-use tools, and they focused on DDT.
They understood the cultural challenge.
In fact, their rather patronizing view was that people at risk of malaria shouldn't be asked to do anything at all.
Everything should be done to them and for them.
But they greatly underestimated the scientific challenge.
They had so much faith in their tools that they stopped doing malaria research.
And so when those tools started to fail, and public opinion started to turn against those tools, they had no scientific expertise to figure out what to do.
The whole campaign crashed, malaria resurged back, but now it was even worse than before because it was corralled into the hardest-to-reach places in the most difficult-to-control forms.
One WHO official at the time actually called that whole campaign "one of the greatest mistakes ever made in public health."
The latest effort to tame malaria started in the late 1990s.
It's similarly directed and financed primarily from outside of malarious societies.
Now this effort well understands the scientific challenge.
They are doing tons of malaria research.
And they understand the economic challenge too.
They're focusing on very cheap, very easy-to-use tools.
But now, I think, the dilemma is the cultural challenge.
The centerpiece of the current effort is the bed net.
It's treated with insecticides.
This thing has been distributed across the malarious world by the millions.
And when you think about the bed net, it's sort of a surgical intervention.
You know, it doesn't really have any value to a family with malaria except that it helps prevent malaria.
And yet we're asking people to use these nets every night.
They have to sleep under them every night.
That's the only way they are effective.
And they have to do that even if the net blocks the breeze, even if they might have to get up in the middle of the night and relieve themselves, even if they might have to move all their furnishings to put this thing up, even if, you know, they might live in a round hut in which it's difficult to string up a square net.
Now that's no big deal if you're fighting a killer disease.
I mean, these are minor inconveniences.
But that's not how people with malaria think of malaria.
So for them, the calculus must be quite different.
Imagine, for example, if a bunch of well-meaning Kenyans came up to those of us in the temperate world and said, "You know, you people have a lot of cold and flu.
We've designed this great, easy-to-use, cheap tool, we're going to give it to you for free.
It's called a face mask, and all you need to do is wear it every day during cold and flu season when you go to school and when you go to work."
Would we do that?
And I wonder if that's how people in the malarious world thought of those nets when they first received them?
Indeed, we know from studies that only 20 percent of the bed nets that were first distributed were actually used.
And even that's probably an overestimate, because the same people who distributed the nets went back and asked the recipients, "Oh, did you use that net I gave you?"
Which is like your Aunt Jane asking you, "Oh, did you use that vase I gave you for Christmas?"
So it's probably an overestimate.
But that's not an insurmountable problem.
We can do more education, we can try to convince these people to use the nets.
And that's what happening now.
We're throwing a lot more time and money into workshops and trainings and musicals and plays and school meetings, all these things to convince people to use the nets we gave you.
And that might work.
But it takes time. It takes money.
It takes resources. It takes infrastructure.
It takes all the things that that cheap, easy-to-use bed net was not supposed to be.
So it's difficult to attack malaria from inside malarious societies, but it's equally tricky when we try to attack it from outside of those societies.
We end up imposing our own priorities on the people of the malarious world.
That's exactly what we did in the 1950s, and that effort backfired.
I would argue today, when we are distributing tools that we've designed and that don't necessarily make sense in people's lives, we run the risk of making the same mistake again.
That's not to say that malaria is unconquerable, because I think it is, but what if we attacked this disease according to the priorities of the people who lived with it?
Take the example of England and the United States.
We had malaria in those countries for hundreds of years, and we got rid of it completely, not because we attacked malaria. We didn't.
We attacked bad roads and bad houses and bad drainage and lack of electricity and rural poverty.
We attacked the malarious way of life, and by doing that, we slowly built malaria out.
Now attacking the malarious way of life, this is something -- these are things people care about today.
And attacking the malarious way of life, it's not fast, it's not cheap, it's not easy, but I think it's the only lasting way forward.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
What I am always thinking about is what this session is about, which is called simplicity.
And almost, I would almost call it being simple-minded, but in the best sense of the word.
I'm trying to figure out two very simple things: how to live and how to die, period.
That's all I'm trying to do, all day long.
And I'm also trying to have some meals, and have some snacks, and, you know, and yell at my children, and do all the normal things that keep you grounded.
So, I was fortunate enough to be born a very dreamy child.
My older sister was busy torturing my parents, and they were busy torturing her.
I was lucky enough to be completely ignored, which is a fabulous thing, actually, I want to tell you.
So, I was able to completely daydream my way through my life.
And I finally daydreamed my way into NYU, at a very good time, in 1967, where I met a man who was trying to blow up the math building of NYU.
And I was writing terrible poetry and knitting sweaters for him.
And feminists hated us, and the whole thing was wretched from beginning to end.
But I kept writing bad poetry, and he didn't blow up the math building, but he went to Cuba.
But I gave him the money, because I was from Riverdale so I had more money than he did.
(Laughter) And that was a good thing to help, you know, the cause.
But, then he came back, and things happened, and I decided I really hated my writing, that it was awful, awful, purple prose.
And I decided that I wanted to tell -- but I still wanted to tell a narrative story and I still wanted to tell my stories.
So I decided that I would start to draw. How hard could that be?
And so what happened was that I started just becoming an editorial illustrator through, you know, sheer whatever, sheer ignorance.
And we started a studio.
Well, Tibor really started the studio, called M&amp;Co.
And the premise of M&amp;Co was, we don't know anything, but that's all right, we're going to do it anyway.
And as a matter of fact, it's better not to know anything, because if you know too much, you're stymied.
So, the premise in the studio was, there are no boundaries, there is no fear.
And I -- and my full-time job, I landed the best job on Earth, was to daydream, and to actually come up with absurd ideas that -- fortunately, there were enough people there, and it was a team, it was a collective, it was not just me coming up with crazy ideas.
But the point was that I was there as myself, as a dreamer.
And so some of the things -- I mean, it was a long history of M&amp;Co, and clearly we also needed to make some money, so we decided we would create a series of products.
And some of the watches there, attempting to be beautiful and humorous -- maybe not attempting, hopefully succeeding.
That to be able to talk about content, to break apart what you normally expect, to use humor and surprise, elegance and humanity in your work was really important to us.
It was a very high, it was a very impersonal time in design and we wanted to say, the content is what's important, not the package, not the wrapping.
You really have to be journalists, you have to be inventors, you have to use your imagination more importantly than anything.
So, the good news is that I have a dog and, though I don't know if I believe in luck -- I don't know what I believe in, it's a very complicated question, but I do know that before I go away, I crank his tail seven times.
So, whenever he sees a suitcase in the house, because everybody's always, you know, leaving, they're always cranking this wonderful dog's tail, and he runs to the other room.
But I am able to make the transition from working for children and -- from working for adults to children, and back and forth, because, you know, I can say that I'm immature, and in a way, that's true.
I don't really -- I mean, I could tell you that I didn't understand, I'm not proud of it, but I didn't understand let's say 95 percent of the talks at this conference.
But I have been taking beautiful notes of drawings and I have a gorgeous onion from Murray Gell-Mann's talk.
And I have a beautiful page of doodles from Jonathan Woodham's talk.
So, good things come out of, you know, incomprehension -- (Laughter) -- which I will do a painting of, and then it will end up in my work.
So, I'm open to the possibilities of not knowing and finding out something new.
So, in writing for children, it seems simple, and it is.
You have to condense a story into 32 pages, usually.
And what you have to do is, you really have to edit down to what you want to say.
And hopefully, you're not talking down to kids and you're not talking in such a way that you, you know, couldn't stand reading it after one time.
So, I hopefully am writing, you know, books that are good for children and for adults.
But the painting reflects -- I don't think differently for children than I do for adults.
I try to use the same kind of imagination, the same kind of whimsy, the same kind of love of language.
So, you know, and I have lots of wonderful-looking friends.
This is Andrew Gatz, and he walked in through the door and I said, "You! Sit down there." You know, I take lots of photos.
And the Bertoia chair in the background is my favorite chair.
So, I get to put in all of the things that I love.
Hopefully, a dialog between adults and children will happen on many different levels, and hopefully different kinds of humor will evolve.
And the books are really journals of my life.
I never -- I don't like plots.
I don't know what a plot means.
I can't stand the idea of anything that starts in the beginning, you know, beginning, middle and end. It really scares me, because my life is too random and too confused, and I enjoy it that way.
But anyway, so we were in Venice, and this is our room. And I had this dream that I was wearing this fantastic green gown, and I was looking out the window, and it was really a beautiful thing.
And so, I was able to put that into this story, which is an alphabet, and hopefully go on to something else.
The letter C had other things in it.
I was fortunate also, to meet the man who's sitting on the bed, though I gave him hair over here and he doesn't have hair.
Well, he has some hair but -- well, he used to have hair.
And with him, I was able to do a project that was really fantastic.
I work for the New Yorker, and I do covers, and 9/11 happened and it was, you know, a complete and utter end of the world as we knew it.
And Rick and I were on our way to a party in the Bronx, and somebody said Bronxistan, and somebody said Ferreristan, and we came up with this New Yorker cover, which we were able to -- we didn't know what we were doing.
We weren't trying to be funny, we weren't trying to be -- well, we were trying to be funny actually, that's not true.
We hoped we'd be funny, but we didn't know it would be a cover, and we didn't know that that image, at the moment that it happened, would be something that would be so wonderful for a lot of people.
And it really became the -- I don't know, you know, it was one of those moments people started laughing at what was going on.
And from, you know, Fattushis, to Taxistan to, you know, for the Fashtoonks, Botoxia, Pashmina, Khlintunisia, you know, we were able to take the city and make fun of this completely foreign, who are -- what's going on over here?
Who are these people? What are these tribes?
And David Remnick, who was really wonderful about it, had one problem. He didn't like Al Zheimers, because he thought it would insult people with Alzheimer's.
But you know, we said, "David, who's going to know?
They're not."
(Laughter) So it stayed in, and it was, and, you know, it was a good thing.
You know, in the course of my life, I never know what's going to happen and that's kind of the beauty part.
And we were on Cape Cod, a place, obviously, of great inspiration, and I picked up this book, "The Elements of Style," at a yard sale.
And I didn't -- and I'd never used it in school, because I was too busy writing poems, and flunking out, and I don't know what, sitting in cafes.
But I picked it up and I started reading it and I thought, this book is amazing.
I said, people should know about this book.
(Laughter) So I decided it needed a few -- it needed a lift, it needed a few illustrations.
And basically, I called the, you know, I convinced the White Estate, and what an intersection of like, you know, Polish Jew, you know, main WASP family. Here I am, saying, I'd like to do something to this book.
And they said yes, and they left me completely alone, which was a gorgeous, wonderful thing.
And I took the examples that they gave, and just did 56 paintings, basically.
So, this is, I don't know if you can read this.
"Well, Susan, this is a fine mess you are in."
And when you're dealing with grammar, which is, you know, incredibly dry, E.B. White wrote such wonderful, whimsical -- and actually, Strunk -- and then you come to the rules and, you know, there are lots of grammar things. "Do you mind me asking a question?
Do you mind my asking a question?"
"Would, could, should, or would, should, could."
And "would" is Coco Chanel's lover, "should" is Edith Sitwell, and "could" is an August Sander subject.
And, "He noticed a large stain in the center of the rug."
(Laughter) So, there's a kind of British understatement, murder-mystery theme that I really love very much.
And then, "Be obscure clearly! Be wild of tongue in a way we can understand."
E.B. White wrote us a number of rules, which can either paralyze you and make you loathe him for the rest of time, or you can ignore them, which I do, or you can, I don't know what, you know, eat a sandwich.
So, what I did when I was painting was I started singing, because I really adore singing, and I think that music is the highest form of all art.
So, I commissioned a wonderful composer, Nico Muhly, who wrote nine songs using the text, and we performed this fantastic evening of -- he wrote music for both amateurs and professionals.
I played the clattering teacup and the slinky in the main reading room of the New York Public Library, where you're supposed to be very, very quiet, and it was a phenomenally wonderful event, which we hopefully will do some more.
Who knows? The New York TimesSelect, the op-ed page, asked me to do a column, and they said, you can do whatever you want.
So, once a month for the last year, I've been doing a column called "The Principles of Uncertainty," which, you know, I don't know who Heisenberg is, but I know I can throw that around now. You know, it's the principles of uncertainty, so, you know.
I'm going to read quickly -- and probably I'm going to edit some, because I don't have that much time left -- a few of the columns.
And basically, I was so, you know, it was so amusing, because I said, "Well, how much space do I have?"
And they said, "Well, you know, it's the Internet."
And I said, "Yes, but how much space do I have?"
And they said, "It's unlimited, it's unlimited."
OK. So, the first one I was very timid, and I'll begin.
"How can I tell you everything that is in my heart?
Impossible to begin. Enough. No. Begin with the hapless dodo."
And I talk about the dodo, and how the dodo became extinct, and then I talk about Spinoza.
"As the last dodo was dying, Spinoza was looking for a rational explanation for everything, called eudaemonia.
And then he breathed his last, with loved ones around him, and I know that he had chicken soup also, as his last meal."
I happen to know it for a fact.
And then he died, and there was no more Spinoza. Extinct.
And then, we don't have a stuffed Spinoza, but we do have a stuffed Pavlov's dog, and I visited him in the Museum of Hygiene in St. Petersburg, in Russia.
And there he is, with this horrible electrical box on his rump in this fantastic, decrepit palace.
"And I think it must have been a very, very dark day when the Bolsheviks arrived.
Maybe amongst themselves they had a few good laughs, but Stalin was a paranoid man, even more than my father."
(Laughter) You don't even know.
"And decided his top people had to be extinctified."
Which I think I made up, which is a good thing.
And so, this is a chart of, you know, just a small chart, because the chart would go on forever of all the people that he killed.
So, shot dead, smacked over the head, you know, thrown away.
"Nabokov's family fled Russia. How could the young Nabokov, sitting innocently and elegantly in a red chair, leafing through a book and butterflies, imagine such displacement, such loss?"
And then I want to tell you that this is a map.
So, "My beautiful mother's family fled Russia as well.
Too many pogroms.
Leaving the shack, the wild blueberry woods, the geese, the River Sluch, they went to Palestine and then America."
And my mother drew this map for me of the United States of America, and that is my DNA over here, because that person who I grew up with had no use for facts whatsoever.
Facts were actually banished from our home.
And so, if you see that Texas -- you know, Texas and California are under Canada, and that South Carolina is on top of North Carolina, this is the home that I grew up in, OK?
So, it's a miracle that I'm here today.
But actually, it's not. It's actually a wonderful thing.
But then she says Tel Aviv and Lenin, which is the town they came from, and, "Sorry, the rest unknown, thank you."
But in her lexicon, "sorry, the rest unknown, thank you" is "sorry, the rest unknown, go to hell," because she couldn't care less.
(Laughter) "The Impossibility of February" is that February's a really wretched month in New York and the images for me conjure up these really awful things.
Well, not so awful.
I received a box in the mail and it was wrapped with newspaper and there was the picture of the man on the newspaper and he was dead.
And I say, "I hope he's not really dead, just enjoying a refreshing lie-down in the snow, but the caption says he is dead."
And actually, he was. I think he's dead, though I don't know, maybe he's not dead.
"And this woman leans over in anguish, not about that man, but about all sad things. It happens quite often in February."
There's consoling.
This man is angry because somebody threw onions all over the staircase, and basically -- you know, I guess onions are a theme here.
And he says, "It is impossible not to lie.
It is February and not lying is impossible."
And I really spend a lot of time wondering, how much truth do we tell?
What is it that we're actually -- what story are we actually telling?
How do we know when we are ourselves?
How do we actually know that these sentences coming out of our mouths are real stories, you know, are real sentences?
Or are they fake sentences that we think we ought to be saying?
I'm going to quickly go through this.
A quote by Bertrand Russell, "All the labor of all the ages, all the devotion, all the inspiration, all the noonday brightness of human genius are destined to extinction.
So now, my friends, if that is true, and it is true, what is the point?"
A complicated question.
And so, you know, I talk to my friends and I go to plays where they're singing Russian songs.
Oh my God, you know what?
Could we have -- no, we don't have time.
I taped my aunt. I taped my aunt singing a song in Russian from the -- you know, could we have it for a second?
Do you have that?
(Music) OK. I taped my -- my aunt used to swim in the ocean every day of the year until she was about 85.
So -- and that's a song about how everybody's miserable because, you know, we're from Russia.
(Laughter) I went to visit Kitty Carlisle Hart, and she is 96, and when I brought her a copy of "The Elements of Style," she said she would treasure it.
And then I said -- oh, and she was talking about Moss Hart, and I said, "When you met him, you knew it was him."
And she said, "I knew it was he."
(Laughter) So, I was the one who should have kept the book, but it was a really wonderful moment.
And she dated George Gershwin, so, you know, get out.
Gershwin died at the age of 38.
He's buried in the same cemetery as my husband.
I don't want to talk about that now.
I do want to talk -- the absolute icing on this cemetery cake is the Barricini family mausoleum nearby.
I think the Barricini family should open a store there and sell chocolate.
(Laughter) And I would like to run it for them.
And I went to visit Louise Bourgeoise, who's also still working, and I looked at her sink, which is really amazing, and left.
And then I photograph and do a painting of a sofa on the street.
And a woman who lives on our street, Lolita.
And then I go and have some tea.
And then my Aunt Frances dies, and before she died, she tried to pay with Sweet'N Low packets for her bagel.
(Laughter) And I wonder what the point is and then I know, and I see that Hy Meyerowitz, Rick Meyerowitz's father, a dry-cleaning supply salesman from the Bronx, won the Charlie Chaplin look-alike contest in 1931.
That's actually Hy.
And I look at a beautiful bowl of fruit, and I look at a dress that I sewed for friends of mine.
And it says, "Ich habe genug," which is a Bach cantata, which I once thought meant "I've had it, I can't take it anymore, give me a break," but I was wrong.
It means "I have enough." And that is utterly true.
I happen to be alive, end of discussion. Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to be showing some of the cybercriminals' latest and nastiest creations.
So basically, please don't go and download any of the viruses that I show you.
Some of you might be wondering what a cybersecurity specialist looks like, and I thought I'd give you a quick insight into my career so far.
It's a pretty accurate description.
This is what someone that specializes in malware and hacking looks like.
So today, computer viruses and trojans, designed to do everything from stealing data to watching you in your webcam to the theft of billions of dollars.
Some malicious code today goes as far as targeting power, utilities and infrastructure.
Let me give you a quick snapshot of what malicious code is capable of today.
Right now, every second, eight new users are joining the Internet.
Today, we will see 250,000 individual new computer viruses.
We will see 30,000 new infected websites.
And, just to kind of tear down a myth here, lots of people think that when you get infected with a computer virus, it's because you went to a porn site.
Right? Well, actually, statistically speaking, if you only visit porn sites, you're safer.
People normally write that down, by the way. (Laughter) Actually, about 80 percent of these are small business websites getting infected.
Today's cybercriminal, what do they look like?
Well, many of you have the image, don't you, of the spotty teenager sitting in a basement, hacking away for notoriety.
But actually today, cybercriminals are wonderfully professional and organized.
In fact, they have product adverts.
You can go online and buy a hacking service to knock your business competitor offline.
Check out this one I found.
(Video) Man: So you're here for one reason, and that reason is because you need your business competitors, rivals, haters, or whatever the reason is, or who, they are to go down.
Well you, my friend, you've came to the right place.
If you want your business competitors to go down, well, they can.
If you want your rivals to go offline, well, they will.
Not only that, we are providing a short-term-to-long-term DDOS service or scheduled attack, starting five dollars per hour for small personal websites to 10 to 50 dollars per hour.
James Lyne: Now, I did actually pay one of these cybercriminals to attack my own website.
Things got a bit tricky when I tried to expense it at the company.
Turns out that's not cool.
But regardless, it's amazing how many products and services are available now to cybercriminals.
For example, this testing platform, which enables the cybercriminals to test the quality of their viruses before they release them on the world.
For a small fee, they can upload it and make sure everything is good.
But it goes further.
Cybercriminals now have crime packs with business intelligence reporting dashboards to manage the distribution of their malicious code.
This is the market leader in malware distribution, the Black Hole Exploit Pack, responsible for nearly one third of malware distribution in the last couple of quarters.
It comes with technical installation guides, video setup routines, and get this, technical support.
You can email the cybercriminals and they'll tell you how to set up your illegal hacking server.
So let me show you what malicious code looks like today.
What I've got here is two systems, an attacker, which I've made look all Matrix-y and scary, and a victim, which you might recognize from home or work.
Now normally, these would be on different sides of the planet or of the Internet, but I've put them side by side because it makes things much more interesting.
Now, there are many ways you can get infected.
You will have come in contact with some of them.
Maybe some of you have received an email that says something like, "Hi, I'm a Nigerian banker, and I'd like to give you 53 billion dollars because I like your face."
Or funnycats.exe, which rumor has it was quite successful in China's recent campaign against America.
Now there are many ways you can get infected.
I want to show you a couple of my favorites.
This is a little USB key.
Now how do you get a USB key to run in a business?
Well, you could try looking really cute.
Awww.
Or, in my case, awkward and pathetic.
So imagine this scenario: I walk into one of your businesses, looking very awkward and pathetic, with a copy of my C.V.
which I've covered in coffee, and I ask the receptionist to plug in this USB key and print me a new one.
So let's have a look here on my victim computer.
What I'm going to do is plug in the USB key.
After a couple of seconds, things start to happen on the computer on their own, usually a bad sign.
This would, of course, normally happen in a couple of seconds, really, really quickly, but I've kind of slowed it down so you can actually see the attack occurring.
Malware is very boring otherwise.
So this is writing out the malicious code, and a few seconds later, on the left-hand side, you'll see the attacker's screen get some interesting new text.
Now if I place the mouse cursor over it, this is what we call a command prompt, and using this we can navigate around the computer.
We can access your documents, your data.
You can turn on the webcam.
That can be very embarrassing.
Or just to really prove a point, we can launch programs like my personal favorite, the Windows Calculator.
So isn't it amazing how much control the attackers can get with such a simple operation?
Let me show you how most malware is now distributed today.
What I'm going to do is open up a website that I wrote.
It's a terrible website. It's got really awful graphics.
And it's got a comments section here where we can submit comments to the website.
Many of you will have used something a bit like this before.
Unfortunately, when this was implemented, the developer was slightly inebriated and managed to forget all of the secure coding practices he had learned.
So let's imagine that our attacker, called Evil Hacker just for comedy value, inserts something a little nasty.
This is a script.
It's code which will be interpreted on the webpage.
So I'm going to submit this post, and then, on my victim computer, I'm going to open up the web browser and browse to my website, www.incrediblyhacked.com.
Notice that after a couple of seconds, I get redirected.
That website address at the top there, which you can just about see, microshaft.com, the browser crashes as it hits one of these exploit packs, and up pops fake antivirus.
This is a virus pretending to look like antivirus software, and it will go through and it will scan the system, have a look at what its popping up here.
It creates some very serious alerts.
Oh look, a child porn proxy server.
We really should clean that up.
What's really insulting about this is not only does it provide the attackers with access to your data, but when the scan finishes, they tell you in order to clean up the fake viruses, you have to register the product.
Now I liked it better when viruses were free.
(Laughter) People now pay cybercriminals money to run viruses, which I find utterly bizarre.
So anyway, let me change pace a little bit.
Chasing 250,000 pieces of malware a day is a massive challenge, and those numbers are only growing directly in proportion to the length of my stress line, you'll note here.
So I want to talk to you briefly about a group of hackers we tracked for a year and actually found -- and this is a rare treat in our job.
Now this was a cross-industry collaboration, people from Facebook, independent researchers, guys from Sophos.
So here we have a couple of documents which our cybercriminals had uploaded to a cloud service, kind of like Dropbox or SkyDrive, like many of you might use.
At the top, you'll notice a section of source code.
What this would do is send the cybercriminals a text message every day telling them how much money they'd made that day, so a kind of cybercriminal billings report, if you will.
If you look closely, you'll notice a series of what are Russian telephone numbers.
Now that's obviously interesting, because that gives us a way of finding our cybercriminals.
Down below, highlighted in red, in the other section of source code, is this bit "leded:leded."
That's a username, kind of like you might have on Twitter.
So let's take this a little further.
There are a few other interesting pieces the cybercriminals had uploaded.
Lots of you here will use smartphones to take photos and post them from the conference.
An interesting feature of lots of modern smartphones is that when you take a photo, it embeds GPS data about where that photo was taken.
In fact, I've been spending a lot of time on Internet dating sites recently, obviously for research purposes, and I've noticed that about 60 percent of the profile pictures on Internet dating sites contain the GPS coordinates of where the photo was taken, which is kind of scary because you wouldn't give out your home address to lots of strangers, but we're happy to give away our GPS coordinates to plus or minus 15 meters.
And our cybercriminals had done the same thing.
So here's a photo which resolves to St. Petersburg.
We then deploy the incredibly advanced hacking tool.
We used Google.
Using the email address, the telephone number and the GPS data, on the left you see an advert for a BMW that one of our cybercriminals is selling, on the other side an advert for the sale of sphynx kittens.
One of these was more stereotypical for me.
A little more searching, and here's our cybercriminal.
Imagine, these are hardened cybercriminals sharing information scarcely.
Imagine what you could find about each of the people in this room.
A bit more searching through the profile and there's a photo of their office.
They were working on the third floor.
And you can also see some photos from his business companion where he has a taste in a certain kind of image.
It turns out he's a member of the Russian Adult Webmasters Federation.
But this is where our investigation starts to slow down.
The cybercriminals have locked down their profiles quite well.
And herein is the greatest lesson of social media and mobile devices for all of us right now.
Our friends, our families and our colleagues can break our security even when we do the right things.
This is MobSoft, one of the companies that this cybercriminal gang owned, and an interesting thing about MobSoft is the 50-percent owner of this posted a job advert, and this job advert matched one of the telephone numbers from the code earlier.
This woman was Maria, and Maria is the wife of one of our cybercriminals.
And it's kind of like she went into her social media settings and clicked on every option imaginable to make herself really, really insecure.
By the end of the investigation, where you can read the full 27-page report at that link, we had photos of the cybercriminals, even the office Christmas party when they were out on an outing.
That's right, cybercriminals do have Christmas parties, as it turns out.
Now you're probably wondering what happened to these guys.
Let me come back to that in just a minute.
I want to change pace to one last little demonstration, a technique that is wonderfully simple and basic, but is interesting in exposing how much information we're all giving away, and it's relevant because it applies to us as a TED audience.
This is normally when people start kind of shuffling in their pockets trying to turn their phones onto airplane mode desperately.
Many of you all know about the concept of scanning for wireless networks.
You do it every time you take out your iPhone or your Blackberry and connect to something like TEDAttendees.
But what you might not know is that you're also beaming out a list of networks you've previously connected to, even when you're not using wireless actively.
So I ran a little scan.
I was relatively inhibited compared to the cybercriminals, who wouldn't be so concerned by law, and here you can see my mobile device.
Okay? So you can see a list of wireless networks.
TEDAttendees, HyattLB. Where do you think I'm staying?
My home network, PrettyFlyForAWifi, which I think is a great name.
Sophos_Visitors, SANSEMEA, companies I work with.
Loganwifi, that's in Boston. HiltonLondon.
CIASurveillanceVan.
We called it that at one of our conferences because we thought that would freak people out, which is quite fun.
This is how geeks party.
So let's make this a little bit more interesting.
Let's talk about you.
Twenty-three percent of you have been to Starbucks recently and used the wireless network.
Things get more interesting.
Forty-six percent of you I could link to a business, XYZ Employee network.
This isn't an exact science, but it gets pretty accurate.
Seven hundred and sixty-one of you I could identify a hotel you'd been to recently, absolutely with pinpoint precision somewhere on the globe.
Two hundred and thirty-four of you, well, I know where you live.
Your wireless network name is so unique that I was able to pinpoint it using data available openly on the Internet with no hacking or clever, clever tricks.
And I should mention as well that some of you do use your names, "James Lyne's iPhone," for example.
And two percent of you have a tendency to extreme profanity.
So something for you to think about: As we adopt these new applications and mobile devices, as we play with these shiny new toys, how much are we trading off convenience for privacy and security?
Next time you install something, look at the settings and ask yourself, "Is this information that I want to share?
Would someone be able to abuse it?"
We also need to think very carefully about how we develop our future talent pool.
You see, technology's changing at a staggering rate, and that 250,000 pieces of malware won't stay the same for long.
There's a very concerning trend that whilst many people coming out of schools now are much more technology-savvy, they know how to use technology, fewer and fewer people are following the feeder subjects to know how that technology works under the covers.
In the U.K., a 60 percent reduction since 2003, and there are similar statistics all over the world.
We also need to think about the legal issues in this area.
The cybercriminals I talked about, despite theft of millions of dollars, actually still haven't been arrested, and at this point possibly never will.
Most laws are national in their implementation, despite cybercrime conventions, where the Internet is borderless and international by definition.
Countries do not agree, which makes this area exceptionally challenging from a legal perspective.
But my biggest ask is this: You see, you're going to leave here and you're going to see some astonishing stories in the news.
You're going to read about malware doing incredible and terrifying, scary things.
However, 99 percent of it works because people fail to do the basics.
So my ask is this: Go online, find these simple best practices, find out how to update and patch your computer.
Get a secure password.
Make sure you use a different password on each of your sites and services online.
Find these resources. Apply them.
The Internet is a fantastic resource for business, for political expression, for art and for learning.
Help me and the security community make life much, much more difficult for cybercriminals.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Do you think it's possible to control someone's attention?
Even more than that, what about predicting human behavior?
I think those are interesting ideas.
For me, that would be the perfect superpower, actually kind of an evil way of approaching it.
But for myself, in the past, I've spent the last 20 years studying human behavior from a rather unorthodox way: picking pockets.
When we think of misdirection, we think of something as looking off to the side, when actually the things right in front of us are often the hardest to see, the things that you look at every day that you're blinded to.
For example, how many of you still have your cell phones on you right now?
Great. Double-check.
Make sure you still have them.
I was doing some shopping before.
(Laughter) You've looked at them a few times today, but I'll ask you a question.
Without looking at it directly yet, can you remember the icon in the bottom right corner?
Bring them out, check and see how accurate you were.
How'd you do?
Now that you're done, close them down.
Every phone has something in common.
No matter how you organize the icons, you still have a clock on the front.
So, without looking at your phone, what time was it?
You just looked at your clock, right?
Interesting idea.
Close your eyes.
I realize I'm asking you to do that while you just heard there's a pickpocket in the room, but close your eyes.
Now, you've been watching me for about 30 seconds.
With your eyes closed, what am I wearing?
Make your best guess.
What color is my shirt? What color is my tie?
Now open your eyes.
Show of hands, were you right?
Interesting, isn't it?
Some of us are a little bit more perceptive than others, it seems.
But I have a different theory about that model of attention.
They have fancy models of attention, Posner's trinity model of attention.
For me, I like to think of it very simple, like a surveillance system.
It's kind of like you have all these fancy sensors, and inside your brain is a little security guard.
For me, I like to call him Frank.
So Frank is sitting at a desk.
He's got lots of cool information in front of him, high-tech equipment, he's got cameras, he's got a little phone that he can pick up, listen to the ears, all these senses, all these perceptions.
But attention is what steers your perceptions, it's what controls your reality.
If you don't attend to something, you can't be aware of it.
But ironically, you can attend to something without being aware of it.
For example, the cocktail effect: You're in a party, having conversations with someone, and yet you can recognize your name without realizing you were listening to that.
Now, for my job, I have to play with techniques to exploit this, to play with your attention as a limited resource.
So if I could control how you spend your attention, if I could maybe steal your attention through a distraction.
Now, instead of doing it like misdirection and throwing it off to the side, instead, what I choose to focus on is Frank, to be able to play with the Frank inside your head, your security guard, and get you, instead of focusing on your external senses, just to go internal for a second.
So if I ask you to access a memory, like, what is that?
What just happened? Do you have a wallet?
Do you have an American Express in your wallet?
And when I do that, your Frank turns around.
He accesses the file. He has to rewind the tape.
What's interesting is, he can't rewind the tape at the same time that he's trying to process new data.
This sounds like a good theory, but I could talk for a long time, tell you lots of things, and a portion of them may be true, but I think it's better if I tried to show that to you here live.
If I come down, I'm going to do a bit of shopping.
Just hold still where you are.
Hello, how are you? It's lovely to see you.
Wonderful job onstage.
Lovely watch, it doesn't come off very well.
Do you have a ring as well?
Good. Just taking inventory. You're like a buffet.
Hard to tell where to start, so many great things.
Hi, how are you? Good to see you.
Hi, sir, could you stand up, please? Just right where you are.
You're married, you follow directions well.
Nice to meet you, sir.
You don't have a lot in your pockets. Anything down here?
Hopefully so. Have a seat. There you go. You're doing well.
Hi, sir, how are you?
Good to see you, sir. You have a ring, a watch.
Do you have a wallet on you? Joe: I don't.
AR: Well, we'll find one for you. Come on up this way, Joe.
Give Joe a round of applause. Come on up, Joe. Let's play a game.
(Applause) AR: Pardon me.
I don't think I need this clicker anymore.
Thank you very much. I appreciate that.
Come on up to the stage, Joe. Let's play a little game now.
Anything in your front pockets?
AR: Money! All right, let's try that.
Can you stand right over this way for me?
Turn around and, let's see, if I give you something that belongs to me, this is just something I have, a poker chip.
Hold out your hand for me.
This is a task for you to focus on.
You have your money in your front pocket?
J: Yup. AR: Good.
I won't put my hand in your pocket. I'm not ready for that kind of commitment.
Once a guy had a hole in his pocket, and that was rather traumatizing for me.
I wanted his wallet, he gave me his number.
Big miscommunication.
Do you feel the poker chip in your hand?
J: I do.
J: Very. AR: Good.
Open your hand. Thank you very much.
I'll cheat if you give me a chance.
Make it harder for me. Just use your hand.
Grab my wrist, but squeeze, squeeze firm.
Did you see it go? Joe: No.
AR: No, it's not here. Open your hand.
While we're focused on the hand, it's sitting on your shoulder.
Go ahead and take it off.
Now, let's try that again.
Hold your hand out flat. Open it up.
Put your hand up a little bit higher, but watch it close.
If I did it slowly, it'd be on your shoulder.
(Laughter) Joe, we're going to keep doing this till you catch it.
You'll get it eventually. I have faith in you.
It's back on your shoulder.
You were focused on your hand, distracted.
While you were watching, I couldn't get your watch off.
Yet you had something inside your pocket.
Do you remember what it was?
J: Money.
AR: Check your pocket. Is it still there?
(Laughter) Oh, there it was. Put it away.
We're just shopping.
I'm going to try to push it inside your hand.
It's amazingly obvious now, isn't it?
Looks a lot like the watch I was wearing, doesn't it?
(Laughter) (Applause) J: That's pretty good. AR: Oh, thanks.
(Applause) But it's only a start. Let's try it a little bit differently.
Hold your hands together. Your other hand on top.
If you're watching this little token, this obviously has become a little target, like a red herring.
If we watch this kind of close, it looks like it goes away.
It's not back on your shoulder.
It falls out of the air, lands right back in the hand.
Did you see it go?
Yeah, funny. We've got a little guy. He's union, works up there all day.
If I do it slowly it goes straight away, it lands by your pocket.
Don't reach in your pocket. That's a different show.
(Squeaking) That's rather strange. They have shots for that.
Can I show them? Rather bizarre. Is this yours, sir?
I have no idea how that works. We'll send that over there.
I need help with this one.
Step over this way for me.
Don't run away. You had something down by your pants pocket.
I was checking mine. I couldn't find everything, but I noticed you had something here.
Can I feel the outside for a moment?
Down here I noticed this. Is this something of yours, sir?
I have no idea. That's a shrimp.
J: Yeah. I'm saving it for later.
AR: You've entertained all of these people in a wonderful way, better than you know.
So we'd love to give you this lovely watch as a gift.
(Laughter) Hopefully it matches his taste.
We have a couple of other things, a little bit of cash.
And we have a few other things, these all belong to you, along with a big round of applause from all your friends.
(Applause) Joe, thank you very much.
(Applause) (Applause ends) So, same question I asked you before, but this time you don't have to close your eyes.
What am I wearing?
Audience: Oh!
(Laughter) (Hesitant applause) (Applause ends) Attention is a powerful thing.
Like I said, it shapes your reality.
So, I guess I'd like to pose that question to you.
If you could control somebody's attention, what would you do with it?
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, robots.
Robots can be programmed to do the same task millions of times with minimal error, something very difficult for us, right?
And it can be very impressive to watch them at work.
Look at them.
I could watch them for hours.
No?
What is less impressive is that if you take these robots out of the factories, where the environments are not perfectly known and measured like here, to do even a simple task which doesn't require much precision, this is what can happen.
I mean, opening a door, you don't require much precision.
(Laughter) Or a small error in the measurements, he misses the valve, and that's it -- (Laughter) with no way of recovering, most of the time.
So why is that?
Well, for many years, robots have been designed to emphasize speed and precision, and this translates into a very specific architecture.
If you take a robot arm, it's a very well-defined set of rigid links and motors, what we call actuators, they move the links about the joints.
In this robotic structure, you have to perfectly measure your environment, so what is around, and you have to perfectly program every movement of the robot joints, because a small error can generate a very large fault, so you can damage something or you can get your robot damaged if something is harder.
So let's talk about them a moment.
And don't think about the brains of these robots or how carefully we program them, but rather look at their bodies.
There is obviously something wrong with it, because what makes a robot precise and strong also makes them ridiculously dangerous and ineffective in the real world, because their body cannot deform or better adjust to the interaction with the real world.
So think about the opposite approach, being softer than anything else around you.
Well, maybe you think that you're not really able to do anything if you're soft, probably.
Well, nature teaches us the opposite.
For example, at the bottom of the ocean, under thousands of pounds of hydrostatic pressure, a completely soft animal can move and interact with a much stiffer object than him.
He walks by carrying around this coconut shell thanks to the flexibility of his tentacles, which serve as both his feet and hands.
And apparently, an octopus can also open a jar.
It's pretty impressive, right?
But clearly, this is not enabled just by the brain of this animal, but also by his body, and it's a clear example, maybe the clearest example, of embodied intelligence, which is a kind of intelligence that all living organisms have.
We all have that.
Our body, its shape, material and structure, plays a fundamental role during a physical task, because we can conform to our environment so we can succeed in a large variety of situations without much planning or calculations ahead.
So why don't we put some of this embodied intelligence into our robotic machines, to release them from relying on excessive work on computation and sensing?
Well, to do that, we can follow the strategy of nature, because with evolution, she's done a pretty good job in designing machines for environment interaction.
And it's easy to notice that nature uses soft material frequently and stiff material sparingly.
And this is what is done in this new field of robotics, which is called "soft robotics," in which the main objective is not to make super-precise machines, because we've already got them, but to make robots able to face unexpected situations in the real world, so able to go out there.
And what makes a robot soft is first of all its compliant body, which is made of materials or structures that can undergo very large deformations, so no more rigid links, and secondly, to move them, we use what we call distributed actuation, so we have to control continuously the shape of this very deformable body, which has the effect of having a lot of links and joints, but we don't have any stiff structure at all.
So you can imagine that building a soft robot is a very different process than stiff robotics, where you have links, gears, screws that you must combine in a very defined way.
In soft robots, you just build your actuator from scratch most of the time, but you shape your flexible material to the form that responds to a certain input.
For example, here, you can just deform a structure doing a fairly complex shape if you think about doing the same with rigid links and joints, and here, what you use is just one input, such as air pressure.
OK, but let's see some cool examples of soft robots.
Here is a little cute guy developed at Harvard University, and he walks thanks to waves of pressure applied along its body, and thanks to the flexibility, he can also sneak under a low bridge, keep walking, and then keep walking a little bit different afterwards.
And it's a very preliminary prototype, but they also built a more robust version with power on board that can actually be sent out in the world and face real-world interactions like a car passing it over it ...
and keep working.
It's cute.
(Laughter) Or a robotic fish, which swims like a real fish does in water simply because it has a soft tail with distributed actuation using still air pressure.
That was from MIT, and of course, we have a robotic octopus.
This was actually one of the first projects developed in this new field of soft robots.
Here, you see the artificial tentacle, but they actually built an entire machine with several tentacles they could just throw in the water, and you see that it can kind of go around and do submarine exploration in a different way than rigid robots would do.
But this is very important for delicate environments, such as coral reefs.
Let's go back to the ground.
Here, you see the view from a growing robot developed by my colleagues in Stanford.
You see the camera fixed on top.
And this robot is particular, because using air pressure, it grows from the tip, while the rest of the body stays in firm contact with the environment.
And this is inspired by plants, not animals, which grows via the material in a similar manner so it can face a pretty large variety of situations.
But I'm a biomedical engineer, and perhaps the application I like the most is in the medical field, and it's very difficult to imagine a closer interaction with the human body than actually going inside the body, for example, to perform a minimally invasive procedure.
And here, robots can be very helpful with the surgeon, because they must enter the body using small holes and straight instruments, and these instruments must interact with very delicate structures in a very uncertain environment, and this must be done safely.
Also bringing the camera inside the body, so bringing the eyes of the surgeon inside the surgical field can be very challenging if you use a rigid stick, like a classic endoscope.
With my previous research group in Europe, we developed this soft camera robot for surgery, which is very different from a classic endoscope, which can move thanks to the flexibility of the module that can bend in every direction and also elongate.
And this was actually used by surgeons to see what they were doing with other instruments from different points of view, without caring that much about what was touched around.
And here you see the soft robot in action, and it just goes inside.
This is a body simulator, not a real human body.
It goes around.
You have a light, because usually, you don't have too many lights inside your body.
We hope.
(Laughter) But sometimes, a surgical procedure can even be done using a single needle, and in Stanford now, we are working on a very flexible needle, kind of a very tiny soft robot which is mechanically designed to use the interaction with the tissues and steer around inside a solid organ.
This makes it possible to reach many different targets, such as tumors, deep inside a solid organ by using one single insertion point.
And you can even steer around the structure that you want to avoid on the way to the target.
So clearly, this is a pretty exciting time for robotics.
We have robots that have to deal with soft structures, so this poses new and very challenging questions for the robotics community, and indeed, we are just starting to learn how to control, how to put sensors on these very flexible structures.
But of course, we are not even close to what nature figured out in millions of years of evolution.
But one thing I know for sure: robots will be softer and safer, and they will be out there helping people.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is our life with bees, and this is our life without bees.
Bees are the most important pollinators of our fruits and vegetables and flowers and crops like alfalfa hay that feed our farm animals.
More than one third of the world's crop production is dependent on bee pollination.
But the ironic thing is that bees are not out there pollinating our food intentionally.
They're out there because they need to eat.
Bees get all of the protein they need in their diet from pollen and all of the carbohydrates they need from nectar.
They're flower-feeders, and as they move from flower to flower, basically on a shopping trip at the local floral mart, they end up providing this valuable pollination service.
In parts of the world where there are no bees, or where they plant varieties that are not attractive to bees, people are paid to do the business of pollination by hand.
These people are moving pollen from flower to flower with a paintbrush.
Now this business of hand pollination is actually not that uncommon.
Tomato growers often pollinate their tomato flowers with a hand-held vibrator.
Now this one's the tomato tickler. (Laughter) Now this is because the pollen within a tomato flower is held very securely within the male part of the flower, the anther, and the only way to release this pollen is to vibrate it.
So bumblebees are one of the few kinds of bees in the world that are able to hold onto the flower and vibrate it, and they do this by shaking their flight muscles at a frequency similar to the musical note C.
So they vibrate the flower, they sonicate it, and that releases the pollen in this efficient swoosh, and the pollen gathers all over the fuzzy bee's body, and she takes it home as food.
Tomato growers now put bumblebee colonies inside the greenhouse to pollinate the tomatoes because they get much more efficient pollination when it's done naturally and they get better quality tomatoes.
So there's other, maybe more personal reasons, to care about bees.
There's over 20,000 species of bees in the world, and they're absolutely gorgeous.
These bees spend the majority of their life cycle hidden in the ground or within a hollow stem and very few of these beautiful species have evolved highly social behavior like honeybees.
Now honeybees tend to be the charismatic representative for the other 19,900-plus species because there's something about honeybees that draws people into their world.
Humans have been drawn to honeybees since early recorded history, mostly to harvest their honey, which is an amazing natural sweetener.
I got drawn into the honeybee world completely by a fluke.
I was 18 years old and bored, and I picked up a book in the library on bees and I spent the night reading it.
I had never thought about insects living in complex societies.
It was like the best of science fiction come true.
And even stranger, there were these people, these beekeepers, that loved their bees like they were family, and when I put down the book, I knew I had to see this for myself.
So I went to work for a commercial beekeeper, a family that owned 2,000 hives of bees in New Mexico.
And I was permanently hooked.
Honeybees can be considered a super-organism, where the colony is the organism and it's comprised of 40,000 to 50,000 individual bee organisms.
Now this society has no central authority.
Nobody's in charge.
So how they come to collective decisions, and how they allocate their tasks and divide their labor, how they communicate where the flowers are, all of their collective social behaviors are mindblowing.
My personal favorite, and one that I've studied for many years, is their system of healthcare.
So bees have social healthcare.
So in my lab, we study how bees keep themselves healthy.
For example, we study hygiene, where some bees are able to locate and weed out sick individuals from the nest, from the colony, and it keeps the colony healthy.
And more recently, we've been studying resins that bees collect from plants.
So bees fly to some plants and they scrape these very, very sticky resins off the leaves, and they take them back to the nest where they cement them into the nest architecture where we call it propolis.
We've found that propolis is a natural disinfectant.
It's a natural antibiotic.
It kills off bacteria and molds and other germs within the colony, and so it bolsters the colony health and their social immunity.
Humans have known about the power of propolis since biblical times.
We've been harvesting propolis out of bee colonies for human medicine, but we didn't know how good it was for the bees.
So honeybees have these remarkable natural defenses that have kept them healthy and thriving for over 50 million years.
So seven years ago, when honeybee colonies were reported to be dying en masse, first in the United States, it was clear that there was something really, really wrong.
In our collective conscience, in a really primal way, we know we can't afford to lose bees.
So what's going on?
Bees are dying from multiple and interacting causes, and I'll go through each of these.
The bottom line is, bees dying reflects a flowerless landscape and a dysfunctional food system.
Now we have the best data on honeybees, so I'll use them as an example.
In the United States, bees in fact have been in decline since World War II.
We have half the number of managed hives in the United States now compared to 1945.
We're down to about two million hives of bees, we think.
And the reason is, after World War II, we changed our farming practices.
We stopped planting cover crops.
We stopped planting clover and alfalfa, which are natural fertilizers that fix nitrogen in the soil, and instead we started using synthetic fertilizers.
Clover and alfalfa are highly nutritious food plants for bees.
And after World War II, we started using herbicides to kill off the weeds in our farms.
Many of these weeds are flowering plants that bees require for their survival.
And we started growing larger and larger crop monocultures.
Now we talk about food deserts, places in our cities, neighborhoods that have no grocery stores.
The very farms that used to sustain bees are now agricultural food deserts, dominated by one or two plant species like corn and soybeans.
Since World War II, we have been systematically eliminating many of the flowering plants that bees need for their survival.
And these monocultures extend even to crops that are good for bees, like almonds.
Fifty years ago, beekeepers would take a few colonies, hives of bees into the almond orchards, for pollination, and also because the pollen in an almond blossom is really high in protein. It's really good for bees.
Now, the scale of almond monoculture demands that most of our nation's bees, over 1.5 million hives of bees, be transported across the nation to pollinate this one crop.
And they're trucked in in semi-loads, and they must be trucked out, because after bloom, the almond orchards are a vast and flowerless landscape.
Bees have been dying over the last 50 years, and we're planting more crops that need them.
There has been a 300 percent increase in crop production that requires bee pollination.
And then there's pesticides.
After World War II, we started using pesticides on a large scale, and this became necessary because of the monocultures that put out a feast for crop pests.
Recently, researchers from Penn State University have started looking at the pesticide residue in the loads of pollen that bees carry home as food, and they've found that every batch of pollen that a honeybee collects has at least six detectable pesticides in it, and this includes every class of insecticides, herbicides, fungicides, and even inert and unlabeled ingredients that are part of the pesticide formulation that can be more toxic than the active ingredient.
This small bee is holding up a large mirror.
How much is it going to take to contaminate humans?
One of these class of insecticides, the neonicontinoids, is making headlines around the world right now.
You've probably heard about it.
This is a new class of insecticides.
It moves through the plant so that a crop pest, a leaf-eating insect, would take a bite of the plant and get a lethal dose and die.
If one of these neonics, we call them, is applied in a high concentration, such as in this ground application, enough of the compound moves through the plant and gets into the pollen and the nectar, where a bee can consume, in this case, a high dose of this neurotoxin that makes the bee twitch and die.
In most agricultural settings, on most of our farms, it's only the seed that's coated with the insecticide, and so a smaller concentration moves through the plant and gets into the pollen and nectar, and if a bee consumes this lower dose, either nothing happens or the bee becomes intoxicated and disoriented and she may not find her way home.
And on top of everything else, bees have their own set of diseases and parasites.
Public enemy number one for bees is this thing.
It's called varroa destructor.
It's aptly named.
It's this big, blood-sucking parasite that compromises the bee's immune system and circulates viruses.
Let me put this all together for you.
I don't know what it feels like to a bee to have a big, bloodsucking parasite running around on it, and I don't know what it feels like to a bee to have a virus, but I do know what it feels like when I have a virus, the flu, and I know how difficult it is for me to get to the grocery store to get good nutrition.
But what if I lived in a food desert?
And what if I had to travel a long distance to get to the grocery store, and I finally got my weak body out there and I consumed, in my food, enough of a pesticide, a neurotoxin, that I couldn't find my way home?
And this is what we mean by multiple and interacting causes of death.
And it's not just our honeybees.
All of our beautiful wild species of bees are at risk, including those tomato-pollinating bumblebees.
These bees are providing backup for our honeybees.
They're providing the pollination insurance alongside our honeybees.
We need all of our bees.
So what are we going to do?
What are we going to do about this big bee bummer that we've created?
It turns out, it's hopeful. It's hopeful.
Every one of you out there can help bees in two very direct and easy ways.
Plant bee-friendly flowers, and don't contaminate these flowers, this bee food, with pesticides.
So go online and search for flowers that are native to your area and plant them.
Plant them in a pot on your doorstep.
Plant them in your front yard, in your lawns, in your boulevards.
Campaign to have them planted in public gardens, community spaces, meadows.
Set aside farmland.
We need a beautiful diversity of flowers that blooms over the entire growing season, from spring to fall.
We need roadsides seeded in flowers for our bees, but also for migrating butterflies and birds and other wildlife.
And we need to think carefully about putting back in cover crops to nourish our soil and nourish our bees.
And we need to diversify our farms.
We need to plant flowering crop borders and hedge rows to disrupt the agricultural food desert and begin to correct the dysfunctional food system that we've created.
So maybe it seems like a really small countermeasure to a big, huge problem -- just go plant flowers -- but when bees have access to good nutrition, we have access to good nutrition through their pollination services.
And when bees have access to good nutrition, they're better able to engage their own natural defenses, their healthcare, that they have relied on for millions of years.
So the beauty of helping bees this way, for me, is that every one of us needs to behave a little bit more like a bee society, an insect society, where each of our individual actions can contribute to a grand solution, an emergent property, that's much greater than the mere sum of our individual actions.
So let the small act of planting flowers and keeping them free of pesticides be the driver of large-scale change.
On behalf of the bees, thank you.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you. Just a quick question.
The latest numbers on the die-off of bees, is there any sign of things bottoming out?
What's your hope/depression level on this?
Maria Spivak: Yeah.
At least in the United States, an average of 30 percent of all bee hives are lost every winter.
About 20 years ago, we were at a 15-percent loss.
So it's getting precarious.
CA: That's not 30 percent a year, that's -- MS: Yes, thirty percent a year.
CA: Thirty percent a year. MS: But then beekeepers are able to divide their colonies and so they can maintain the same number, they can recuperate some of their loss.
We're kind of at a tipping point.
We can't really afford to lose that many more.
We need to be really appreciative of all the beekeepers out there. Plant flowers.
CA: Thank you.
(Applause)
Eric Berlow: I'm an ecologist, and Sean's a physicist, and we both study complex networks.
And we met a couple years ago when we discovered that we had both given a short TED Talk about the ecology of war, and we realized that we were connected by the ideas we shared before we ever met.
And then we thought, you know, there are thousands of other talks out there, especially TEDx Talks, that are popping up all over the world.
How are they connected, and what does that global conversation look like?
So Sean's going to tell you a little bit about how we did that.
Sean Gourley: Exactly. So we took 24,000 TEDx Talks from around the world, 147 different countries, and we took these talks and we wanted to find the mathematical structures that underly the ideas behind them.
And we wanted to do that so we could see how they connected with each other.
And so, of course, if you're going to do this kind of stuff, you need a lot of data.
So the data that you've got is a great thing called YouTube, and we can go down and basically pull all the open information from YouTube, all the comments, all the views, who's watching it, where are they watching it, what are they saying in the comments.
But we can also pull up, using speech-to-text translation, we can pull the entire transcript, and that works even for people with kind of funny accents like myself.
So we can take their transcript and actually do some pretty cool things.
We can take natural language processing algorithms to kind of read through with a computer, line by line, extracting key concepts from this.
And we take those key concepts and they sort of form this mathematical structure of an idea.
And we call that the meme-ome.
And the meme-ome, you know, quite simply, is the mathematics that underlies an idea, and we can do some pretty interesting analysis with it, which I want to share with you now.
So each idea has its own meme-ome, and each idea is unique with that, but of course, ideas, they borrow from each other, they kind of steal sometimes, and they certainly build on each other, and we can go through mathematically and take the meme-ome from one talk and compare it to the meme-ome from every other talk, and if there's a similarity between the two of them, we can create a link and represent that as a graph, just like Eric and I are connected.
So that's theory, that's great.
Let's see how it works in actual practice.
So what we've got here now is the global footprint of all the TEDx Talks over the last four years exploding out around the world from New York all the way down to little old New Zealand in the corner.
And what we did on this is we analyzed the top 25 percent of these, and we started to see where the connections occurred, where they connected with each other.
Cameron Russell talking about image and beauty connected over into Europe.
We've got a bigger conversation about Israel and Palestine radiating outwards from the Middle East.
And we've got something a little broader like big data with a truly global footprint reminiscent of a conversation that is happening everywhere.
So from this, we kind of run up against the limits of what we can actually do with a geographic projection, but luckily, computer technology allows us to go out into multidimensional space.
So we can take in our network projection and apply a physics engine to this, and the similar talks kind of smash together, and the different ones fly apart, and what we're left with is something quite beautiful.
EB: So I want to just point out here that every node is a talk, they're linked if they share similar ideas, and that comes from a machine reading of entire talk transcripts, and then all these topics that pop out, they're not from tags and keywords.
They come from the network structure of interconnected ideas. Keep going.
SG: Absolutely. So I got a little quick on that, but he's going to slow me down.
We've got education connected to storytelling triangulated next to social media.
You've got, of course, the human brain right next to healthcare, which you might expect, but also you've got video games, which is sort of adjacent, as those two spaces interface with each other.
But I want to take you into one cluster that's particularly important to me, and that's the environment.
And I want to kind of zoom in on that and see if we can get a little more resolution.
So as we go in here, what we start to see, apply the physics engine again, we see what's one conversation is actually composed of many smaller ones.
The structure starts to emerge where we see a kind of fractal behavior of the words and the language that we use to describe the things that are important to us all around this world.
So you've got food economy and local food at the top, you've got greenhouse gases, solar and nuclear waste.
What you're getting is a range of smaller conversations, each connected to each other through the ideas and the language they share, creating a broader concept of the environment.
And of course, from here, we can go and zoom in and see, well, what are young people looking at?
And they're looking at energy technology and nuclear fusion.
This is their kind of resonance for the conversation around the environment.
If we split along gender lines, we can see females resonating heavily with food economy, but also out there in hope and optimism.
And so there's a lot of exciting stuff we can do here, and I'll throw to Eric for the next part.
EB: Yeah, I mean, just to point out here, you cannot get this kind of perspective from a simple tag search on YouTube.
Let's now zoom back out to the entire global conversation out of environment, and look at all the talks together.
Now often, when we're faced with this amount of content, we do a couple of things to simplify it.
We might just say, well, what are the most popular talks out there?
And a few rise to the surface.
There's a talk about gratitude.
There's another one about personal health and nutrition.
And of course, there's got to be one about porn, right?
And so then we might say, well, gratitude, that was last year.
What's trending now? What's the popular talk now?
And we can see that the new, emerging, top trending topic is about digital privacy.
So this is great. It simplifies things.
But there's so much creative content that's just buried at the bottom.
And I hate that. How do we bubble stuff up to the surface that's maybe really creative and interesting?
Well, we can go back to the network structure of ideas to do that.
Remember, it's that network structure that is creating these emergent topics, and let's say we could take two of them, like cities and genetics, and say, well, are there any talks that creatively bridge these two really different disciplines.
And that's -- Essentially, this kind of creative remix is one of the hallmarks of innovation.
Well here's one by Jessica Green about the microbial ecology of buildings.
It's literally defining a new field.
And we could go back to those topics and say, well, what talks are central to those conversations?
In the cities cluster, one of the most central was one by Mitch Joachim about ecological cities, and in the genetics cluster, we have a talk about synthetic biology by Craig Venter.
These are talks that are linking many talks within their discipline.
We could go the other direction and say, well, what are talks that are broadly synthesizing a lot of different kinds of fields.
We used a measure of ecological diversity to get this.
Like, a talk by Steven Pinker on the history of violence, very synthetic.
And then, of course, there are talks that are so unique they're kind of out in the stratosphere, in their own special place, and we call that the Colleen Flanagan index.
And if you don't know Colleen, she's an artist, and I asked her, "Well, what's it like out there in the stratosphere of our idea space?"
And apparently it smells like bacon.
I wouldn't know.
So we're using these network motifs to find talks that are unique, ones that are creatively synthesizing a lot of different fields, ones that are central to their topic, and ones that are really creatively bridging disparate fields.
Okay? We never would have found those with our obsession with what's trending now.
And all of this comes from the architecture of complexity, or the patterns of how things are connected.
SG: So that's exactly right.
We've got ourselves in a world that's massively complex, and we've been using algorithms to kind of filter it down so we can navigate through it.
And those algorithms, whilst being kind of useful, are also very, very narrow, and we can do better than that, because we can realize that their complexity is not random.
It has mathematical structure, and we can use that mathematical structure to go and explore things like the world of ideas to see what's being said, to see what's not being said, and to be a little bit more human and, hopefully, a little smarter.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When my father and I started a company to 3D print human tissues and organs, some people initially thought we were a little crazy.
But since then, much progress has been made, both in our lab and other labs around the world.
And given this, we started getting questions like, "If you can grow human body parts, can you also grow animal products like meat and leather?"
When someone first suggested this to me, quite frankly I thought they were a little crazy, but what I soon came to realize was that this is not so crazy after all.
What's crazy is what we do today.
I'm convinced that in 30 years, when we look back on today and on how we raise and slaughter billions of animals to make our hamburgers and our handbags, we'll see this as being wasteful and indeed crazy.
Did you know that today we maintain a global herd of 60 billion animals to provide our meat, dairy, eggs and leather goods?
And over the next few decades, as the world's population expands to 10 billion, this will need to nearly double to 100 billion animals.
But maintaining this herd takes a major toll on our planet.
Animals are not just raw materials.
They're living beings, and already our livestock is one of the largest users of land, fresh water, and one of the biggest producers of greenhouse gases which drive climate change.
On top of this, when you get so many animals so close together, it creates a breeding ground for disease and opportunities for harm and abuse.
Clearly, we cannot continue on this path which puts the environment, public health, and food security at risk.
There is another way, because essentially, animal products are just collections of tissues, and right now we breed and raise highly complex animals only to create products that are made of relatively simple tissues.
What if, instead of starting with a complex and sentient animal, we started with what the tissues are made of, the basic unit of life, the cell?
This is biofabrication, where cells themselves can be used to grow biological products like tissues and organs.
Already in medicine, biofabrication techniques have been used to grow sophisticated body parts, like ears, windpipes, skin, blood vessels and bone, that have been successfully implanted into patients.
And beyond medicine, biofabrication can be a humane, sustainable and scalable new industry.
And we should begin by reimagining leather.
I emphasize leather because it is so widely used.
It is beautiful, and it has long been a part of our history.
Growing leather is also technically simpler than growing other animal products like meat.
It mainly uses one cell type, and it is largely two-dimensional.
It is also less polarizing for consumers and regulators.
Until biofabrication is better understood, it is clear that, initially at least, more people would be willing to wear novel materials than would be willing to eat novel foods, no matter how delicious.
In this sense, leather is a gateway material, a beginning for the mainstream biofabrication industry.
If we can succeed here, it brings our other consumer bioproducts like meat closer on the horizon.
Now how do we do it?
To grow leather, we begin by taking cells from an animal, through a simple biopsy.
The animal could be a cow, lamb, or even something more exotic.
This process does no harm, and Daisy the cow can live a happy life.
We then isolate the skin cells and multiply them in a cell culture medium.
This takes millions of cells and expands them into billions.
And we then coax these cells to produce collagen, as they would naturally.
This collagen is the stuff between cells.
It's natural connective tissue.
It's the extracellular matrix, but in leather, it's the main building block.
And what we next do is we take the cells and their collagen and we spread them out to form sheets, and then we layer these thin sheets on top of one another, like phyllo pastry, to form thicker sheets, which we then let mature.
And finally, we take this multilayered skin and through a shorter and much less chemical tanning process, we create leather.
And so I'm very excited to show you, for the first time, the first batch of our cultured leather, fresh from the lab.
This is real, genuine leather, without the animal sacrifice.
It can have all the characteristics of leather because it is made of the same cells, and better yet, there is no hair to remove, no scars or insect's bites, and no waste.
This leather can be grown in the shape of a wallet, a handbag or a car seat.
It is not limited to the irregular shape of a cow or an alligator.
And because we make this material, we grow this leather from the ground up, we can control its properties in very interesting ways.
This piece of leather is a mere seven tissue layers thick, and as you can see, it is nearly transparent.
And this leather is 21 layers thick and quite opaque.
You don't have that kind of fine control with conventional leather.
And we can tune this leather for other desirable qualities, like softness, breathability, durability, elasticity and even things like pattern.
We can mimic nature, but in some ways also improve upon it.
This type of leather can do what today's leather does, but with imagination, probably much more.
What could the future of animal products look like?
It need not look like this, which is actually the state of the art today.
Rather, it could be much more like this.
Already, we have been manufacturing with cell cultures for thousands of years, beginning with products like wine, beer and yogurt.
And speaking of food, our cultured food has evolved, and today we prepare cultured food in beautiful, sterile facilities like this.
A brewery is essentially a bioreactor.
It is where cell culture takes place.
Imagine that in this facility, instead of brewing beer, we were brewing leather or meat.
Imagine touring this facility, learning about how the leather or meat is cultured, seeing the process from beginning to end, and even trying some.
It's clean, open and educational, and this is in contrast to the hidden, guarded and remote factories where leather and meat is produced today.
Perhaps biofabrication is a natural evolution of manufacturing for mankind.
It's environmentally responsible, efficient and humane.
It allows us to be creative.
We can design new materials, new products, and new facilities.
We need to move past just killing animals as a resource to something more civilized and evolved.
Perhaps we are ready for something literally and figuratively more cultured.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Democracy is in trouble, no question about that, and it comes in part from a deep dilemma in which it is embedded.
It's increasingly irrelevant to the kinds of decisions we face that have to do with global pandemics, a cross-border problem; with HIV, a transnational problem; with markets and immigration, something that goes beyond national borders; with terrorism, with war, all now cross-border problems.
In fact, we live in a 21st-century world of interdependence, and brutal interdependent problems, and when we look for solutions in politics and in democracy, we are faced with political institutions designed 400 years ago, autonomous, sovereign nation-states with jurisdictions and territories separate from one another, each claiming to be able to solve the problem of its own people.
Twenty-first-century, transnational world of problems and challenges, 17th-century world of political institutions.
In that dilemma lies the central problem of democracy.
And like many others, I've been thinking about what can one do about this, this asymmetry between 21st-century challenges and archaic and increasingly dysfunctional political institutions like nation-states.
And my suggestion is that we change the subject, that we stop talking about nations, about bordered states, and we start talking about cities.
Because I think you will find, when we talk about cities, we are talking about the political institutions in which civilization and culture were born.
We are talking about the cradle of democracy.
We are talking about the venues in which those public spaces where we come together to create democracy, and at the same time protest those who would take our freedom, take place.
Think of some great names: the Place de la Bastille, Zuccotti Park, Tahrir Square, Taksim Square in today's headlines in Istanbul, or, yes, Tiananmen Square in Beijing.
(Applause) Those are the public spaces where we announce ourselves as citizens, as participants, as people with the right to write our own narratives.
Cities are not only the oldest of institutions, they're the most enduring.
If you think about it, Constantinople, Istanbul, much older than Turkey.
Alexandria, much older than Egypt.
Rome, far older than Italy.
Cities endure the ages.
They are the places where we are born, grow up, are educated, work, marry, pray, play, get old, and in time, die.
They are home.
Very different than nation-states, which are abstractions.
We pay taxes, we vote occasionally, we watch the men and women we choose rule rule more or less without us.
Not so in those homes known as our towns and cities where we live.
Moreover, today, more than half of the world's population live in cities.
In the developed world, it's about 78 percent.
More than three out of four people live in urban institutions, urban places, in cities today.
So cities are where the action is.
Cities are us. Aristotle said in the ancient world, man is a political animal.
I say we are an urban animal.
We are an urban species, at home in our cities.
So to come back to the dilemma, if the dilemma is we have old-fashioned political nation-states unable to govern the world, respond to the global challenges that we face like climate change, then maybe it's time for mayors to rule the world, for mayors and the citizens and the peoples they represent to engage in global governance.
When I say if mayors ruled the world, when I first came up with that phrase, it occurred to me that actually, they already do.
There are scores of international, inter-city, cross-border institutions, networks of cities in which cities are already, quite quietly, below the horizon, working together to deal with climate change, to deal with security, to deal with immigration, to deal with all of those tough, interdependent problems that we face.
They have strange names: UCLG, United Cities and Local Governments; ICLEI, the International Council for Local Environmental Issues.
And the list goes on: Citynet in Asia; City Protocol, a new organization out of Barcelona that is using the web to share best practices among countries.
And then all the things we know a little better, the U.S. Conference of Mayors, the Mexican Conference of Mayors, the European Conference of Mayors.
Mayors are where this is happening.
And so the question is, how can we create a world in which mayors and the citizens they represent play a more prominent role?
Well, to understand that, we need to understand why cities are special, why mayors are so different than prime ministers and presidents, because my premise is that a mayor and a prime minister are at the opposite ends of a political spectrum.
To be a prime minister or a president, you have to have an ideology, you have to have a meta-narrative, you have to have a theory of how things work, you have to belong to a party.
Independents, on the whole, don't get elected to office.
But mayors are just the opposite.
Mayors are pragmatists, they're problem-solvers.
Their job is to get things done, and if they don't, they're out of a job.
Mayor Nutter of Philadelphia said, we could never get away here in Philadelphia with the stuff that goes on in Washington, the paralysis, the non-action, the inaction.
Why? Because potholes have to get filled, because the trains have to run, because kids have to be able to get to school.
And that's what we have to do, and to do that is about pragmatism in that deep, American sense, reaching outcomes.
Washington, Beijing, Paris, as world capitals, are anything but pragmatic, but real city mayors have to be pragmatists.
They have to get things done, they have to put ideology and religion and ethnicity aside and draw their cities together.
We saw this a couple of decades ago when Teddy Kollek, the great mayor of Jerusalem in the '80s and the '90s, was besieged one day in his office by religious leaders from all of the backgrounds, Christian prelates, rabbis, imams.
They were arguing with one another about access to the holy sites.
And the squabble went on and on, and Kollek listened and listened, and he finally said, "Gentlemen, spare me your sermons, and I will fix your sewers."
(Laughter) That's what mayors do.
They fix sewers, they get the trains running.
There isn't a left or a right way of doing.
Boris Johnson in London calls himself an anarcho-Tory.
Strange term, but in some ways, he is.
He's a libertarian. He's an anarchist.
He rides to work on a bike, but at the same time, he's in some ways a conservative.
Bloomberg in New York was a Democrat, then he was a Republican, and finally he was an Independent, and said the party label just gets in the way.
Luzhkov, 20 years mayor in Moscow, though he helped found a party, United Party with Putin, in fact refused to be defined by the party and finally, in fact, lost his job not under Brezhnev, not under Gorbachev, but under Putin, who wanted a more faithful party follower.
So mayors are pragmatists and problem-solvers.
They get things done.
But the second thing about mayors is they are also what I like to call homeboys, or to include the women mayors, homies.
They're from the neighborhood.
They're part of the neighborhood. They're known.
Ed Koch used to wander around New York City saying, "How am I doing?"
Imagine David Cameron wandering around the United Kingdom asking, "How am I doing?" He wouldn't like the answer.
Or Putin. Or any national leader.
He could ask that because he knew New Yorkers and they knew him.
Mayors are usually from the places they govern.
It's pretty hard to be a carpetbagger and be a mayor.
You can run for the Senate out of a different state, but it's hard to do that as a mayor.
And as a result, mayors and city councillors and local authorities have a much higher trust level, and this is the third feature about mayors, than national governing officials.
In the United States, we know the pathetic figures: 18 percent of Americans approve of Congress and what they do.
And even with a relatively popular president like Obama, the figures for the Presidency run about 40, 45, sometimes 50 percent at best.
The Supreme Court has fallen way down from what it used to be.
But when you ask, "Do you trust your city councillor, do you trust your mayor?"
the rates shoot up to 70, 75, even 80 percent, because they're from the neighborhood, because the people they work with are their neighbors, because, like Mayor Booker in Newark, a mayor is likely to get out of his car on the way to work and go in and pull people out of a burning building -- that happened to Mayor Booker -- or intervene in a mugging in the street as he goes to work because he sees it.
No head of state would be permitted by their security details to do it, nor be in a position to do it.
That's the difference, and the difference has to do with the character of cities themselves, because cities are profoundly multicultural, open, participatory, democratic, able to work with one another.
When states face each other, China and the U.S., they face each other like this.
When cities interact, they interact like this.
China and the U.S., despite the recent meta-meeting in California, are locked in all kinds of anger, resentment, and rivalry for number one.
We heard more about who will be number one.
Cities don't worry about number one.
They have to work together, and they do work together.
They work together in climate change, for example.
Organizations like the C40, like ICLEI, which I mentioned, have been working together many, many years before Copenhagen.
In Copenhagen, four or five years ago, 184 nations came together to explain to one another why their sovereignty didn't permit them to deal with the grave, grave crisis of climate change, but the mayor of Copenhagen had invited 200 mayors to attend.
They came, they stayed, and they found ways and are still finding ways to work together, city-to-city, and through inter-city organizations.
Eighty percent of carbon emissions come from cities, which means cities are in a position to solve the carbon problem, or most of it, whether or not the states of which they are a part make agreements with one another.
And they are doing it.
Los Angeles cleaned up its port, which was 40 percent of carbon emissions, and as a result got rid of about 20 percent of carbon.
New York has a program to upgrade its old buildings, make them better insulated in the winter, to not leak energy in the summer, not leak air conditioning. That's having an impact.
Bogota, where Mayor Mockus, when he was mayor, he introduced a transportation system that saved energy, that allowed surface buses to run in effect like subways, express buses with corridors.
It helped unemployment, because people could get across town, and it had a profound impact on climate as well as many other things there.
Singapore, as it developed its high-rises and its remarkable public housing, also developed an island of parks, and if you go there, you'll see how much of it is green land and park land.
Cities are doing this, but not just one by one.
They are doing it together.
They are sharing what they do, and they are making a difference by shared best practices.
Bike shares, many of you have heard of it, started 20 or 30 years ago in Latin America.
Now it's in hundreds of cities around the world.
Pedestrian zones, congestion fees, emission limits in cities like California cities have, there's lots and lots that cities can do even when opaque, stubborn nations refuse to act.
So what's the bottom line here?
The bottom line is, we still live politically in a world of borders, a world of boundaries, a world of walls, a world where states refuse to act together.
Yet we know that the reality we experience day to day is a world without borders, a world of diseases without borders and doctors without borders, maladies sans frontières, Médecins Sans Frontières, of economics and technology without borders, of education without borders, of terrorism and war without borders.
That is the real world, and unless we find a way to globalize democracy or democratize globalization, we will increasingly not only risk the failure to address all of these transnational problems, but we will risk losing democracy itself, locked up in the old nation-state box, unable to address global problems democratically.
So where does that leave us?
I'll tell you. The road to global democracy doesn't run through states.
It runs through cities.
Democracy was born in the ancient polis.
I believe it can be reborn in the global cosmopolis.
In that journey from polis to cosmopolis, we can rediscover the power of democracy on a global level.
We can create not a League of Nations, which failed, but a League of Cities, not a United or a dis-United Nations, but United Cities of the World.
We can create a global parliament of mayors.
That's an idea. It's in my conception of the coming world, but it's also on the table in City Halls in Seoul, Korea, in Amsterdam, in Hamburg, and in New York.
Mayors are considering that idea of how you can actually constitute a global parliament of mayors, and I love that idea, because a parliament of mayors is a parliament of citizens and a parliament of citizens is a parliament of us, of you and of me.
If ever there were citizens without borders, I think it's the citizens of TED who show the promise to be those citizens without borders.
I am ready to reach out and embrace a new global democracy, to take back our democracy.
And the only question is, are you?
Thank you so much, my fellow citizens.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
I'd like to tell you about a legal case that I worked on involving a man named Steve Titus.
Titus was a restaurant manager.
He was 31 years old, he lived in Seattle, Washington, he was engaged to Gretchen, about to be married, she was the love of his life.
And one night, the couple went out for a romantic restaurant meal.
They were on their way home, and they were pulled over by a police officer.
You see, Titus' car sort of resembled a car that was driven earlier in the evening by a man who raped a female hitchhiker, and Titus kind of resembled that rapist.
So the police took a picture of Titus, they put it in a photo lineup, they later showed it to the victim, and she pointed to Titus' photo.
She said, "That one's the closest."
The police and the prosecution proceeded with a trial, and when Steve Titus was put on trial for rape, the rape victim got on the stand and said, "I'm absolutely positive that's the man."
And Titus was convicted.
He proclaimed his innocence, his family screamed at the jury, his fiancée collapsed on the floor sobbing, and Titus is taken away to jail.
So what would you do at this point?
What would you do?
Well, Titus lost complete faith in the legal system, and yet he got an idea.
He called up the local newspaper, he got the interest of an investigative journalist, and that journalist actually found the real rapist, a man who ultimately confessed to this rape, a man who was thought to have committed 50 rapes in that area, and when this information was given to the judge, the judge set Titus free.
And really, that's where this case should have ended.
It should have been over.
Titus should have thought of this as a horrible year, a year of accusation and trial, but over.
It didn't end that way.
Titus was so bitter.
He'd lost his job. He couldn't get it back.
He lost his fiancée.
She couldn't put up with his persistent anger.
He lost his entire savings, and so he decided to file a lawsuit against the police and others whom he felt were responsible for his suffering.
And that's when I really started working on this case, trying to figure out how did that victim go from "That one's the closest" to "I'm absolutely positive that's the guy."
Well, Titus was consumed with his civil case.
He spent every waking moment thinking about it, and just days before he was to have his day in court, he woke up in the morning, doubled over in pain, and died of a stress-related heart attack.
He was 35 years old.
So I was asked to work on Titus' case because I'm a psychological scientist.
I study memory. I've studied memory for decades.
And if I meet somebody on an airplane -- this happened on the way over to Scotland -- if I meet somebody on an airplane, and we ask each other, "What do you do? What do you do?"
and I say "I study memory," they usually want to tell me how they have trouble remembering names, or they've got a relative who's got Alzheimer's or some kind of memory problem, but I have to tell them I don't study when people forget.
I study the opposite: when they remember, when they remember things that didn't happen or remember things that were different from the way they really were.
I study false memories.
Unhappily, Steve Titus is not the only person to be convicted based on somebody's false memory.
In one project in the United States, information has been gathered on 300 innocent people, 300 defendants who were convicted of crimes they didn't do.
They spent 10, 20, 30 years in prison for these crimes, and now DNA testing has proven that they are actually innocent.
And when those cases have been analyzed, three quarters of them are due to faulty memory, faulty eyewitness memory.
Well, why?
Like the jurors who convicted those innocent people and the jurors who convicted Titus, many people believe that memory works like a recording device.
You just record the information, then you call it up and play it back when you want to answer questions or identify images.
But decades of work in psychology has shown that this just isn't true.
Our memories are constructive.
They're reconstructive.
Memory works a little bit more like a Wikipedia page: You can go in there and change it, but so can other people.
I first started studying this constructive memory process in the 1970s.
I did my experiments that involved showing people simulated crimes and accidents and asking them questions about what they remember.
In one study, we showed people a simulated accident and we asked people, how fast were the cars going when they hit each other?
And we asked other people, how fast were the cars going when they smashed into each other?
And if we asked the leading "smashed" question, the witnesses told us the cars were going faster, and moreover, that leading "smashed" question caused people to be more likely to tell us that they saw broken glass in the accident scene when there wasn't any broken glass at all.
In another study, we showed a simulated accident where a car went through an intersection with a stop sign, and if we asked a question that insinuated it was a yield sign, many witnesses told us they remember seeing a yield sign at the intersection, not a stop sign.
And you might be thinking, well, you know, these are filmed events, they are not particularly stressful.
Would the same kind of mistakes be made with a really stressful event?
In a study we published just a few months ago, we have an answer to this question, because what was unusual about this study is we arranged for people to have a very stressful experience.
The subjects in this study were members of the U.S. military who were undergoing a harrowing training exercise to teach them what it's going to be like for them if they are ever captured as prisoners of war.
And as part of this training exercise, these soldiers are interrogated in an aggressive, hostile, physically abusive fashion for 30 minutes and later on they have to try to identify the person who conducted that interrogation.
And when we feed them suggestive information that insinuates it's a different person, many of them misidentify their interrogator, often identifying someone who doesn't even remotely resemble the real interrogator.
And so what these studies are showing is that when you feed people misinformation about some experience that they may have had, you can distort or contaminate or change their memory.
Well out there in the real world, misinformation is everywhere.
We get misinformation not only if we're questioned in a leading way, but if we talk to other witnesses who might consciously or inadvertently feed us some erroneous information, or if we see media coverage about some event we might have experienced, all of these provide the opportunity for this kind of contamination of our memory.
In the 1990s, we began to see an even more extreme kind of memory problem.
Some patients were going into therapy with one problem -- maybe they had depression, an eating disorder -- and they were coming out of therapy with a different problem.
Extreme memories for horrific brutalizations, sometimes in satanic rituals, sometimes involving really bizarre and unusual elements.
One woman came out of psychotherapy believing that she'd endured years of ritualistic abuse, where she was forced into a pregnancy and that the baby was cut from her belly.
But there were no physical scars or any kind of physical evidence that could have supported her story.
And when I began looking into these cases, I was wondering, where do these bizarre memories come from?
And what I found is that most of these situations involved some particular form of psychotherapy.
And so I asked, were some of the things going on in this psychotherapy -- like the imagination exercises or dream interpretation, or in some cases hypnosis, or in some cases exposure to false information -- were these leading these patients to develop these very bizarre, unlikely memories?
And I designed some experiments to try to study the processes that were being used in this psychotherapy so I could study the development of these very rich false memories.
In one of the first studies we did, we used suggestion, a method inspired by the psychotherapy we saw in these cases, we used this kind of suggestion and planted a false memory that when you were a kid, five or six years old, you were lost in a shopping mall.
You were frightened. You were crying.
You were ultimately rescued by an elderly person and reunited with the family.
And we succeeded in planting this memory in the minds of about a quarter of our subjects.
And you might be thinking, well, that's not particularly stressful.
But we and other investigators have planted rich false memories of things that were much more unusual and much more stressful.
So in a study done in Tennessee, researchers planted the false memory that when you were a kid, you nearly drowned and had to be rescued by a life guard.
And in a study done in Canada, researchers planted the false memory that when you were a kid, something as awful as being attacked by a vicious animal happened to you, succeeding with about half of their subjects.
And in a study done in Italy, researchers planted the false memory, when you were a kid, you witnessed demonic possession.
I do want to add that it might seem like we are traumatizing these experimental subjects in the name of science, but our studies have gone through thorough evaluation by research ethics boards that have made the decision that the temporary discomfort that some of these subjects might experience in these studies is outweighed by the importance of this problem for understanding memory processes and the abuse of memory that is going on in some places in the world.
Well, to my surprise, when I published this work and began to speak out against this particular brand of psychotherapy, it created some pretty bad problems for me: hostilities, primarily from the repressed memory therapists, who felt under attack, and by the patients whom they had influenced.
I had sometimes armed guards at speeches that I was invited to give, people trying to drum up letter-writing campaigns to get me fired.
But probably the worst was I suspected that a woman was innocent of abuse that was being claimed by her grown daughter.
She accused her mother of sexual abuse based on a repressed memory.
And this accusing daughter had actually allowed her story to be filmed and presented in public places.
I was suspicious of this story, and so I started to investigate, and eventually found information that convinced me that this mother was innocent.
I published an exposé on the case, and a little while later, the accusing daughter filed a lawsuit.
Even though I'd never mentioned her name, she sued me for defamation and invasion of privacy.
And I went through nearly five years of dealing with this messy, unpleasant litigation, but finally, finally, it was over and I could really get back to my work.
In the process, however, I became part of a disturbing trend in America where scientists are being sued for simply speaking out on matters of great public controversy.
When I got back to my work, I asked this question: if I plant a false memory in your mind, does it have repercussions?
Does it affect your later thoughts, your later behaviors?
Our first study planted a false memory that you got sick as a child eating certain foods: hard-boiled eggs, dill pickles, strawberry ice cream.
And we found that once we planted this false memory, people didn't want to eat the foods as much at an outdoor picnic.
The false memories aren't necessarily bad or unpleasant.
If we planted a warm, fuzzy memory involving a healthy food like asparagus, we could get people to want to eat asparagus more.
And so what these studies are showing is that you can plant false memories and they have repercussions that affect behavior long after the memories take hold.
Well, along with this ability to plant memories and control behavior obviously come some important ethical issues, like, when should we use this mind technology?
And should we ever ban its use?
Therapists can't ethically plant false memories in the mind of their patients even if it would help the patient, but there's nothing to stop a parent from trying this out on their overweight or obese teenager.
And when I suggested this publicly, it created an outcry again.
"There she goes. She's advocating that parents lie to their children."
Hello, Santa Claus. (Laughter) I mean, another way to think about this is, which would you rather have, a kid with obesity, diabetes, shortened lifespan, all the things that go with it, or a kid with one little extra bit of false memory?
I know what I would choose for a kid of mine.
But maybe my work has made me different from most people.
Most people cherish their memories, know that they represent their identity, who they are, where they came from.
And I appreciate that. I feel that way too.
But I know from my work how much fiction is already in there.
If I've learned anything from these decades of working on these problems, it's this: just because somebody tells you something and they say it with confidence, just because they say it with lots of detail, just because they express emotion when they say it, it doesn't mean that it really happened.
We can't reliably distinguish true memories from false memories.
We need independent corroboration.
Such a discovery has made me more tolerant of the everyday memory mistakes that my friends and family members make.
Such a discovery might have saved Steve Titus, the man whose whole future was snatched away by a false memory.
But meanwhile, we should all keep in mind, we'd do well to, that memory, like liberty, is a fragile thing.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. (Applause) Thanks very much. (Applause)
There is an ancient proverb that says it's very difficult to find a black cat in a dark room, especially when there is no cat.
I find this a particularly apt description of science and how science works -- bumbling around in a dark room, bumping into things, trying to figure out what shape this might be, what that might be, there are reports of a cat somewhere around, they may not be reliable, they may be, and so forth and so on.
Now I know this is different than the way most people think about science.
Science, we generally are told, is a very well-ordered mechanism for understanding the world, for gaining facts, for gaining data, that it's rule-based, that scientists use this thing called the scientific method and we've been doing this for 14 generations or so now, and the scientific method is a set of rules for getting hard, cold facts out of the data.
I'd like to tell you that's not the case.
So there's the scientific method, but what's really going on is this. (Laughter) [The Scientific Method vs. Farting Around] And it's going on kind of like that.
[... in the dark] (Laughter) So what is the difference, then, between the way I believe science is pursued and the way it seems to be perceived?
So this difference first came to me in some ways in my dual role at Columbia University, where I'm both a professor and run a laboratory in neuroscience where we try to figure out how the brain works.
We do this by studying the sense of smell, the sense of olfaction, and in the laboratory, it's a great pleasure and fascinating work and exciting to work with graduate students and post-docs and think up cool experiments to understand how this sense of smell works and how the brain might be working, and, well, frankly, it's kind of exhilarating.
But at the same time, it's my responsibility to teach a large course to undergraduates on the brain, and that's a big subject, and it takes quite a while to organize that, and it's quite challenging and it's quite interesting, but I have to say, it's not so exhilarating.
So what was the difference?
Well, the course I was and am teaching is called Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience - I. (Laughs) It's 25 lectures full of all sorts of facts, it uses this giant book called "Principles of Neural Science" by three famous neuroscientists.
This book comes in at 1,414 pages, it weighs a hefty seven and a half pounds.
Just to put that in some perspective, that's the weight of two normal human brains.
(Laughter) So I began to realize, by the end of this course, that the students maybe were getting the idea that we must know everything there is to know about the brain.
That's clearly not true.
And they must also have this idea, I suppose, that what scientists do is collect data and collect facts and stick them in these big books.
And that's not really the case either.
When I go to a meeting, after the meeting day is over and we collect in the bar over a couple of beers with my colleagues, we never talk about what we know.
We talk about what we don't know.
We talk about what still has to get done, what's so critical to get done in the lab.
Indeed, this was, I think, best said by Marie Curie who said that one never notices what has been done but only what remains to be done.
This was in a letter to her brother after obtaining her second graduate degree, I should say.
I have to point out this has always been one of my favorite pictures of Marie Curie, because I am convinced that that glow behind her is not a photographic effect. (Laughter) That's the real thing.
It is true that her papers are, to this day, stored in a basement room in the Bibliothèque Française in a concrete room that's lead-lined, and if you're a scholar and you want access to these notebooks, you have to put on a full radiation hazmat suit, so it's pretty scary business.
Nonetheless, this is what I think we were leaving out of our courses and leaving out of the interaction that we have with the public as scientists, the what-remains-to-be-done.
This is the stuff that's exhilarating and interesting.
It is, if you will, the ignorance.
That's what was missing.
So I thought, well, maybe I should teach a course on ignorance, something I can finally excel at, perhaps, for example.
So I did start teaching this course on ignorance, and it's been quite interesting and I'd like to tell you to go to the website.
You can find all sorts of information there. It's wide open.
And it's been really quite an interesting time for me to meet up with other scientists who come in and talk about what it is they don't know.
Now I use this word "ignorance," of course, to be at least in part intentionally provocative, because ignorance has a lot of bad connotations and I clearly don't mean any of those.
So I don't mean stupidity, I don't mean a callow indifference to fact or reason or data.
The ignorant are clearly unenlightened, unaware, uninformed, and present company today excepted, often occupy elected offices, it seems to me.
That's another story, perhaps.
I mean a different kind of ignorance.
I mean a kind of ignorance that's less pejorative, a kind of ignorance that comes from a communal gap in our knowledge, something that's just not there to be known or isn't known well enough yet or we can't make predictions from, the kind of ignorance that's maybe best summed up in a statement by James Clerk Maxwell, perhaps the greatest physicist between Newton and Einstein, who said, "Thoroughly conscious ignorance is the prelude to every real advance in science."
I think it's a wonderful idea: thoroughly conscious ignorance.
So that's the kind of ignorance that I want to talk about today, but of course the first thing we have to clear up is what are we going to do with all those facts?
So it is true that science piles up at an alarming rate.
We all have this sense that science is this mountain of facts, this accumulation model of science, as many have called it, and it seems impregnable, it seems impossible.
How can you ever know all of this?
And indeed, the scientific literature grows at an alarming rate.
In 2006, there were 1.3 million papers published.
There's about a two-and-a-half-percent yearly growth rate, and so last year we saw over one and a half million papers being published.
Divide that by the number of minutes in a year, and you wind up with three new papers per minute.
So I've been up here a little over 10 minutes, I've already lost three papers.
I have to get out of here actually. I have to go read.
So what do we do about this? Well, the fact is that what scientists do about it is a kind of a controlled neglect, if you will.
We just don't worry about it, in a way.
The facts are important. You have to know a lot of stuff to be a scientist. That's true.
But knowing a lot of stuff doesn't make you a scientist.
You need to know a lot of stuff to be a lawyer or an accountant or an electrician or a carpenter.
But in science, knowing a lot of stuff is not the point.
Knowing a lot of stuff is there to help you get to more ignorance.
So knowledge is a big subject, but I would say ignorance is a bigger one.
So this leads us to maybe think about, a little bit about, some of the models of science that we tend to use, and I'd like to disabuse you of some of them.
So one of them, a popular one, is that scientists are patiently putting the pieces of a puzzle together to reveal some grand scheme or another.
This is clearly not true. For one, with puzzles, the manufacturer has guaranteed that there's a solution.
We don't have any such guarantee.
Indeed, there are many of us who aren't so sure about the manufacturer.
(Laughter) So I think the puzzle model doesn't work.
Another popular model is that science is busy unraveling things the way you unravel the peels of an onion.
So peel by peel, you take away the layers of the onion to get at some fundamental kernel of truth.
I don't think that's the way it works either.
Another one, a kind of popular one, is the iceberg idea, that we only see the tip of the iceberg but underneath is where most of the iceberg is hidden.
But all of these models are based on the idea of a large body of facts that we can somehow or another get completed.
We can chip away at this iceberg and figure out what it is, or we could just wait for it to melt, I suppose, these days, but one way or another we could get to the whole iceberg. Right?
Or make it manageable. But I don't think that's the case.
I think what really happens in science is a model more like the magic well, where no matter how many buckets you take out, there's always another bucket of water to be had, or my particularly favorite one, with the effect and everything, the ripples on a pond.
So if you think of knowledge being this ever-expanding ripple on a pond, the important thing to realize is that our ignorance, the circumference of this knowledge, also grows with knowledge.
So the knowledge generates ignorance.
This is really well said, I thought, by George Bernard Shaw.
This is actually part of a toast that he delivered to celebrate Einstein at a dinner celebrating Einstein's work, in which he claims that science just creates more questions than it answers. ["Science is always wrong. It never solves a problem without creating 10 more."] I find that kind of glorious, and I think he's precisely right, plus it's a kind of job security.
As it turns out, he kind of cribbed that from the philosopher Immanuel Kant who a hundred years earlier had come up with this idea of question propagation, that every answer begets more questions.
I love that term, "question propagation," this idea of questions propagating out there.
So I'd say the model we want to take is not that we start out kind of ignorant and we get some facts together and then we gain knowledge.
It's rather kind of the other way around, really.
What do we use this knowledge for?
What are we using this collection of facts for?
We're using it to make better ignorance, to come up with, if you will, higher-quality ignorance.
Because, you know, there's low-quality ignorance and there's high-quality ignorance. It's not all the same.
Scientists argue about this all the time.
Sometimes we call them bull sessions.
Sometimes we call them grant proposals.
But nonetheless, it's what the argument is about.
It's the ignorance. It's the what we don't know.
It's what makes a good question.
So how do we think about these questions?
I'm going to show you a graph that shows up quite a bit on happy hour posters in various science departments.
This graph asks the relationship between what you know and how much you know about it.
So what you know, you can know anywhere from nothing to everything, of course, and how much you know about it can be anywhere from a little to a lot.
So let's put a point on the graph. There's an undergraduate.
Doesn't know much but they have a lot of interest.
They're interested in almost everything.
Now you look at a master's student, a little further along in their education, and you see they know a bit more, but it's been narrowed somewhat.
And finally you get your Ph.D., where it turns out you know a tremendous amount about almost nothing. (Laughter) What's really disturbing is the trend line that goes through that because, of course, when it dips below the zero axis, there, it gets into a negative area.
That's where you find people like me, I'm afraid.
So the important thing here is that this can all be changed.
This whole view can be changed by just changing the label on the x-axis.
So instead of how much you know about it, we could say, "What can you ask about it?"
So yes, you do need to know a lot of stuff as a scientist, but the purpose of knowing a lot of stuff is not just to know a lot of stuff. That just makes you a geek, right?
Knowing a lot of stuff, the purpose is to be able to ask lots of questions, to be able to frame thoughtful, interesting questions, because that's where the real work is.
Let me give you a quick idea of a couple of these sorts of questions.
I'm a neuroscientist, so how would we come up with a question in neuroscience?
Because it's not always quite so straightforward.
So, for example, we could say, well what is it that the brain does?
Well, one thing the brain does, it moves us around.
We walk around on two legs.
That seems kind of simple, somehow or another.
I mean, virtually everybody over 10 months of age walks around on two legs, right?
So that maybe is not that interesting.
So instead maybe we want to choose something a little more complicated to look at.
How about the visual system?
There it is, the visual system.
I mean, we love our visual systems. We do all kinds of cool stuff.
Indeed, there are over 12,000 neuroscientists who work on the visual system, from the retina to the visual cortex, in an attempt to understand not just the visual system but to also understand how general principles of how the brain might work.
But now here's the thing: Our technology has actually been pretty good at replicating what the visual system does.
We have TV, we have movies, we have animation, we have photography, we have pattern recognition, all of these sorts of things.
They work differently than our visual systems in some cases, but nonetheless we've been pretty good at making a technology work like our visual system.
Somehow or another, a hundred years of robotics, you never saw a robot walk on two legs, because robots don't walk on two legs because it's not such an easy thing to do.
A hundred years of robotics, and we can't get a robot that can move more than a couple steps one way or the other.
You ask them to go up an inclined plane, and they fall over.
Turn around, and they fall over. It's a serious problem.
So what is it that's the most difficult thing for a brain to do?
What ought we to be studying?
Perhaps it ought to be walking on two legs, or the motor system.
I'll give you an example from my own lab, my own particularly smelly question, since we work on the sense of smell.
But here's a diagram of five molecules and sort of a chemical notation.
These are just plain old molecules, but if you sniff those molecules up these two little holes in the front of your face, you will have in your mind the distinct impression of a rose.
If there's a real rose there, those molecules will be the ones, but even if there's no rose there, you'll have the memory of a molecule.
How do we turn molecules into perceptions?
What's the process by which that could happen?
Here's another example: two very simple molecules, again in this kind of chemical notation.
It might be easier to visualize them this way, so the gray circles are carbon atoms, the white ones are hydrogen atoms and the red ones are oxygen atoms.
Now these two molecules differ by only one carbon atom and two little hydrogen atoms that ride along with it, and yet one of them, heptyl acetate, has the distinct odor of a pear, and hexyl acetate is unmistakably banana.
So there are two really interesting questions here, it seems to me.
One is, how can a simple little molecule like that create a perception in your brain that's so clear as a pear or a banana?
And secondly, how the hell can we tell the difference between two molecules that differ by a single carbon atom?
I mean, that's remarkable to me, clearly the best chemical detector on the face of the planet.
And you don't even think about it, do you?
So this is a favorite quote of mine that takes us back to the ignorance and the idea of questions.
I like to quote because I think dead people shouldn't be excluded from the conversation.
And I also think it's important to realize that the conversation's been going on for a while, by the way.
So Erwin Schrodinger, a great quantum physicist and, I think, philosopher, points out how you have to "abide by ignorance for an indefinite period" of time.
And it's this abiding by ignorance that I think we have to learn how to do.
This is a tricky thing. This is not such an easy business.
I guess it comes down to our education system, so I'm going to talk a little bit about ignorance and education, because I think that's where it really has to play out.
So for one, let's face it, in the age of Google and Wikipedia, the business model of the university and probably secondary schools is simply going to have to change.
We just can't sell facts for a living anymore.
They're available with a click of the mouse, or if you want to, you could probably just ask the wall one of these days, wherever they're going to hide the things that tell us all this stuff.
So what do we have to do? We have to give our students a taste for the boundaries, for what's outside that circumference, for what's outside the facts, what's just beyond the facts.
How do we do that?
Well, one of the problems, of course, turns out to be testing.
We currently have an educational system which is very efficient but is very efficient at a rather bad thing.
So in second grade, all the kids are interested in science, the girls and the boys.
They like to take stuff apart. They have great curiosity.
They like to investigate things. They go to science museums.
They like to play around. They're in second grade.
They're interested.
But by 11th or 12th grade, fewer than 10 percent of them have any interest in science whatsoever, let alone a desire to go into science as a career.
So we have this remarkably efficient system for beating any interest in science out of everybody's head.
Is this what we want?
I think this comes from what a teacher colleague of mine calls "the bulimic method of education."
You know. You can imagine what it is.
We just jam a whole bunch of facts down their throats over here and then they puke it up on an exam over here and everybody goes home with no added intellectual heft whatsoever.
This can't possibly continue to go on.
So what do we do? Well the geneticists, I have to say, have an interesting maxim they live by.
Geneticists always say, you always get what you screen for.
And that's meant as a warning.
So we always will get what we screen for, and part of what we screen for is in our testing methods.
Well, we hear a lot about testing and evaluation, and we have to think carefully when we're testing whether we're evaluating or whether we're weeding, whether we're weeding people out, whether we're making some cut.
Evaluation is one thing. You hear a lot about evaluation in the literature these days, in the educational literature, but evaluation really amounts to feedback and it amounts to an opportunity for trial and error.
It amounts to a chance to work over a longer period of time with this kind of feedback.
That's different than weeding, and usually, I have to tell you, when people talk about evaluation, evaluating students, evaluating teachers, evaluating schools, evaluating programs, that they're really talking about weeding.
And that's a bad thing, because then you will get what you select for, which is what we've gotten so far.
So I'd say what we need is a test that says, "What is x?"
and the answers are "I don't know, because no one does," or "What's the question?" Even better.
Or, "You know what, I'll look it up, I'll ask someone, I'll phone someone. I'll find out."
Because that's what we want people to do, and that's how you evaluate them.
And maybe for the advanced placement classes, it could be, "Here's the answer. What's the next question?"
That's the one I like in particular.
So let me end with a quote from William Butler Yeats, who said "Education is not about filling buckets; it is lighting fires."
So I'd say, let's get out the matches.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
We are going to take a quick voyage over the cognitive history of the 20th century, because during that century, our minds have altered dramatically.
As you all know, the cars that people drove in 1900 have altered because the roads are better and because of technology.
And our minds have altered, too.
We've gone from people who confronted a concrete world and analyzed that world primarily in terms of how much it would benefit them to people who confront a very complex world, and it's a world where we've had to develop new mental habits, new habits of mind.
And these include things like clothing that concrete world with classification, introducing abstractions that we try to make logically consistent, and also taking the hypothetical seriously, that is, wondering about what might have been rather than what is.
Now, this dramatic change was drawn to my attention through massive I.Q. gains over time, and these have been truly massive.
That is, we don't just get a few more questions right on I.Q. tests.
We get far more questions right on I.Q. tests than each succeeding generation back to the time that they were invented.
Indeed, if you score the people a century ago against modern norms, they would have an average I.Q. of 70.
If you score us against their norms, we would have an average I.Q. of 130.
Now this has raised all sorts of questions.
Were our immediate ancestors on the verge of mental retardation?
Because 70 is normally the score for mental retardation.
Or are we on the verge of all being gifted?
Because 130 is the cutting line for giftedness.
Now I'm going to try and argue for a third alternative that's much more illuminating than either of those, and to put this into perspective, let's imagine that a Martian came down to Earth and found a ruined civilization.
And this Martian was an archaeologist, and they found scores, target scores, that people had used for shooting.
And first they looked at 1865, and they found that in a minute, people had only put one bullet in the bullseye.
And then they found, in 1898, that they'd put about five bullets in the bullseye in a minute.
And then about 1918 they put a hundred bullets in the bullseye.
And initially, that archaeologist would be baffled.
They would say, look, these tests were designed to find out how much people were steady of hand, how keen their eyesight was, whether they had control of their weapon.
How could these performances have escalated to this enormous degree?
Well we now know, of course, the answer.
If that Martian looked at battlefields, they would find that people had only muskets at the time of the Civil War and that they had repeating rifles at the time of the Spanish-American War, and then they had machine guns by the time of World War I.
And, in other words, it was the equipment that was in the hands of the average soldier that was responsible, not greater keenness of eye or steadiness of hand.
Now what we have to imagine is the mental artillery that we have picked up over those hundred years, and I think again that another thinker will help us here, and that's Luria.
Luria looked at people just before they entered the scientific age, and he found that these people were resistant to classifying the concrete world.
They wanted to break it up into little bits that they could use.
He found that they were resistant to deducing the hypothetical, to speculating about what might be, and he found finally that they didn't deal well with abstractions or using logic on those abstractions.
Now let me give you a sample of some of his interviews.
He talked to the head man of a person in rural Russia.
They'd only had, as people had in 1900, about four years of schooling.
And he asked that particular person, what do crows and fish have in common?
And the fellow said, "Absolutely nothing.
You know, I can eat a fish. I can't eat a crow.
A crow can peck at a fish.
A fish can't do anything to a crow."
And Luria said, "But aren't they both animals?"
And he said, "Of course not.
One's a fish.
The other is a bird."
And he was interested, effectively, in what he could do with those concrete objects.
And then Luria went to another person, and he said to them, "There are no camels in Germany.
Hamburg is a city in Germany.
Are there camels in Hamburg?"
And the fellow said, "Well, if it's large enough, there ought to be camels there."
And Luria said, "But what do my words imply?"
And he said, "Well, maybe it's a small village, and there's no room for camels."
In other words, he was unwilling to treat this as anything but a concrete problem, and he was used to camels being in villages, and he was quite unable to use the hypothetical, to ask himself what if there were no camels in Germany.
A third interview was conducted with someone about the North Pole.
And Luria said, "At the North Pole, there is always snow.
Wherever there is always snow, the bears are white.
What color are the bears at the North Pole?"
And the response was, "Such a thing is to be settled by testimony.
If a wise person came from the North Pole and told me the bears were white, I might believe him, but every bear that I have seen is a brown bear."
Now you see again, this person has rejected going beyond the concrete world and analyzing it through everyday experience, and it was important to that person what color bears were -- that is, they had to hunt bears.
They weren't willing to engage in this.
One of them said to Luria, "How can we solve things that aren't real problems?
None of these problems are real.
How can we address them?"
Now, these three categories -- classification, using logic on abstractions, taking the hypothetical seriously -- how much difference do they make in the real world beyond the testing room?
And let me give you a few illustrations.
First, almost all of us today get a high school diploma.
That is, we've gone from four to eight years of education to 12 years of formal education, and 52 percent of Americans have actually experienced some type of tertiary education.
Now, not only do we have much more education, and much of that education is scientific, and you can't do science without classifying the world.
You can't do science without proposing hypotheses.
You can't do science without making it logically consistent.
And even down in grade school, things have changed.
In 1910, they looked at the examinations that the state of Ohio gave to 14-year-olds, and they found that they were all for socially valued concrete information.
They were things like, what are the capitals of the 44 or 45 states that existed at that time?
When they looked at the exams that the state of Ohio gave in 1990, they were all about abstractions.
They were things like, why is the largest city of a state rarely the capital?
And you were supposed to think, well, the state legislature was rural-controlled, and they hated the big city, so rather than putting the capital in a big city, they put it in a county seat.
They put it in Albany rather than New York.
They put it in Harrisburg rather than Philadelphia.
And so forth.
So the tenor of education has changed.
We are educating people to take the hypothetical seriously, to use abstractions, and to link them logically.
What about employment?
Well, in 1900, three percent of Americans practiced professions that were cognitively demanding.
Only three percent were lawyers or doctors or teachers.
Today, 35 percent of Americans practice cognitively demanding professions, not only to the professions proper like lawyer or doctor or scientist or lecturer, but many, many sub-professions having to do with being a technician, a computer programmer.
A whole range of professions now make cognitive demands.
And we can only meet the terms of employment in the modern world by being cognitively far more flexible.
And it's not just that we have many more people in cognitively demanding professions.
The professions have been upgraded.
Compare the doctor in 1900, who really had only a few tricks up his sleeve, with the modern general practitioner or specialist, with years of scientific training.
Compare the banker in 1900, who really just needed a good accountant and to know who was trustworthy in the local community for paying back their mortgage.
Well, the merchant bankers who brought the world to their knees may have been morally remiss, but they were cognitively very agile.
They went far beyond that 1900 banker.
They had to look at computer projections for the housing market.
They had to get complicated CDO-squared in order to bundle debt together and make debt look as if it were actually a profitable asset.
They had to prepare a case to get rating agencies to give it a AAA, though in many cases, they had virtually bribed the rating agencies.
And they also, of course, had to get people to accept these so-called assets and pay money for them even though they were highly vulnerable.
Or take a farmer today.
I take the farm manager of today as very different from the farmer of 1900.
So it hasn't just been the spread of cognitively demanding professions.
It's also been the upgrading of tasks like lawyer and doctor and what have you that have made demands on our cognitive faculties.
But I've talked about education and employment.
Some of the habits of mind that we have developed over the 20th century have paid off in unexpected areas.
I'm primarily a moral philosopher.
I merely have a holiday in psychology, and what interests me in general is moral debate.
Now over the last century, in developed nations like America, moral debate has escalated because we take the hypothetical seriously, and we also take universals seriously and look for logical connections.
When I came home in 1955 from university at the time of Martin Luther King, a lot of people came home at that time and started having arguments with their parents and grandparents.
My father was born in 1885, and he was mildly racially biased.
As an Irishman, he hated the English so much he didn't have much emotion for anyone else.
(Laughter) But he did have a sense that black people were inferior.
And when we said to our parents and grandparents, "How would you feel if tomorrow morning you woke up black?"
they said that is the dumbest thing you've ever said.
Who have you ever known who woke up in the morning -- (Laughter) -- that turned black?
In other words, they were fixed in the concrete mores and attitudes they had inherited.
They would not take the hypothetical seriously, and without the hypothetical, it's very difficult to get moral argument off the ground.
You have to say, imagine you were in Iran, and imagine that your relatives all suffered from collateral damage even though they had done no wrong.
How would you feel about that?
And if someone of the older generation says, well, our government takes care of us, and it's up to their government to take care of them, they're just not willing to take the hypothetical seriously.
Or take an Islamic father whose daughter has been raped, and he feels he's honor-bound to kill her.
Well, he's treating his mores as if they were sticks and stones and rocks that he had inherited, and they're unmovable in any way by logic.
They're just inherited mores.
Today we would say something like, well, imagine you were knocked unconscious and sodomized.
Would you deserve to be killed?
And he would say, well that's not in the Koran.
That's not one of the principles I've got.
Well you, today, universalize your principles.
You state them as abstractions and you use logic on them.
If you have a principle such as, people shouldn't suffer unless they're guilty of something, then to exclude black people you've got to make exceptions, don't you?
You have to say, well, blackness of skin, you couldn't suffer just for that.
It must be that blacks are somehow tainted.
And then we can bring empirical evidence to bear, can't we, and say, well how can you consider all blacks tainted when St. Augustine was black and Thomas Sowell is black.
And you can get moral argument off the ground, then, because you're not treating moral principles as concrete entities.
You're treating them as universals, to be rendered consistent by logic.
Now how did all of this arise out of I.Q. tests?
That's what initially got me going on cognitive history.
If you look at the I.Q. test, you find the gains have been greatest in certain areas.
The similarities subtest of the Wechsler is about classification, and we have made enormous gains on that classification subtest.
There are other parts of the I.Q. test battery that are about using logic on abstractions.
Some of you may have taken Raven's Progressive Matrices, and it's all about analogies.
And in 1900, people could do simple analogies.
That is, if you said to them, cats are like wildcats.
What are dogs like?
They would say wolves.
But by 1960, people could attack Raven's on a much more sophisticated level.
If you said, we've got two squares followed by a triangle, what follows two circles?
They could say a semicircle.
Just as a triangle is half of a square, a semicircle is half of a circle.
By 2010, college graduates, if you said two circles followed by a semicircle, two sixteens followed by what, they would say eight, because eight is half of 16.
That is, they had moved so far from the concrete world that they could even ignore the appearance of the symbols that were involved in the question.
Now, I should say one thing that's very disheartening.
We haven't made progress on all fronts.
One of the ways in which we would like to deal with the sophistication of the modern world is through politics, and sadly you can have humane moral principles, you can classify, you can use logic on abstractions, and if you're ignorant of history and of other countries, you can't do politics.
We've noticed, in a trend among young Americans, that they read less history and less literature and less material about foreign lands, and they're essentially ahistorical.
They live in the bubble of the present.
They don't know the Korean War from the war in Vietnam.
They don't know who was an ally of America in World War II.
Think how different America would be if every American knew that this is the fifth time Western armies have gone to Afghanistan to put its house in order, and if they had some idea of exactly what had happened on those four previous occasions.
(Laughter) And that is, they had barely left, and there wasn't a trace in the sand.
Or imagine how different things would be if most Americans knew that we had been lied into four of our last six wars.
You know, the Spanish didn't sink the battleship Maine, the Lusitania was not an innocent vessel but was loaded with munitions, the North Vietnamese did not attack the Seventh Fleet, and, of course, Saddam Hussein hated al Qaeda and had nothing to do with it, and yet the administration convinced 45 percent of the people that they were brothers in arms, when he would hang one from the nearest lamppost.
But I don't want to end on a pessimistic note.
The 20th century has shown enormous cognitive reserves in ordinary people that we have now realized, and the aristocracy was convinced that the average person couldn't make it, that they could never share their mindset or their cognitive abilities.
Lord Curzon once said he saw people bathing in the North Sea, and he said, "Why did no one tell me what white bodies the lower orders have?"
As if they were a reptile.
Well, Dickens was right and he was wrong. [Correction: Rudyard Kipling] [Kipling] said, "The colonel's lady and Judy O'Grady are sisters underneath the skin."
(Applause)
So I'm going to talk about trust, and I'm going to start by reminding you of the standard views that people have about trust.
I think these are so commonplace, they've become clichés of our society.
And I think there are three.
One's a claim: there has been a great decline in trust, very widely believed.
The second is an aim: we should have more trust.
And the third is a task: we should rebuild trust.
I think that the claim, the aim and the task are all misconceived.
So what I'm going to try to tell you today is a different story about a claim, an aim and a task which I think give one quite a lot better purchase on the matter.
First the claim: Why do people think trust has declined?
And if I really think about it on the basis of my own evidence, I don't know the answer.
I'm inclined to think it may have declined in some activities or some institutions and it might have grown in others.
I don't have an overview.
But, of course, I can look at the opinion polls, and the opinion polls are supposedly the source of a belief that trust has declined.
When you actually look at opinion polls across time, there's not much evidence for that.
That's to say, the people who were mistrusted 20 years ago, principally journalists and politicians, are still mistrusted.
And the people who were highly trusted 20 years ago are still rather highly trusted: judges, nurses.
The rest of us are in between, and by the way, the average person in the street is almost exactly midway.
But is that good evidence?
What opinion polls record is, of course, opinions.
What else can they record?
So they're looking at the generic attitudes that people report when you ask them certain questions.
Do you trust politicians? Do you trust teachers?
Now if somebody said to you, "Do you trust greengrocers?
Do you trust fishmongers?
Do you trust elementary school teachers?"
you would probably begin by saying, "To do what?"
And that would be a perfectly sensible response.
And you might say, when you understood the answer to that, "Well, I trust some of them, but not others."
That's a perfectly rational thing.
In short, in our real lives, we seek to place trust in a differentiated way.
We don't make an assumption that the level of trust that we will have in every instance of a certain type of official or office-holder or type of person is going to be uniform.
I might, for example, say that I certainly trust a certain elementary school teacher I know to teach the reception class to read, but in no way to drive the school minibus.
I might, after all, know that she wasn't a good driver.
I might trust my most loquacious friend to keep a conversation going but not -- but perhaps not to keep a secret.
Simple.
So if we've got those evidence in our ordinary lives of the way that trust is differentiated, why do we sort of drop all that intelligence when we think about trust more abstractly?
I think the polls are very bad guides to the level of trust that actually exists, because they try to obliterate the good judgment that goes into placing trust.
Secondly, what about the aim?
The aim is to have more trust.
Well frankly, I think that's a stupid aim.
It's not what I would aim at.
I would aim to have more trust in the trustworthy but not in the untrustworthy.
In fact, I aim positively to try not to trust the untrustworthy.
And I think, of those people who, for example, placed their savings with the very aptly named Mr. Madoff, who then made off with them, and I think of them, and I think, well, yes, too much trust.
More trust is not an intelligent aim in this life.
Intelligently placed and intelligently refused trust is the proper aim.
Well once one says that, one says, yeah, okay, that means that what matters in the first place is not trust but trustworthiness.
It's judging how trustworthy people are in particular respects.
And I think that judgment requires us to look at three things.
Are they competent? Are they honest? Are they reliable?
And if we find that a person is competent in the relevant matters, and reliable and honest, we'll have a pretty good reason to trust them, because they'll be trustworthy.
But if, on the other hand, they're unreliable, we might not.
I have friends who are competent and honest, but I would not trust them to post a letter, because they're forgetful.
I have friends who are very confident they can do certain things, but I realize that they overestimate their own competence.
And I'm very glad to say, I don't think I have many friends who are competent and reliable but extremely dishonest.
(Laughter) If so, I haven't yet spotted it.
But that's what we're looking for: trustworthiness before trust.
Trust is the response.
Trustworthiness is what we have to judge.
And, of course, it's difficult.
Across the last few decades, we've tried to construct systems of accountability for all sorts of institutions and professionals and officials and so on that will make it easier for us to judge their trustworthiness.
A lot of these systems have the converse effect.
They don't work as they're supposed to.
I remember I was talking with a midwife who said, "Well, you see, the problem is it takes longer to do the paperwork than to deliver the baby."
And all over our public life, our institutional life, we find that problem, that the system of accountability that is meant to secure trustworthiness and evidence of trustworthiness is actually doing the opposite.
It is distracting people who have to do difficult tasks, like midwives, from doing them by requiring them to tick the boxes, as we say.
You can all give your own examples there.
So so much for the aim.
The aim, I think, is more trustworthiness, and that is going to be different if we are trying to be trustworthy and communicate our trustworthiness to other people, and if we are trying to judge whether other people or office-holders or politicians are trustworthy.
It's not easy. It is judgment, and simple reaction, attitudes, don't do adequately here.
Now thirdly, the task.
Calling the task rebuilding trust, I think, also gets things backwards.
It suggests that you and I should rebuild trust.
Well, we can do that for ourselves.
We can rebuild a bit of trustworthiness.
We can do it two people together trying to improve trust.
But trust, in the end, is distinctive because it's given by other people.
You can't rebuild what other people give you.
You have to give them the basis for giving you their trust.
So you have to, I think, be trustworthy.
And that, of course, is because you can't fool all of the people all of the time, usually.
But you also have to provide usable evidence that you are trustworthy.
How to do it?
Well every day, all over the place, it's being done by ordinary people, by officials, by institutions, quite effectively.
Let me give you a simple commercial example.
The shop where I buy my socks says I may take them back, and they don't ask any questions.
They take them back and give me the money or give me the pair of socks of the color I wanted.
That's super. I trust them because they have made themselves vulnerable to me.
I think there's a big lesson in that.
If you make yourself vulnerable to the other party, then that is very good evidence that you are trustworthy and you have confidence in what you are saying.
So in the end, I think what we are aiming for is not very difficult to discern.
It is relationships in which people are trustworthy and can judge when and how the other person is trustworthy.
So the moral of all this is, we need to think much less about trust, let alone about attitudes of trust detected or mis-detected by opinion polls, much more about being trustworthy, and how you give people adequate, useful and simple evidence that you're trustworthy.
Thanks.
(Applause)
There's an ancient and universal concept that words have power, that spells exist, and that if we could only pronounce the right words, then -- whoosh! -- you know, an avalanche would come and wipe out the hobbits, right?
So this is a very attractive idea, because we're very lazy, like the Sorcerer's Apprentice, or the world's greatest computer programmer.
This idea has a lot of traction with us.
We love the idea that words, when pronounced, are little more than pure information, but they evoke physical action in the real world that helps us do work.
So, of course, with lots of programmable computers and robots around, this is an easy thing to picture.
How many of you know what I'm talking about?
Raise your right hand.
How many don't know what I'm talking about?
Raise your left hand.
So that's great. So that was too easy.
You guys have very insecure computers, OK?
So now the thing is, this is a different kind of spell.
This is a computer program made of zeros and ones.
It can be pronounced on a computer, does something like this.
The important thing is we can write it in a high-level language.
A computer magician can write this thing.
It can be compiled into zeros and ones and pronounced by a computer.
And that's what makes computers powerful, these high-level languages that can be compiled.
And so, I'm here to tell you, you don't need a computer to actually have a spell.
In fact, what you can do at the molecular level is that if you encode information -- you encode a spell or program as molecules -- then physics can actually directly interpret that information and run a program.
It's what happens in proteins.
When this amino-acid sequence gets pronounced as atoms, these little letters are sticky for each other.
It collapses into a three-dimensional shape that turns it into a nanomachine that actually cuts DNA.
The interesting thing is that if you change the sequence, you change the three-dimensional folding.
You get, now, a DNA stapler, instead.
These are the kind of molecular programs we want to be able to write.
The problem is, we don't know the machine language of proteins or have a compiler for proteins.
So I've joined a growing band of people that try to make molecular spells using DNA.
We use DNA because it's cheaper, it's easier to handle, it's something we understand really well -- so well, in fact, that we think we can actually write programming languages for DNA and have molecular compilers.
So then, we think we can do that.
One of my first questions doing this was: How can you make an arbitrary shape or pattern out of DNA?
I decided to use a type of DNA origami, where you take a long strand of DNA and fold it into whatever shape or pattern you might want.
So here's a shape.
I actually spent about a year in my home in my underwear, coding, like Linus [Torvalds], in that picture before.
This program takes a shape and spits out 250 DNA sequences.
These short DNA sequences are what are going to fold the long strand into this shape that we want to make.
So you send an e-mail with these sequences in it to a company, and the company pronounces them on a DNA synthesizer, a machine about the size of a photocopier.
And they take your e-mail, and every letter in your e-mail, they replace with a 30-atom cluster -- one for each letter, A, T, C and G in DNA.
They string them up in the right sequence, and then they send them back to you via FedEx.
So you get 250 of these in the mail in little tubes.
I mix them together, add a little bit of salt water, and then add this long strand I was telling you about, that I've stolen from a virus.
And then what happens is, you heat this whole thing up to about boiling.
You cool it down to room temperature, and as you do, those short strands do the following thing: each one of them binds that long strand in one place, and then has a second half that binds that long strand in a distant place, and brings those two parts of the long strand close together so they stick together.
So the net effect of all 250 of these strands is to fold the long strand into the shape you're looking for.
It'll approximate that shape.
We do this for real, in the test tube.
In each little drop of water, you get 50 billion of these guys.
With a microscope, you can see them on a surface.
The neat thing is if you change the sequence and change the spell, just change the sequence of the staples, you can make a molecule that looks like this.
And, you know, he likes to hang out with his buddies.
A lot of them are actually pretty good.
If you change the spell again, you change the sequence again, you get really nice, 130-nanometer triangles.
If you do it again, you can get arbitrary patterns.
So on a rectangle, you can paint patterns of North and South America, or the words, "DNA."
So that's DNA origami. That's one way.
There are many ways of casting molecular spells using DNA.
What we really want to do in the end is learn how to program self-assembly so we can build anything, right?
We want to be able to build technological artifacts that are maybe good for the world.
We want to learn how to build biological artifacts, like people and whales and trees.
And if it's the case that we can reach that level of complexity, if our ability to program molecules gets to be that good, then that will truly be magic.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
For a long time in my life, I felt like I'd been living two different lives.
There's the life that everyone sees, and then there's the life that only I see.
And in the life that everyone sees, who I am is a friend, a son, a brother, a stand-up comedian and a teenager.
That's the life everyone sees.
If you were to ask my friends and family to describe me, that's what they would tell you.
And that's a huge part of me. That is who I am.
And if you were to ask me to describe myself, I'd probably say some of those same things.
And I wouldn't be lying, but I wouldn't totally be telling you the truth, either, because the truth is, that's just the life everyone else sees.
In the life that only I see, who I am, who I really am, is someone who struggles intensely with depression.
I have for the last six years of my life, and I continue to every day.
Now, for someone who has never experienced depression or doesn't really know what that means, that might surprise them to hear, because there's this pretty popular misconception that depression is just being sad when something in your life goes wrong, when you break up with your girlfriend, when you lose a loved one, when you don't get the job you wanted.
But that's sadness. That's a natural thing.
That's a natural human emotion.
Real depression isn't being sad when something in your life goes wrong.
Real depression is being sad when everything in your life is going right.
That's real depression, and that's what I suffer from.
And to be totally honest, that's hard for me to stand up here and say.
It's hard for me to talk about, and it seems to be hard for everyone to talk about, so much so that no one's talking about it.
And no one's talking about depression, but we need to be, because right now it's a massive problem.
It's a massive problem.
But we don't see it on social media, right?
We don't see it on Facebook. We don't see it on Twitter.
We don't see it on the news, because it's not happy, it's not fun, it's not light.
And so because we don't see it, we don't see the severity of it.
But the severity of it and the seriousness of it is this: every 30 seconds, every 30 seconds, somewhere, someone in the world takes their own life because of depression, and it might be two blocks away, it might be two countries away, it might be two continents away, but it's happening, and it's happening every single day.
And we have a tendency, as a society, to look at that and go, "So what?"
So what? We look at that, and we go, "That's your problem.
That's their problem."
We say we're sad and we say we're sorry, but we also say, "So what?"
Well, two years ago it was my problem, because I sat on the edge of my bed where I'd sat a million times before and I was suicidal.
I was suicidal, and if you were to look at my life on the surface, you wouldn't see a kid who was suicidal.
You'd see a kid who was the captain of his basketball team, the drama and theater student of the year, the English student of the year, someone who was consistently on the honor roll and consistently at every party.
So you would say I wasn't depressed, you would say I wasn't suicidal, but you would be wrong.
You would be wrong. So I sat there that night beside a bottle of pills with a pen and paper in my hand and I thought about taking my own life and I came this close to doing it.
I came this close to doing it.
And I didn't, so that makes me one of the lucky ones, one of the people who gets to step out on the ledge and look down but not jump, one of the lucky ones who survives.
Well, I survived, and that just leaves me with my story, and my story is this: In four simple words, I suffer from depression.
I suffer from depression, and for a long time, I think, I was living two totally different lives, where one person was always afraid of the other.
I was afraid that people would see me for who I really was, that I wasn't the perfect, popular kid in high school everyone thought I was, that beneath my smile, there was struggle, and beneath my light, there was dark, and beneath my big personality just hid even bigger pain.
See, some people might fear girls not liking them back.
Some people might fear sharks. Some people might fear death.
But for me, for a large part of my life, I feared myself.
I feared my truth, I feared my honesty, I feared my vulnerability, and that fear made me feel like I was forced into a corner, like I was forced into a corner and there was only one way out, and so I thought about that way every single day.
I thought about it every single day, and if I'm being totally honest, standing here I've thought about it again since, because that's the sickness, that's the struggle, that's depression, and depression isn't chicken pox.
You don't beat it once and it's gone forever.
It's something you live with. It's something you live in.
It's the roommate you can't kick out. It's the voice you can't ignore.
It's the feelings you can't seem to escape, the scariest part is that after a while, you become numb to it. It becomes normal for you, and what you really fear the most isn't the suffering inside of you.
It's the stigma inside of others, it's the shame, it's the embarrassment, it's the disapproving look on a friend's face, it's the whispers in the hallway that you're weak, it's the comments that you're crazy.
That's what keeps you from getting help.
That's what makes you hold it in and hide it.
It's the stigma. So you hold it in and you hide it, and you hold it in and you hide it, and even though it's keeping you in bed every day and it's making your life feel empty no matter how much you try and fill it, you hide it, because the stigma in our society around depression is very real.
It's very real, and if you think that it isn't, ask yourself this: Would you rather make your next Facebook status say you're having a tough time getting out of bed because you hurt your back or you're having a tough time getting out of bed every morning because you're depressed?
That's the stigma, because unfortunately, we live in a world where if you break your arm, everyone runs over to sign your cast, but if you tell people you're depressed, everyone runs the other way.
That's the stigma.
We are so, so, so accepting of any body part breaking down other than our brains. And that's ignorance.
That's pure ignorance, and that ignorance has created a world that doesn't understand depression, that doesn't understand mental health.
And that's ironic to me, because depression is one of the best documented problems we have in the world, yet it's one of the least discussed.
We just push it aside and put it in a corner and pretend it's not there and hope it'll fix itself.
Well, it won't. It hasn't, and it's not going to, because that's wishful thinking, and wishful thinking isn't a game plan, it's procrastination, and we can't procrastinate on something this important.
The first step in solving any problem is recognizing there is one.
Well, we haven't done that, so we can't really expect to find an answer when we're still afraid of the question.
And I don't know what the solution is.
I wish I did, but I don't -- but I think, I think it has to start here.
It has to start with me, it has to start with you, it has to start with the people who are suffering, the ones who are hidden in the shadows.
We need to speak up and shatter the silence.
We need to be the ones who are brave for what we believe in, because if there's one thing that I've come to realize, if there's one thing that I see as the biggest problem, it's not in building a world where we eliminate the ignorance of others.
It's in building a world where we teach the acceptance of ourselves, where we're okay with who we are, because when we get honest, we see that we all struggle and we all suffer.
Whether it's with this, whether it's with something else, we all know what it is to hurt.
We all know what it is to have pain in our heart, and we all know how important it is to heal.
But right now, depression is society's deep cut that we're content to put a Band-Aid over and pretend it's not there.
Well, it is there. It is there, and you know what? It's okay.
Depression is okay. If you're going through it, know that you're okay.
And know that you're sick, you're not weak, and it's an issue, not an identity, because when you get past the fear and the ridicule and the judgment and the stigma of others, you can see depression for what it really is, and that's just a part of life, just a part of life, and as much as I hate, as much as I hate some of the places, some of the parts of my life depression has dragged me down to, in a lot of ways I'm grateful for it.
Because yeah, it's put me in the valleys, but only to show me there's peaks, and yeah it's dragged me through the dark but only to remind me there is light.
My pain, more than anything in 19 years on this planet, has given me perspective, and my hurt, my hurt has forced me to have hope, have hope and to have faith, faith in myself, faith in others, faith that it can get better, that we can change this, that we can speak up and speak out and fight back against ignorance, fight back against intolerance, and more than anything, learn to love ourselves, learn to accept ourselves for who we are, the people we are, not the people the world wants us to be.
Because the world I believe in is one where embracing your light doesn't mean ignoring your dark.
The world I believe in is one where we're measured by our ability to overcome adversities, not avoid them.
The world I believe in is one where I can look someone in the eye and say, "I'm going through hell," and they can look back at me and go, "Me too," and that's okay, and it's okay because depression is okay. We're people.
We're people, and we struggle and we suffer and we bleed and we cry, and if you think that true strength means never showing any weakness, then I'm here to tell you you're wrong.
You're wrong, because it's the opposite.
We're people, and we have problems.
We're not perfect, and that's okay.
So we need to stop the ignorance, stop the intolerance, stop the stigma, and stop the silence, and we need to take away the taboos, take a look at the truth, and start talking, because the only way we're going to beat a problem that people are battling alone is by standing strong together, by standing strong together.
And I believe that we can.
I believe that we can. Thank you guys so much.
This is a dream come true. Thank you. (Applause) Thank you. (Applause)
So I wanted to tell a story that really obsessed me when I was writing my new book, and it's a story of something that happened 3,000 years ago, when the Kingdom of Israel was in its infancy.
And it takes place in an area called the Shephelah in what is now Israel.
And the reason the story obsessed me is that I thought I understood it, and then I went back over it and I realized that I didn't understand it at all.
Ancient Palestine had a -- along its eastern border, there's a mountain range.
Still same is true of Israel today.
And in the mountain range are all of the ancient cities of that region, so Jerusalem, Bethlehem, Hebron.
And then there's a coastal plain along the Mediterranean, where Tel Aviv is now.
And connecting the mountain range with the coastal plain is an area called the Shephelah, which is a series of valleys and ridges that run east to west, and you can follow the Shephelah, go through the Shephelah to get from the coastal plain to the mountains.
And the Shephelah, if you've been to Israel, you'll know it's just about the most beautiful part of Israel.
It's gorgeous, with forests of oak and wheat fields and vineyards.
But more importantly, though, in the history of that region, it's served, it's had a real strategic function, and that is, it is the means by which hostile armies on the coastal plain find their way, get up into the mountains and threaten those living in the mountains.
And 3,000 years ago, that's exactly what happens.
The Philistines, who are the biggest of enemies of the Kingdom of Israel, are living in the coastal plain.
They're originally from Crete. They're a seafaring people.
And they may start to make their way through one of the valleys of the Shephelah up into the mountains, because what they want to do is occupy the highland area right by Bethlehem and split the Kingdom of Israel in two.
And the Kingdom of Israel, which is headed by King Saul, obviously catches wind of this, and Saul brings his army down from the mountains and he confronts the Philistines in the Valley of Elah, one of the most beautiful of the valleys of the Shephelah.
And the Israelites dig in along the northern ridge, and the Philistines dig in along the southern ridge, and the two armies just sit there for weeks and stare at each other, because they're deadlocked.
Neither can attack the other, because to attack the other side you've got to come down the mountain into the valley and then up the other side, and you're completely exposed.
So finally, to break the deadlock, the Philistines send their mightiest warrior down into the valley floor, and he calls out and he says to the Israelites, "Send your mightiest warrior down, and we'll have this out, just the two of us."
This was a tradition in ancient warfare called single combat.
It was a way of settling disputes without incurring the bloodshed of a major battle.
And the Philistine who is sent down, their mighty warrior, is a giant.
He's 6 foot 9.
He's outfitted head to toe in this glittering bronze armor, and he's got a sword and he's got a javelin and he's got his spear. He is absolutely terrifying.
And he's so terrifying that none of the Israelite soldiers want to fight him.
It's a death wish, right? There's no way they think they can take him.
And finally the only person who will come forward is this young shepherd boy, and he goes up to Saul and he says, "I'll fight him."
And Saul says, "You can't fight him. That's ridiculous.
You're this kid. This is this mighty warrior."
But the shepherd is adamant. He says, "No, no, no, you don't understand, I have been defending my flock against lions and wolves for years. I think I can do it."
And Saul has no choice. He's got no one else who's come forward.
So he says, "All right."
And then he turns to the kid, and he says, "But you've got to wear this armor. You can't go as you are."
So he tries to give the shepherd his armor, and the shepherd says, "No."
He says, "I can't wear this stuff."
The Biblical verse is, "I cannot wear this for I have not proved it," meaning, "I've never worn armor before. You've got to be crazy."
So he reaches down instead on the ground and picks up five stones and puts them in his shepherd's bag and starts to walk down the mountainside to meet the giant.
And the giant sees this figure approaching, and calls out, "Come to me so I can feed your flesh to the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the field."
He issues this kind of taunt towards this person coming to fight him.
And the shepherd draws closer and closer, and the giant sees that he's carrying a staff.
That's all he's carrying.
Instead of a weapon, just this shepherd's staff, and he says -- he's insulted -- "Am I a dog that you would come to me with sticks?"
And the shepherd boy takes one of his stones out of his pocket, puts it in his sling and rolls it around and lets it fly and it hits the giant right between the eyes -- right here, in his most vulnerable spot -- and he falls down either dead or unconscious, and the shepherd boy runs up and takes his sword and cuts off his head, and the Philistines see this and they turn and they just run.
And of course, the name of the giant is Goliath and the name of the shepherd boy is David, and the reason that story has obsessed me over the course of writing my book is that everything I thought I knew about that story turned out to be wrong.
So David, in that story, is supposed to be the underdog, right?
In fact, that term, David and Goliath, has entered our language as a metaphor for improbable victories by some weak party over someone far stronger.
Now why do we call David an underdog?
Well, we call him an underdog because he's a kid, a little kid, and Goliath is this big, strong giant.
We also call him an underdog because Goliath is an experienced warrior, and David is just a shepherd.
But most importantly, we call him an underdog because all he has is -- it's that Goliath is outfitted with all of this modern weaponry, this glittering coat of armor and a sword and a javelin and a spear, and all David has is this sling.
Well, let's start there with the phrase "All David has is this sling," because that's the first mistake that we make.
In ancient warfare, there are three kinds of warriors.
There's cavalry, men on horseback and with chariots.
There's heavy infantry, which are foot soldiers, armed foot soldiers with swords and shields and some kind of armor.
And there's artillery, and artillery are archers, but, more importantly, slingers.
And a slinger is someone who has a leather pouch with two long cords attached to it, and they put a projectile, either a rock or a lead ball, inside the pouch, and they whirl it around like this and they let one of the cords go, and the effect is to send the projectile forward towards its target.
That's what David has, and it's important to understand that that sling is not a slingshot.
It's not this, right? It's not a child's toy.
It's in fact an incredibly devastating weapon.
When David rolls it around like this, he's turning the sling around probably at six or seven revolutions per second, and that means that when the rock is released, it's going forward really fast, probably 35 meters per second.
That's substantially faster than a baseball thrown by even the finest of baseball pitchers.
More than that, the stones in the Valley of Elah were not normal rocks. They were barium sulphate, which are rocks twice the density of normal stones.
If you do the calculations on the ballistics, on the stopping power of the rock fired from David's sling, it's roughly equal to the stopping power of a [.45 caliber] handgun.
This is an incredibly devastating weapon.
Accuracy, we know from historical records that slingers -- experienced slingers could hit and maim or even kill a target at distances of up to 200 yards.
From medieval tapestries, we know that slingers were capable of hitting birds in flight.
They were incredibly accurate.
When David lines up -- and he's not 200 yards away from Goliath, he's quite close to Goliath -- when he lines up and fires that thing at Goliath, he has every intention and every expectation of being able to hit Goliath at his most vulnerable spot between his eyes.
If you go back over the history of ancient warfare, you will find time and time again that slingers were the decisive factor against infantry in one kind of battle or another.
So what's Goliath? He's heavy infantry, and his expectation when he challenges the Israelites to a duel is that he's going to be fighting another heavy infantryman.
When he says, "Come to me that I might feed your flesh to the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the field," the key phrase is "Come to me."
Come up to me because we're going to fight, hand to hand, like this.
Saul has the same expectation.
David says, "I want to fight Goliath," and Saul tries to give him his armor, because Saul is thinking, "Oh, when you say 'fight Goliath,' you mean 'fight him in hand-to-hand combat,' infantry on infantry."
But David has absolutely no expectation.
He's not going to fight him that way. Why would he?
He's a shepherd. He's spent his entire career using a sling to defend his flock against lions and wolves.
That's where his strength lies.
So here he is, this shepherd, experienced in the use of a devastating weapon, up against this lumbering giant weighed down by a hundred pounds of armor and these incredibly heavy weapons that are useful only in short-range combat.
Goliath is a sitting duck. He doesn't have a chance.
So why do we keep calling David an underdog, and why do we keep referring to his victory as improbable?
There's a second piece of this that's important.
It's not just that we misunderstand David and his choice of weaponry.
It's also that we profoundly misunderstand Goliath.
Goliath is not what he seems to be.
There's all kinds of hints of this in the Biblical text, things that are in retrospect quite puzzling and don't square with his image as this mighty warrior.
So to begin with, the Bible says that Goliath is led onto the valley floor by an attendant.
Now that is weird, right?
Here is this mighty warrior challenging the Israelites to one-on-one combat.
Why is he being led by the hand by some young boy, presumably, to the point of combat?
Secondly, the Bible story makes special note of how slowly Goliath moves, another odd thing to say when you're describing the mightiest warrior known to man at that point.
And then there's this whole weird thing about how long it takes Goliath to react to the sight of David.
So David's coming down the mountain, and he's clearly not preparing for hand-to-hand combat.
There is nothing about him that says, "I am about to fight you like this."
He's not even carrying a sword.
Why does Goliath not react to that?
It's as if he's oblivious to what's going on that day.
And then there's that strange comment he makes to David: "Am I a dog that you should come to me with sticks?"
Sticks? David only has one stick.
Well, it turns out that there's been a great deal of speculation within the medical community over the years about whether there is something fundamentally wrong with Goliath, an attempt to make sense of all of those apparent anomalies.
There have been many articles written.
The first one was in 1960 in the Indiana Medical Journal, and it started a chain of speculation that starts with an explanation for Goliath's height.
So Goliath is head and shoulders above all of his peers in that era, and usually when someone is that far out of the norm, there's an explanation for it.
So the most common form of giantism is a condition called acromegaly, and acromegaly is caused by a benign tumor on your pituitary gland that causes an overproduction of human growth hormone.
And throughout history, many of the most famous giants have all had acromegaly.
So the tallest person of all time was a guy named Robert Wadlow who was still growing when he died at the age of 24 and he was 8 foot 11.
He had acromegaly.
Do you remember the wrestler André the Giant?
Famous. He had acromegaly.
There's even speculation that Abraham Lincoln had acromegaly.
Anyone who's unusually tall, that's the first explanation we come up with.
And acromegaly has a very distinct set of side effects associated with it, principally having to do with vision.
The pituitary tumor, as it grows, often starts to compress the visual nerves in your brain, with the result that people with acromegaly have either double vision or they are profoundly nearsighted.
So when people have started to speculate about what might have been wrong with Goliath, they've said, "Wait a minute, he looks and sounds an awful lot like someone who has acromegaly."
And that would also explain so much of what was strange about his behavior that day.
Why does he move so slowly and have to be escorted down into the valley floor by an attendant?
Because he can't make his way on his own.
Why is he so strangely oblivious to David that he doesn't understand that David's not going to fight him until the very last moment?
Because he can't see him.
When he says, "Come to me that I might feed your flesh to the birds of the heavens and the beasts of the field," the phrase "come to me" is a hint also of his vulnerability.
Come to me because I can't see you.
And then there's, "Am I a dog that you should come to me with sticks?"
He sees two sticks when David has only one.
So the Israelites up on the mountain ridge looking down on him thought he was this extraordinarily powerful foe.
What they didn't understand was that the very thing that was the source of his apparent strength was also the source of his greatest weakness.
And there is, I think, in that, a very important lesson for all of us.
Giants are not as strong and powerful as they seem.
And sometimes the shepherd boy has a sling in his pocket.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I think it's safe to say that all humans will be intimate with death at least once in their lives.
But what if that intimacy began long before you faced your own transition from life into death?
What would life be like if the dead literally lived alongside you?
In my husband's homeland in the highlands of Sulawesi island in eastern Indonesia, there is a community of people that experience death not as a singular event but as a gradual social process.
In Tana Toraja, the most important social moments in people's lives, the focal points of social and cultural interaction are not weddings or births or even family dinners, but funerals.
So these funerals are characterized by elaborate rituals that tie people in a system of reciprocal debt based on the amount of animals -- pigs, chickens and, most importantly, water buffalo -- that are sacrificed and distributed in the name of the deceased.
So this cultural complex surrounding death, the ritual enactment of the end of life, has made death the most visible and remarkable aspect of Toraja's landscape.
Lasting anywhere from a few days to a few weeks, funeral ceremonies are a raucous affair, where commemorating someone who's died is not so much a private sadness but more of a publicly shared transition.
And it's a transition that's just as much about the identity of the living as it is about remembrance of the dead.
So every year, thousands of visitors come to Tana Toraja to see, as it were, this culture of death, and for many people these grandiose ceremonies and the length of the ceremonies are somehow incommensurable with the way that we face our own mortality in the West.
So even as we share death as a universal experience, it's not experienced the same way the world over.
And as an anthropologist, I see these differences in experience being rooted in the cultural and social world through which we define the phenomena around us.
So where we see an unquestionable reality, death as an irrefutable biological condition, Torajans see the expired corporeal form as part of a larger social genesis.
So again, the physical cessation of life is not the same as death.
In fact, a member of society is only truly dead when the extended family can agree upon and marshal the resources necessary to hold a funeral ceremony that is considered appropriate in terms of resources for the status of the deceased.
And this ceremony has to take place in front of the eyes of the whole community with everyone's participation.
So after a person's physical death, their body is placed in a special room in the traditional residence, which is called the tongkonan.
And the tongkonan is symbolic not only of the family's identity but also of the human life cycle from birth to death.
So essentially, the shape of the building that you're born into is the shape of the structure which carries you to your ancestral resting place.
Until the funeral ceremony, which can be held years after a person's physical death, the deceased is referred to as "to makala," a sick person, or "to mama," a person who is asleep, and they continue to be a member of the household.
They are symbolically fed and cared for, and the family at this time will begin a number of ritual injunctions, which communicates to the wider community around them that one of their members is undergoing the transition from this life into the afterlife known as Puya.
So I know what some of you must be thinking right now.
Is she really saying that these people live with the bodies of their dead relatives?
And that's exactly what I'm saying.
But instead of giving in to the sort of visceral reaction we have to this idea of proximity to bodies, proximity to death, or how this notion just does not fit into our very biological or medical sort of definition of death, I like to think about what the Torajan way of viewing death encompasses of the human experience that the medical definition leaves out.
I think that Torajans socially recognize and culturally express what many of us feel to be true despite the widespread acceptance of the biomedical definition of death, and that is that our relationships with other humans, their impact on our social reality, doesn't cease with the termination of the physical processes of the body, that there's a period of transition as the relationship between the living and the dead is transformed but not ended.
So Torajans express this idea of this enduring relationship by lavishing love and attention on the most visible symbol of that relationship, the human body.
So my husband has fond memories of talking to and playing with and generally being around his deceased grandfather, and for him there is nothing unnatural about this.
This is a natural part of the process as the family comes to terms with the transition in their relationship to the deceased, and this is the transition from relating to the deceased as a person who's living to relating to the deceased as a person who's an ancestor.
And here you can see these wooden effigies of the ancestors, so these are people who have already been buried, already had a funeral ceremony.
These are called tau tau.
So the funeral ceremony itself embodies this relational perspective on death.
It ritualizes the impact of death on families and communities.
And it's also a moment of self-awareness.
It's a moment when people think about who they are, their place in society, and their role in the life cycle in accordance with Torajan cosmology.
There's a saying in Toraja that all people will become grandparents, and what this means is that after death, we all become part of the ancestral line that anchors us between the past and the present and will define who our loved ones are into the future.
So essentially, we all become grandparents to the generations of human children that come after us.
And this metaphor of membership in the greater human family is the way that children also describe the money that they invest in these sacrificial buffaloes that are thought to carry people's soul from here to the afterlife, and children will explain that they will invest the money in this because they want to repay their parents the debt for all of the years their parents spent investing and caring for them.
But the sacrifice of buffalo and the ritual display of wealth also exhibits the status of the deceased, and, by extension, the deceased's family.
So at funerals, relationships are reconfirmed but also transformed in a ritual drama that highlights the most salient feature about death in this place: its impact on life and the relationships of the living.
So all of this focus on death doesn't mean that Torajans don't aspire to the ideal of a long life.
They engage in many practices thought to confer good health and survival to an advanced age.
But they don't put much stock in efforts to prolong life in the face of debilitating illness or in old age.
It's said in Toraja that everybody has sort of a predetermined amount of life.
It's called the sunga'.
And like a thread, it should be allowed to unspool to its natural end.
So by having death as a part of the cultural and social fabric of life, people's everyday decisions about their health and healthcare are affected.
The patriarch of my husband's maternal clan, Nenet Katcha, is now approaching the age of 100, as far as we can tell.
And there are increasing signs that he is about to depart on his own journey for Puya.
And his death will be greatly mourned.
But I know that my husband's family looks forward to the moment when they can ritually display what his remarkable presence has meant to their lives, when they can ritually recount his life's narrative, weaving his story into the history of their community.
His story is their story.
His funeral songs will sing them a song about themselves.
And it's a story that has no discernible beginning, no foreseeable end.
It's a story that goes on long after his body no longer does.
People ask me if I'm frightened or repulsed by participating in a culture where the physical manifestations of death greet us at every turn.
But I see something profoundly transformative in experiencing death as a social process and not just a biological one.
In reality, the relationship between the living and the dead has its own drama in the U.S. healthcare system, where decisions about how long to stretch the thread of life are made based on our emotional and social ties with the people around us, not just on medicine's ability to prolong life.
We, like the Torajans, base our decisions about life on the meanings and the definitions that we ascribe to death.
So I'm not suggesting that anyone in this audience should run out and adopt the traditions of the Torajans.
It might be a little bit difficult to put into play in the United States.
But I want to ask what we can gain from seeing physical death not only as a biological process but as part of the greater human story.
What would it be like to look on the expired human form with love because it's so intimately a part of who we all are?
If we could expand our definition of death to encompass life, we could experience death as part of life and perhaps face death with something other than fear.
Perhaps one of the answers to the challenges that are facing the U.S. healthcare system, particularly in the end-of-life care, is as simple as a shift in perspective, and the shift in perspective in this case would be to look at the social life of every death.
It might help us recognize that the way we limit our conversation about death to something that's medical or biological is reflective of a larger culture that we all share of avoiding death, being afraid of talking about it.
If we could entertain and value other kinds of knowledge about life, including other definitions of death, it has the potential to change the discussions that we have about the end of life.
It could change the way that we die, but more importantly, it could transform the way that we live.
(Applause)
So my name is Amy Webb, and a few years ago I found myself at the end of yet another fantastic relationship that came burning down in a spectacular fashion.
And I thought, what's wrong with me?
I don't understand why this keeps happening.
So I asked everybody in my life what they thought.
I turned to my grandmother, who always had plenty of advice, and she said, "Stop being so picky.
You've got to date around.
And most importantly, true love will find you when you least expect it."
Now as it turns out, I'm somebody who thinks a lot about data, as you'll soon find.
I am constantly swimming in numbers, formulas and charts.
I also have a very tight-knit family, and I'm very, very close with my sister, and as a result, I wanted to have the same type of family when I grew up.
So I'm at the end of this bad breakup, I'm 30 years old, I figure I'm probably going to have to date somebody for about six months before I'm ready to get monogamous and before we can sort of cohabitate, and we have to do that for a while before we can get engaged.
And if I want to start having children by the time I'm 35, that meant that I would have had to have been on my way to marriage five years ago.
So that wasn't going to work.
If my strategy was to least-expect my way into true love, then the variable that I had to deal with was serendipity.
In short, I was trying to figure out what's the probability of my finding Mr. Right?
Well, at the time I was living in the city of Philadelphia, and it's a big city, and I figured, in this entire place, there are lots of possibilities.
So again, I started doing some math.
Population of Philadelphia: it has 1.5 million people.
I figure about half of that are men, so that takes the number down to 750,000.
I'm looking for a guy between the ages of 30 and 36, which was only four percent of the population, so now I'm dealing with the possibility of 30,000 men.
I was looking for somebody who was Jewish, because I am and that was important to me.
That's only 2.3 percent of the population.
I figure I'm attracted to maybe one out of 10 of those men, and there was no way I was going to deal with somebody who was an avid golfer.
So that basically meant there were 35 men for me that I could possibly date in the entire city of Philadelphia.
In the meantime, my very large Jewish family was already all married and well on their way to having lots and lots of children, and I felt like I was under tremendous peer pressure to get my life going already.
So I have two possible strategies at this point I'm sort of figuring out.
One, I can take my grandmother's advice and sort of least-expect my way into maybe bumping into the one out of 35 possible men in the entire 1.5-million-person city of Philadelphia, or I could try online dating.
Now, I like the idea of online dating, because it's predicated on an algorithm, and that's really just a simple way of saying I've got a problem, I'm going to use some data, run it through a system and get to a solution.
So online dating is the second most popular way that people now meet each other, but as it turns out, algorithms have been around for thousands of years in almost every culture.
In fact, in Judaism, there were matchmakers a long time ago, and though they didn't have an explicit algorithm per se, they definitely were running through formulas in their heads, like, is the girl going to like the boy?
Are the families going to get along?
What's the rabbi going to say?
Are they going to start having children right away?
The matchmaker would sort of think through all of this, put two people together, and that would be the end of it.
So in my case, I thought, well, will data and an algorithm lead me to my Prince Charming?
So I decided to sign on.
Now, there was one small catch.
As I'm signing on to the various dating websites, as it happens, I was really, really busy.
But that actually wasn't the biggest problem.
The biggest problem is that I hate filling out questionnaires of any kind, and I certainly don't like questionnaires that are like Cosmo quizzes.
So I just copied and pasted from my résumé.
(Laughter) So in the descriptive part up top, I said that I was an award-winning journalist and a future thinker.
When I was asked about fun activities and my ideal date, I said monetization and fluency in Japanese.
I talked a lot about JavaScript.
(Laughter) So obviously this was not the best way to put my most sexy foot forward.
But the real failure was that there were plenty of men for me to date.
These algorithms had a sea full of men that wanted to take me out on lots of dates -- what turned out to be truly awful dates.
There was this guy Steve, the I.T. guy.
The algorithm matched us up because we share a love of gadgets, we share a love of math and data and '80s music, and so I agreed to go out with him.
So Steve the I.T. guy invited me out to one of Philadelphia's white-table-cloth, extremely expensive restaurants.
And we went in, and right off the bat, our conversation really wasn't taking flight, but he was ordering a lot of food.
In fact, he didn't even bother looking at the menu.
He was ordering multiple appetizers, multiple entrées, for me as well, and suddenly there are piles and piles of food on our table, also lots and lots of bottles of wine.
So we're nearing the end of our conversation and the end of dinner, and I've decided Steve the I.T. guy and I are really just not meant for each other, but we'll part ways as friends, when he gets up to go to the bathroom, and in the meantime, the bill comes to our table.
And listen, I'm a modern woman.
I am totally down with splitting the bill.
But then Steve the I.T. guy didn't come back.
(Gasping) And that was my entire month's rent.
(Audience gasps) So needless to say, I was not having a good night.
So I run home, I call my mother, I call my sister, and as I do, at the end of each one of these terrible, terrible dates, I regale them with the details.
And they say to me, "Stop complaining."
(Laughter) "You're just being too picky."
So I said, fine, from here on out I'm only going on dates where I know there's Wi-Fi, and I'm bringing my laptop.
I'm going to shove it into my bag, I'm going to have this email template, and I'm going to fill it out and collect information on all these different data points during the date to prove to everybody that empirically, these dates really are terrible.
(Laughter) So I started tracking things like really stupid, awkward, sexual remarks; bad vocabulary; the number of times a man forced me to high-five him.
(Laughter) So I started to crunch some numbers, and that allowed me to make some correlations.
So as it turns out, for some reason, men who drink Scotch reference kinky sex immediately.
(Laughter) Well, it turns out that these probably weren't bad guys.
There were just bad for me.
And as it happens, the algorithms that were setting us up, they weren't bad either.
These algorithms were doing exactly what they were designed to do, which was to take our user-generated information, in my case, my résumé, and match it up with other people's information.
See, the real problem here is that, while the algorithms work just fine, you and I don't, when confronted with blank windows where we're supposed to input our information online.
Very few of us have the ability to be totally and brutally honest with ourselves.
The other problem is that these websites are asking us questions like, are you a dog person or a cat person?
Do you like horror films or romance films?
I'm not looking for a pen pal.
I'm looking for a husband. Right?
So there's a certain amount of superficiality in that data.
So I said fine, I've got a new plan.
I'm going to keep using these online dating sites, but I'm going to treat them as databases, and rather than waiting for an algorithm to set me up, I think I'm going to try reverse-engineering this entire system.
So knowing that there was superficial data that was being used to match me up with other people, I decided instead to ask my own questions.
What was every single possible thing that I could think of that I was looking for in a mate?
So I started writing and writing and writing, and at the end, I had amassed 72 different data points.
I wanted somebody was Jew-ish, so I was looking for somebody who had the same background and thoughts on our culture, but wasn't going to force me to go to shul every Friday and Saturday.
I wanted somebody who worked hard, because work for me is extremely important, but not too hard.
For me, the hobbies that I have are really just new work projects that I've launched.
I also wanted somebody who not only wanted two children, but was going to have the same attitude toward parenting that I do, so somebody who was going to be totally okay with forcing our child to start taking piano lessons at age three, and also maybe computer science classes if we could wrangle it.
So things like that, but I also wanted somebody who would go to far-flung, exotic places, like Petra, Jordan.
I also wanted somebody who would weigh 20 pounds more than me at all times, regardless of what I weighed.
(Laughter) So I now have these 72 different data points, which, to be fair, is a lot.
So what I did was, I went through and I prioritized that list.
I broke it into a top tier and a second tier of points, and I ranked everything starting at 100 and going all the way down to 91, and listing things like I was looking for somebody who was really smart, who would challenge and stimulate me, and balancing that with a second tier and a second set of points.
These things were also important to me but not necessarily deal-breakers.
(Laughter) So once I had all this done, I then built a scoring system, because what I wanted to do was to sort of mathematically calculate whether or not I thought the guy that I found online would be a match with me.
I figured there would be a minimum of 700 points before I would agree to email somebody or respond to an email message.
For 900 points, I'd agree to go out on a date, and I wouldn't even consider any kind of relationship before somebody had crossed the 1,500 point threshold.
Well, as it turns out, this worked pretty well.
So I go back online now.
I found Jewishdoc57 who's incredibly good-looking, incredibly well-spoken, he had hiked Mt. Fuji, he had walked along the Great Wall.
He likes to travel as long as it doesn't involve a cruise ship.
And I thought, I've done it!
I've cracked the code.
I have just found the Jewish Prince Charming of my family's dreams.
There was only one problem: He didn't like me back.
And I guess the one variable that I haven't considered is the competition.
Who are all of the other women on these dating sites?
I found SmileyGirl1978.
She said she was a "Fun girl who is Happy and Outgoing."
She listed her job as "teacher."
She said she is "silly, nice and friendly."
She likes to make people laugh "alot."
At this moment I knew, clicking profile after profile that looked like this, that I needed to do some market research.
So I created 10 fake male profiles.
Now, before I lose all of you -- (Laughter) -- understand that I did this strictly to gather data about everybody else in the system.
I didn't carry on crazy Catfish-style relationships with anybody.
I really was just scraping their data.
But I didn't want everybody's data.
I only wanted data on the women who were going to be attracted to the type of man that I really, really wanted to marry.
When I released these men into the wild, I did follow some rules.
So I didn't reach out to any woman first.
I just waited to see who these profiles were going to attract, and mainly what I was looking at was two different data sets.
So I was looking at qualitative data, so what was the humor, the tone, the voice, the communication style that these women shared in common?
And also quantitative data, so what was the average length of their profile, how much time was spent between messages?
What I was trying to get at here was that I figured, in person, I would be just as competitive as a SmileyGirl1978.
I wanted to figure out how to maximize my own profile online.
Well, one month later, I had a lot of data, and I was able to do another analysis.
And as it turns out, content matters a lot.
So smart people tend to write a lot -- 3,000, 4,000, 5,000 words about themselves, which may all be very, very interesting.
The challenge here, though, is that the popular men and women are sticking to 97 words on average that are written very, very well, even though it may not seem like it all the time.
The other hallmark of the people who do this well is that they're using non-specific language.
So in my case, "The English Patient" is my most favorite movie ever, but it doesn't work to use that in a profile, because that's a superficial data point, and somebody may disagree and decide they don't want to go out because they didn't like sitting through the three-hour movie.
Also, optimistic language matters a lot.
So this is a word cloud highlighting the most popular words that were used by the most popular women, words like "fun" and "girl" and "love."
And what I realized was not that I had to dumb down my own profile.
Remember, I'm somebody who said that I speak fluent Japanese and I know JavaScript and I was okay with that.
The difference is that it's about being more approachable and helping people understand the best way to reach out to you.
And as it turns out, timing is also really, really important.
Just because you have access to somebody's mobile phone number or their instant message account and it's 2 o'clock in the morning and you happen to be awake, doesn't mean that that's a good time to communicate with those people.
The popular women on these online sites spend an average of 23 hours in between each communication.
And that's what we would normally do in the usual process of courtship.
And finally -- there were the photos.
All of the women who were popular showed some skin.
They all looked really great, which turned out to be in sharp contrast to what I had uploaded.
(Laughter) Once I had all of this information, I was able to create a super profile, so it was still me, but it was me optimized now for this ecosystem.
And as it turns out, I did a really good job.
I was the most popular person online.
(Laughter) (Applause) And as it turns out, lots and lots of men wanted to date me.
So I call my mom, I call my sister, I call my grandmother.
I'm telling them about this fabulous news, and they say, "This is wonderful! How soon are you going out?"
I said, "Actually, I'm not going to go out with anybody."
Because remember, in my scoring system, they have to reach a minimum threshold of 700 points, and none of them have done that.
They said, "What? You're still being too damn picky."
Well, not too long after that, I found this guy, Thevenin, and he said that he was culturally Jewish, he said that his job was an arctic baby seal hunter, which I thought was very clever.
He talked in detail about travel.
He made a lot of really interesting cultural references.
He looked and talked exactly like what I wanted, and immediately, he scored 850 points.
It was enough for a date.
Three weeks later, we met up in person for what turned out to be a 14-hour-long conversation that went from coffee shop to restaurant to another coffee shop to another restaurant, and when he dropped me back off at my house that night I re-scored him -- [1,050 points!] Thought, you know what, this entire time, I haven't been picky enough.
Well, a year and a half after that, we were non-cruise ship traveling through Petra, Jordan, when he got down on his knee and proposed.
A year after that, we were married, and about a year and a half after that, our daughter, Petra, was born.
Audience: Oh!
(Applause) [What it means...] Obviously, I'm having a fabulous life, so -- (Laughter) The question is, what does all of this mean for you?
Well, as it turns out, there is an algorithm for love.
It's just not the ones that we're being presented with online.
In fact, it's something that you write yourself.
So whether you're looking for a husband or a wife or you're trying to find your passion or you're trying to start a business, all you have to really do is figure out your own framework and play by your own rules, and feel free to be as picky as you want.
Well, on my wedding day, I had a conversation again with my grandmother, and she said, "All right, maybe I was wrong.
It looks like you did come up with a really, really great system.
Now, your matzah balls ...
They should be fluffy, not hard."
(Laughter) And I'll take her advice on that.
(Applause)
An image is worth more than a thousand words, so I'm going to start my talk by stop talking and show you a few images that I recently captured.
So by now, my talk is already 6,000 words long, and I feel like I should stop here.
(Laughter) At the same time, I probably owe you some explanation about the images that you just saw.
What I am trying to do as a photographer, as an artist, is to bring the world of art and science together.
Whether it is an image of a soap bubble captured at the very moment where it's bursting, as you can see in this image, whether it's a universe made of tiny little beads of oil paint, strange liquids that behave in very peculiar ways, or paint that is modeled by centrifugal forces, I'm always trying to link those two fields together.
What I find very intriguing about those two is that they both look at the same thing: They are a response to their surroundings.
And yet, they do it in a very different way.
If you look at science on one hand, science is a very rational approach to its surroundings, whereas art on the other hand is usually an emotional approach to its surroundings.
What I am trying to do is I'm trying to bring those two views into one so that my images both speak to the viewer's heart but also to the viewer's brain.
Let me demonstrate this based on three projects.
The first one has to do with making sound visible.
Now as you may know, sound travels in waves, so if you have a speaker, a speaker actually does nothing else than taking the audio signal, transform it into a vibration, which is then transported through the air, is captured by our ear, and transformed into an audio signal again.
Now I was thinking, how can I make those sound waves visible?
So I came up with the following setup.
I took a speaker, I placed a thin foil of plastic on top of that speaker, and then I added tiny little crystals on top of that speaker.
And now, if I would play a sound through that speaker, it would cause the crystals to move up and down.
Now this happens very fast, in the blink of an eye, so, together with LG, we captured this motion with a camera that is able to capture more than 3,000 frames per second.
Let me show you what this looks like.
(Music: "Teardrop" by Massive Attack) (Applause) Thank you very much.
I agree, it looks pretty amazing.
But I have to tell you a funny story.
I got an indoor sunburn doing this while shooting in Los Angeles.
Now in Los Angeles, you could get a decent sunburn just on any of the beaches, but I got mine indoors, and what happened is that, if you're shooting at 3,000 frames per second, you need to have a silly amount of light, lots of lights.
So we had this speaker set up, and we had the camera facing it, and lots of lights pointing at the speaker, and I would set up the speaker, put the tiny little crystals on top of that speaker, and we would do this over and over again, and it was until midday that I realized that I had a completely red face because of the lights pointing at the speaker.
What was so funny about it was that the speaker was only coming from the right side, so the right side of my face was completely red and I looked like the Phantom of the Opera for the rest of the week.
Let me now turn to another project which involves less harmful substances.
Has anyone of you heard of ferrofluid?
Ah, some of you have. Excellent.
Should I skip that part?
(Laughter) Ferrofluid has a very strange behavior.
It's a liquid that is completely black.
It's got an oily consistency.
And it's got tiny little particles of metal in it, which makes it magnetic.
So if I now put this liquid into a magnetic field, it would change its appearance.
Now I've got a live demonstration over here to show this to you.
So I've got a camera pointing down at this plate, and underneath that plate, there is a magnet.
Now I'm going to add some of that ferrofluid to that magnet.
Let's just slightly move it to the right and maybe focus it a little bit more. Excellent.
So what you can see now is that the ferrofluid has formed spikes.
This is due to the attraction and the repulsion of the individual particles inside the liquid.
Now this looks already quite interesting, but let me now add some watercolors to it.
Those are just standard watercolors that you would paint with.
You wouldn't paint with syringes, but it works just the same.
So what happened now is, when the watercolor was flowing into the structure, the watercolors do not mix with the ferrofluid.
That's because the ferrofluid itself is hydrophobic.
That means it doesn't mix with the water.
And at the same time, it tries to maintain its position above the magnet, and therefore, it creates those amazing-looking structures of channels and tiny little ponds of colorful water paint.
So that was the second project.
Let me now turn to the last project, which involves the national beverage of Scotland.
(Laughter) This image, and also this one, were made using whiskey.
Now you might ask yourself, how did he do that?
Did he drink half a bottle of whiskey and then draw the hallucination he got from being drunk onto paper?
I can assure you I was fully conscious while I was taking those pictures.
Now, whiskey contains 40 percent of alcohol, and alcohol has got some very interesting properties.
Maybe you have experienced some of those properties before, but I am talking about the physical properties, not the other ones.
So when I open the bottle, the alcohol molecules would spread in the air, and that's because alcohol is a very volatile substance.
And at the same time, alcohol is highly flammable.
And it was with those two properties that I was able to create the images that you're seeing right now.
Let me demonstrate this over here.
And what I have here is an empty glass vessel.
It's got nothing in it.
And now I'm going to fill it with oxygen and whiskey.
Add some more.
Now we just wait for a few seconds for the molecules to spread inside the bottle.
And now, let's set that on fire.
(Laughter) So that's all that happens.
It goes really fast, and it's not that impressive.
I could do it again to show it one more time, but some would argue that this is a complete waste of the whiskey, and that I should rather drink it.
But let me show you a slow motion in a completely darkened room of what I just showed you in this live demonstration.
So what happened is that the flame traveled through the glass vessel from top to bottom, burning the mix of the air molecules and the alcohol.
So the images that you saw at the beginning, they are actually a flame stopped in time while it is traveling through the bottle, and you have to imagine it was flipped around 180 degrees.
So that's how those images were made.
(Applause) Thank you.
So, I have now showed you three projects, and you might ask yourself, what is it good for?
What's the idea behind it?
Is it just a waste of whiskey?
Is it just some strange materials?
Those three projects, they're based on very simple scientific phenomena, such as magnetism, the sound waves, or over here, the physical properties of a substance, and what I'm trying to do is I'm trying to use these phenomena and show them in a poetic and unseen way, and therefore invite the viewer to pause for a moment and think about all the beauty that is constantly surrounding us.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, we used to solve big problems.
On July 21st, 1969, Buzz Aldrin climbed out of Apollo 11's lunar module and descended onto the Sea of Tranquility.
Armstrong and Aldrin were alone, but their presence on the moon's gray surface was the culmination of a convulsive, collective effort.
The Apollo program was the greatest peacetime mobilization in the history of the United States.
To get to the moon, NASA spent around 180 billion dollars in today's money, or four percent of the federal budget.
Apollo employed around 400,000 people and demanded the collaboration of 20,000 companies, universities and government agencies.
People died, including the crew of Apollo 1.
But before the Apollo program ended, 24 men flew to the moon.
Twelve walked on its surface, of whom Aldrin, following the death of Armstrong last year, is now the most senior.
So why did they go?
They didn't bring much back: 841 pounds of old rocks, and something all 24 later emphasized -- a new sense of the smallness and the fragility of our common home.
Why did they go? The cynical answer is they went because President Kennedy wanted to show the Soviets that his nation had the better rockets.
But Kennedy's own words at Rice University in 1962 provide a better clue.
(Video) John F. Kennedy: But why, some say, the moon?
Why choose this as our goal?
And they may well ask, why climb the highest mountain?
Why, 35 years ago, fly the Atlantic?
Why does Rice play Texas?
We choose to go to the moon.
We choose to go to the moon.
(Applause) We choose to go to the moon in this decade, and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.
Jason Pontin: To contemporaries, Apollo wasn't only a victory of West over East in the Cold War.
At the time, the strongest emotion was of wonder at the transcendent powers of technology.
They went because it was a big thing to do.
Landing on the moon occurred in the context of a long series of technological triumphs.
The first half of the 20th century produced the assembly line and the airplane, penicillin and a vaccine for tuberculosis.
In the middle years of the century, polio was eradicated and smallpox eliminated.
Technology itself seemed to possess what Alvin Toffler in 1970 called "accelerative thrust."
For most of human history, we could go no faster than a horse or a boat with a sail, but in 1969, the crew of Apollo 10 flew at 25,000 miles an hour.
Since 1970, no human beings have been back to the moon.
No one has traveled faster than the crew of Apollo 10, and blithe optimism about technology's powers has evaporated as big problems we had imagined technology would solve, such as going to Mars, creating clean energy, curing cancer, or feeding the world have come to seem intractably hard.
I remember watching the liftoff of Apollo 17.
I was five years old, and my mother told me not to stare at the fiery exhaust of a Saturn V rocket.
I vaguely knew this was to be the last of the moon missions, but I was absolutely certain there would be Mars colonies in my lifetime.
So "Something happened to our capacity to solve big problems with technology" has become a commonplace.
You hear it all the time.
We've heard it over the last two days here at TED.
It feels as if technologists have diverted us and enriched themselves with trivial toys, with things like iPhones and apps and social media, or algorithms that speed automated trading.
There's nothing wrong with most of these things.
They've expanded and enriched our lives.
But they don't solve humanity's big problems.
What happened?
So there is a parochial explanation in Silicon Valley, which admits that it has been funding less ambitious companies than it did in the years when it financed Intel, Microsoft, Apple and Genentech.
Silicon Valley says the markets are to blame, in particular the incentives that venture capitalists offer to entrepreneurs.
Silicon Valley says that venture investing shifted away from funding transformational ideas and towards funding incremental problems or even fake problems.
But I don't think that explanation is good enough.
It mostly explains what's wrong with Silicon Valley.
Even when venture capitalists were at their most risk-happy, they preferred small investments, tiny investments that offered an exit within 10 years.
V.C.s have always struggled to invest profitably in technologies such as energy whose capital requirements are huge and whose development is long and lengthy, and V.C.s have never, never funded the development of technologies meant to solve big problems that possess no immediate commercial value.
No, the reasons we can't solve big problems are more complicated and more profound.
Sometimes we choose not to solve big problems.
We could go to Mars if we want.
NASA even has the outline of a plan.
But going to Mars would follow a political decision with popular appeal, and that will never happen.
We won't go to Mars, because everyone thinks there are more important things to do here on Earth.
Sometimes, we can't solve big problems because our political systems fail.
Today, less than two percent of the world's energy consumption derives from advanced, renewable sources such as solar, wind and biofuels, less than two percent, and the reason is purely economic.
Coal and natural gas are cheaper than solar and wind, and petroleum is cheaper than biofuels.
We want alternative energy sources that can compete on price. None exist.
Now, technologists, business leaders and economists all basically agree on what national policies and international treaties would spur the development of alternative energy: mostly, a significant increase in energy research and development, and some kind of price on carbon.
But there's no hope in the present political climate that we will see U.S. energy policy or international treaties that reflect that consensus.
Sometimes, big problems that had seemed technological turn out not to be so.
Famines were long understood to be caused by failures in food supply.
But 30 years of research have taught us that famines are political crises that catastrophically affect food distribution.
Technology can improve things like crop yields or systems for storing and transporting food, but there will be famines so long as there are bad governments.
Finally, big problems sometimes elude solution because we don't really understand the problem.
President Nixon declared war on cancer in 1971, but we soon discovered there are many kinds of cancer, most of them fiendishly resistant to therapy, and it is only in the last 10 years that effective, viable therapies have come to seem real.
Hard problems are hard.
It's not true that we can't solve big problems through technology.
We can, we must, but these four elements must all be present: Political leaders and the public must care to solve a problem; institutions must support its solution; It must really be a technological problem; and we must understand it.
The Apollo mission, which has become a kind of metaphor for technology's capacity to solve big problems, met these criteria.
But it is an irreproducible model for the future.
It is not 1961.
There is no galvanizing contest like the Cold War, no politician like John Kennedy who can heroize the difficult and the dangerous, and no popular science fictional mythology such as exploring the solar system.
Most of all, going to the moon turned out to be easy.
It was just three days away.
And arguably it wasn't even solving much of a problem.
We are left alone with our day, and the solutions of the future will be harder won.
God knows, we don't lack for the challenges.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Here's a question we need to rethink together: What should be the role of money and markets in our societies?
Today, there are very few things that money can't buy.
If you're sentenced to a jail term in Santa Barbara, California, you should know that if you don't like the standard accommodations, you can buy a prison cell upgrade.
It's true. For how much, do you think?
What would you guess?
Five hundred dollars?
It's not the Ritz-Carlton. It's a jail!
Eighty-two dollars a night.
Eighty-two dollars a night.
If you go to an amusement park and don't want to stand in the long lines for the popular rides, there is now a solution.
In many theme parks, you can pay extra to jump to the head of the line.
They call them Fast Track or VIP tickets.
And this isn't only happening in amusement parks.
In Washington, D.C., long lines, queues sometimes form for important Congressional hearings.
Now some people don't like to wait in long queues, maybe overnight, even in the rain.
So now, for lobbyists and others who are very keen to attend these hearings but don't like to wait, there are companies, line-standing companies, and you can go to them.
You can pay them a certain amount of money, they hire homeless people and others who need a job to stand waiting in the line for as long as it takes, and the lobbyist, just before the hearing begins, can take his or her place at the head of the line and a seat in the front of the room.
Paid line standing.
It's happening, the recourse to market mechanisms and market thinking and market solutions, in bigger arenas.
Take the way we fight our wars.
Did you know that, in Iraq and Afghanistan, there were more private military contractors on the ground than there were U.S. military troops?
Now this isn't because we had a public debate about whether we wanted to outsource war to private companies, but this is what has happened.
Over the past three decades, we have lived through a quiet revolution.
We've drifted almost without realizing it from having a market economy to becoming market societies.
The difference is this: A market economy is a tool, a valuable and effective tool, for organizing productive activity, but a market society is a place where almost everything is up for sale.
It's a way of life, in which market thinking and market values begin to dominate every aspect of life: personal relations, family life, health, education, politics, law, civic life.
Now, why worry? Why worry about our becoming market societies?
For two reasons, I think.
One of them has to do with inequality.
The more things money can buy, the more affluence, or the lack of it, matters.
If the only thing that money determined was access to yachts or fancy vacations or BMWs, then inequality wouldn't matter very much.
But when money comes increasingly to govern access to the essentials of the good life -- decent health care, access to the best education, political voice and influence in campaigns -- when money comes to govern all of those things, inequality matters a great deal.
And so the marketization of everything sharpens the sting of inequality and its social and civic consequence.
That's one reason to worry.
There's a second reason apart from the worry about inequality, and it's this: with some social goods and practices, when market thinking and market values enter, they may change the meaning of those practices and crowd out attitudes and norms worth caring about.
I'd like to take an example of a controversial use of a market mechanism, a cash incentive, and see what you think about it.
Many schools struggle with the challenge of motivating kids, especially kids from disadvantaged backgrounds, to study hard, to do well in school, to apply themselves.
Some economists have proposed a market solution: Offer cash incentives to kids for getting good grades or high test scores or for reading books.
They've tried this, actually.
They've done some experiments in some major American cities.
In New York, in Chicago, in Washington, D.C., they've tried this, offering 50 dollars for an A, 35 dollars for a B.
In Dallas, Texas, they have a program that offers eight-year-olds two dollars for each book they read.
So let's see what -- Some people are in favor, some people are opposed to this cash incentive to motivate achievement.
Let's see what people here think about it.
Imagine that you are the head of a major school system, and someone comes to you with this proposal.
And let's say it's a foundation. They will provide the funds.
You don't have to take it out of your budget.
How many would be in favor and how many would be opposed to giving it a try?
Let's see by a show of hands.
First, how many think it might at least be worth a try to see if it would work? Raise your hand.
And how many would be opposed? How many would -- So the majority here are opposed, but a sizable minority are in favor.
Let's have a discussion.
Let's start with those of you who object, who would rule it out even before trying.
What would be your reason?
Who will get our discussion started? Yes?
Heike Moses: Hello everyone, I'm Heike, and I think it just kills the intrinsic motivation, so in the respect that children, if they would like to read, you just take this incentive away in just paying them, so it just changes behavior.
Michael Sandel: Takes the intrinsic incentive away.
What is, or should be, the intrinsic motivation?
HM: Well, the intrinsic motivation should be to learn.
MS: To learn. HM: To get to know the world.
And then, if you stop paying them, what happens then?
Then they stop reading?
MS: Now, let's see if there's someone who favors, who thinks it's worth trying this.
Elizabeth Loftus: I'm Elizabeth Loftus, and you said worth a try, so why not try it and do the experiment and measure things?
MS: And measure. And what would you measure?
You'd measure how many -- EL: How many books they read and how many books they continued to read after you stopped paying them.
MS: Oh, after you stopped paying.
All right, what about that?
HM: To be frank, I just think this is, not to offend anyone, a very American way.
(Laughter) (Applause) MS: All right. What's emerged from this discussion is the following question: Will the cash incentive drive out or corrupt or crowd out the higher motivation, the intrinsic lesson that we hope to convey, which is to learn to love to learn and to read for their own sakes?
And people disagree about what the effect will be, but that seems to be the question, that somehow a market mechanism or a cash incentive teaches the wrong lesson, and if it does, what will become of these children later?
I should tell you what's happened with these experiments.
The cash for good grades has had very mixed results, for the most part has not resulted in higher grades.
The two dollars for each book did lead those kids to read more books.
It also led them to read shorter books.
(Laughter) But the real question is, what will become of these kids later?
Will they have learned that reading is a chore, a form of piecework to be done for pay, that's the worry, or may it lead them to read maybe for the wrong reason initially but then lead them to fall in love with reading for its own sake?
Now, what this, even this brief debate, brings out is something that many economists overlook.
Economists often assume that markets are inert, that they do not touch or taint the goods they exchange.
Market exchange, they assume, doesn't change the meaning or value of the goods being exchanged.
This may be true enough if we're talking about material goods.
If you sell me a flat screen television or give me one as a gift, it will be the same good.
It will work the same either way.
But the same may not be true if we're talking about nonmaterial goods and social practices such as teaching and learning or engaging together in civic life.
In those domains, bringing market mechanisms and cash incentives may undermine or crowd out nonmarket values and attitudes worth caring about.
Once we see that markets and commerce, when extended beyond the material domain, can change the character of the goods themselves, can change the meaning of the social practices, as in the example of teaching and learning, we have to ask where markets belong and where they don't, where they may actually undermine values and attitudes worth caring about.
But to have this debate, we have to do something we're not very good at, and that is to reason together in public about the value and the meaning of the social practices we prize, from our bodies to family life to personal relations to health to teaching and learning to civic life.
Now these are controversial questions, and so we tend to shrink from them.
In fact, during the past three decades, when market reasoning and market thinking have gathered force and gained prestige, our public discourse during this time has become hollowed out, empty of larger moral meaning.
For fear of disagreement, we shrink from these questions.
But once we see that markets change the character of goods, we have to debate among ourselves these bigger questions about how to value goods.
One of the most corrosive effects of putting a price on everything is on commonality, the sense that we are all in it together.
Against the background of rising inequality, marketizing every aspect of life leads to a condition where those who are affluent and those who are of modest means increasingly live separate lives.
We live and work and shop and play in different places.
Our children go to different schools.
This isn't good for democracy, nor is it a satisfying way to live, even for those of us who can afford to buy our way to the head of the line.
Here's why.
Democracy does not require perfect equality, but what it does require is that citizens share in a common life.
What matters is that people of different social backgrounds and different walks of life encounter one another, bump up against one another in the ordinary course of life, because this is what teaches us to negotiate and to abide our differences.
And this is how we come to care for the common good.
And so, in the end, the question of markets is not mainly an economic question.
It's really a question of how we want to live together.
Do we want a society where everything is up for sale, or are there certain moral and civic goods that markets do not honor and money cannot buy?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I think we're all aware that the world today is full of problems.
We've been hearing them today and yesterday and every day for decades.
Serious problems, big problems, pressing problems.
Poor nutrition, access to water, climate change, deforestation, lack of skills, insecurity, not enough food, not enough healthcare, pollution.
There's problem after problem, and I think what really separates this time from any time I can remember in my brief time on Earth is the awareness of these problems.
We're all very aware.
Why are we having so much trouble dealing with these problems?
That's the question I've been struggling with, coming from my very different perspective.
I'm not a social problem guy.
I'm a guy that works with business, helps business make money.
God forbid.
So why are we having so many problems with these social problems, and really is there any role for business, and if so, what is that role?
I think that in order to address that question, we have to step back and think about how we've understood and pondered both the problems and the solutions to these great social challenges that we face.
Now, I think many have seen business as the problem, or at least one of the problems, in many of the social challenges we face.
You know, think of the fast food industry, the drug industry, the banking industry.
You know, this is a low point in the respect for business.
Business is not seen as the solution.
It's seen as the problem now, for most people.
And rightly so, in many cases.
There's a lot of bad actors out there that have done the wrong thing, that actually have made the problem worse.
So this perspective is perhaps justified.
How have we tended to see the solutions to these social problems, these many issues that we face in society?
Well, we've tended to see the solutions in terms of NGOs, in terms of government, in terms of philanthropy.
Indeed, the kind of unique organizational entity of this age is this tremendous rise of NGOs and social organizations.
This is a unique, new organizational form that we've seen grown up.
Enormous innovation, enormous energy, enormous talent now has been mobilized through this structure to try to deal with all of these challenges.
And many of us here are deeply involved in that.
I'm a business school professor, but I've actually founded, I think, now, four nonprofits.
Whenever I got interested and became aware of a societal problem, that was what I did, form a nonprofit.
That was the way we've thought about how to deal with these issues.
Even a business school professor has thought about it that way.
But I think at this moment, we've been at this for quite a while.
We've been aware of these problems for decades.
We have decades of experience with our NGOs and with our government entities, and there's an awkward reality.
The awkward reality is we're not making fast enough progress.
We're not winning.
These problems still seem very daunting and very intractable, and any solutions we're achieving are small solutions.
We're making incremental progress.
What's the fundamental problem we have in dealing with these social problems?
If we cut all the complexity away, we have the problem of scale.
We can't scale.
We can make progress. We can show benefits.
We can show results. We can make things better.
We're helping. We're doing better. We're doing good.
We can't scale.
We can't make a large-scale impact on these problems.
Why is that?
Because we don't have the resources.
And that's really clear now.
And that's clearer now than it's been for decades.
There's simply not enough money to deal with any of these problems at scale using the current model.
There's not enough tax revenue, there's not enough philanthropic donations, to deal with these problems the way we're dealing with them now.
We've got to confront that reality.
And the scarcity of resources for dealing with these problems is only growing, certainly in the advanced world today, with all the fiscal problems we face.
So if it's fundamentally a resource problem, where are the resources in society?
How are those resources really created, the resources we're going to need to deal with all these societal challenges?
Well there, I think the answer is very clear: They're in business.
All wealth is actually created by business.
Business creates wealth when it meets needs at a profit.
That's how all wealth is created.
It's meeting needs at a profit that leads to taxes and that leads to incomes and that leads to charitable donations.
That's where all the resources come from.
Only business can actually create resources.
Other institutions can utilize them to do important work, but only business can create them.
And business creates them when it's able to meet a need at a profit.
The resources are overwhelmingly generated by business.
The question then is, how do we tap into this?
How do we tap into this?
Business generates those resources when it makes a profit.
That profit is that small difference between the price and the cost it takes to produce whatever solution business has created to whatever problem they're trying to solve.
But that profit is the magic.
Why? Because that profit allows whatever solution we've created to be infinitely scalable.
Because if we can make a profit, we can do it for 10, 100, a million, 100 million, a billion.
The solution becomes self-sustaining.
That's what business does when it makes a profit.
Now what does this all have to do with social problems?
Well, one line of thinking is, let's take this profit and redeploy it into social problems.
Business should give more.
Business should be more responsible.
And that's been the path that we've been on in business.
But again, this path that we've been on is not getting us where we need to go.
Now, I started out as a strategy professor, and I'm still a strategy professor.
I'm proud of that.
But I've also, over the years, worked more and more on social issues.
I've worked on healthcare, the environment, economic development, reducing poverty, and as I worked more and more in the social field, I started seeing something that had a profound impact on me and my whole life, in a way.
The conventional wisdom in economics and the view in business has historically been that actually, there's a tradeoff between social performance and economic performance.
The conventional wisdom has been that business actually makes a profit by causing a social problem.
The classic example is pollution.
If business pollutes, it makes more money than if it tried to reduce that pollution.
Reducing pollution is expensive, therefore businesses don't want to do it.
It's profitable to have an unsafe working environment.
It's too expensive to have a safe working environment, therefore business makes more money if they don't have a safe working environment.
That's been the conventional wisdom.
A lot of companies have fallen into that conventional wisdom.
They resisted environmental improvement.
They resisted workplace improvement.
That thinking has led to, I think, much of the behavior that we have come to criticize in business, that I come to criticize in business.
But the more deeply I got into all these social issues, one after another, and actually, the more I tried to address them myself, personally, in a few cases, through nonprofits that I was involved with, the more I found actually that the reality is the opposite.
Business does not profit from causing social problems, actually not in any fundamental sense.
That's a very simplistic view.
The deeper we get into these issues, the more we start to understand that actually business profits from solving from social problems.
That's where the real profit comes.
Let's take pollution.
We've learned today that actually reducing pollution and emissions is generating profit.
It saves money.
It makes the business more productive and efficient.
It doesn't waste resources.
Having a safer working environment actually, and avoiding accidents, it makes the business more profitable, because it's a sign of good processes.
Accidents are expensive and costly.
Issue by issue by issue, we start to learn that actually there's no trade-off between social progress and economic efficiency in any fundamental sense.
Another issue is health.
I mean, what we've found is actually health of employees is something that business should treasure, because that health allows those employees to be more productive and come to work and not be absent.
The deeper work, the new work, the new thinking on the interface between business and social problems is actually showing that there's a fundamental, deep synergy, particularly if you're not thinking in the very short run.
In the very short run, you can sometimes fool yourself into thinking that there's fundamentally opposing goals, but in the long run, ultimately, we're learning in field after field that this is simply not true.
So how could we tap into the power of business to address the fundamental problems that we face?
Imagine if we could do that, because if we could do it, we could scale.
We could tap into this enormous resource pool and this organizational capacity.
And guess what? That's happening now, finally, partly because of people like you who have raised these issues now for year after year and decade after decade.
We see organizations like Dow Chemical leading the revolution away from trans fat and saturated fat with innovative new products.
This is an example of Jain Irrigation.
This is a company that's brought drip irrigation technology to thousands and millions of farmers, reducing substantially the use of water.
We see companies like the Brazilian forestry company Fibria that's figured out how to avoid tearing down old growth forest and using eucalyptus and getting much more yield per hectare of pulp and making much more paper than you could make by cutting down those old trees.
You see companies like Cisco that are training so far four million people in I.T. skills to actually, yes, be responsible, but help expand the opportunity to disseminate I.T. technology and grow the whole business.
There's a fundamental opportunity for business today to impact and address these social problems, and this opportunity is the largest business opportunity we see in business.
And the question is, how can we get business thinking to adapt this issue of shared value?
This is what I call shared value: addressing a social issue with a business model.
That's shared value.
Shared value is capitalism, but it's a higher kind of capitalism.
It's capitalism as it was ultimately meant to be, meeting important needs, not incrementally competing for trivial differences in product attributes and market share.
Shared value is when we can create social value and economic value simultaneously.
It's finding those opportunities that will unleash the greatest possibility we have to actually address these social problems because we can scale.
We can address shared value at multiple levels.
It's real. It's happening.
But in order to get this solution working, we have to now change how business sees itself, and this is thankfully underway.
Businesses got trapped into the conventional wisdom that they shouldn't worry about social problems, that this was sort of something on the side, that somebody else was doing it.
We're now seeing companies embrace this idea.
But we also have to recognize business is not going to do this as effectively as if we have NGOs and government working in partnership with business.
The new NGOs that are really moving the needle are the ones that have found these partnerships, that have found these ways to collaborate.
The governments that are making the most progress are the governments that have found ways to enable shared value in business rather than see government as the only player that has to call the shots.
And government has many ways in which it could impact the willingness and the ability of companies to compete in this way.
I think if we can get business seeing itself differently, and if we can get others seeing business differently, we can change the world.
I know it. I'm seeing it.
I'm feeling it.
Young people, I think, my Harvard Business School students, are getting it.
If we can break down this sort of divide, this unease, this tension, this sense that we're not fundamentally collaborating here in driving these social problems, we can break this down, and we finally, I think, can have solutions.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The work of a transportation commissioner isn't just about stop signs and traffic signals.
It involves the design of cities and the design of city streets.
Streets are some of the most valuable resources that a city has, and yet it's an asset that's largely hidden in plain sight.
And the lesson from New York over the past six years is that you can update this asset.
You can remake your streets quickly, inexpensively, it can provide immediate benefits, and it can be quite popular.
You just need to look at them a little differently.
This is important because we live in an urban age.
For the first time in history, most people live in cities, and the U.N. estimates that over the next 40 years, the population is going to double on the planet.
So the design of cities is a key issue for our future.
Mayor Bloomberg recognized this when he launched PlaNYC in 2007.
The plan recognized that cities are in a global marketplace, and that if we're going to continue to grow and thrive and to attract the million more people that are expected to move here, we need to focus on the quality of life and the efficiency of our infrastructure.
For many cities, our streets have been in a kind of suspended animation for generations.
This is a picture of Times Square in the '50s, and despite all of the technological innovation, cultural changes, political changes, this is Times Square in 2008.
Not much has changed in those 50 years.
So we worked hard to refocus our agenda, to maximize efficient mobility, providing more room for buses, more room for bikes, more room for people to enjoy the city, and to make our streets as safe as they can be for everybody that uses them.
We set out a clear action plan with goals and benchmarks.
Having goals is important, because if you want to change and steer the ship of a big city in a new direction, you need to know where you're going and why.
The design of a street can tell you everything about what's expected on it.
In this case, it's expected that you shelter in place.
The design of this street is really to maximize the movement of cars moving as quickly as possible from point A to point B, and it misses all the other ways that a street is used.
When we started out, we did some early surveys about how our streets were used, and we found that New York City was largely a city without seats.
Pictures like this, people perched on a fire hydrant, not the mark of a world-class city.
(Laughter) It's not great for parents with kids.
It's not great for seniors. It's not great for retailers.
It's probably not good for the fire hydrants.
Certainly not good for the police department.
So we worked hard to change that balance, and probably the best example of our new approach is in Times Square.
Three hundred and fifty thousand people a day walk through Times Square, and people had tried for years to make changes.
They changed signals, they changed lanes, everything they could do to make Times Square work better.
It was dangerous, hard to cross the street.
It was chaotic.
And so, none of those approaches worked, so we took a different approach, a bigger approach, looked at our street differently.
And so we did a six-month pilot.
We closed Broadway from 42nd Street to 47th Street and created two and a half acres of new pedestrian space.
And the temporary materials are an important part of the program, because we were able to show how it worked.
And I work for a data-driven mayor, as you probably know.
So it was all about the data.
So if it worked better for traffic, if it was better for mobility, if it was safer, better for business, we would keep it, and if it didn't work, no harm, no foul, we could put it back the way that it was, because these were temporary materials.
And that was a very big part of the buy-in, much less anxiety when you think that something can be put back.
But the results were overwhelming.
Traffic moved better. It was much safer.
Five new flagship stores opened.
It's been a total home run.
Times Square is now one of the top 10 retail locations on the planet.
And this is an important lesson, because it doesn't need to be a zero-sum game between moving traffic and creating public space.
Every project has its surprises, and one of the big surprises with Times Square was how quickly people flocked to the space.
We put out the orange barrels, and people just materialized immediately into the street.
It was like a Star Trek episode, you know?
They weren't there before, and then zzzzzt!
All the people arrived.
Where they'd been, I don't know, but they were there.
And this actually posed an immediate challenge for us, because the street furniture had not yet arrived.
So we went to a hardware store and bought hundreds of lawn chairs, and we put those lawn chairs out on the street.
And the lawn chairs became the talk of the town.
It wasn't about that we'd closed Broadway to cars.
It was about those lawn chairs.
"What did you think about the lawn chairs?"
"Do you like the color of the lawn chairs?"
So if you've got a big, controversial project, think about lawn chairs.
(Laughter) This is the final design for Times Square, and it will create a level surface, sidewalk to sidewalk, beautiful pavers that have studs in them to reflect the light from the billboards, creating a great new energy on the street, and we think it's going to really create a great place, a new crossroads of the world that is worthy of its name.
And we will be cutting the ribbon on this, the first phase, this December.
With all of our projects, our public space projects, we work closely with local businesses and local merchant groups who maintain the spaces, move the furniture, take care of the plants.
This is in front of Macy's, and they were a big supporter of this new approach, because they understood that more people on foot is better for business.
And we've done these projects all across the city in all kinds of neighborhoods.
This is in Bed-Stuy, Brooklyn, and you can see the short leg that was there, used for cars, that's not really needed.
So what we did is we painted over the street, put down epoxy gravel, and connected the triangle to the storefronts on Grand Avenue, created a great new public space, and it's been great for businesses along Grand Avenue.
We did the same thing in DUMBO, in Brooklyn, and this is one of our first projects that we did, and we took an underutilized, pretty dingy-looking parking lot and used some paint and planters to transform it over a weekend.
And in the three years since we've implemented the project, retail sales have increased 172 percent.
And that's twice that of adjacent areas in the same neighborhood.
We've moved very, very quickly with paint and temporary materials.
Instead of waiting through years of planning studies and computer models to get something done, we've done it with paint and temporary materials.
And the proof is not in a computer model.
It is in the real-world performance of the street.
You can have fun with paint.
All told, we've created over 50 pedestrian plazas in all five boroughs across the city.
We've repurposed 26 acres of active car lanes and turned them into new pedestrian space.
I think one of the successes is in its emulation.
You're seeing this kind of approach, since we've painted Times Square, you've seen this approach in Boston, in Chicago, in San Francisco, in Mexico City, Buenos Aires, you name it.
This is actually in Los Angeles, and they actually copied even the green dots that we had on the streets.
But I can't underscore enough how much more quickly this enables you to move over traditional construction methods.
We also brought this quick-acting approach to our cycling program, and in six years turned cycling into a real transportation option in New York.
I think it's fair to say -- (Applause) -- it used to be a fairly scary place to ride a bike, and now New York has become one of the cycling capitals in the United States.
And we moved quickly to create an interconnected network of lanes.
You can see the map in 2007.
This is how it looked in 2013 after we built out 350 miles of on-street bike lanes.
I love this because it looks so easy.
You just click it, and they're there.
We also brought new designs to the street.
We created the first parking-protected bike lane in the United States.
(Applause) We protected bikers by floating parking lanes, and it's been great.
Bike volumes have spiked.
Injuries to all users, pedestrians, cyclists, drivers, are all down 50 percent.
And we've built 30 miles of these protected bike lanes, and now you're seeing them pop up all over the country.
And you can see here that this strategy has worked.
The blue line is the number of cyclists, soaring.
The green line is the number of bike lanes.
And the yellow line is the number of injuries, which has remained essentially flat.
After this big expansion, you've seen no net increase in injuries, and so there is something to that axiom that there is safety in numbers.
Not everybody liked the new bike lanes, and there was a lawsuit and somewhat of a media frenzy a couple years ago.
One Brooklyn paper called this bike lane that we have on Prospect Park West "the most contested piece of land outside of the Gaza Strip."
(Laughter) And this is what we had done.
So if you dig below the headlines, though, you'll see that the people were far ahead of the press, far ahead of the politicians.
In fact, I think most politicians would be happy to have those kind of poll numbers.
Sixty-four percent of New Yorkers support these bike lanes.
This summer, we launched Citi Bike, the largest bike share program in the United States, with 6,000 bikes and 330 stations located next to one another.
Since we've launched the program, three million trips have been taken.
People have ridden seven million miles.
That's 280 times around the globe.
And so with this little blue key, you can unlock the keys to the city and this brand new transportation option.
And daily usage just continues to soar.
What has happened is the average daily ridership on the streets of New York is 36,000 people.
The high that we've had so far is 44,000 in August.
Yesterday, 40,000 people used Citi Bike in New York City.
The bikes are being used six times a day.
And I think you also see it in the kinds of riders that are on the streets.
In the past, it looked like the guy on the left, ninja-clad bike messenger.
And today, cyclists look like New York City looks.
It's diverse -- young, old, black, white, women, kids, all getting on a bike.
It's an affordable, safe, convenient way to get around.
Quite radical.
We've also brought this approach to our buses, and New York City has the largest bus fleet in North America, the slowest bus speeds.
As everybody knows, you can walk across town faster than you can take the bus.
And so we focused on the most congested areas of New York City, built out six bus rapid transit lines, 57 miles of new speedy bus lanes.
You pay at a kiosk before you get on the bus.
We've got dedicated lanes that keep cars out because they get ticketed by a camera if they use that lane, and it's been a huge success.
I think one of my very favorite moments as transportation commissioner was the day that we launched Citi Bike, and I was riding Citi Bike up First Avenue in my protected bike lane, and I looked over and I saw pedestrians standing safely on the pedestrian islands, and the traffic was flowing, birds were singing -- (Laughter) -- the buses were speeding up their dedicated lanes.
It was just fantastic.
And this is how it looked six years ago.
And so, I think that the lesson that we have from New York is that it's possible to change your streets quickly, it's not expensive, it can provide immediate benefits, and it can be quite popular.
You just need to reimagine your streets.
They're hidden in plain sight.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"Iran is Israel's best friend, and we do not intend to change our position in relation to Tehran."
Believe it or not, this is a quote from an Israeli prime minister, but it's not Ben-Gurion or Golda Meir from the era of the Shah.
It's actually from Yitzhak Rabin.
The year is 1987.
Ayatollah Khomeini is still alive, and much like Ahmadinejad today, he's using the worst rhetoric against Israel.
Yet, Rabin referred to Iran as a geostrategic friend.
Today, when we hear the threats of war and the high rhetoric, we're oftentimes led to believe that this is yet another one of those unsolvable Middle Eastern conflicts with roots as old as the region itself.
Nothing could be further from the truth, and I hope today to show you why that is.
The relations between the Iranian and the Jewish people throughout history has actually been quite positive, starting in 539 B.C., when King Cyrus the Great of Persia liberated the Jewish people from their Babylonian captivity.
A third of the Jewish population stayed in Babylonia.
They're today's Iraqi Jews.
A third migrated to Persia.
They're today's Iranian Jews, still 25,000 of them living in Iran, making them the largest Jewish community in the Middle East outside of Israel itself.
And a third returned to historic Palestine, did the second rebuilding of the Temple in Jerusalem, financed, incidentally, by Persian tax money.
But even in modern times, relations have been close at times.
Rabin's statement was a reflection of decades of security and intelligence collaboration between the two, which in turn was born out of perception of common threats.
Both states feared the Soviet Union and strong Arab states such as Egypt and Iraq.
And, in addition, the Israeli doctrine of the periphery, the idea that Israel's security was best achieved by creating alliances with the non-Arab states in the periphery of the region in order to balance the Arab states in its vicinity.
Now, from the Shah's perspective, though, he wanted to keep this as secret as possible, so when Yitzhak Rabin, for instance, traveled to Iran in the '70s, he usually wore a wig so that no one would recognize him.
The Iranians built a special tarmac at the airport in Tehran, far away from the central terminal, so that no one would notice the large number of Israeli planes shuttling between Tel Aviv and Tehran.
Now, did all of this end with the Islamic revolution in 1979?
In spite of the very clear anti-Israeli ideology of the new regime, the geopolitical logic for their collaboration lived on, because they still had common threats.
And when Iraq invaded Iran in 1980, Israel feared an Iraqi victory and actively helped Iran by selling it arms and providing it with spare parts for Iran's American weaponry at a moment when Iran was very vulnerable because of an American arms embargo that Israel was more than happy to violate.
In fact, back in the 1980s, it was Israel that lobbied Washington to talk to Iran, to sell arms to Iran, and not pay attention to Iran's anti-Israeli ideology.
And this, of course, climaxed in the Iran-Contra scandal of the 1980s.
But with the end of the Cold War came also the end of the Israeli-Iranian cold peace.
Suddenly, the two common threats that had pushed them closer together throughout decades, more or less evaporated.
The Soviet Union collapsed, Iraq was defeated, and a new environment was created in the region in which both of them felt more secure, but they were also now left unchecked.
Without Iraq balancing Iran, Iran could now become a threat, some in Israel argued.
In fact, the current dynamic that you see between Iran and Israel has its roots more so in the geopolitical reconfiguration of the region after the Cold War than in the events of 1979, because at this point, Iran and Israel emerge as two of the most powerful states in the region, and rather than viewing each other as potential security partners, they increasingly came to view each other as rivals and competitors.
So Israel, who in the 1980s lobbied for and improved U.S.-Iran relations now feared a U.S.-Iran rapprochement, thinking that it would come at Israel's security interests' expense, and instead sought to put Iran in increased isolation.
Ironically, this was happening at a time when Iran was more interested in peacemaking with Washington than to see to Israel's destruction.
Iran had put itself in isolation because of its radicalism, and after having helped the United States indirectly in the war against Iraq in 1991, the Iranians were hoping that they would be rewarded by being included in the post-war security architecture of the region.
But Washington chose to ignore Iran's outreach, as it would a decade later in Afghanistan, and instead moved to intensify Iran's isolation, and it is at this point, around 1993, '94, that Iran begins to translate its anti-Israeli ideology into operational policy.
The Iranians believed that whatever they did, even if they moderated their policies, the U.S. would continue to seek Iran's isolation, and the only way Iran could compel Washington to change its position was by imposing a cost on the U.S. if it didn't.
The easiest target was the peace process, and now the Iranian ideological bark was to be accompanied by a nonconventional bite, and Iran began supporting extensively Palestinian Islamist groups that it previously had shunned.
In some ways, this sounds paradoxical, but according to Martin Indyk of the Clinton administration, the Iranians had not gotten it entirely wrong, because the more peace there would be between Israel and Palestine, the U.S. believed, the more Iran would get isolated.
The more Iran got isolated, the more peace there would be.
So according to Indyk, and these are his words, the Iranians had an interest to do us in on the peace process in order to defeat our policy of containment.
To defeat our policy of containment, not about ideology.
But throughout even the worst times of their entanglement, all sides have reached out to each other.
Netanyahu, when he got elected in 1996, reached out to the Iranians to see if there were any ways that the doctrine of the periphery could be resurrected.
Tehran was not interested.
A few years later, the Iranians sent a comprehensive negotiation proposal to the Bush administration, a proposal that revealed that there was some potential of getting Iran and Israel back on terms again.
The Bush administration did not even respond.
All sides have never missed an opportunity to miss an opportunity.
But this is not an ancient conflict.
This is not even an ideological conflict.
The ebbs and flows of hostility have not shifted with ideological zeal, but rather with changes in the geopolitical landscape.
When Iran and Israel's security imperatives dictated collaboration, they did so in spite of lethal ideological opposition to each other.
When Iran's ideological impulses collided with its strategic interests, the strategic interests always prevailed.
This is good news, because it means that neither war nor enmity is a foregone conclusion.
But some want war.
Some believe or say that it's 1938, Iran is Germany, and Ahmadinejad is Hitler.
If we accept this to be true, that indeed it is 1938, Iran is Germany, Ahmadinejad is Hitler, then the question we have to ask ourself is, who wishes to play the role of Neville Chamberlain?
Who will risk peace?
This is an analogy that is deliberately aimed at eliminating diplomacy, and when you eliminate diplomacy, you make war inevitable.
In an ideological conflict, there can be no truce, no draw, no compromise, only victory or defeat.
But rather than making war inevitable by viewing this as ideological, we would be wise to seek ways to make peace possible.
Iran and Israel's conflict is a new phenomenon, only a few decades old in a history of 2,500 years, and precisely because its roots are geopolitical, it means that solutions can be found, compromises can be struck, however difficult it yet may be.
After all, it was Yitzhak Rabin himself who said, "You don't make peace with your friends.
You make it with your enemies."
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the last two and a half years, I'm one of the few, if not the only, child psychiatrist operating in refugee camps, shorelines and rescue boats in Greece and the Mediterranean Sea.
And I can say, with great confidence, that we are witnessing a mental-health catastrophe that will affect most of us, and it will change our world.
I live in Haifa, but nowadays, I spend most of my time abroad.
During my time on the Greek island of Lesbos and on the rescue boats in the Mediterranean, thousands of refugee boats arrived to the shoreline, crowded with more than 1.5 million refugees.
One-fourth of them are children, fleeing war and hardship.
Each boat carries different sufferings and traumas from Syria, Iraq, Afganistan and different countries in Africa.
In the last three years alone, more than 12,000 refugees lost their lives.
And hundreds of thousands lost their souls and their mental health due to this cruel and traumatic experience.
I want to tell you about Omar, a five-year-old Syrian refugee boy who arrived to the shore on Lesbos on a crowded rubber boat.
Crying, frightened, unable to understand what's happening to him, he was right on the verge of developing a new trauma.
I knew right away that this was a golden hour, a short period of time in which I could change his story, I could change the story that he would tell himself for the rest of his life.
I could reframe his memories.
I quickly held out my hands and said to his shaking mother in Arabic, (Arabic) "Ateeni elwalad o khudi nafas."
"Give me the boy, and take a breath."
His mother gave him to me.
Omar looked at me with scared, tearful eyes and said, (Arabic) "Ammo (uncle in Arabic), shu hada?"
"What is this?"
as he pointed out to the police helicopter hovering above us.
"It's a helicopter!
It's here to photograph you with big cameras, because only the great and the powerful heroes, like you, Omar, can cross the sea."
Omar looked at me, stopped crying and asked me, (Arabic) "Ana batal?"
"I'm a hero?"
I talked to Omar for 15 minutes.
And I gave his parents some guidance to follow.
This short psychological intervention decreases the prevalence of post-traumatic stress disorder and other mental health issues in the future, preparing Omar to get an education, join the workforce, raise a family and beyond.
How?
By stimulating the good memories that will be stored in the amygdala, the emotional storage of the human brain.
These memories will fight the traumatic ones, if they are reactivated in the future.
To Omar, the smell of the sea will not just remind him of his traumatic journey from Syria.
Because to Omar, this story is now a story of bravery.
This is the power of the golden hour, which can reframe the trauma and establish a new narrative.
But Omar is only one out of more than 350,000 children without the proper mental health support in this crisis alone.
Three hundred and fifty thousand children and me.
We need mental health professionals to join rescue teams during times of active crisis.
This is why my wife and I and friends co-founded "Humanity Crew."
One of the few aid organizations in the world that specializes in providing psychosocial aid and first-response mental health interventions to refugees and displaced populations.
To provide them with a suitable intervention, we create the four-step approach, a psychosocial work plan that follows the refugees on each step of their journey.
Starting inside the sea, on the rescue boats, as mental health lifeguards.
Later in the camps, hospitals and through our online clinic that breaks down borders and overcomes languages.
And ending in the asylum countries, helping them integrate.
Since our first mission in 2015, "Humanity Crew" had 194 delegations of qualified, trained volunteers and therapists.
We have provided 26,000 hours of mental health support to over 10,000 refugees.
We can all do something to prevent this mental health catastrophe.
We need to acknowledge that first aid is not just needed for the body, but it has also to include the mind, the soul.
The impact on the soul is hardly visible, but the damage can be there for life.
Let's not forget that what distinguishes us humans from machines is the beautiful and the delicate soul within us.
Let's try harder to save more Omars.
Thank you.
(Applause) (Cheers) (Applause)
Well, as Chris pointed out, I study the human brain, the functions and structure of the human brain.
And I just want you to think for a minute about what this entails.
Here is this mass of jelly, three-pound mass of jelly you can hold in the palm of your hand, and it can contemplate the vastness of interstellar space.
It can contemplate the meaning of infinity and it can contemplate itself contemplating on the meaning of infinity.
And this peculiar recursive quality that we call self-awareness, which I think is the holy grail of neuroscience, of neurology, and hopefully, someday, we'll understand how that happens.
OK, so how do you study this mysterious organ?
I mean, you have 100 billion nerve cells, little wisps of protoplasm, interacting with each other, and from this activity emerges the whole spectrum of abilities that we call human nature and human consciousness.
How does this happen?
Well, there are many ways of approaching the functions of the human brain.
One approach, the one we use mainly, is to look at patients with sustained damage to a small region of the brain, where there's been a genetic change in a small region of the brain.
What then happens is not an across-the-board reduction in all your mental capacities, a sort of blunting of your cognitive ability.
What you get is a highly selective loss of one function, with other functions being preserved intact, and this gives you some confidence in asserting that that part of the brain is somehow involved in mediating that function.
So you can then map function onto structure, and then find out what the circuitry's doing to generate that particular function.
So that's what we're trying to do.
So let me give you a few striking examples of this.
In fact, I'm giving you three examples, six minutes each, during this talk.
The first example is an extraordinary syndrome called Capgras syndrome.
If you look at the first slide there, that's the temporal lobes, frontal lobes, parietal lobes, OK -- the lobes that constitute the brain.
And if you look, tucked away inside the inner surface of the temporal lobes -- you can't see it there -- is a little structure called the fusiform gyrus.
And that's been called the face area in the brain, because when it's damaged, you can no longer recognize people's faces.
You can still recognize them from their voice and say, "Oh yeah, that's Joe," but you can't look at their face and know who it is, right?
You can't even recognize yourself in the mirror.
I mean, you know it's you because you wink and it winks, and you know it's a mirror, but you don't really recognize yourself as yourself.
OK. Now that syndrome is well known as caused by damage to the fusiform gyrus.
But there's another rare syndrome, so rare, in fact, that very few physicians have heard about it, not even neurologists.
This is called the Capgras delusion, and that is a patient, who's otherwise completely normal, has had a head injury, comes out of coma, otherwise completely normal, he looks at his mother and says, "This looks exactly like my mother, this woman, but she's an impostor.
She's some other woman pretending to be my mother."
Now, why does this happen?
Why would somebody -- and this person is perfectly lucid and intelligent in all other respects, but when he sees his mother, his delusion kicks in and says, it's not mother.
Now, the most common interpretation of this, which you find in all the psychiatry textbooks, is a Freudian view, and that is that this chap -- and the same argument applies to women, by the way, but I'll just talk about guys.
When you're a little baby, a young baby, you had a strong sexual attraction to your mother.
This is the so-called Oedipus complex of Freud.
I'm not saying I believe this, but this is the standard Freudian view.
And then, as you grow up, the cortex develops, and inhibits these latent sexual urges towards your mother.
Thank God, or you would all be sexually aroused when you saw your mother.
And then what happens is, there's a blow to your head, damaging the cortex, allowing these latent sexual urges to emerge, flaming to the surface, and suddenly and inexplicably you find yourself being sexually aroused by your mother.
And you say, "My God, if this is my mom, how come I'm being sexually turned on?
She's some other woman. She's an impostor."
It's the only interpretation that makes sense to your damaged brain.
This has never made much sense to me, this argument.
It's very ingenious, as all Freudian arguments are -- (Laughter) -- but didn't make much sense because I have seen the same delusion, a patient having the same delusion, about his pet poodle.
(Laughter) He'll say, "Doctor, this is not Fifi. It looks exactly like Fifi, but it's some other dog." Right?
Now, you try using the Freudian explanation there.
(Laughter) You'll start talking about the latent bestiality in all humans, or some such thing, which is quite absurd, of course.
Now, what's really going on?
So, to explain this curious disorder, we look at the structure and functions of the normal visual pathways in the brain.
Normally, visual signals come in, into the eyeballs, go to the visual areas in the brain.
There are, in fact, 30 areas in the back of your brain concerned with just vision, and after processing all that, the message goes to a small structure called the fusiform gyrus, where you perceive faces.
There are neurons there that are sensitive to faces.
You can call it the face area of the brain, right?
I talked about that earlier.
Now, when that area's damaged, you lose the ability to see faces, right?
But from that area, the message cascades into a structure called the amygdala in the limbic system, the emotional core of the brain, and that structure, called the amygdala, gauges the emotional significance of what you're looking at.
Is it prey? Is it predator? Is it mate?
Or is it something absolutely trivial, like a piece of lint, or a piece of chalk, or a -- I don't want to point to that, but -- or a shoe, or something like that? OK?
Which you can completely ignore.
So if the amygdala is excited, and this is something important, the messages then cascade into the autonomic nervous system.
Your heart starts beating faster.
You start sweating to dissipate the heat that you're going to create from muscular exertion.
And that's fortunate, because we can put two electrodes on your palm and measure the change in skin resistance produced by sweating.
So I can determine, when you're looking at something, whether you're excited or whether you're aroused, or not, OK?
And I'll get to that in a minute.
So my idea was, when this chap looks at an object, when he looks at his -- any object for that matter, it goes to the visual areas and, however, and it's processed in the fusiform gyrus, and you recognize it as a pea plant, or a table, or your mother, for that matter, OK?
And then the message cascades into the amygdala, and then goes down the autonomic nervous system.
But maybe, in this chap, that wire that goes from the amygdala to the limbic system, the emotional core of the brain, is cut by the accident.
So because the fusiform is intact, the chap can still recognize his mother, and says, "Oh yeah, this looks like my mother."
But because the wire is cut to the emotional centers, he says, "But how come, if it's my mother, I don't experience a warmth?"
Or terror, as the case may be? Right?
(Laughter) And therefore, he says, "How do I account for this inexplicable lack of emotions?
This can't be my mother.
It's some strange woman pretending to be my mother."
How do you test this?
Well, what you do is, if you take any one of you here, and put you in front of a screen, and measure your galvanic skin response, and show pictures on the screen, I can measure how you sweat when you see an object, like a table or an umbrella. Of course, you don't sweat.
If I show you a picture of a lion, or a tiger, or a pinup, you start sweating, right?
And, believe it or not, if I show you a picture of your mother -- I'm talking about normal people -- you start sweating.
You don't even have to be Jewish.
(Laughter) Now, what happens if you show this patient?
You take the patient and show him pictures on the screen and measure his galvanic skin response.
Tables and chairs and lint, nothing happens, as in normal people, but when you show him a picture of his mother, the galvanic skin response is flat.
There's no emotional reaction to his mother, because that wire going from the visual areas to the emotional centers is cut.
So his vision is normal because the visual areas are normal, his emotions are normal -- he'll laugh, he'll cry, so on and so forth -- but the wire from vision to emotions is cut and therefore he has this delusion that his mother is an impostor.
It's a lovely example of the sort of thing we do: take a bizarre, seemingly incomprehensible, neural psychiatric syndrome and say that the standard Freudian view is wrong, that, in fact, you can come up with a precise explanation in terms of the known neural anatomy of the brain.
By the way, if this patient then goes, and mother phones from an adjacent room -- phones him -- and he picks up the phone, and he says, "Wow, mom, how are you? Where are you?"
There's no delusion through the phone.
Then, she approaches him after an hour, he says, "Who are you?
You look just like my mother." OK?
The reason is there's a separate pathway going from the hearing centers in the brain to the emotional centers, and that's not been cut by the accident.
So this explains why through the phone he recognizes his mother, no problem.
When he sees her in person, he says it's an impostor.
OK, how is all this complex circuitry set up in the brain?
Is it nature, genes, or is it nurture?
And we approach this problem by considering another curious syndrome called phantom limb.
And you all know what a phantom limb is.
When an arm is amputated, or a leg is amputated, for gangrene, or you lose it in war -- for example, in the Iraq war, it's now a serious problem -- you continue to vividly feel the presence of that missing arm, and that's called a phantom arm or a phantom leg.
In fact, you can get a phantom with almost any part of the body.
Believe it or not, even with internal viscera.
I've had patients with the uterus removed -- hysterectomy -- who have a phantom uterus, including phantom menstrual cramps at the appropriate time of the month.
And in fact, one student asked me the other day, "Do they get phantom PMS?"
(Laughter) A subject ripe for scientific enquiry, but we haven't pursued that.
OK, now the next question is, what can you learn about phantom limbs by doing experiments?
One of the things we've found was, about half the patients with phantom limbs claim that they can move the phantom.
It'll pat his brother on the shoulder, it'll answer the phone when it rings, it'll wave goodbye.
These are very compelling, vivid sensations.
The patient's not delusional.
He knows that the arm is not there, but, nevertheless, it's a compelling sensory experience for the patient.
But however, about half the patients, this doesn't happen.
The phantom limb -- they'll say, "But doctor, the phantom limb is paralyzed.
It's fixed in a clenched spasm and it's excruciatingly painful.
If only I could move it, maybe the pain will be relieved."
Now, why would a phantom limb be paralyzed?
It sounds like an oxymoron.
But when we were looking at the case sheets, what we found was, these people with the paralyzed phantom limbs, the original arm was paralyzed because of the peripheral nerve injury.
The actual nerve supplying the arm was severed, was cut, by say, a motorcycle accident.
So the patient had an actual arm, which is painful, in a sling for a few months or a year, and then, in a misguided attempt to get rid of the pain in the arm, the surgeon amputates the arm, and then you get a phantom arm with the same pains, right?
And this is a serious clinical problem.
Patients become depressed.
Some of them are driven to suicide, OK?
So, how do you treat this syndrome?
Now, why do you get a paralyzed phantom limb?
When I looked at the case sheet, I found that they had an actual arm, and the nerves supplying the arm had been cut, and the actual arm had been paralyzed, and lying in a sling for several months before the amputation, and this pain then gets carried over into the phantom itself.
Why does this happen?
When the arm was intact, but paralyzed, the brain sends commands to the arm, the front of the brain, saying, "Move," but it's getting visual feedback saying, "No."
Move. No. Move. No. Move. No.
And this gets wired into the circuitry of the brain, and we call this learned paralysis, OK?
The brain learns, because of this Hebbian, associative link, that the mere command to move the arm creates a sensation of a paralyzed arm.
And then, when you've amputated the arm, this learned paralysis carries over into your body image and into your phantom, OK?
Now, how do you help these patients?
How do you unlearn the learned paralysis, so you can relieve him of this excruciating, clenching spasm of the phantom arm?
Well, we said, what if you now send the command to the phantom, but give him visual feedback that it's obeying his command, right?
Maybe you can relieve the phantom pain, the phantom cramp.
How do you do that? Well, virtual reality.
But that costs millions of dollars.
So, I hit on a way of doing this for three dollars, but don't tell my funding agencies.
(Laughter) OK? What you do is you create what I call a mirror box.
You have a cardboard box with a mirror in the middle, and then you put the phantom -- so my first patient, Derek, came in.
He had his arm amputated 10 years ago.
He had a brachial avulsion, so the nerves were cut and the arm was paralyzed, lying in a sling for a year, and then the arm was amputated.
He had a phantom arm, excruciatingly painful, and he couldn't move it.
It was a paralyzed phantom arm.
So he came there, and I gave him a mirror like that, in a box, which I call a mirror box, right?
And the patient puts his phantom left arm, which is clenched and in spasm, on the left side of the mirror, and the normal hand on the right side of the mirror, and makes the same posture, the clenched posture, and looks inside the mirror. And what does he experience?
He looks at the phantom being resurrected, because he's looking at the reflection of the normal arm in the mirror, and it looks like this phantom has been resurrected.
"Now," I said, "now, look, wiggle your phantom -- your real fingers, or move your real fingers while looking in the mirror."
He's going to get the visual impression that the phantom is moving, right?
That's obvious, but the astonishing thing is, the patient then says, "Oh my God, my phantom is moving again, and the pain, the clenching spasm, is relieved."
And remember, my first patient who came in -- (Applause) -- thank you. (Applause) My first patient came in, and he looked in the mirror, and I said, "Look at your reflection of your phantom."
And he started giggling, he says, "I can see my phantom."
But he's not stupid. He knows it's not real.
He knows it's a mirror reflection, but it's a vivid sensory experience.
Now, I said, "Move your normal hand and phantom."
He said, "Oh, I can't move my phantom. You know that. It's painful."
I said, "Move your normal hand."
And he says, "Oh my God, my phantom is moving again. I don't believe this!
And my pain is being relieved." OK?
And then I said, "Close your eyes."
He closes his eyes.
"And move your normal hand."
"Oh, nothing. It's clenched again."
"OK, open your eyes."
"Oh my God, oh my God, it's moving again!"
So, he was like a kid in a candy store.
So, I said, OK, this proves my theory about learned paralysis and the critical role of visual input, but I'm not going to get a Nobel Prize for getting somebody to move his phantom limb.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's a completely useless ability, if you think about it.
(Laughter) But then I started realizing, maybe other kinds of paralysis that you see in neurology, like stroke, focal dystonias -- there may be a learned component to this, which you can overcome with the simple device of using a mirror.
So, I said, "Look, Derek" -- well, first of all, the guy can't just go around carrying a mirror to alleviate his pain -- I said, "Look, Derek, take it home and practice with it for a week or two.
Maybe, after a period of practice, you can dispense with the mirror, unlearn the paralysis, and start moving your paralyzed arm, and then, relieve yourself of pain."
So he said OK, and he took it home.
I said, "Look, it's, after all, two dollars. Take it home."
So, he took it home, and after two weeks, he phones me, and he said, "Doctor, you're not going to believe this."
I said, "What?"
He said, "It's gone."
I said, "What's gone?"
I thought maybe the mirror box was gone.
(Laughter) He said, "No, no, no, you know this phantom I've had for the last 10 years?
It's disappeared."
And I said -- I got worried, I said, my God, I mean I've changed this guy's body image, what about human subjects, ethics and all of that?
And I said, "Derek, does this bother you?"
He said, "No, last three days, I've not had a phantom arm and therefore no phantom elbow pain, no clenching, no phantom forearm pain, all those pains are gone away.
But the problem is I still have my phantom fingers dangling from the shoulder, and your box doesn't reach."
(Laughter) "So, can you change the design and put it on my forehead, so I can, you know, do this and eliminate my phantom fingers?"
He thought I was some kind of magician.
Now, why does this happen?
It's because the brain is faced with tremendous sensory conflict.
It's getting messages from vision saying the phantom is back.
On the other hand, there's no proprioception, muscle signals saying that there is no arm, right?
And your motor command saying there is an arm, and, because of this conflict, the brain says, to hell with it, there is no phantom, there is no arm, right?
It goes into a sort of denial -- it gates the signals.
And when the arm disappears, the bonus is, the pain disappears because you can't have disembodied pain floating out there, in space.
So, that's the bonus.
Now, this technique has been tried on dozens of patients by other groups in Helsinki, so it may prove to be valuable as a treatment for phantom pain, and indeed, people have tried it for stroke rehabilitation.
Stroke you normally think of as damage to the fibers, nothing you can do about it.
But, it turns out some component of stroke paralysis is also learned paralysis, and maybe that component can be overcome using mirrors.
This has also gone through clinical trials, helping lots and lots of patients.
OK, let me switch gears now to the third part of my talk, which is about another curious phenomenon called synesthesia.
This was discovered by Francis Galton in the nineteenth century.
He was a cousin of Charles Darwin.
He pointed out that certain people in the population, who are otherwise completely normal, had the following peculiarity: every time they see a number, it's colored.
Five is blue, seven is yellow, eight is chartreuse, nine is indigo, OK?
Bear in mind, these people are completely normal in other respects.
Or C sharp -- sometimes, tones evoke color.
C sharp is blue, F sharp is green, another tone might be yellow, right?
Why does this happen?
This is called synesthesia. Galton called it synesthesia, a mingling of the senses.
In us, all the senses are distinct.
These people muddle up their senses.
Why does this happen?
One of the two aspects of this problem are very intriguing.
Synesthesia runs in families, so Galton said this is a hereditary basis, a genetic basis.
Secondly, synesthesia is about -- and this is what gets me to my point about the main theme of this lecture, which is about creativity -- synesthesia is eight times more common among artists, poets, novelists and other creative people than in the general population.
Why would that be?
I'm going to answer that question.
It's never been answered before.
OK, what is synesthesia? What causes it?
Well, there are many theories.
One theory is they're just crazy.
Now, that's not really a scientific theory, so we can forget about it.
Another theory is they are acid junkies and potheads, right?
Now, there may be some truth to this, because it's much more common here in the Bay Area than in San Diego.
(Laughter) OK. Now, the third theory is that -- well, let's ask ourselves what's really going on in synesthesia. All right?
So, we found that the color area and the number area are right next to each other in the brain, in the fusiform gyrus.
So we said, there's some accidental cross wiring between color and numbers in the brain.
So, every time you see a number, you see a corresponding color, and that's why you get synesthesia.
Now remember -- why does this happen?
Why would there be crossed wires in some people?
Remember I said it runs in families?
That gives you the clue.
And that is, there is an abnormal gene, a mutation in the gene that causes this abnormal cross wiring.
In all of us, it turns out we are born with everything wired to everything else.
So, every brain region is wired to every other region, and these are trimmed down to create the characteristic modular architecture of the adult brain.
So, if there's a gene causing this trimming and if that gene mutates, then you get deficient trimming between adjacent brain areas.
And if it's between number and color, you get number-color synesthesia.
If it's between tone and color, you get tone-color synesthesia.
So far, so good.
Now, what if this gene is expressed everywhere in the brain, so everything is cross-connected?
Well, think about what artists, novelists and poets have in common, the ability to engage in metaphorical thinking, linking seemingly unrelated ideas, such as, "It is the east, and Juliet is the Sun."
Well, you don't say, Juliet is the sun, does that mean she's a glowing ball of fire?
I mean, schizophrenics do that, but it's a different story, right?
Normal people say, she's warm like the sun, she's radiant like the sun, she's nurturing like the sun.
Instantly, you've found the links.
Now, if you assume that this greater cross wiring and concepts are also in different parts of the brain, then it's going to create a greater propensity towards metaphorical thinking and creativity in people with synesthesia.
And, hence, the eight times more common incidence of synesthesia among poets, artists and novelists.
OK, it's a very phrenological view of synesthesia.
The last demonstration -- can I take one minute?
(Applause) OK. I'm going to show you that you're all synesthetes, but you're in denial about it.
Here's what I call Martian alphabet. Just like your alphabet, A is A, B is B, C is C.
Different shapes for different phonemes, right?
Here, you've got Martian alphabet.
One of them is Kiki, one of them is Bouba.
Which one is Kiki and which one is Bouba?
How many of you think that's Kiki and that's Bouba? Raise your hands.
Well, it's one or two mutants.
(Laughter) How many of you think that's Bouba, that's Kiki? Raise your hands.
Ninety-nine percent of you.
Now, none of you is a Martian. How did you do that?
It's because you're all doing a cross-model synesthetic abstraction, meaning you're saying that that sharp inflection -- ki-ki, in your auditory cortex, the hair cells being excited -- Kiki, mimics the visual inflection, sudden inflection of that jagged shape.
Now, this is very important, because what it's telling you is your brain is engaging in a primitive -- it's just -- it looks like a silly illusion, but these photons in your eye are doing this shape, and hair cells in your ear are exciting the auditory pattern, but the brain is able to extract the common denominator.
It's a primitive form of abstraction, and we now know this happens in the fusiform gyrus of the brain, because when that's damaged, these people lose the ability to engage in Bouba Kiki, but they also lose the ability to engage in metaphor.
If you ask this guy, what -- "all that glitters is not gold," what does that mean?"
The patient says, "Well, if it's metallic and shiny, it doesn't mean it's gold.
You have to measure its specific gravity, OK?"
So, they completely miss the metaphorical meaning.
So, this area is about eight times the size in higher -- especially in humans -- as in lower primates.
Something very interesting is going on here in the angular gyrus, because it's the crossroads between hearing, vision and touch, and it became enormous in humans. And something very interesting is going on.
And I think it's a basis of many uniquely human abilities like abstraction, metaphor and creativity.
All of these questions that philosophers have been studying for millennia, we scientists can begin to explore by doing brain imaging, and by studying patients and asking the right questions.
Thank you.
(Applause) Sorry about that.
(Laughter)
I'm a physician trained in infectious diseases, and following my training, I moved to Somalia from San Francisco.
And my goodbye greeting from the chief of infectious diseases at San Francisco General was, "Gary, this is the biggest mistake you'll ever make."
But I landed in a refugee situation that had a million refugees in 40 camps, and there were six of us doctors.
There were many epidemics there.
My responsibilities were largely related to tuberculosis, and then we got struck by an epidemic of cholera.
So it was the spread of tuberculosis and the spread of cholera that I was responsible for inhibiting.
And in order to do this work, we, of course, because of the limitation in health workers, had to recruit refugees to be a specialized new category of health worker.
Following three years of work in Somalia, I got picked up by the World Health Organization, and got assigned to the epidemics of AIDS.
My primary responsibility was Uganda, but also I worked in Rwanda and Burundi and Zaire, now Congo, Tanzania, Malawi, and several other countries.
And my last assignment there was to run a unit called intervention development, which was responsible for designing interventions.
After 10 years of working overseas, I was exhausted.
I really had very little left.
I had been traveling to one country after another.
I was emotionally feeling very isolated.
I wanted to come home.
I'd seen a lot of death, in particular epidemic death, and epidemic death has a different feel to it.
It's full of panic and fear, and I'd heard the women wailing and crying in the desert.
And I wanted to come home and take a break and maybe start over.
I was not aware of any epidemic problems in America.
In fact, I wasn't aware of any problems in America.
In fact -- seriously.
And in fact I would visit friends of mine, and I noticed that they had water that came right into their homes.
How many of you have such a situation?
(Laughter) And some of them, many of them actually, had water that came into more than one room.
And I noticed that they would move this little thermoregulatory device to change the temperature in their home by one degree or two degrees.
And now I do that.
And I really didn't know what I would do, but friends of mine began telling me about children shooting other children with guns.
And I asked the question, what are you doing about it?
What are you in America doing about it?
And there were two essential explanations or ideas that were prevalent.
And one was punishment.
And this I had heard about before.
We who had worked in behavior knew that punishment was something that was discussed but also that it was highly overvalued.
It was not a main driver of behavior, nor was it a main driver of behavior change.
And besides that, it reminded me of ancient epidemics that were previously completely misunderstood because the science hadn't been there before, epidemics of plague or typhus or leprosy, where the prevalent ideas were that there were bad people or bad humors or bad air, and widows were dragged around the moat, and dungeons were part of the solution.
The other explanation or, in a way, the solution suggested, is please fix all of these things: the schools, the community, the homes, the families, everything.
And I'd heard this before as well.
I'd called this the "everything" theory, or EOE: Everything On Earth.
But we'd also realized in treating other processes and problems that sometimes you don't need to treat everything.
And so the sense that I had was there was a giant gap here.
The problem of violence was stuck, and this has historically been the case in many other issues.
Diarrheal diseases had been stuck.
Malaria had been stuck.
Frequently, a strategy has to be rethought.
It's not as if I had any idea what it would look like, but there was a sense that we would have to do something with new categories of workers and something having to do with behavior change and something having to do with public education.
But I began to ask questions and search out the usual things that I had been exploring before, like, what do the maps look like?
What do the graphs look like?
What does the data look like?
And the maps of violence in most U.S. cities looked like this.
There was clustering.
This reminded me of clustering that we'd seen also in infectious epidemics, for example cholera.
And then we looked at the maps, and the maps showed this typical wave upon wave upon wave, because all epidemics are combinations of many epidemics.
And it also looked like infectious epidemics.
And then we asked the question, well what really predicts a case of violence?
And it turns out that the greatest predictor of a case of violence is a preceding case of violence.
Which also sounds like, if there is a case of flu, someone gave someone a case of flu, or a cold, or the greatest risk factor of tuberculosis is having been exposed to tuberculosis.
And so we see that violence is, in a way, behaving like a contagious disease.
We're aware of this anyway even in our common experiences or our newspaper stories of the spread of violence from fights or in gang wars or in civil wars or even in genocides.
And so there's good news about this, though, because there's a way to reverse epidemics, and there's really only three things that are done to reverse epidemics, and the first of it is interrupting transmission.
In order to interrupt transmission, you need to detect and find first cases.
In other words, for T.B. you have to find somebody who has active T.B. who is infecting other people.
Make sense?
And there's special workers for doing that.
For this particular problem, we designed a new category of worker who, like a SARS worker or someone looking for bird flu, might find first cases.
In this case, it's someone who's very angry because someone looked at his girlfriend or owes him money, and you can find workers and train them into these specialized categories.
And the second thing to do, of course, is to prevent further spread, that means to find who else has been exposed, but may not be spreading so much right now like someone with a smaller case of T.B., or someone who is just hanging out in the neighborhoods, but in the same group, and then they need to be, in a way, managed as well, particular to the specific disease process.
And then the third part, the shifting the norms, and that means a whole bunch of community activities, remodeling, public education, and then you've got what you might call group immunity.
And that combination of factors is how the AIDS epidemic in Uganda was very successfully reversed.
And so what we decided to do in the year 2000 is kind of put this together in a way by hiring in new categories of workers, the first being violence interruptors.
And then we would put all of this into place in one neighborhood in what was the worst police district in the United States at the time.
So violence interruptors hired from the same group, credibility, trust, access, just like the health workers in Somalia, but designed for a different category, and trained in persuasion, cooling people down, buying time, reframing.
And then another category of worker, the outreach workers, to keep people in a way on therapy for six to 24 months.
Just like T.B., but the object is behavior change.
And then a bunch of community activities for changing norms.
Now our first experiment of this resulted in a 67-percent drop in shootings and killings in the West Garfield neighborhood of Chicago.
(Applause) And this was a beautiful thing for the neighborhood itself, first 50 or 60 days, then 90 days, and then there was unfortunately another shooting in another 90 days, and the moms were hanging out in the afternoon.
They were using parks they weren't using before.
The sun was out. Everybody was happy.
But of course, the funders said, "Wait a second, do it again."
And so we had to then, fortunately, get the funds to repeat this experience, and this is one of the next four neighborhoods that had a 45-percent drop in shootings and killings.
And since that time, this has been replicated 20 times.
There have been independent evaluations supported by the Justice Department and by the CDC and performed by Johns Hopkins that have shown 30-to-50-percent and 40-to-70-percent reductions in shootings and killings using this new method.
In fact, there have been three independent evaluations of this now.
Now we've gotten a lot of attention as a result of this, including being featured on The New York Times' Sunday magazine cover story.
The Economist in 2009 said this is "the approach that will come to prominence."
And even a movie was made around our work.
[The Interrupters] However, not so fast, because a lot of people did not agree with this way of going about it.
We got a lot of criticism, a lot of opposition, and a lot of opponents.
In other words, what do you mean, health problem?
What do you mean, epidemic?
What do you mean, no bad guys?
And there's whole industries designed for managing bad people.
What do you mean, hiring people who have backgrounds?
My business friends said, "Gary, you're being criticized tremendously.
You must be doing something right."
(Laughter) My musician friends added the word "dude."
So anyway, additionally, there was still this problem, and we were getting highly criticized as well for not dealing with all of these other problems.
Yet we were able to manage malaria and reduce HIV and reduce diarrheal diseases in places with awful economies without healing the economy.
So what's actually happened is, although there is still some opposition, the movement is clearly growing.
Many of the major cities in the U.S., including New York City and Baltimore and Kansas City, their health departments are running this now.
Chicago and New Orleans, the health departments are having a very large role in this.
This is being embraced more by law enforcement than it had been years ago.
Trauma centers and hospitals are doing their part in stepping up.
And the U.S. Conference of Mayors has endorsed not only the approach but the specific model.
Where there's really been uptake even faster is in the international environment, where there's a 55-percent drop in the first neighborhood in Puerto Rico, where interruptions are just beginning in Honduras, where the strategy has been applied in Kenya for the recent elections, and where there have been 500 interruptions in Iraq.
So violence is responding as a disease even as it behaves as a disease.
So the theory, in a way, is kind of being validated by the treatment.
And recently, the Institute of Medicine came out with a workshop report which went through some of the data, including the neuroscience, on how this problem is really transmitted.
So I think this is good news, because it allows us an opportunity to come out of the Middle Ages, which is where I feel this field has been.
It gives us an opportunity to consider the possibility of replacing some of these prisons with playgrounds or parks, and to consider the possibility of converting our neighborhoods into neighborhoods, and to allow there to be a new strategy, a new set of methods, a new set of workers: science, in a way, replacing morality.
And moving away from emotions is the most important part of the solution to science as a more important part of the solution.
So I didn't mean to come up with this at all.
It was a matter of, I wanted actually a break, and we looked at maps, we looked at graphs, we asked some questions and tried some tools that actually have been used many times before for other things.
For myself, I tried to get away from infectious diseases, and I didn't.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So in my free time outside of Twitter I experiment a little bit with telling stories online, experimenting with what we can do with new digital tools.
And in my job at Twitter, I actually spent a little bit of time working with authors and storytellers as well, helping to expand out the bounds of what people are experimenting with.
And I want to talk through some examples today of things that people have done that I think are really fascinating using flexible identity and anonymity on the web and blurring the lines between fact and fiction.
But I want to start and go back to the 1930s.
Long before a little thing called Twitter, radio brought us broadcasts and connected millions of people to single points of broadcast.
And from those single points emanated stories.
Some of them were familiar stories.
Some of them were new stories.
And for a while they were familiar formats, but then radio began to evolve its own unique formats specific to that medium.
Think about episodes that happened live on radio.
Combining the live play and the serialization of written fiction, you get this new format.
And the reason why I bring up radio is that I think radio is a great example of how a new medium defines new formats which then define new stories.
And of course, today, we have an entirely new medium to play with, which is this online world.
This is the map of verified users on Twitter and the connections between them.
There are thousands upon thousands of them.
Every single one of these points is its own broadcaster.
We've gone to this world of many to many, where access to the tools is the only barrier to broadcasting.
And I think that we should start to see wildly new formats emerge as people learn how to tell stories in this new medium.
I actually believe that we are in a wide open frontier for creative experimentation, if you will, that we've explored and begun to settle this wild land of the Internet and are now just getting ready to start to build structures on it, and those structures are the new formats of storytelling that the Internet will allow us to create.
I believe this starts with an evolution of existing methods.
The short story, for example, people are saying that the short story is experiencing a renaissance of sorts thanks to e-readers, digital marketplaces.
One writer, Hugh Howey, experimented with short stories on Amazon by releasing one very short story called "Wool."
And he actually says that he didn't intend for "Wool" to become a series, but that the audience loved the first story so much they demanded more, and so he gave them more.
He gave them "Wool 2," which was a little bit longer than the first one, "Wool 3," which was even longer, culminating in "Wool 5," which was a 60,000-word novel.
I think Howey was able to do all of this because he had the quick feedback system of e-books.
He was able to write and publish in relatively short order.
There was no mediator between him and the audience.
It was just him directly connected with his audience and building on the feedback and enthusiasm that they were giving him.
So this whole project was an experiment.
It started with the one short story, and I think the experimentation actually became a part of Howey's format.
And that's something that this medium enabled, was experimentation being a part of the format itself.
This is a short story by the author Jennifer Egan called "Black Box."
It was originally written specifically with Twitter in mind.
Egan convinced The New Yorker to start a New Yorker fiction account from which they could tweet all of these lines that she created.
Now Twitter, of course, has a 140-character limit.
Egan mocked that up just writing manually in this storyboard sketchbook, used the physical space constraints of those storyboard squares to write each individual tweet, and those tweets ended up becoming over 600 of them that were serialized by The New Yorker.
Every night, at 8 p.m., you could tune in to a short story from The New Yorker's fiction account.
I think that's pretty exciting: tune-in literary fiction.
The experience of Egan's story, of course, like anything on Twitter, there were multiple ways to experience it.
You could scroll back through it, but interestingly, if you were watching it live, there was this suspense that built because the actual tweets, you had no control over when you would read them.
They were coming at a pretty regular clip, but as the story was building, normally, as a reader, you control how fast you move through a text, but in this case, The New Yorker did, and they were sending you bit by bit by bit, and you had this suspense of waiting for the next line.
Another great example of fiction and the short story on Twitter, Elliott Holt is an author who wrote a story called "Evidence."
It began with this tweet: "On November 28 at 10:13 p.m., a woman identified as Miranda Brown, 44, of Brooklyn, fell to her death from the roof of a Manhattan hotel."
It begins in Elliott's voice, but then Elliott's voice recedes, and we hear the voices of Elsa, Margot and Simon, characters that Elliott created on Twitter specifically to tell this story, a story from multiple perspectives leading up to this moment at 10:13 p.m.
when this woman falls to her death.
These three characters brought an authentic vision from multiple perspectives.
One reviewer called Elliott's story "Twitter fiction done right," because she did.
She captured that voice and she had multiple characters and it happened in real time.
Interestingly, though, it wasn't just Twitter as a distribution mechanism.
It was also Twitter as a production mechanism.
Elliott told me later she wrote the whole thing with her thumbs.
She laid on the couch and just went back and forth between different characters tweeting out each line, line by line.
I think that this kind of spontaneous creation of what was coming out of the characters' voices really lent an authenticity to the characters themselves, but also to this format that she had created of multiple perspectives in a single story on Twitter.
As you begin to play with flexible identity online, it gets even more interesting as you start to interact with the real world.
Things like Invisible Obama or the famous "binders full of women" that came up during the 2012 election cycle, or even the fan fiction universe of "West Wing" Twitter in which you have all of these accounts for every single one of the characters in "The West Wing," including the bird that taps at Josh Lyman's window in one single episode. (Laughter) All of these are rapid iterations on a theme.
They are creative people experimenting with the bounds of what is possible in this medium.
You look at something like "West Wing" Twitter, in which you have these fictional characters that engage with the real world.
They comment on politics, they cry out against the evils of Congress.
Keep in mind, they're all Democrats.
And they engage with the real world.
They respond to it.
So once you take flexible identity, anonymity, engagement with the real world, and you move beyond simple homage or parody and you put these tools to work in telling a story, that's when things get really interesting.
So during the Chicago mayoral election there was a parody account.
It was Mayor Emanuel.
It gave you everything you wanted from Rahm Emanuel, particularly in the expletive department.
This foul-mouthed account followed the daily activities of the race, providing commentary as it went.
It followed all of the natural tropes of a good, solid Twitter parody account, but then started to get weird.
And as it progressed, it moved from this commentary to a multi-week, real-time science fiction epic in which your protagonist, Rahm Emanuel, engages in multi-dimensional travel on election day, which is -- it didn't actually happen.
I double checked the newspapers.
And then, very interestingly, it came to an end.
This is something that doesn't usually happen with a Twitter parody account.
It ended, a true narrative conclusion.
And so the author, Dan Sinker, who was a journalist, who was completely anonymous this whole time, I think Dan -- it made a lot of sense for him to turn this into a book, because it was a narrative format in the end, and I think that turning it into a book is representative of this idea that he had created something new that needed to be translated into previous formats.
One of my favorite examples of something that's happening on Twitter right now, actually, is the very absurdist Crimer Show.
Crimer Show tells the story of a supercriminal and a hapless detective that face off in this exceptionally strange lingo, with all of the tropes of a television show.
Crimer Show's creator has said that it is a parody of a popular type of show in the U.K., but, man, is it weird.
And there are all these times where Crimer, the supercriminal, does all of these TV things.
He's always taking off his sunglasses or turning to the camera, but these things just happen in text.
I think borrowing all of these tropes from television and additionally presenting each Crimer Show as an episode, spelled E-P-P-A-S-O-D, "eppasod," presenting them as episodes really, it creates something new.
There is a new "eppasod" of Crimer Show on Twitter pretty much every day, and they're archived that way.
And I think this is an interesting experiment in format.
Something totally new has been created here out of parodying something on television.
I think in nonfiction real-time storytelling, there are a lot of really excellent examples as well.
RealTimeWWII is an account that documents what was happening on this day 60 years ago in exceptional detail, as if you were reading the news reports from that day.
And the author Teju Cole has done a lot of experimentation with putting a literary twist on events of the news.
In this particular case, he's talking about drone strikes.
I think that in both of these examples, you're beginning to see ways in which people are telling stories with nonfiction content that can be built into new types of fictional storytelling.
So with real-time storytelling, blurring the lines between fact and fiction, the real world and the digital world, flexible identity, anonymity, these are all tools that we have accessible to us, and I think that they're just the building blocks.
They are the bits that we use to create the structures, the frames, that then become our settlements on this wide open frontier for creative experimentation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"Give me liberty or give me death."
When Patrick Henry, the governor of Virginia, said these words in 1775, he could never have imagined just how much they would come to resonate with American generations to come.
At the time, these words were earmarked and targeted against the British, but over the last 200 years, they've come to embody what many Westerners believe, that freedom is the most cherished value, and that the best systems of politics and economics have freedom embedded in them.
Who could blame them?
Over the past hundred years, the combination of liberal democracy and private capitalism has helped to catapult the United States and Western countries to new levels of economic development.
In the United States over the past hundred years, incomes have increased 30 times, and hundreds of thousands of people have been moved out of poverty.
Meanwhile, American ingenuity and innovation has helped to spur industrialization and also helped in the creation and the building of things like household appliances such as refrigerators and televisions, motor vehicles and even the mobile phones in your pockets.
It's no surprise, then, that even at the depths of the private capitalism crisis, President Obama said, "The question before us is not whether the market is a force for good or ill.
Its power to generate wealth and to expand freedom is unmatched."
Thus, there's understandably a deep-seated presumption among Westerners that the whole world will decide to adopt private capitalism as the model of economic growth, liberal democracy, and will continue to prioritize political rights over economic rights.
However, to many who live in the emerging markets, this is an illusion, and even though the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was signed in 1948, was unanimously adopted, what it did was to mask a schism that has emerged between developed and developing countries, and the ideological beliefs between political and economic rights.
This schism has only grown wider.
Today, many people who live in the emerging markets, where 90 percent of the world's population lives, believe that the Western obsession with political rights is beside the point, and what is actually important is delivering on food, shelter, education and healthcare.
"Give me liberty or give me death" is all well and good if you can afford it, but if you're living on less than one dollar a day, you're far too busy trying to survive and to provide for your family than to spend your time going around trying to proclaim and defend democracy.
Now, I know many people in this room and around the world will think, "Well actually, this is hard to grasp," because private capitalism and liberal democracy are held sacrosanct.
But I ask you today, what would you do if you had to choose?
What if you had to choose between a roof over your head and the right to vote?
Over the last 10 years, I've had the privilege to travel to over 60 countries, many of them in the emerging markets, in Latin America, Asia, and my own continent of Africa.
I've met with presidents, dissidents, policymakers, lawyers, teachers, doctors and the man on the street, and through these conversations, it's become clear to me that many people in the emerging markets believe that there's actually a split occurring between what people believe ideologically in terms of politics and economics in the West and that which people believe in the rest of the world.
Now, don't get me wrong.
I'm not saying people in the emerging markets don't understand democracy, nor am I saying that they wouldn't ideally like to pick their presidents or their leaders.
Of course they would.
However, I am saying that on balance, they worry more about where their living standard improvements are going to come from, and how it is their governments can deliver for them, than whether or not the government was elected by democracy.
The fact of the matter is that this has become a very poignant question because there is for the first time in a long time a real challenge to the Western ideological systems of politics and economics, and this is a system that is embodied by China.
And rather than have private capitalism, they have state capitalism.
Instead of liberal democracy, they have de-prioritized the democratic system.
And they have also decided to prioritize economic rights over political rights.
I put it to you today that it is this system that is embodied by China that is gathering momentum amongst people in the emerging markets as the system to follow, because they believe increasingly that it is the system that will promise the best and fastest improvements in living standards in the shortest period of time.
If you will indulge me, I will spend a few moments explaining to you first why economically they've come to this belief.
First of all, it's China's economic performance over the past 30 years.
She's been able to produce record economic growth and meaningfully move many people out of poverty, specifically putting a meaningful dent in poverty by moving over 300 million people out of indigence.
It's not just in economics, but it's also in terms of living standards.
We see that in China, 28 percent of people had secondary school access.
Today, it's closer to 82 percent.
So in its totality, economic improvement has been quite significant.
Second, China has been able to meaningfully improve its income inequality without changing the political construct.
Today, the United States and China are the two leading economies in the world.
They have vastly different political systems and different economic systems, one with private capitalism, another one broadly with state capitalism.
However, these two countries have the identical GINI Coefficient, which is a measure of income equality.
Perhaps what is more disturbing is that China's income equality has been improving in recent times, whereas that of the United States has been declining.
Thirdly, people in the emerging markets look at China's amazing and legendary infrastructure rollout.
This is not just about China building roads and ports and railways in her own country -- she's been able to build 85,000 kilometers of road network in China and surpass that of the United States -- but even if you look to places like Africa, China has been able to help tar the distance of Cape Town to Cairo, which is 9,000 miles, or three times the distance of New York to California.
Now this is something that people can see and point to.
Perhaps it's no surprise that in a 2007 Pew survey, when surveyed, Africans in 10 countries said they thought that the Chinese were doing amazing things to improve their livelihoods by wide margins, by as much as 98 percent.
Finally, China is also providing innovative solutions to age-old social problems that the world faces.
If you travel to Mogadishu, Mexico City or Mumbai, you find that dilapidated infrastructure and logistics continue to be a stumbling block to the delivery of medicine and healthcare in the rural areas.
However, through a network of state-owned enterprises, the Chinese have been able to go into these rural areas, using their companies to help deliver on these healthcare solutions.
Ladies and gentlemen, it's no surprise that around the world, people are pointing at what China is doing and saying, "I like that. I want that.
I want to be able to do what China's doing.
That is the system that seems to work."
I'm here to also tell you that there are lots of shifts occurring around what China is doing in the democratic stance.
In particular, there is growing doubt among people in the emerging markets, when people now believe that democracy is no longer to be viewed as a prerequisite for economic growth.
In fact, countries like Taiwan, Singapore, Chile, not just China, have shown that actually, it's economic growth that is a prerequisite for democracy.
In a recent study, the evidence has shown that income is the greatest determinant of how long a democracy can last.
The study found that if your per capita income is about 1,000 dollars a year, your democracy will last about eight and a half years.
If your per capita income is between 2,000 and 4,000 dollars per year, then you're likely to only get 33 years of democracy.
And only if your per capita income is above 6,000 dollars a year will you have democracy come hell or high water.
What this is telling us is that we need to first establish a middle class that is able to hold the government accountable.
But perhaps it's also telling us that we should be worried about going around the world and shoehorning democracy, because ultimately we run the risk of ending up with illiberal democracies, democracies that in some sense could be worse than the authoritarian governments that they seek to replace.
The evidence around illiberal democracies is quite depressing.
Freedom House finds that although 50 percent of the world's countries today are democratic, 70 percent of those countries are illiberal in the sense that people don't have free speech or freedom of movement.
But also, we're finding from Freedom House in a study that they published last year that freedom has been on the decline every year for the past seven years.
What this says is that for people like me who care about liberal democracy, is we've got to find a more sustainable way of ensuring that we have a sustainable form of democracy in a liberal way, and that has its roots in economics.
But it also says that as China moves toward being the largest economy in the world, something that is expected to happen by experts in 2016, that this schism between the political and economic ideologies of the West and the rest is likely to widen.
What might that world look like?
Well, the world could look like more state involvement and state capitalism; greater protectionisms of nation-states; but also, as I just pointed out a moment ago, ever-declining political rights and individual rights.
The question that is left for us in general is, what then should the West be doing?
And I suggest that they have two options.
The West can either compete or cooperate.
If the West chooses to compete with the Chinese model, and in effect go around the world and continue to try and push an agenda of private capitalism and liberal democracy, this is basically going against headwinds, but it also would be a natural stance for the West to take because in many ways it is the antithesis of the Chinese model of de-prioritizing democracy, and state capitalism.
Now the fact of the matter is, if the West decides to compete, it will create a wider schism.
The other option is for the West to cooperate, and by cooperating I mean giving the emerging market countries the flexibility to figure out in an organic way what political and economic system works best for them.
Now I'm sure some of you in the room will be thinking, well, this is like ceding to China, and this is a way, in other words, for the West to take a back seat.
But I put it to you that if the United States and European countries want to remain globally influential, they may have to consider cooperating in the short term in order to compete, and by that, they might have to focus more aggressively on economic outcomes to help create the middle class and therefore be able to hold government accountable and create the democracies that we really want.
The fact of the matter is that instead of going around the world and haranguing countries for engaging with China, the West should be encouraging its own businesses to trade and invest in these regions.
Instead of criticizing China for bad behavior, the West should be showing how it is that their own system of politics and economics is the superior one.
And instead of shoehorning democracy around the world, perhaps the West should take a leaf out of its own history book and remember that it takes a lot of patience in order to develop the models and the systems that you have today.
Indeed, the Supreme Court Justice Stephen Breyer reminds us that it took the United States nearly 170 years from the time that the Constitution was written for there to be equal rights in the United States.
Some people would argue that today there is still no equal rights.
In fact, there are groups who would argue that they still do not have equal rights under the law.
At its very best, the Western model speaks for itself.
It's the model that put food on the table.
It's the refrigerators.
It put a man on the moon.
But the fact of the matter is, although people back in the day used to point at the Western countries and say, "I want that, I like that," there's now a new person in town in the form of a country, China.
Today, generations are looking at China and saying, "China can produce infrastructure, China can produce economic growth, and we like that."
Because ultimately, the question before us, and the question before seven billion people on the planet is, how can we create prosperity?
People who care and will pivot towards the model of politics and economics in a very rational way, to those models that will ensure that they can have better living standards in the shortest period of time.
As you leave here today, I would like to leave you with a very personal message, which is what it is that I believe we should be doing as individuals, and this is really about being open-minded, open-minded to the fact that our hopes and dreams of creating prosperity for people around the world, creating and meaningfully putting a dent in poverty for hundreds of millions of people, has to be based in being open-minded, because these systems have good things and they have bad things.
Just to illustrate, I went into my annals of myself.
That's a picture of me.
Awww. (Laughter) I was born and raised in Zambia in 1969.
At the time of my birth, blacks were not issued birth certificates, and that law only changed in 1973.
This is an affidavit from the Zambian government.
I bring this to you to tell you that in 40 years, I've gone from not being recognized as a human being to standing in front of the illustrious TED crowd today to talk to you about my views.
In this vein, we can increase economic growth.
We can meaningfully put a dent in poverty.
But also, it's going to require that we look at our assumptions, assumptions and strictures that we've grown up with around democracy, around private capitalism, around what creates economic growth and reduces poverty and creates freedoms.
We might have to tear those books up and start to look at other options and be open-minded to seek the truth.
Ultimately, it's about transforming the world and making it a better place.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So I'm a city planner, an urban designer, former arts advocate, trained in architecture and art history, and I want to talk to you today not about design but about America and how America can be more economically resilient, how America can be healthier, and how America can be more environmentally sustainable.
And I realize this is a global forum, but I think I need to talk about America because there is a history, in some places, not all, of American ideas being appropriated, being emulated, for better or for worse, around the world.
And the worst idea we've ever had is suburban sprawl.
It's being emulated in many places as we speak.
By suburban sprawl, I refer to the reorganization of the landscape and the creation of the landscape around the requirement of automobile use, and that the automobile that was once an instrument of freedom has become a gas-belching, time-wasting and life-threatening prosthetic device that many of us need just to, most Americans, in fact, need, just to live their daily lives.
And there's an alternative.
You know, we say, half the world is living in cities.
Well, in America, that living in cities, for many of them, they're living in cities still where they're dependent on that automobile.
And what I work for, and to do, is to make our cities more walkable.
But I can't give design arguments for that that will have as much impact as the arguments that I've learned from the economists, the epidemiologists and the environmentalists.
So these are the three arguments that I'm going to give you quickly today.
When I was growing up in the '70s, the typical American spent one tenth of their income, American family, on transportation.
Since then, we've doubled the number of roads in America, and we now spend one fifth of our income on transportation.
Working families, which are defined as earning between 20,000 and 50,000 dollars a year in America are spending more now on transportation than on housing, slightly more, because of this phenomenon called "drive till you qualify," finding homes further and further and further from the city centers and from their jobs, so that they're locked in this, two, three hours, four hours a day of commuting.
And these are the neighborhoods, for example, in the Central Valley of California that weren't hurt when the housing bubble burst and when the price of gas went up; they were decimated.
And in fact, these are many of the half-vacant communities that you see today.
Imagine putting everything you have into your mortgage, it goes underwater, and you have to pay twice as much for all the driving that you're doing.
So we know what it's done to our society and all the extra work we have to do to support our cars.
What happens when a city decides it's going to set other priorities?
And probably the best example we have here in America is Portland, Oregon.
Portland made a bunch of decisions in the 1970s that began to distinguish it from almost every other American city.
While most other cities were growing an undifferentiated spare tire of sprawl, they instituted an urban growth boundary.
While most cities were reaming out their roads, removing parallel parking and trees in order to flow more traffic, they instituted a skinny streets program.
And while most cities were investing in more roads and more highways, they actually invested in bicycling and in walking.
And they spent 60 million dollars on bike facilities, which seems like a lot of money, but it was spent over about 30 years, so two million dollars a year -- not that much -- and half the price of the one cloverleaf that they decided to rebuild in that city.
These changes and others like them changed the way that Portlanders live, and their vehicle-miles traveled per day, the amount that each person drives, actually peaked in 1996, has been dropping ever since, and they now drive 20 percent less than the rest of the country.
The typical Portland citizen drives four miles less, and 11 minutes less per day than they did before.
The economist Joe Cortright did the math and he found out that those four miles plus those 11 minutes adds up to fully three and a half percent of all income earned in the region.
So if they're not spending that money on driving -- and by the way, 85 percent of the money we spend on driving leaves the local economy -- if they're not spending that money on driving, what are they spending it on?
Well, Portland is reputed to have the most roof racks per capita, the most independent bookstores per capita, the most strip clubs per capita.
These are all exaggerations, slight exaggerations of a fundamental truth, which is Portlanders spend a lot more on recreation of all kinds than the rest of America.
Actually, Oregonians spend more on alcohol than most other states, which may be a good thing or a bad thing, but it makes you glad they're driving less.
(Laughter) But actually, they're spending most of it in their homes, and home investment is about as local an investment as you can get.
But there's a whole other Portland story, which isn't part of this calculus, which is that young, educated people have been moving to Portland in droves, so that between the last two censuses, they had a 50-percent increase in college-educated millennials, which is five times what you saw anywhere else in the country, or, I should say, of the national average.
So on the one hand, a city saves money for its residents by being more walkable and more bikeable, but on the other hand, it also is the cool kind of city that people want to be in these days.
So the best economic strategy you can have as a city is not the old way of trying to attract corporations and trying to have a biotech cluster or a medical cluster, or an aerospace cluster, but to become a place where people want to be.
And millennials, certainly, these engines of entrepreneurship, 64 percent of whom decide first where they want to live, then they move there, then they look for a job, they will come to your city.
The health argument is a scary one, and you've probably heard part of this argument before.
Again, back in the '70s, a lot's changed since then, back in the '70s, one in 10 Americans was obese.
Now one out of three Americans is obese, and a second third of the population is overweight.
Twenty-five percent of young men and 40 percent of young women are too heavy to enlist in our own military forces.
According to the Center for Disease Control, fully one third of all children born after 2000 will get diabetes.
We have the first generation of children in America who are predicted to live shorter lives than their parents.
I believe that this American healthcare crisis that we've all heard about is an urban design crisis, and that the design of our cities lies at the cure.
Because we've talked a long time about diet, and we know that diet impacts weight, and weight of course impacts health.
But we've only started talking about inactivity, and how inactivity born of our landscape, inactivity that comes from the fact that we live in a place where there is no longer any such thing as a useful walk, is driving our weight up.
And we finally have the studies, one in Britain called "Gluttony versus sloth" that tracked weight against diet and tracked weight against inactivity, and found a much higher, stronger correlation between the latter two.
Dr. James Levine at, in this case, the aptly-named Mayo Clinic put his test subjects in electronic underwear, held their diet steady, and then started pumping the calories in.
Some people gained weight, some people didn't gain weight.
Expecting some metabolic or DNA factor at work, they were shocked to learn that the only difference between the subjects that they could figure out was the amount they were moving, and that in fact those who gained weight were sitting, on average, two hours more per day than those who didn't.
So we have these studies that tie weight to inactivity, but even more, we now have studies that tie weight to where you live.
Do you live in a more walkable city or do you live in a less walkable city, or where in your city do you live?
In San Diego, they used Walk Score -- Walk Score rates every address in America and soon the world in terms of how walkable it is -- they used Walk Score to designate more walkable neighborhoods and less walkable neighborhoods.
Well guess what? If you lived in a more walkable neighborhood, you were 35 percent likely to be overweight.
If you lived in a less walkable neighborhood, you were 60 percent likely to be overweight.
So we have study after study now that's tying where you live to your health, particularly as in America, the biggest health crisis we have is this one that's stemming from environmental-induced inactivity.
And I learned a new word last week.
They call these neighborhoods "obesageneric."
I may have that wrong, but you get the idea.
Now that's one thing, of course.
Briefly mentioning, we have an asthma epidemic in this country.
You probably haven't thought that much about it.
Fourteen Americans die each day from asthma, three times what it was in the '90s, and it's almost all coming from car exhaust.
American pollution does not come from factories anymore, it comes from tailpipes, and the amount that people are driving in your city, your urban VMT, is a good prediction of the asthma problems in your city.
And then finally, in terms of driving, there's the issue of the single-largest killer of healthy adults, and one of the largest killers of all people, is car crashes.
And we take car crashes for granted.
We figure it's a natural risk of being on the road.
But in fact, here in America, 12 people out of every 100,000 die every year from car crashes.
We're pretty safe here.
Well, guess what? In England, it's seven per 100,000.
It's Japan, it's four per 100,000.
Do you know where it's three per 100,000?
New York City.
San Francisco, the same thing. Portland, the same thing.
Oh, so cities make us safer because we're driving less?
Tulsa: 14 per 100,000.
Orlando: 20 per 100,000.
It's not whether you're in the city or not, it's how is your city designed?
Was it designed around cars or around people?
Because if your city is designed around cars, it's really good at smashing them into each other.
That's part of a much larger health argument.
Finally, the environmental argument is fascinating, because the environmentalists turned on a dime about 10 years ago.
The environmental movement in America has historically been an anti-city movement from Jefferson on.
"Cities are pestilential to the health, to the liberties, to the morals of man.
If we continue to pile upon ourselves in cities, as they do in Europe, we shall become as corrupt as they are in Europe and take to eating one another as they do there."
He apparently had a sense of humor.
And then the American environmental movement has been a classically Arcadian movement.
To become more environmental, we move into the country, we commune with nature, we build suburbs.
But, of course, we've seen what that does.
The carbon mapping of America, where is the CO2 being emitted, for many years only hammered this argument in more strongly.
If you look at any carbon map, because we map it per square mile, any carbon map of the U.S., it looks like a night sky satellite photo of the U.S., hottest in the cities, cooler in the suburbs, dark, peaceful in the countryside.
Until some economists said, you know, is that the right way to measure CO2?
There are only so many people in this country at any given time, and we can choose to live where perhaps we would have a lighter impact.
And they said, let's measure CO2 per household, and when they did that, the maps just flipped, coolest in the center city, warmer in the suburbs, and red hot in these exurban "drive till you qualify" neighborhoods.
So a fundamental shift, and now you have environmentalists and economists like Ed Glaeser saying we are a destructive species.
If you love nature, the best thing you can do is stay the heck away from it, move to a city, and the denser the better, and the denser cities like Manhattan are the cities that perform the best.
So the average Manhattanite is consuming gasoline at the rate the rest of the nation hasn't seen since the '20s, consuming half of the electricity of Dallas.
But of course, we can do better.
Canadian cities, they consume half the gasoline of American cities.
European cities consume half as much again.
So obviously, we can do better, and we want to do better, and we're all trying to be green.
My final argument in this topic is that I think we're trying to be green the wrong way, and I'm one of many people who believes that this focus on gadgets, on accessorizing -- What can I add to my house, what can I add to what I've already got to make my lifestyle more sustainable? -- has kind of dominated the discussion.
So I'm not immune to this.
My wife and I built a new house on an abandoned lot in Washington, D.C., and we did our best to clear the shelves of the sustainability store.
We've got the solar photovoltaic system, solar hot water heater, dual-flush toilets, bamboo floors.
A log burning in my German high-tech stove apparently, supposedly, contributes less carbon to the atmosphere than were it left alone to decompose in the forest.
Yet all of these innovations -- That's what they said in the brochure.
(Laughter) All of these innovations together contribute a fraction of what we contribute by living in a walkable neighborhood three blocks from a metro in the heart of a city.
We've changed all our light bulbs to energy-savers, and you should do the same thing, but changing all your light bulbs to energy-savers saves as much energy in a year as moving to a walkable city does in a week.
And we don't want to have this argument.
Politicians and marketers are afraid of marketing green as a "lifestyle choice."
You don't want to tell Americans, God forbid, that they have to change their lifestyle.
But what if lifestyle was really about quality of life and about perhaps something that we would all enjoy more, something that would be better than what we have right now?
Well, the gold standard of quality of life rankings, it's called the Mercer Survey.
You may have heard of it.
They rank hundreds of nations worldwide according to 10 criteria that they believe add up to quality of life: health, economics, education, housing, you name it.
There's six more. Short talk.
(Laughter) And it's very interesting to see that the highest-ranking American city, Honolulu, number 28, is followed by kind of the usual suspects of Seattle and Boston and all walkable cities.
The driving cities in the Sun Belt, the Dallases and the Phoenixes and, sorry, Atlanta, these cities are not appearing on the list.
But who's doing even better?
The Canadian cities like Vancouver, where again, they're burning half the fuel.
And then it's usually won by cities where they speak German, like Dusseldorf or Vienna, where they're burning, again, half as much fuel.
And you see this alignment, this strange alignment.
Is being more sustainble what gives you a higher quality of life?
I would argue the same thing that makes you more sustainble is what gives you a higher quality of life, and that's living in a walkable neighborhood.
So sustainability, which includes our wealth and our health may not be a direct function of our sustainability.
But particularly here in America, we are polluting so much because we're throwing away our time and our money and our lives on the highway, then these two problems would seem to share the same solution, which is to make our cities more walkable.
Doing so isn't easy, but it can be done, it has been done, and it's being done now in more than a few cities, around the globe and in our country.
I take some solace from Winston Churchill, who put it this way: "The Americans can be counted on to do the right thing once they have exhausted the alternatives." (Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
As humans, it's in our nature to want to improve our health and minimize our suffering.
Whatever life throws at us, whether it's cancer, diabetes, heart disease, or even broken bones, we want to try and get better.
Now I'm head of a biomaterials lab, and I'm really fascinated by the way that humans have used materials in really creative ways in the body over time.
Take, for example, this beautiful blue nacre shell.
This was actually used by the Mayans as an artificial tooth replacement.
We're not quite sure why they did it.
It's hard. It's durable.
But it also had other very nice properties.
In fact, when they put it into the jawbone, it could integrate into the jaw, and we know now with very sophisticated imaging technologies that part of that integration comes from the fact that this material is designed in a very specific way, has a beautiful chemistry, has a beautiful architecture.
And I think in many ways we can sort of think of the use of the blue nacre shell and the Mayans as the first real application of the bluetooth technology.
(Laughter) But if we move on and think throughout history how people have used different materials in the body, very often it's been physicians that have been quite creative.
They've taken things off the shelf.
One of my favorite examples is that of Sir Harold Ridley, who was a famous ophthalmologist, or at least became a famous ophthalmologist.
And during World War II, what he would see would be pilots coming back from their missions, and he noticed that within their eyes they had shards of small bits of material lodged within the eye, but the very interesting thing about it was that material, actually, wasn't causing any inflammatory response.
So he looked into this, and he figured out that actually that material was little shards of plastic that were coming from the canopy of the Spitfires.
And this led him to propose that material as a new material for intraocular lenses.
It's called PMMA, and it's now used in millions of people every year and helps in preventing cataracts.
And that example, I think, is a really nice one, because it helps remind us that in the early days, people often chose materials because they were bioinert.
Their very purpose was to perform a mechanical function.
You'd put them in the body and you wouldn't get an adverse response.
And what I want to show you is that in regenerative medicine, we've really shifted away from that idea of taking a bioinert material.
We're actually actively looking for materials that will be bioactive, that will interact with the body, and that furthermore we can put in the body, they'll have their function, and then they'll dissolve away over time.
If we look at this schematic, this is showing you what we think of as the typical tissue-engineering approach.
We have cells there, typically from the patient.
We can put those onto a material, and we can make that material very complex if we want to, and we can then grow that up in the lab or we can put it straight back into the patient.
And this is an approach that's used all over the world, including in our lab.
But one of the things that's really important when we're thinking about stem cells is that obviously stem cells can be many different things, and they want to be many different things, and so we want to make sure that the environment we put them into has enough information so that they can become the right sort of specialist tissue.
And if we think about the different types of tissues that people are looking at regenerating all over the world, in all the different labs in the world, there's pretty much every tissue you can think of.
And actually, the structure of those tissues is quite different, and it's going to really depend on whether your patient has any underlying disease, other conditions, in terms of how you're going to regenerate your tissue, and you're going to need to think about the materials you're going to use really carefully, their biochemistry, their mechanics, and many other properties as well.
Our tissues all have very different abilities to regenerate, and here we see poor Prometheus, who made a rather tricky career choice and was punished by the Greek gods.
He was tied to a rock, and an eagle would come every day to eat his liver.
But of course his liver would regenerate every day, and so day after day he was punished for eternity by the gods.
And liver will regenerate in this very nice way, but actually if we think of other tissues, like cartilage, for example, even the simplest nick and you're going to find it really difficult to regenerate your cartilage.
So it's going to be very different from tissue to tissue.
Now, bone is somewhere in between, and this is one of the tissues that we work on a lot in our lab.
And bone is actually quite good at repairing.
It has to be. We've probably all had fractures at some point or other.
And one of the ways that you can think about repairing your fracture is this procedure here, called an iliac crest harvest.
And what the surgeon might do is take some bone from your iliac crest, which is just here, and then transplant that somewhere else in the body.
And it actually works really well, because it's your own bone, and it's well vascularized, which means it's got a really good blood supply.
But the problem is, there's only so much you can take, and also when you do that operation, your patients might actually have significant pain in that defect site even two years after the operation.
So what we were thinking is, there's a tremendous need for bone repair, of course, but this iliac crest-type approach really has a lot of limitations to it, and could we perhaps recreate the generation of bone within the body on demand and then be able to transplant it without these very, very painful aftereffects that you would have with the iliac crest harvest?
And so this is what we did, and the way we did it was by coming back to this typical tissue-engineering approach but actually thinking about it rather differently.
And we simplified it a lot, so we got rid of a lot of these steps.
We got rid of the need to harvest cells from the patient, we got rid of the need to put in really fancy chemistries, and we got rid of the need to culture these scaffolds in the lab.
And what we really focused on was our material system and making it quite simple, but because we used it in a really clever way, we were able to generate enormous amounts of bone using this approach.
So we were using the body as really the catalyst to help us to make lots of new bone.
And it's an approach that we call the in vivo bioreactor, and we were able to make enormous amounts of bone using this approach.
And I'll talk you through this.
So what we do is, in humans, we all have a layer of stem cells on the outside of our long bones.
That layer is called the periosteum.
And that layer is actually normally very, very tightly bound to the underlying bone, and it's got stem cells in it.
Those stem cells are really important in the embryo when it develops, and they also sort of wake up if you have a fracture to help you with repairing the bone.
So we take that periosteum layer and we developed a way to inject underneath it a liquid that then, within 30 seconds, would turn into quite a rigid gel and can actually lift the periosteum away from the bone.
So it creates, in essence, an artificial cavity that is right next to both the bone but also this really rich layer of stem cells.
And we go in through a pinhole incision so that no other cells from the body can get in, and what happens is that that artificial in vivo bioreactor cavity can then lead to the proliferation of these stem cells, and they can form lots of new tissue, and then over time, you can harvest that tissue and use it elsewhere in the body.
This is a histology slide of what we see when we do that, and essentially what we see is very large amounts of bone.
So in this picture, you can see the middle of the leg, so the bone marrow, then you can see the original bone, and you can see where that original bone finishes, and just to the left of that is the new bone that's grown within that bioreactor cavity, and you can actually make it even larger.
And that demarcation that you can see between the original bone and the new bone acts as a very slight point of weakness, so actually now the surgeon can come along, can harvest away that new bone, and the periosteum can grow back, so you're left with the leg in the same sort of state as if you hadn't operated on it in the first place.
So it's very, very low in terms of after-pain compared to an iliac crest harvest.
And you can grow different amounts of bone depending on how much gel you put in there, so it really is an on demand sort of procedure.
Now, at the time that we did this, this received a lot of attention in the press, because it was a really nice way of generating new bone, and we got many, many contacts from different people that were interested in using this.
And I'm just going to tell you, sometimes those contacts are very strange, slightly unexpected, and the very most interesting, let me put it that way, contact that I had, was actually from a team of American footballers that all wanted to have double-thickness skulls made on their head.
And so you do get these kinds of contacts, and of course, being British and also growing up in France, I tend to be very blunt, and so I had to explain to them very nicely that in their particular case, there probably wasn't that much in there to protect in the first place.
(Laughter) (Applause) So this was our approach, and it was simple materials, but we thought about it carefully.
And actually we know that those cells in the body, in the embryo, as they develop can form a different kind of tissue, cartilage, and so we developed a gel that was slightly different in nature and slightly different chemistry, put it in there, and we were able to get 100 percent cartilage instead.
And this approach works really well, I think, for pre-planned procedures, but it's something you do have to pre-plan.
So for other kinds of operations, there's definitely a need for other scaffold-based approaches.
And when you think about designing those other scaffolds, actually, you need a really multi-disciplinary team.
And so our team has chemists, it has cell biologists, surgeons, physicists even, and those people all come together and we think really hard about designing the materials.
But we want to make them have enough information that we can get the cells to do what we want, but not be so complex as to make it difficult to get to clinic.
And so one of the things we think about a lot is really trying to understand the structure of the tissues in the body.
And so if we think of bone, obviously my own favorite tissue, we zoom in, we can see, even if you don't know anything about bone structure, it's beautifully organized, really beautifully organized.
We've lots of blood vessels in there.
And if we zoom in again, we see that the cells are actually surrounded by a 3D matrix of nano-scale fibers, and they give a lot of information to the cells.
And if we zoom in again, actually in the case of bone, the matrix around the cells is beautifully organized at the nano scale, and it's a hybrid material that's part organic, part inorganic.
And that's led to a whole field, really, that has looked at developing materials that have this hybrid kind of structure.
And so I'm showing here just two examples where we've made some materials that have that sort of structure, and you can really tailor it.
You can see here a very squishy one and now a material that's also this hybrid sort of material but actually has remarkable toughness, and it's no longer brittle.
And an inorganic material would normally be really brittle, and you wouldn't be able to have that sort of strength and toughness in it.
One other thing I want to quickly mention is that many of the scaffolds we make are porous, and they have to be, because you want blood vessels to grow in there.
But the pores are actually oftentimes much bigger than the cells, and so even though it's 3D, the cell might see it more as a slightly curved surface, and that's a little bit unnatural.
And so one of the things you can think about doing is actually making scaffolds with slightly different dimensions that might be able to surround your cells in 3D and give them a little bit more information.
And there's a lot of work going on in both of these areas.
Now finally, I just want to talk a little bit about applying this sort of thing to cardiovascular disease, because this is a really big clinical problem.
And one of the things that we know is that, unfortunately, if you have a heart attack, then that tissue can start to die, and your outcome may not be very good over time.
And it would be really great, actually, if we could stop that dead tissue either from dying or help it to regenerate.
And there's lots and lots of stem cell trials going on worldwide, and they use many different types of cells, but one common theme that seems to be coming out is that actually, very often, those cells will die once you've implanted them.
And you can either put them into the heart or into the blood system, but either way, we don't seem to be able to get quite the right number of cells getting to the location we want them to and being able to deliver the sort of beautiful cell regeneration that we would like to have to get good clinical outcomes.
And so some of the things that we're thinking of, and many other people in the field are thinking of, are actually developing materials for that.
But there's a difference here.
We still need chemistry, we still need mechanics, we still need really interesting topography, and we still need really interesting ways to surround the cells.
But now, the cells also would probably quite like a material that's going to be able to be conductive, because the cells themselves will respond very well and will actually conduct signals between themselves.
You can see them now beating synchronously on these materials, and that's a very, very exciting development that's going on.
So just to wrap up, I'd like to actually say that being able to work in this sort of field, all of us that work in this field that's not only super-exciting science, but also has the potential to impact on patients, however big or small they are, is really a great privilege.
And so for that, I'd like to thank all of you as well.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Throughout my career, I've been fortunate enough to work with many of the great international architects, documenting their work and observing how their designs have the capacity to influence the cities in which they sit.
I think of new cities like Dubai or ancient cities like Rome with Zaha Hadid's incredible MAXXI museum, or like right here in New York with the High Line, a city which has been so much influenced by the development of this.
But what I find really fascinating is what happens when architects and planners leave and these places become appropriated by people, like here in Chandigarh, India, the city which has been completely designed by the architect Le Corbusier.
Now 60 years later, the city has been taken over by people in very different ways from whatever perhaps intended for, like here, where you have the people sitting in the windows of the assembly hall.
But over the course of several years, I've been documenting Rem Koolhaas's CCTV building in Beijing and the olympic stadium in the same city by the architects Herzog and de Meuron.
At these large-scale construction sites in China, you see a sort of makeshift camp where workers live during the entire building process.
As the length of the construction takes years, workers end up forming a rather rough-and-ready informal city, making for quite a juxtaposition against the sophisticated structures that they're building.
Over the past seven years, I've been following my fascination with the built environment, and for those of you who know me, you would say that this obsession has led me to live out of a suitcase 365 days a year.
Being constantly on the move means that sometimes I am able to catch life's most unpredictable moments, like here in New York the day after the Sandy storm hit the city.
Just over three years ago, I was for the first time in Caracas, Venezuela, and while flying over the city, I was just amazed by the extent to which the slums reach into every corner of the city, a place where nearly 70 percent of the population lives in slums, draped literally all over the mountains.
During a conversation with local architects Urban-Think Tank, I learned about the Torre David, a 45-story office building which sits right in the center of Caracas.
The building was under construction until the collapse of the Venezuelan economy and the death of the developer in the early '90s.
About eight years ago, people started moving into the abandoned tower and began to build their homes right in between every column of this unfinished tower.
There's only one little entrance to the entire building, and the 3,000 residents come in and out through that single door.
Together, the inhabitants created public spaces and designed them to feel more like a home and less like an unfinished tower.
In the lobby, they painted the walls and planted trees.
They also made a basketball court.
But when you look up closely, you see massive holes where elevators and services would have run through.
Within the tower, people have come up with all sorts of solutions in response to the various needs which arise from living in an unfinished tower.
With no elevators, the tower is like a 45-story walkup.
Designed in very specific ways by this group of people who haven't had any education in architecture or design.
And with each inhabitant finding their own unique way of coming by, this tower becomes like a living city, a place which is alive with micro-economies and small businesses.
The inventive inhabitants, for instance, find opportunities in the most unexpected cases, like the adjacent parking garage, which has been reclaimed as a taxi route to shuttle the inhabitants up through the ramps in order to shorten the hike up to the apartments.
A walk through the tower reveals how residents have figured out how to create walls, how to make an air flow, how to create transparency, circulation throughout the tower, essentially creating a home that's completely adapted to the conditions of the site.
When a new inhabitant moves into the tower, they already have a roof over their head, so they just typically mark their space with a few curtains or sheets.
Slowly, from found materials, walls rise, and people create a space out of any found objects or materials.
It's remarkable to see the design decisions that they're making, like when everything is made out of red bricks, some residents will cover that red brick with another layer of red brick-patterned wallpaper just to make it a kind of clean finish.
The inhabitants literally built up these homes with their own hands, and this labor of love instills a great sense of pride in many families living in this tower.
They typically make the best out of their conditions, and try to make their spaces look nice and homey, or at least up until as far as they can reach.
Throughout the tower, you come across all kinds of services, like the barber, small factories, and every floor has a little grocery store or shop.
And you even find a church.
And on the 30th floor, there is a gym where all the weights and barbells are made out of the leftover pulleys from the elevators which were never installed.
From the outside, behind this always-changing facade, you see how the fixed concrete beams provide a framework for the inhabitants to create their homes in an organic, intuitive way that responds directly to their needs.
Let's go now to Africa, to Nigeria, to a community called Makoko, a slum where 150,000 people live just meters above the Lagos Lagoon.
While it may appear to be a completely chaotic place, when you see it from above, there seems to be a whole grid of waterways and canals connecting each and every home.
From the main dock, people board long wooden canoes which carry them out to their various homes and shops located in the expansive area.
When out on the water, it's clear that life has been completely adapted to this very specific way of living.
Even the canoes become variety stores where ladies paddle from house to house, selling anything from toothpaste to fresh fruits.
Behind every window and door frame, you'll see a small child peering back at you, and while Makoko seems to be packed with people, what's more shocking is actually the amount of children pouring out of every building.
The population growth in Nigeria, and especially in these areas like Makoko, are painful reminders of how out of control things really are.
In Makoko, very few systems and infrastructures exist.
Electricity is rigged and freshest water comes from self-built wells throughout the area.
This entire economic model is designed to meet a specific way of living on the water, so fishing and boat-making are common professions.
You'll have a set of entrepreneurs who have set up businesses throughout the area, like barbershops, CD and DVD stores, movie theaters, tailors, everything is there.
There is even a photo studio where you see the sort of aspiration to live in a real house or to be associated with a faraway place, like that hotel in Sweden.
On this particular evening, I came across this live band dressed to the T in their coordinating outfits.
They were floating through the canals in a large canoe with a fitted-out generator for all of the community to enjoy.
By nightfall, the area becomes almost pitch black, save for a small lightbulb or a fire.
What originally brought me to Makoko was this project from a friend of mine, Kunlé Adeyemi, who recently finished building this three-story floating school for the kids in Makoko.
With this entire village existing on the water, public space is very limited, so now that the school is finished, the ground floor is a playground for the kids, but when classes are out, the platform is just like a town square, where the fishermen mend their nets and floating shopkeepers dock their boats.
Another place I'd like to share with you is the Zabbaleen in Cairo.
They're descendants of farmers who began migrating from the upper Egypt in the '40s, and today they make their living by collecting and recycling waste from homes from all over Cairo.
For years, the Zabbaleen would live in makeshift villages where they would move around trying to avoid the local authorities, but in the early 1980s, they settled on the Mokattam rocks just at the eastern edge of the city.
Today, they live in this area, approximately 50,000 to 70,000 people, who live in this community of self-built multi-story houses where up to three generations live in one structure.
While these apartments that they built for themselves appear to lack any planning or formal grid, each family specializing in a certain form of recycling means that the ground floor of each apartment is reserved for garbage-related activities and the upper floor is dedicated to living space.
I find it incredible to see how these piles and piles of garbage are invisible to the people who live there, like this very distinguished man who is posing while all this garbage is sort of streaming out behind him, or like these two young men who are sitting and chatting amongst these tons of garbage.
While to most of us, living amongst these piles and piles of garbage may seem totally uninhabitable, to those in the Zabbaleen, this is just a different type of normal.
In all these places I've talked about today, what I do find fascinating is that there's really no such thing as normal, and it proves that people are able to adapt to any kind of situation.
Throughout the day, it's quite common to come across a small party taking place in the streets, just like this engagement party.
In this tradition, the bride-to-be displays all of their belongings, which they soon bring to their new husband.
A gathering like this one offers such a juxtaposition where all the new stuff is displayed and all the garbage is used as props to display all their new home accessories.
Like Makoko and the Torre David, throughout the Zabbaleen you'll find all the same facilities as in any typical neighborhood.
There are the retail shops, the cafes and the restaurants, and the community is this community of Coptic Christians, so you'll also find a church, along with the scores of religious iconographies throughout the area, and also all the everyday services like the electronic repair shops, the barbers, everything.
Visiting the homes of the Zabbaleen is also full of surprises.
While from the outside, these homes look like any other informal structure in the city, when you step inside, you are met with all manner of design decisions and interior decoration.
Despite having limited access to space and money, the homes in the area are designed with care and detail.
Every apartment is unique, and this individuality tells a story about each family's circumstances and values.
Many of these people take their homes and interior spaces very seriously, putting a lot of work and care into the details.
The shared spaces are also treated in the same manner, where walls are decorated in faux marble patterns.
But despite this elaborate decor, sometimes these apartments are used in very unexpected ways, like this home which caught my attention while all the mud and the grass was literally seeping out under the front door.
When I was let in, it appeared that this fifth-floor apartment was being transformed into a complete animal farm, where six or seven cows stood grazing in what otherwise would be the living room.
But then in the apartment across the hall from this cow shed lives a newly married couple in what locals describe as one of the nicest apartments in the area.
The attention to this detail astonished me, and as the owner of the home so proudly led me around this apartment, from floor to ceiling, every part was decorated.
But if it weren't for the strangely familiar stomach-churning odor that constantly passes through the apartment, it would be easy to forget that you are standing next to a cow shed and on top of a landfill.
What moved me the most was that despite these seemingly inhospitable conditions, I was welcomed with open arms into a home that was made with love, care, and unreserved passion.
Let's move across the map to China, to an area called Shanxi, Henan and Gansu.
In a region famous for the soft, porous Loess Plateau soil, there lived until recently an estimated 40 million people in these houses underground.
These dwellings are called the yaodongs.
Through this architecture by subtraction, these yaodongs are built literally inside of the soil.
In these villages, you see an entirely altered landscape, and hidden behind these mounds of dirt are these square, rectangular houses which sit seven meters below the ground.
When I asked people why they were digging their houses from the ground, they simply replied that they are poor wheat and apple farmers who didn't have the money to buy materials, and this digging out was their most logical form of living.
From Makoko to Zabbaleen, these communities have approached the tasks of planning, design and management of their communities and neighborhoods in ways that respond specifically to their environment and circumstances.
Created by these very people who live, work and play in these particular spaces, these neighborhoods are intuitively designed to make the most of their circumstances.
In most of these places, the government is completely absent, leaving inhabitants with no choice but to reappropriate found materials, and while these communities are highly disadvantaged, they do present examples of brilliant forms of ingenuity, and prove that indeed we have the ability to adapt to all manner of circumstances.
What makes places like the Torre David particularly remarkable is this sort of skeleton framework where people can have a foundation where they can tap into.
Now imagine what these already ingenious communities could create themselves, and how highly particular their solutions would be, if they were given the basic infrastructures that they could tap into.
Today, you see these large residential development projects which offer cookie-cutter housing solutions to massive amounts of people.
From China to Brazil, these projects attempt to provide as many houses as possible, but they're completely generic and simply do not work as an answer to the individual needs of the people.
I would like to end with a quote from a friend of mine and a source of inspiration, Zita Cobb, the founder of the wonderful Shorefast Foundation, based out of Fogo Island, Newfoundland.
She says that "there's this plague of sameness which is killing the human joy," and I couldn't agree with her more.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm James.
I'm a writer and artist, and I make work about technology.
I do things like draw life-size outlines of military drones in city streets around the world, so that people can start to think and get their heads around these really quite hard-to-see and hard-to-think-about technologies.
I make things like neural networks that predict the results of elections based on weather reports, because I'm intrigued about what the actual possibilities of these weird new technologies are.
Last year, I built my own self-driving car.
But because I don't really trust technology, I also designed a trap for it.
(Laughter) And I do these things mostly because I find them completely fascinating, but also because I think when we talk about technology, we're largely talking about ourselves and the way that we understand the world.
So here's a story about technology.
This is a "surprise egg" video.
It's basically a video of someone opening up loads of chocolate eggs and showing the toys inside to the viewer.
That's it. That's all it does for seven long minutes.
And I want you to notice two things about this.
First of all, this video has 30 million views.
(Laughter) And the other thing is, it comes from a channel that has 6.3 million subscribers, that has a total of eight billion views, and it's all just more videos like this -- 30 million people watching a guy opening up these eggs.
It sounds pretty weird, but if you search for "surprise eggs" on YouTube, it'll tell you there's 10 million of these videos, and I think that's an undercount.
I think there's way, way more of these.
If you keep searching, they're endless.
There's millions and millions of these videos in increasingly baroque combinations of brands and materials, and there's more and more of them being uploaded every single day.
Like, this is a strange world. Right?
But the thing is, it's not adults who are watching these videos.
It's kids, small children.
These videos are like crack for little kids.
There's something about the repetition, the constant little dopamine hit of the reveal, that completely hooks them in.
And little kids watch these videos over and over and over again, and they do it for hours and hours and hours.
And if you try and take the screen away from them, they'll scream and scream and scream.
If you don't believe me -- and I've already seen people in the audience nodding -- if you don't believe me, find someone with small children and ask them, and they'll know about the surprise egg videos.
So this is where we start.
It's 2018, and someone, or lots of people, are using the same mechanism that, like, Facebook and Instagram are using to get you to keep checking that app, and they're using it on YouTube to hack the brains of very small children in return for advertising revenue.
At least, I hope that's what they're doing.
I hope that's what they're doing it for, because there's easier ways of making ad revenue on YouTube.
You can just make stuff up or steal stuff.
So if you search for really popular kids' cartoons like "Peppa Pig" or "Paw Patrol," you'll find there's millions and millions of these online as well.
Of course, most of them aren't posted by the original content creators.
They come from loads and loads of different random accounts, and it's impossible to know who's posting them or what their motives might be.
Does that sound kind of familiar?
Because it's exactly the same mechanism that's happening across most of our digital services, where it's impossible to know where this information is coming from.
It's basically fake news for kids, and we're training them from birth to click on the very first link that comes along, regardless of what the source is.
That's doesn't seem like a terribly good idea.
Here's another thing that's really big on kids' YouTube.
This is called the "Finger Family Song."
I just heard someone groan in the audience.
This is the "Finger Family Song."
This is the very first one I could find.
It's from 2007, and it only has 200,000 views, which is, like, nothing in this game.
But it has this insanely earwormy tune, which I'm not going to play to you, because it will sear itself into your brain in the same way that it seared itself into mine, and I'm not going to do that to you.
But like the surprise eggs, it's got inside kids' heads and addicted them to it.
So within a few years, these finger family videos start appearing everywhere, and you get versions in different languages with popular kids' cartoons using food or, frankly, using whatever kind of animation elements you seem to have lying around.
And once again, there are millions and millions and millions of these videos available online in all of these kind of insane combinations.
And the more time you start to spend with them, the crazier and crazier you start to feel that you might be.
And that's where I kind of launched into this, that feeling of deep strangeness and deep lack of understanding of how this thing was constructed that seems to be presented around me.
Because it's impossible to know where these things are coming from.
Like, who is making them?
Some of them appear to be made of teams of professional animators.
Some of them are just randomly assembled by software.
Some of them are quite wholesome-looking young kids' entertainers.
And some of them are from people who really clearly shouldn't be around children at all.
(Laughter) And once again, this impossibility of figuring out who's making this stuff -- like, this is a bot?
Is this a person? Is this a troll?
What does it mean that we can't tell the difference between these things anymore?
And again, doesn't that uncertainty feel kind of familiar right now?
So the main way people get views on their videos -- and remember, views mean money -- is that they stuff the titles of these videos with these popular terms.
So you take, like, "surprise eggs" and then you add "Paw Patrol," "Easter egg," or whatever these things are, all of these words from other popular videos into your title, until you end up with this kind of meaningless mash of language that doesn't make sense to humans at all.
Because of course it's only really tiny kids who are watching your video, and what the hell do they know?
Your real audience for this stuff is software.
It's the algorithms.
It's the software that YouTube uses to select which videos are like other videos, to make them popular, to make them recommended.
And that's why you end up with this kind of completely meaningless mash, both of title and of content.
But the thing is, you have to remember, there really are still people within this algorithmically optimized system, people who are kind of increasingly forced to act out these increasingly bizarre combinations of words, like a desperate improvisation artist responding to the combined screams of a million toddlers at once.
There are real people trapped within these systems, and that's the other deeply strange thing about this algorithmically driven culture, because even if you're human, you have to end up behaving like a machine just to survive.
And also, on the other side of the screen, there still are these little kids watching this stuff, stuck, their full attention grabbed by these weird mechanisms.
And most of these kids are too small to even use a website.
They're just kind of hammering on the screen with their little hands.
And so there's autoplay, where it just keeps playing these videos over and over and over in a loop, endlessly for hours and hours at a time.
And there's so much weirdness in the system now that autoplay takes you to some pretty strange places.
This is how, within a dozen steps, you can go from a cute video of a counting train to masturbating Mickey Mouse.
Yeah. I'm sorry about that.
This does get worse.
This is what happens when all of these different keywords, all these different pieces of attention, this desperate generation of content, all comes together into a single place.
This is where all those deeply weird keywords come home to roost.
You cross-breed the finger family video with some live-action superhero stuff, you add in some weird, trollish in-jokes or something, and suddenly, you come to a very weird place indeed.
The stuff that tends to upset parents is the stuff that has kind of violent or sexual content, right?
Children's cartoons getting assaulted, getting killed, weird pranks that actually genuinely terrify children.
What you have is software pulling in all of these different influences to automatically generate kids' worst nightmares.
And this stuff really, really does affect small children.
Parents report their children being traumatized, becoming afraid of the dark, becoming afraid of their favorite cartoon characters.
If you take one thing away from this, it's that if you have small children, keep them the hell away from YouTube.
(Applause) But the other thing, the thing that really gets to me about this, is that I'm not sure we even really understand how we got to this point.
We've taken all of this influence, all of these things, and munged them together in a way that no one really intended.
And yet, this is also the way that we're building the entire world.
We're taking all of this data, a lot of it bad data, a lot of historical data full of prejudice, full of all of our worst impulses of history, and we're building that into huge data sets and then we're automating it.
And we're munging it together into things like credit reports, into insurance premiums, into things like predictive policing systems, into sentencing guidelines.
This is the way we're actually constructing the world today out of this data.
And I don't know what's worse, that we built a system that seems to be entirely optimized for the absolute worst aspects of human behavior, or that we seem to have done it by accident, without even realizing that we were doing it, because we didn't really understand the systems that we were building, and we didn't really understand how to do anything differently with it.
There's a couple of things I think that really seem to be driving this most fully on YouTube, and the first of those is advertising, which is the monetization of attention without any real other variables at work, any care for the people who are actually developing this content, the centralization of the power, the separation of those things.
And I think however you feel about the use of advertising to kind of support stuff, the sight of grown men in diapers rolling around in the sand in the hope that an algorithm that they don't really understand will give them money for it suggests that this probably isn't the thing that we should be basing our society and culture upon, and the way in which we should be funding it.
And the other thing that's kind of the major driver of this is automation, which is the deployment of all of this technology as soon as it arrives, without any kind of oversight, and then once it's out there, kind of throwing up our hands and going, "Hey, it's not us, it's the technology."
Like, "We're not involved in it."
That's not really good enough, because this stuff isn't just algorithmically governed, it's also algorithmically policed.
When YouTube first started to pay attention to this, the first thing they said they'd do about it was that they'd deploy better machine learning algorithms to moderate the content.
Well, machine learning, as any expert in it will tell you, is basically what we've started to call software that we don't really understand how it works.
And I think we have enough of that already.
We shouldn't be leaving this stuff up to AI to decide what's appropriate or not, because we know what happens.
It'll start censoring other things.
It'll start censoring queer content.
It'll start censoring legitimate public speech.
What's allowed in these discourses, it shouldn't be something that's left up to unaccountable systems.
It's part of a discussion all of us should be having.
But I'd leave a reminder that the alternative isn't very pleasant, either.
YouTube also announced recently that they're going to release a version of their kids' app that would be entirely moderated by humans.
Facebook -- Zuckerberg said much the same thing at Congress, when pressed about how they were going to moderate their stuff.
He said they'd have humans doing it.
And what that really means is, instead of having toddlers being the first person to see this stuff, you're going to have underpaid, precarious contract workers without proper mental health support being damaged by it as well.
(Laughter) And I think we can all do quite a lot better than that.
(Applause) The thought, I think, that brings those two things together, really, for me, is agency.
It's like, how much do we really understand -- by agency, I mean: how we know how to act in our own best interests.
Which -- it's almost impossible to do in these systems that we don't really fully understand.
Inequality of power always leads to violence.
And we can see inside these systems that inequality of understanding does the same thing.
If there's one thing that we can do to start to improve these systems, it's to make them more legible to the people who use them, so that all of us have a common understanding of what's actually going on here.
The thing, though, I think most about these systems is that this isn't, as I hope I've explained, really about YouTube.
It's about everything.
These issues of accountability and agency, of opacity and complexity, of the violence and exploitation that inherently results from the concentration of power in a few hands -- these are much, much larger issues.
And they're issues not just of YouTube and not just of technology in general, and they're not even new.
They've been with us for ages.
But we finally built this system, this global system, the internet, that's actually showing them to us in this extraordinary way, making them undeniable.
Technology has this extraordinary capacity to both instantiate and continue all of our most extraordinary, often hidden desires and biases and encoding them into the world, but it also writes them down so that we can see them, so that we can't pretend they don't exist anymore.
We need to stop thinking about technology as a solution to all of our problems, but think of it as a guide to what those problems actually are, so we can start thinking about them properly and start to address them.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) Helen Walters: James, thank you for coming and giving us that talk.
So it's interesting: when you think about the films where the robotic overlords take over, it's all a bit more glamorous than what you're describing.
But I wonder -- in those films, you have the resistance mounting.
Is there a resistance mounting towards this stuff?
Do you see any positive signs, green shoots of resistance?
James Bridle: I don't know about direct resistance, because I think this stuff is super long-term.
I think it's baked into culture in really deep ways.
A friend of mine, Eleanor Saitta, always says that any technological problems of sufficient scale and scope are political problems first of all.
So all of these things we're working to address within this are not going to be addressed just by building the technology better, but actually by changing the society that's producing these technologies.
So no, right now, I think we've got a hell of a long way to go.
But as I said, I think by unpacking them, by explaining them, by talking about them super honestly, we can actually start to at least begin that process.
HW: And so when you talk about legibility and digital literacy, I find it difficult to imagine that we need to place the burden of digital literacy on users themselves.
But whose responsibility is education in this new world?
JB: Again, I think this responsibility is kind of up to all of us, that everything we do, everything we build, everything we make, needs to be made in a consensual discussion with everyone who's avoiding it; that we're not building systems intended to trick and surprise people into doing the right thing, but that they're actually involved in every step in educating them, because each of these systems is educational.
That's what I'm hopeful about, about even this really grim stuff, that if you can take it and look at it properly, it's actually in itself a piece of education that allows you to start seeing how complex systems come together and work and maybe be able to apply that knowledge elsewhere in the world.
HW: James, it's such an important discussion, and I know many people here are really open and prepared to have it, so thanks for starting off our morning.
JB: Thanks very much. Cheers.
(Applause)
So I'd like you to come back with me just for a few minutes to a dark night in China, the night I met my husband.
It was a city so long ago that it was still called Peking.
So I went to a party.
I sat down next to a stout, middle-aged man with owl glasses and a bow tie, and he turned out to be a Fulbright scholar, there in China specifically to study Sino-Soviet relations.
What a gift it was to the eager, young foreign correspondent that I was then.
I'd pump him for information, I'm mentally scribbling notes for the stories I plan to write.
I talk to him for hours.
Only months later, I discover who he really was.
He was the China representative for the American Soybean Association.
"I don't understand. Soybeans?
You told me you were a Fulbright scholar."
"Well, how long would you have talked to me if I told you we're in soybeans?"
(Laughter) I said, "You jerk."
Only jerk wasn't the word I used.
I said, "You could've gotten me fired."
And he said, "Let's get married."
(Laughter) "Travel the world and have lots of kids."
So we did.
(Laughter) (Applause) And what an alive man Terence Bryan Foley turned out to be.
He was a Chinese scholar who later, in his 60s, got a Ph.D. in Chinese history.
He spoke six languages, he played 15 musical instruments, he was a licensed pilot, he had once been a San Francisco cable car operator, he was an expert in swine nutrition, dairy cattle, Dixieland jazz, film noir, and we did travel the country, and the world, and we did have a lot of kids.
We followed my job, and it seemed like there was nothing that we couldn't do.
So when we found the cancer, it doesn't seem strange to us at all that without saying a word to each other, we believed that, if we were smart enough and strong enough and brave enough, and we worked hard enough, we could keep him from dying ever.
And for years, it seemed like we were succeeding.
The surgeon emerged from the surgery.
What'd he say? He said what surgeons always say: "We got it all."
Then there was a setback when the pathologists looked at the kidney cancer closely.
It turned out to be a rare, exceedingly aggressive type, with a diagnosis that was almost universally fatal in several weeks at most.
And yet, he did not die.
Mysteriously, he lived on.
He coached Little League for our son.
He built a playhouse for our daughter.
And meanwhile, I'm burying myself in the Internet looking for specialists.
I'm looking for a cure.
So a year goes by before the cancer, as cancers do, reappears, and with it comes another death sentence, this time nine months.
So we try another treatment, aggressive, nasty.
It makes him so sick, he has to quit it, yet still he lives on.
Then another year goes by.
Two years go by.
More specialists.
We take the kids to Italy.
We take the kids to Australia.
And then more years pass, and the cancer begins to grow.
This time, there's new treatments on the horizon.
They're exotic. They're experimental.
They're going to attack the cancer in new ways.
So he enters a clinical trial, and it works.
The cancer begins to shrink, and for the third time, we've dodged death.
So now I ask you, how do I feel when the time finally comes and there's another dark night, sometime between midnight and 2 a.m.?
This time it's on the intensive care ward when a twentysomething resident that I've never met before tells me that Terence is dying, perhaps tonight.
So what do I say when he says, "What do you want me to do?"
There's another drug out there.
It's newer. It's more powerful.
He started it just two weeks ago.
Perhaps there's still hope ahead.
So what do I say?
I say, "Keep him alive if you can."
And Terence died six days later.
So we fought, we struggled, we triumphed.
It was an exhilarating fight, and I'd repeat the fight today without a moment's hesitation.
We fought together, we lived together.
It turned what could have been seven of the grimmest years of our life into seven of the most glorious.
It was also an expensive fight.
It was the kind of fight and the kind of choices that everyone here agrees pump up the cost of end-of-life care, and of healthcare for all of us.
And for me, for us, we pushed the fight right over the edge, and I never got the chance to say to him what I say to him now almost every day: "Hey, buddy, it was a hell of a ride."
We never got the chance to say goodbye.
We never thought it was the end.
We always had hope.
So what do we make of all of this?
Being a journalist, after Terence died, I wrote a book, "The Cost Of Hope."
I wrote it because I wanted to know why I did what I did, why he did what he did, why everyone around us did what they did.
And what did I discover?
Well, one of the things I discovered is that experts think that one answer to what I did at the end was a piece of paper, the advance directive, to help families get past the seemingly irrational choices.
Yet I had that piece of paper.
We both did.
And they were readily available.
I had them right at hand.
Both of them said the same thing: Do nothing if there is no further hope.
I knew Terence's wishes as clearly and as surely as I knew my own.
Yet we never got to no further hope.
Even with that clear-cut paper in our hands, we just kept redefining hope.
I believed I could keep him from dying, and I'd be embarrassed to say that if I hadn't seen so many people and have talked to so many people who have felt exactly the same way.
Right up until days before his death, I felt strongly and powerfully, and, you might say, irrationally, that I could keep him from dying ever.
Now, what do the experts call this?
They say it's denial.
It's a strong word, isn't it?
Yet I will tell you that denial isn't even close to a strong enough word to describe what those of us facing the death of our loved ones go through.
And I hear the medical professionals say, "Well, we'd like to do such-and-such, but the family's in denial.
The family won't listen to reason.
They're in denial.
How can they insist on this treatment at the end?
It's so clear, yet they're in denial."
Now, I think this maybe isn't a very useful way of thinking.
It's not just families either.
The medical professionals too, you out there, you're in denial too.
You want to help. You want to fix.
You want to do.
You've succeeded in everything you've done, and having a patient die, well, that must feel like failure.
I saw it firsthand.
Just days before Terence died, his oncologist said, "Tell Terence that better days are just ahead."
Days before he died.
Yet Ira Byock, the director of palliative medicine at Dartmouth said, "You know, the best doctor in the world has never succeeded in making anyone immortal."
So what the experts call "denial," I call "hope," and I'd like to borrow a phrase from my friends in software design.
You just redefine denial and hope, and it becomes a feature of being human.
It's not a bug.
It's a feature.
(Laughter) So we need to think more constructively about this very common, very profound and very powerful human emotion.
It's part of the human condition, and yet our system and our thinking isn't built to accommodate it.
So Terence told me a story on that long-ago night, and I believed it.
Maybe I wanted to believe it.
And during Terence's illness, I, we, we wanted to believe the story of our fight together too.
Giving up the fight -- for that's how it felt, it felt like giving up -- meant giving up not only his life but also our story, our story of us as fighters, the story of us as invincible, and for the doctors, the story of themselves as healers.
So what do we need?
Maybe we don't need a new piece of paper.
Maybe we need a new story, not a story about giving up the fight or of hopelessness, but rather a story of victory and triumph, of a valiant battle and, eventually, a graceful retreat, a story that acknowledges that not even the greatest general defeats every foe, that no doctor has ever succeeded in making anyone immortal, and that no wife, no matter how hard she tried, has ever stopped even the bravest, wittiest and most maddeningly lovable husband from dying when it was his time to go.
People did mention hospice, but I wouldn't listen.
Hospice was for people who were dying, and Terence wasn't dying.
As a result, he spent just four days in hospice, which I'm sure, as you all know, is a pretty typical outcome, and we never said goodbye because we were unprepared for the end.
We have a noble path to curing the disease, patients and doctors alike, but there doesn't seem to be a noble path to dying.
Dying is seen as failing, and we had a heroic narrative for fighting together, but we didn't have a heroic narrative for letting go.
So maybe we need a narrative for acknowledging the end, and for saying goodbye, and maybe our new story will be about a hero's fight, and a hero's goodbye.
Terence loved poetry, and the Greek poet Constantine Cavafy is one of my favorite poets.
So I'll give you a couple lines from him.
This is a poem about Mark Antony.
You know Mark Antony, the conquering hero, Cleopatra's guy?
Actually, one of Cleopatra's guys.
And he's been a pretty good general.
He's won all the fights, he's eluded all the people that are out to get him, and yet this time, finally, he's come to the city of Alexandria and realized he's lost.
The people are leaving. They're playing instruments.
They're singing.
And suddenly he knows he's been defeated.
And he suddenly knows he's been deserted by the gods, and it's time to let go.
And the poet tells him what to do.
He tells him how to say a noble goodbye, a goodbye that's fit for a hero.
"As if long-prepared, as if courageous, as it becomes you who were worthy of such a city, approach the window with a firm step, and with emotion, but not with the entreaties or the complaints of a coward, as a last enjoyment, listen to the sounds, the exquisite instruments of the musical troops, and bid her farewell, the Alexandria you are losing."
That's a goodbye for a man who was larger than life, a goodbye for a man for whom anything, well, almost anything, was possible, a goodbye for a man who kept hope alive.
And isn't that what we're missing?
How can we learn that people's decisions about their loved ones are often based strongly, powerfully, many times irrationally, on the slimmest of hopes?
The overwhelming presence of hope isn't denial.
It's part of our DNA as humans, and maybe it's time our healthcare system -- doctors, patients, insurance companies, us, started accounting for the power of that hope.
Hope isn't a bug.
It's a feature.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to tell you a story connecting the notorious privacy incident involving Adam and Eve, and the remarkable shift in the boundaries between public and private which has occurred in the past 10 years.
You know the incident.
Adam and Eve one day in the Garden of Eden realize they are naked.
They freak out.
And the rest is history.
Nowadays, Adam and Eve would probably act differently.
[@Adam Last nite was a blast! loved dat apple LOL] [@Eve yep.. babe, know what happened to my pants tho?] We do reveal so much more information about ourselves online than ever before, and so much information about us is being collected by organizations.
Now there is much to gain and benefit from this massive analysis of personal information, or big data, but there are also complex tradeoffs that come from giving away our privacy.
And my story is about these tradeoffs.
We start with an observation which, in my mind, has become clearer and clearer in the past few years, that any personal information can become sensitive information.
Back in the year 2000, about 100 billion photos were shot worldwide, but only a minuscule proportion of them were actually uploaded online.
In 2010, only on Facebook, in a single month, 2.5 billion photos were uploaded, most of them identified.
In the same span of time, computers' ability to recognize people in photos improved by three orders of magnitude.
What happens when you combine these technologies together: increasing availability of facial data; improving facial recognizing ability by computers; but also cloud computing, which gives anyone in this theater the kind of computational power which a few years ago was only the domain of three-letter agencies; and ubiquitous computing, which allows my phone, which is not a supercomputer, to connect to the Internet and do there hundreds of thousands of face metrics in a few seconds?
Well, we conjecture that the result of this combination of technologies will be a radical change in our very notions of privacy and anonymity.
To test that, we did an experiment on Carnegie Mellon University campus.
We asked students who were walking by to participate in a study, and we took a shot with a webcam, and we asked them to fill out a survey on a laptop.
While they were filling out the survey, we uploaded their shot to a cloud-computing cluster, and we started using a facial recognizer to match that shot to a database of some hundreds of thousands of images which we had downloaded from Facebook profiles.
By the time the subject reached the last page on the survey, the page had been dynamically updated with the 10 best matching photos which the recognizer had found, and we asked the subjects to indicate whether he or she found themselves in the photo.
Do you see the subject?
Well, the computer did, and in fact did so for one out of three subjects.
So essentially, we can start from an anonymous face, offline or online, and we can use facial recognition to give a name to that anonymous face thanks to social media data.
But a few years back, we did something else.
We started from social media data, we combined it statistically with data from U.S. government social security, and we ended up predicting social security numbers, which in the United States are extremely sensitive information.
Do you see where I'm going with this?
So if you combine the two studies together, then the question becomes, can you start from a face and, using facial recognition, find a name and publicly available information about that name and that person, and from that publicly available information infer non-publicly available information, much more sensitive ones which you link back to the face?
And the answer is, yes, we can, and we did.
Of course, the accuracy keeps getting worse.
[27% of subjects' first 5 SSN digits identified (with 4 attempts)] But in fact, we even decided to develop an iPhone app which uses the phone's internal camera to take a shot of a subject and then upload it to a cloud and then do what I just described to you in real time: looking for a match, finding public information, trying to infer sensitive information, and then sending back to the phone so that it is overlaid on the face of the subject, an example of augmented reality, probably a creepy example of augmented reality.
In fact, we didn't develop the app to make it available, just as a proof of concept.
In fact, take these technologies and push them to their logical extreme.
Imagine a future in which strangers around you will look at you through their Google Glasses or, one day, their contact lenses, and use seven or eight data points about you to infer anything else which may be known about you.
What will this future without secrets look like?
And should we care?
We may like to believe that the future with so much wealth of data would be a future with no more biases, but in fact, having so much information doesn't mean that we will make decisions which are more objective.
In another experiment, we presented to our subjects information about a potential job candidate.
We included in this information some references to some funny, absolutely legal, but perhaps slightly embarrassing information that the subject had posted online.
Now interestingly, among our subjects, some had posted comparable information, and some had not.
Which group do you think was more likely to judge harshly our subject?
Paradoxically, it was the group who had posted similar information, an example of moral dissonance.
Now you may be thinking, this does not apply to me, because I have nothing to hide.
But in fact, privacy is not about having something negative to hide.
Imagine that you are the H.R. director of a certain organization, and you receive résumés, and you decide to find more information about the candidates.
Therefore, you Google their names and in a certain universe, you find this information.
Or in a parallel universe, you find this information.
Do you think that you would be equally likely to call either candidate for an interview?
If you think so, then you are not like the U.S. employers who are, in fact, part of our experiment, meaning we did exactly that.
We created Facebook profiles, manipulating traits, then we started sending out résumés to companies in the U.S., and we detected, we monitored, whether they were searching for our candidates, and whether they were acting on the information they found on social media. And they were.
Discrimination was happening through social media for equally skilled candidates.
Now marketers like us to believe that all information about us will always be used in a manner which is in our favor.
But think again. Why should that be always the case?
In a movie which came out a few years ago, "Minority Report," a famous scene had Tom Cruise walk in a mall and holographic personalized advertising would appear around him.
Now, that movie is set in 2054, about 40 years from now, and as exciting as that technology looks, it already vastly underestimates the amount of information that organizations can gather about you, and how they can use it to influence you in a way that you will not even detect.
So as an example, this is another experiment actually we are running, not yet completed.
Imagine that an organization has access to your list of Facebook friends, and through some kind of algorithm they can detect the two friends that you like the most.
And then they create, in real time, a facial composite of these two friends.
Now studies prior to ours have shown that people don't recognize any longer even themselves in facial composites, but they react to those composites in a positive manner.
So next time you are looking for a certain product, and there is an ad suggesting you to buy it, it will not be just a standard spokesperson.
It will be one of your friends, and you will not even know that this is happening.
Now the problem is that the current policy mechanisms we have to protect ourselves from the abuses of personal information are like bringing a knife to a gunfight.
One of these mechanisms is transparency, telling people what you are going to do with their data.
And in principle, that's a very good thing.
It's necessary, but it is not sufficient.
Transparency can be misdirected.
You can tell people what you are going to do, and then you still nudge them to disclose arbitrary amounts of personal information.
So in yet another experiment, this one with students, we asked them to provide information about their campus behavior, including pretty sensitive questions, such as this one.
[Have you ever cheated in an exam?] Now to one group of subjects, we told them, "Only other students will see your answers."
To another group of subjects, we told them, "Students and faculty will see your answers."
Transparency. Notification. And sure enough, this worked, in the sense that the first group of subjects were much more likely to disclose than the second.
It makes sense, right?
But then we added the misdirection.
We repeated the experiment with the same two groups, this time adding a delay between the time we told subjects how we would use their data and the time we actually started answering the questions.
How long a delay do you think we had to add in order to nullify the inhibitory effect of knowing that faculty would see your answers?
Ten minutes?
Five minutes?
One minute?
How about 15 seconds?
Fifteen seconds were sufficient to have the two groups disclose the same amount of information, as if the second group now no longer cares for faculty reading their answers.
Now I have to admit that this talk so far may sound exceedingly gloomy, but that is not my point.
In fact, I want to share with you the fact that there are alternatives.
The way we are doing things now is not the only way they can done, and certainly not the best way they can be done.
When someone tells you, "People don't care about privacy," consider whether the game has been designed and rigged so that they cannot care about privacy, and coming to the realization that these manipulations occur is already halfway through the process of being able to protect yourself.
When someone tells you that privacy is incompatible with the benefits of big data, consider that in the last 20 years, researchers have created technologies to allow virtually any electronic transactions to take place in a more privacy-preserving manner.
We can browse the Internet anonymously.
We can send emails that can only be read by the intended recipient, not even the NSA.
We can have even privacy-preserving data mining.
In other words, we can have the benefits of big data while protecting privacy.
Of course, these technologies imply a shifting of cost and revenues between data holders and data subjects, which is why, perhaps, you don't hear more about them.
Which brings me back to the Garden of Eden.
There is a second privacy interpretation of the story of the Garden of Eden which doesn't have to do with the issue of Adam and Eve feeling naked and feeling ashamed.
You can find echoes of this interpretation in John Milton's "Paradise Lost."
In the garden, Adam and Eve are materially content.
They're happy. They are satisfied.
However, they also lack knowledge and self-awareness.
The moment they eat the aptly named fruit of knowledge, that's when they discover themselves.
They become aware. They achieve autonomy.
The price to pay, however, is leaving the garden.
So privacy, in a way, is both the means and the price to pay for freedom.
Again, marketers tell us that big data and social media are not just a paradise of profit for them, but a Garden of Eden for the rest of us.
We get free content.
We get to play Angry Birds. We get targeted apps.
But in fact, in a few years, organizations will know so much about us, they will be able to infer our desires before we even form them, and perhaps buy products on our behalf before we even know we need them.
Now there was one English author who anticipated this kind of future where we would trade away our autonomy and freedom for comfort.
Even more so than George Orwell, the author is, of course, Aldous Huxley.
In "Brave New World," he imagines a society where technologies that we created originally for freedom end up coercing us.
However, in the book, he also offers us a way out of that society, similar to the path that Adam and Eve had to follow to leave the garden.
In the words of the Savage, regaining autonomy and freedom is possible, although the price to pay is steep.
So I do believe that one of the defining fights of our times will be the fight for the control over personal information, the fight over whether big data will become a force for freedom, rather than a force which will hiddenly manipulate us.
Right now, many of us do not even know that the fight is going on, but it is, whether you like it or not.
And at the risk of playing the serpent, I will tell you that the tools for the fight are here, the awareness of what is going on, and in your hands, just a few clicks away.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hetain Patel: (In Chinese) Yuyu Rau: Hi, I'm Hetain. I'm an artist.
And this is Yuyu, who is a dancer I have been working with.
I have asked her to translate for me.
HP: (In Chinese) YR: If I may, I would like to tell you a little bit about myself and my artwork.
HP: (In Chinese) YR: I was born and raised near Manchester, in England, but I'm not going to say it in English to you, because I'm trying to avoid any assumptions that might be made from my northern accent.
(Laughter) HP: (In Chinese) YR: The only problem with masking it with Chinese Mandarin is I can only speak this paragraph, which I have learned by heart when I was visiting in China. (Laughter) So all I can do is keep repeating it in different tones and hope you won't notice.
(Laughter) HP: (In Chinese) (Laughter) YR: Needless to say, I would like to apologize to any Mandarin speakers in the audience.
As a child, I would hate being made to wear the Indian kurta pajama, because I didn't think it was very cool.
It felt a bit girly to me, like a dress, and it had this baggy trouser part you had to tie really tight to avoid the embarrassment of them falling down.
My dad never wore it, so I didn't see why I had to.
Also, it makes me feel a bit uncomfortable, that people assume I represent something genuinely Indian when I wear it, because that's not how I feel.
HP: (In Chinese) YR: Actually, the only way I feel comfortable wearing it is by pretending they are the robes of a kung fu warrior like Li Mu Bai from that film, "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon."
(Music) Okay.
So my artwork is about identity and language, challenging common assumptions based on how we look like or where we come from, gender, race, class.
What makes us who we are anyway?
HP: (In Chinese) YR: I used to read Spider-Man comics, watch kung fu movies, take philosophy lessons from Bruce Lee.
He would say things like -- HP: Empty your mind.
(Laughter) Be formless, shapeless, like water.
Now you put water into a cup.
It becomes the cup.
You put water into a bottle, it becomes the bottle.
Put it in a teapot, it becomes the teapot.
Now, water can flow or it can crash.
Be water, my friend. (Applause) YR: This year, I am 32 years old, the same age Bruce Lee was when he died.
I have been wondering recently, if he were alive today, what advice he would give me about making this TED Talk.
HP: Don't imitate my voice.
It offends me.
(Laughter) YR: Good advice, but I still think that we learn who we are by copying others.
Who here hasn't imitated their childhood hero in the playground, or mum or father?
I have.
HP: A few years ago, in order to make this video for my artwork, I shaved off all my hair so that I could grow it back as my father had it when he first emigrated from India to the U.K. in the 1960s.
He had a side parting and a neat mustache.
At first, it was going very well.
I even started to get discounts in Indian shops.
(Laughter) But then very quickly, I started to underestimate my mustache growing ability, and it got way too big.
It didn't look Indian anymore.
Instead, people from across the road, they would shout things like -- HP and YR: Arriba! Arriba! Ándale! Ándale!
(Laughter) HP: Actually, I don't know why I am even talking like this.
My dad doesn't even have an Indian accent anymore.
He talks like this now.
So it's not just my father that I've imitated.
A few years ago I went to China for a few months, and I couldn't speak Chinese, and this frustrated me, so I wrote about this and had it translated into Chinese, and then I learned this by heart, like music, I guess.
YR: This phrase is now etched into my mind clearer than the pin number to my bank card, so I can pretend I speak Chinese fluently.
When I had learned this phrase, I had an artist over there hear me out to see how accurate it sounded.
I spoke the phrase, and then he laughed and told me, "Oh yeah, that's great, only it kind of sounds like a woman."
I said, "What?"
He said, "Yeah, you learned from a woman?"
I said, "Yes. So?"
He then explained the tonal differences between male and female voices are very different and distinct, and that I had learned it very well, but in a woman's voice.
(Laughter) (Applause) HP: Okay. So this imitation business does come with risk.
It doesn't always go as you plan it, even with a talented translator.
But I am going to stick with it, because contrary to what we might usually assume, imitating somebody can reveal something unique.
So every time I fail to become more like my father, I become more like myself.
Every time I fail to become Bruce Lee, I become more authentically me.
This is my art.
I strive for authenticity, even if it comes in a shape that we might not usually expect.
It's only recently that I've started to understand that I didn't learn to sit like this through being Indian.
I learned this from Spider-Man.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
You know, there's a small country nestled in the Himalayan Mountains, far from these beautiful mountains, where the people of the Kingdom of Bhutan have decided to do something different, which is to measure their gross national happiness rather than their gross national product.
And why not?
After all, happiness is not just a privilege for the lucky few, but a fundamental human right for all.
And what is happiness?
Happiness is the freedom of choice.
The freedom to chose where to live, what to do, what to buy, what to sell, from whom, to whom, when and how.
Where does choice come from?
And who gets to express it, and how do we express it?
Well, one way to express choice is through the market.
Well-functioning markets provide choices, and ultimately, the ability to express one's pursuit for happiness.
The great Indian economist, Amartya Sen, was awarded the Nobel prize for demonstrating that famine is not so much about the availability of food supply, but rather the ability to acquire or entitle oneself to that food through the market.
In 1984, in what can only be considered one of the greatest crimes of humanity, nearly one million people died of starvation in my country of birth, Ethiopia.
Not because there was not enough food -- because there was actually a surplus of food in the fertile regions of the south parts of the country -- but because in the north, people could not access or entitle themselves to that food.
That was a turning point for my life.
Most Africans today, by far, are farmers.
And most of Africa's farmers are, by and large, small farmers in terms of land that they operate, and very, very small farmers in terms of the capital they have at their disposal.
African agriculture today is among, or is, the most under-capitalized in the world.
Only seven percent of arable land in Africa is irrigated, compared to 40 percent in Asia.
African farmers only use some 22 kilograms of fertilizer per hectare, compared to 144 in Asia.
Road density is six times greater in Asia than it is in rural Africa.
There are eight times more tractors in Latin America, and three times more tractors in Asia, than in Africa.
The small farmer in Africa today lives a life without much choice, and therefore without much freedom.
His livelihood is predetermined by the conditions of grinding poverty.
He comes to the market when prices are lowest, with the meager fruits of his hard labor, just after the harvest, because he has no choice.
She comes back to the market some months later, when prices are highest, in what we call the lean season -- when food is scarce -- because she has to feed her family and has no choice.
The real question is, how can markets be developed in rural Africa to harness the power of innovation and entrepreneurship that we know exists?
Another notable economist, Theodore Schultz, in 1974 won the Nobel prize for demonstrating that farmers are efficient, but poor.
Meaning, in fact, that farmers are rational and profit-minded just like everybody else.
Well, we don't need, now, any more Nobel prizes to know that farmers want a fair shake at the market and want to make money, just like everyone else.
And one thing is clear, which is at least now we know that Africa is open for business.
And that business is agriculture.
Over two decades ago, the world insisted to Africa that markets must be liberalized, that economies must be structurally adjusted.
This meant that governments were to remove themselves from the business of buying and selling -- which they did rather inefficiently -- and let the private market do its magic.
Well, what happened over the last 25 years?
Did Africa feed itself?
Did our farmers turn into highly productive commercial actors?
I think we're all in this room, probably, because we know that, in fact, Africa is the only region in the world where hunger and malnutrition are projected to go up over the next 10 years, where the food import bill is now double what it was 20 years ago, where food production per capita has stagnated, and where fertilizer use has declined rather than increased.
So why didn't agriculture markets perform to expectations?
The market reforms prompted by the West -- and I've spent some 15 years traveling around the continent doing research on agricultural markets, and have interviewed traders in 10 to 15 countries in this continent, hundreds of traders -- trying to understand what went wrong with our market reform.
And it seems to me that the reforms might have thrown the baby out with the bath water.
Like its agriculture, Africa's markets are highly under-capitalized and inefficient.
We know from our work around the continent that transaction costs of reaching the market, and the risks of transacting in rural, agriculture markets, are extremely high.
In fact, only one third of agricultural output produced in Africa even reaches the market.
Africa's markets are weak not only because of weak infrastructure in terms of roads and telecommunications, but also because of the virtual absence of necessary market institutions, such as market information, grades and standards, and reliable ways to connect buyers and sellers.
Because of this, commodity buyers and sellers typically transact in small circles, in narrow networks of people they know and trust.
And because of that, as grain changes hands -- and I've measured that it changes hands four, five times in its trajectory from the farmer to the consumer -- every time it changes hands -- and I've seen this all over rural Africa -- it also changes sacks.
And I thought that was incredibly peculiar.
And really realized that that was because -- as traders would tell me over and over -- that's the only way people know what they're getting in terms of the quantity and the product quality.
And that actually has huge implications for the ability of markets to quickly respond to price signals, and situations where there are deficits, for example.
It also has very high cost implications.
I have measured that 26 percent of the marketing margin is simply due to the fact that, because of the absence of grades and standards and market information, sacks have to be constantly changed.
And this leads to very high handling costs.
For their part, small farmers, who produce the bulk of our agricultural output in Africa, come to the market with virtually no information at all -- blind -- trusting that they're going to have some sort of demand for their produce, and completely at the mercy of the merchants in the only market, the nearest local market they know -- where they're unable to negotiate better prices or reduce their risk.
Speaking of risk, we have seen that price volatility of food crops in Africa is the highest in the world.
In Africa, small farmers bear the brunt of this risk.
In fact, in my view, there is no region of the world and no period in history that farmers have been expected to bear the kind of market risk that Africa's farmers have to bear.
And in my view, there is simply no place in the world that has grown its agriculture on the kind of risk that our farmers in Africa today face.
In Ethiopia, for example, the variation in maize prices from year to year is as much as 50 percent annually.
This kind of market risk is mind-boggling, and has direct implications for not only the incentives of farmers to invest in higher productivity technology, such as modern seeds and fertilizers, but also direct implications for food security.
To give you an example, between 2001 and 2002, Ethiopian maize farmers produced two years of bumper harvest.
That in turn, because of the weak marketing system, led to an 80 percent collapse in maize prices in the country.
This made it unprofitable for some farmers to even harvest the grain from the fields.
And we calculated that some 300,000 tons of grain was left in the fields to rot in early 2002.
Not six months later, in July 2002, Ethiopia announced a major food crisis, to the same proportions as 1984: 14 million people at risk of starvation.
What also happened that year is in the areas where there were good rains, and where farmers had previously produced surplus grain, farmers had decided to withdraw from the fertilizer market, not use fertilizer and actually had dropped their use of fertilizer by 27 percent.
This is a tragic example of arrested development, or a budding green revolution stopped in its tracks.
And this is not just specific to Ethiopia, but happens over and over, all over Africa.
Well, I'm not here today to lament about the situation, or wring my hands.
I am here to tell you that change is in the air.
Africa today is not the Africa waiting for aid solutions, or cookie-cutter foreign expert policy prescriptions.
Africa has learned, or is learning somewhat slowly, that markets don't happen by themselves.
In the 1980s, it was very fashionable to talk about getting prices right.
There was a very influential book about that, which was mainly about getting governments out of the market.
We now recognize that getting markets right is about not just price incentives, but also investing in the right infrastructure and the appropriate and necessary institutions to create the conditions to unleash the power of innovation in the market.
When conditions are right, we know and see that that innovation is ready to explode in rural Africa, just like anywhere else.
Nearly three years ago, I decided to leave my comfortable job as a World Bank senior economist in Washington and come back to my country of birth, Ethiopia, after nearly 30 years abroad.
I did so for a simple reason.
After having spent more than a decade understanding, studying, and trying to convince policymakers and donors about what was wrong with Africa's agricultural markets, I decided it was time to do something about it.
I currently lead, in Ethiopia, an exciting new initiative to establish the first Ethiopia Commodity Exchange, or ECX.
Now, the commodity exchange itself, that concept, is not new to the world.
In fact, in 1848, 82 grain merchants and farmers got together in a small town at the crossroads of the Illinois River and Lake Michigan to establish a way to trade better amongst themselves.
That was, of course, the birth of the Chicago Board of Trade, which is the most famous commodity exchange in the world.
The Chicago Board of Trade was established then for precisely the same reasons that our farmers today would benefit from a commodity exchange.
In the American Midwest, farmers used to load grain onto barges and send it upriver to the Chicago market.
But once it arrived, if no buyer was to be found, or if prices suddenly dropped, farmers would incur tremendous losses.
And in fact, would even dump the grain in Lake Michigan, rather than spend more money transporting it back to their farms.
Well, the need to avoid these huge risks and tremendous losses led to the birth of the futures market, and the underlying system of grading grain and receipting -- issuing warehouse receipts on the basis of which trade could be done.
From there, the greatest innovation of all came about in this market, which is that buyers and sellers could transact grain without actually having to physically or visually inspect the grain.
That meant that grain could be traded across tremendous distances, and even across time -- as far forward as 18 months into the future.
This innovation is at the heart of the transformation of American agriculture, and the rise of Chicago to a global market, agricultural market, superpower from where it was, a small regional town.
Now, over the last century, we tend to think of commodity exchanges as the purview of Western industrialized countries, and that the reference prices for cotton, coffee, cocoa -- products produced mainly in the south -- are actually a reference price, or a price discovered in these organized commodity exchanges in the northern countries.
But that is actually changing.
And we're seeing a shift -- powered mainly because of information technology -- a shift in market dominance towards the emerging markets.
And over the last decade, you see that the share of Western exchanges -- and this is the U.S. share of exchanges in the world -- has gone down by nearly half in just the last decade.
Similarly, there's been explosive growth in India, for example, where rural farmers are using exchanges -- growing here over the last three years by 270 percent a year.
This is powered by low-cost VSAT technology, aggressively trying to reach farmers to bring them into the market.
China's Dalian Commodity Exchange, three years ago, 2004, overtook the Chicago Board of Trade to become the second largest commodity exchange in the world.
Now, in Ethiopia, we're in the process of designing the first organized Ethiopia Commodity Exchange.
We're not trying to cut and paste the Chicago model or the India model, but creating a system uniquely tailored to Ethiopia's needs and realities, Ethiopia's small farmers.
So, the ECX is an Ethiopian exchange for Ethiopia.
We're creating a system that serves all market actors, that creates integrity, trust, efficiency, transparency and enables small farmers to manage the risks that I have described.
In the design of our commodity exchange in Ethiopia, we've done something rather unique, which is to take the approach of an integrated perspective, or what we call the ECX Edge.
The ECX Edge pretty much creates the entire ecosystem in which the market will develop itself.
And this is because one of the things we've learned over the last decade of studying market development in Africa is that the piecemeal approach does not work.
You've got one donor trying to develop market information, another trying to work on or sponsor grades and standards, another ICT, and yet another on warehousing, or warehouse receipts.
In our approach in Ethiopia, we've decided to put together the entire ecosystem, or environment, in which trade takes place.
That means that the exchange will operate a trading system, which will initially start as an open outcry, because we don't think the country's ready for full electronic trading.
But at the same time, we'll do something which I think no exchange in the world has ever done, which is itself to operate something like an Internet cafe in the rural areas.
So that farmers and small traders can actually come to a terminal center -- what we call the remote access terminal centers -- and actually, without having to buy a computer or figure out how to dial up or any of those things, simply see the trading that's happening on the Addis Ababa trading floor.
At the same time, what's very fundamental to this market is that -- and again, an innovation that we've designed for our exchange -- is that the exchange will operate warehouses around the country, in which grade certification and warehouse receipting will be done.
And in turn, we'll operate an in-house clearing system, to assure that payment is done appropriately, in the right amount and at the right time, so that basically, we create trust and integrity in the system.
Obviously, we work with exchange actors, and as we're developing the exchange market itself, we're also developing the regulatory infrastructure and legal framework, the overarching legal framework for making this market work.
So, in fact, our proclamation is going to parliament next month.
What's really important is that the ECX will operate a market information system to disseminate prices in real time to farmers around the country, using VSAT technology to bring an electronic price dissemination directly to farmers.
What this does is transforms, fundamentally, the farmers' relationship to the market.
Whereas before the farmer used to think local -- meaning that he or she would go to the nearest local market, eight to 10 kilometers away on average, and sell whatever they happened to have, without any idea of what the price premium or anything else was -- now farmers come with knowledge of what prices are at the national market.
And they start to think national, and even global.
They start to make not only commercial marketing decisions, but also planting decisions, on the basis of information coming from the futures price market.
And they come to the market knowing what grades their products will achieve in terms of a price premium.
So all of this will transform farmers.
It will also transform the way traders do business.
It will stop them from doing simple, back-to-back, limited arbitrage to really thinking strategically about how to move grain across long distances from [surplus regions] to [deficit areas].
Can Ethiopia do this?
It seems very ambitious.
But it will create new opportunities.
We believe that this initiative requires great political will, and we'll have to align the financial sector, as well as the ICT sector, and really even the underlying legal framework.
We believe that the winds of change are here, and that we can do it.
ECX is the market for Ethiopia's new millennium, which starts in about eight months.
The last parliament of our century opened with our president announcing to the country that this was the most important economic initiative for the country today.
We believe that the stakes are high, but that the returns will be even greater.
ECX, moreover, can become a trading platform for a pan-African market in agricultural commodities.
Ethiopia's domestic market is about one billion dollars of value.
And we feel that over the next five years, if Ethiopia can capture even 40 percent, just 40 percent, of the domestic market, and add just 25 percent value to that market, the value of the market doubles.
Ethiopia's agricultural market is 30 percent higher than South Africa's grain production, and, in fact, Ethiopia is the second largest maize producer in Africa.
So the potential is there.
The will is there.
The commitment is there.
So we feel that we have a winning value proposition to transform farmers' choices, to grow our agriculture, and to change Africa.
So, we are in the business of finding our happiness.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I've spent my life working on sustainability.
I set up a climate change NGO called The Climate Group.
I worked on forestry issues in WWF.
I worked on development and agriculture issues in the U.N. system.
About 25 years in total, and then three years ago, I found myself talking to IKEA's CEO about joining his team.
Like many people here, well, I want to maximize my personal impact in the world, so I'm going to explain why I joined the team there.
But first, let's just take three numbers.
The first number is three: three billion people.
This is the number of people joining the global middle class by 2030, coming out of poverty.
It's fantastic for them and their families, but we've got two billion people in the global middle class today, and this swells that number to five, a big challenge when we already have resource scarcity.
The second number is six: This is six degrees centigrade, what we're heading towards in terms of global warming.
We're not heading towards one degree or three degrees or four degrees, we're heading toward six degrees.
And if you think about it, all of the weird weather we've been having the last few years, much of that is due to just one degree warming, and we need CO2 emissions to peak by the end of this decade globally and then come down.
It's not inevitable, but we need to act decisively.
The third number is 12: That's the number of cities in the world that had a million or more people when my grandmother was born.
You can see my grandmother there.
That was in the beginning of the last century.
So just 12 cities. She was born in Manchester, England, the ninth largest city in the world.
Now there are 500 cities, nearly, with a million people or more in them.
And if you look at the century from 1950 to 2050, that's the century when we build all the world's cities, the century that we're in the middle of right now.
Every other century was kind of practice, and this lays down a blueprint for how we live.
So think about it.
We're building cities like never before, bringing people out of poverty like never before, and changing the climate like never before.
Sustainability has gone from a nice-to-do to a must-do.
it's about what we do right here, right now, and for the rest of our working lives.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about what business can do and what a business like IKEA can do, and we have a sustainability strategy called "people and planet positive" to help guide our business to have a positive impact on the world.
Why would we not want to have a positive impact on the world as a business?
Other companies have sustainability strategies.
I'm going to refer to some of those as well, and I'm just going to mention a few of the commitments as illustrations that we've got.
But first, let's think of customers.
We know from asking people from China to the U.S.
that the vast majority of people care about sustainability after the day-to-day issues, the day-to-day issues of, how do I get my kids to school?
Can I pay the bills at the end of the month?
Then they care about big issues like climate change.
But they want it to be easy, affordable and attractive, and they expect business to help, and they're a little bit disappointed today.
So take your mind back and think of the first sustainable products.
We had detergents that could wash your whites grayer.
We had the early energy-efficient light bulbs that took five minutes to warm up and then you were left looking a kind of sickly color.
And we had the rough, recycled toilet paper.
So every time you pulled on a t-shirt, or switched the light on, or went to the bathroom, or sometimes all three together, you were reminded sustainability was about compromise.
It wasn't a great start.
Today we have choices.
We can make products that are beautiful or ugly, sustainable or unsustainable, affordable or expensive, functional or useless.
So let's make beautiful, functional, affordable, sustainable products.
Let's take the LED.
The LED is the next best thing to daylight.
The old-fashioned lightbulbs, the incandescent bulbs -- I'm not going to ask for a show of hands of how many of you still have them in your homes, wasting energy every time you switch them on -- change them after this -- or whether we have them on the stage here at TED or not -- but those old incandescent light bulbs really should have been sold as heaters.
They were mis-sold for more than a hundred years.
They produced heat and a little bit of light on the side.
Now we have lights that produce light and a little bit of heat on the side.
You save 85 percent of the electricity with an LED that you would have done in an old incandescent.
And the best thing is, they'll also last for more than 20 years.
So think about that.
You'll change your smartphone seven or eight times, probably more if you're in this audience.
You'll change your car, if you have one, three or four times.
Your kids could go to school, go to college, go away and have kids of their own, come back, bring the grandkids, you'll have the same lightbulb saving you energy.
So LEDs are fantastic.
What we decided to do was not to sell LEDs on the side marked up high and continue to push all the old bulbs, the halogens and the CFLs.
We decided, over the next two years, we will ban the halogens and the CFLs ourselves.
We will go all in.
And this is what business needs to do: go all-in, go 100 percent, because then you stop investing in the old stuff, you invest in the new stuff, you lower costs, you use your supply chain and your creativity and you get the prices down so everybody can afford the best lights so they can save energy.
(Applause) It's not just about products in people's homes.
We've got to think about the raw materials that produce our products.
Obviously there's fantastic opportunities with recycled materials, and we can and will go zero waste.
And there's opportunities in a circular economy.
But we're still dependent on natural, raw materials.
Let's take cotton.
Cotton's brilliant. Probably many people are wearing cotton right now.
It's a brilliant textile in use.
It's really dirty in production.
It uses lots of pesticides, lots of fertilizer, lots of water.
So we've worked with others, with other businesses and NGOs, on the Better Cotton Initiative, working right back down to the farm, and there you can halve the amount of water and halve the chemical inputs, the yields increase, and 60 percent of the costs of running many of these farms with farmers with low incomes can be chemical imports.
Yields increase, and you halve the input costs.
Farmers are coming out of poverty. They love it.
Already hundreds of thousands of farmers have been reached, and now we've got 60 percent better cotton in our business.
Again, we're going all-in.
By 2015, we'll be 100 percent Better Cotton.
Take the topic of 100 percent targets, actually.
People sometimes think that 100 percent's going to be hard, and we've had the conversation in the business.
Actually, we found 100 percent is easier to do than 90 percent or 50 percent.
If you have a 90 percent target, everyone in the business finds a reason to be in the 10 percent.
When it's 100 percent, it's kind of clear, and businesspeople like clarity, because then you just get the job done.
So, wood. We know with forestry, it's a choice.
You've got illegal logging and deforestation still on a very large scale, or you can have fantastic, responsible forestry that we can be proud of.
It's a simple choice, so we've worked for many years with the Forest Stewardship Council, with literally hundreds of other organizations, and there's a point here about collaboration.
So hundreds of others, of NGOs, of forest workers' unions, and of businesses, have helped create the Forest Stewardship Council, which sets standards for forestry and then checks the forestry's good on the ground.
Now together, through our supply chain, with partners, we've managed to certify 35 million hectares of forestry.
That's about the size of Germany.
And we've decided in the next three years, we will double the volume of certified material we put through our business.
So be decisive on these issues.
Use your supply chain to drive good.
But then it comes to your operations.
Some things are certain, I think.
We know we'll use electricity in 20 or 30 years' time.
We know the sun will be shining somewhere, and the wind will still be blowing in 20 or 30 years' time.
So why not make our energy out of the sun and the wind?
And why not take control of it ourselves?
So we're going 100 percent renewable.
By 2020, we'll produce more renewable energy than the energy we consume as a business.
For all of our stores, our own factories, our distribution centers, we've installed 300,000 solar panels so far, and we've got 14 wind farms we own and operate in six countries, and we're not done yet.
But think of a solar panel.
A solar panel pays for itself in seven or eight years.
The electricity is free.
Every time the sun comes out after that, the electricity is free.
So this is a good thing for the CFO, not just the sustainability guy.
Every business can do things like this.
But then we've got to look beyond our operations, and I think everybody would agree that now business has to take full responsibility for the impacts of your supply chain.
Many businesses now, fortunately, have codes of conduct and audit their supply chains, but not every business. Far from it.
And this came in IKEA actually in the '90s.
We found there was a risk of child labor in the supply chain, and people in the business were shocked.
And it was clearly totally unacceptable, so then you have to act.
So a code of conduct was developed, and now we have 80 auditors out in the world every day making sure all our factories secure good working conditions and protect human rights and make sure there is no child labor.
But it's not just as simple as making sure there's no child labor.
You've got to say that's not enough today.
I think we'd all agree that children are the most important people in the world and the most vulnerable.
So what can a business do today to actually use your total value chain to support a better quality of life and protect child rights?
We've worked with UNICEF and Save the Children on developing some new business principles with children's rights.
Increasing numbers of businesses are signing up to these, but actually in a survey, many business leaders said they thought their business had nothing to do with children.
So what we decided to do was, we will look and ask ourselves the tough questions with partners who know more than us, what can we do to go beyond our business to help improve the lives of children?
We also have a foundation that's committed to work through partners and help improve the lives and protect the rights of 100 million children by 2015.
You know the phrase, you can manage what you measure?
Well, you should measure what you care about.
If you're not measuring things, you don't care and you don't know.
So let's take an example, measure the things that are important in your business.
Isn't it about time that businesses were led equally by men and women?
(Applause) So we know for our 17,000 managers across IKEA that 47 percent are women today, but it's not enough, and we want to close the gap and follow it all the way through to senior management.
And we do not want to wait another hundred years.
So we've launched a women's open network this week in IKEA, and we'll do whatever it takes to lead the change.
So the message here is, measure what you care about and lead the change, and don't wait a hundred years.
So we've gone from sustainability being a nice-to-do to a must-do. It's a must-do.
It's still nice to do, but it's a must-do.
And everybody can do something on this as an individual.
Be a discerning consumer.
Vote with your wallets.
Search out the companies that are acting on this.
But also, there are other businesses already acting.
I mentioned renewable energy.
You go to Google or Lego, they're going 100 percent renewable too, in the same way that we are.
On having really good sustainability strategies, there are companies like Nike, Patagonia, Timberland, Marks &amp; Spencer.
But I don't think any of those businesses would say they're perfect. We certainly wouldn't.
We'll make mistakes going forward, but it's about setting a clear direction, being transparent, having a dialogue with the right partners, and choosing to lead on the issues that really count.
So if you're a business leader, if you're not already weaving sustainability right into the heart of your business model, I'd urge you to do so.
And together, we can help create a sustainable world, and, if we get it right, we can make sustainability affordable for the many people, not a luxury for the few.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Africa is booming.
Per capita incomes since the year 2000 have doubled, and this boom is impacting on everyone.
Life expectancy has increased by one year every three years for the last decade.
That means if an African child is born today, rather than three days ago, they will get an extra day of life at the end of their lifespan.
It's that quick.
And HIV infection rates are down 27 percent: 600,000 less people a year are getting HIV in sub-Saharan Africa.
The battle against malaria is being won, with deaths from malaria down 27 percent, according to the latest World Bank data.
And malaria nets actually are playing a role in that.
This shouldn't surprise us, because actually, everybody grows.
If you go back to Imperial Rome in the Year 1 A.D., there was admittedly about 1,800 years where there wasn't an awful lot of growth.
But then the people that the Romans would have called Scottish barbarians, my ancestors, were actually part of the Industrial Revolution, and in the 19th century, growth began to accelerate, and you saw that get quicker and quicker, and it's been impacting everyone.
It doesn't matter if this is the jungles of Singapore or the tundra of northern Finland.
Everybody gets involved. It's just a matter of when the inevitable happens.
Among the reasons I think it's happening right now is the quality of the leadership across Africa.
I think most of us would agree that in the 1990s, the greatest politician in the world was African, but I'm meeting brilliant people across the continent the entire time, and they're doing the reforms which have transformed the economic situation for their countries.
And the West is engaging with that.
The West has given debt forgiveness programs which have halved sub-Saharan debt from about 70 percent of GDP down to about 40.
At the same time, our debt level's gone up to 120 and we're all feeling slightly miserable as a result.
Politics gets weaker when debt is high.
When public sector debt is low, governments don't have to choose between investing in education and health and paying interest on that debt you owe.
And it's not just the public sector which is looking so good.
The private sector as well.
Again, in the West, we have private sector debt of 200 percent of GDP in Spain, the U.K., and the U.S.
That's an awful lot of debt.
Africa, many African countries, are sitting at 10 to 30 percent of GDP.
If there's any continent that can do what China has done -- China's at about 130 percent of GDP on that chart -- if anyone can do what China has done in the last 30 years, it'll be Africa in the next 30.
So they've got great government finances, great private sector debt.
Does anyone recognize this? In fact, they do.
Foreign direct investment has poured into Africa in the last 15 years.
Back in the '70s, no one touched the continent with a barge pole.
And this investment is actually Western-led.
We hear a lot about China, and they do lend a lot of money, but 60 percent of the FDI in the last couple of years has come from Europe, America, Australia, Canada.
Ten percent's come from India.
And they're investing in energy.
Africa produces 10 million barrels a day of oil now.
It's the same as Saudi Arabia or Russia.
And they're investing in telecoms, shopping malls.
And this very encouraging story, I think, is partly demographic-led.
And it's not just about African demographics.
I'm showing you the number of 15- to 24-year-olds in various parts of the world, and the blue line is the one I want you to focus on for a second.
Ten years ago, say you're Foxconn setting up an iPhone factory, by chance.
You might choose China, which is the bulk of that East Asian blue line, where there's 200 million young people, and every year until 2010 that's getting bigger.
Which means you're going to have new guys knocking on the door saying, "Give us a job," and, "I don't need a big pay rise, just please give me a job."
Now, that's completely changed now.
This decade, we're going to see a 20- to 30-percent fall in the number of 15- to 24-year-olds in China.
So where do you set up your new factory?
You look at South Asia, and people are.
They're looking at Pakistan and Bangladesh, and they're also looking at Africa.
And they're looking at Africa because that yellow line is showing you that the number of young Africans is going to continue to get bigger decade after decade after decade out to 2050.
Now, there's a problem with lots of young people coming into any market, particularly when they're young men.
A bit dangerous, sometimes.
I think one of the crucial factors is how educated is that demographic?
If you look at the red line here, what you're going to see is that in 1975, just nine percent of kids were in secondary school education in sub-Saharan Africa.
Would you set up a factory in sub-Sahara in the mid-1970s?
Nobody else did.
They chose instead Turkey and Mexico to set up the textiles factories, because their education levels were 25 to 30 percent.
Today, sub-Sahara is at the levels that Turkey and Mexico were at in 1975.
They will get the textiles jobs that will take people out of rural poverty and put them on the road to industrialization and wealth.
So what's Africa looking like today?
This is how I look at Africa.
It's a bit odd, because I'm an economist.
Each little box is about a billion dollars, and you see that I pay an awful lot of attention to Nigeria sitting there in the middle.
South Africa is playing a role.
But when I'm thinking about the future, I'm actually most interested in Central, Western and Southern Africa.
If I look at Africa by population, East Africa stands out as so much potential.
And I'm showing you something else with these maps.
I'm showing you democracy versus autocracy.
Fragile democracies is the beige color.
Strong democracies are the orange color.
And what you'll see here is that most Africans are now living in democracies.
Why does that matter?
Because what people want is what politicians try, they don't always succeed, but they try and deliver.
And what you've got is a reinforcing positive circle going on.
In Ghana in the elections, in December 2012, the battle between the two candidates was over education.
One guy offered free secondary school education to all, not just 30 percent.
The other guy had to say, I'm going to build 50 new schools.
He won by a margin.
So democracy is encouraging governments to invest in education.
Education is helping growth and investment, and that's giving budget revenues, which is giving governments more money, which is helping growth through education.
It's a positive, virtuous circle.
But I get asked this question, and this particular question makes me quite sad: It's, "But what about corruption?
How can you invest in Africa when there's corruption?"
And what makes me sad about it is that this graph here is showing you that the biggest correlation with corruption is wealth.
When you're poor, corruption is not your biggest priority.
And the countries on the right hand side, you'll see the per capita GDP, basically every country with a per capita GDP of, say, less than 5,000 dollars, has got a corruption score of roughly, what's that, about three?
Three out of 10. That's not good.
Every poor country is corrupt.
Every rich country is relatively uncorrupt.
How do you get from poverty and corruption to wealth and less corruption?
You see the middle class grow.
And the way to do that is to invest, not to say I'm not investing in that continent because there's too much corruption.
Now, I don't want to be an apologist for corruption.
I've been arrested because I refused to pay a bribe -- not in Africa, actually.
But what I'm saying here is that we can make a difference and we can do that by investing.
Now I'm going to let you in on a little not-so-secret.
Economists aren't great at forecasting.
Because the question really is, what happens next?
And if you go back to the year 2000, what you'll find is The Economist had a very famous cover, "The Hopeless Continent," and what they'd done is they'd looked at growth in Africa over the previous 10 years -- two percent -- and they said, what's going to happen in the next 10 years?
They assumed two percent, and that made it a pretty hopeless story, because population growth was two and a half.
People got poorer in Africa in the 1990s.
Now 2012, The Economist has a new cover, and what does that new cover show?
That new cover shows, well, Africa rising, because the growth over the last 10 years has been about five and a half percent.
I would like to see if you can all now become economists, because if growth for the last 10 years has been five and a half percent, what do you think the IMF is forecasting for the next five years of growth in Africa?
Very good. I think you're secretly saying to your head, probably five and a half percent.
You're all economists, and I think, like most economists, wrong.
No offense.
What I like to do is try and find the countries that are doing exactly what Africa has already done, and it means that jump from 1,800 years of nothing to whoof, suddenly shooting through the roof.
India is one of those examples.
This is Indian growth from 1960 to 2010.
Ignore the scale on the bottom for a second.
Actually, for the first 20 years, the '60s and '70s, India didn't really grow.
It grew at two percent when population growth was about two and a half.
If that's familiar, that's exactly what happened in sub-Sahara in the '80s and the '90s.
And then something happened in 1980.
Boom! India began to explode.
It wasn't a "Hindu rate of growth," "democracies can't grow." Actually India could.
And if I lay sub-Saharan growth on top of the Indian growth story, it's remarkably similar.
Twenty years of not much growth and a trend line which is actually telling you that sub-Saharan African growth is slightly better than India.
And if I then lay developing Asia on top of this, I'm saying India is 20 years ahead of Africa, I'm saying developing Asia is 10 years ahead of India, I can draw out some forecasts for the next 30 to 40 years which I think are better than the ones where you're looking backwards.
And that tells me this: that Africa is going to go from a $2 trillion economy today to a $29 trillion economy by 2050.
Now that's bigger than Europe and America put together in today's money.
Life expectancy is going to go up by 13 years.
The population's going to double from one billion to two billion, so household incomes are going to go up sevenfold in the next 35 years.
And when I present this in Africa -- Nairobi, Lagos, Accra -- I get one question.
"Charlie, why are you so pessimistic?"
And you know what?
Actually, I think they've got a point.
Am I really saying that there can be nothing learned, yes from the positives in Asia and India, but also the negatives?
Perhaps Africa can avoid some of the mistakes that have been made.
Surely, the technologies that we're talking about here this last week, surely some of these can perhaps help Africa grow even faster?
And I think here we can play a role.
Because technology does let you help.
You can go and download some of the great African literature from the Internet now.
No, not right now, just 30 seconds.
You can go and buy some of the great tunes.
My iPod's full of them.
Buy African products.
Go on holiday and see for yourself the change that's happening.
Invest.
Perhaps hire people, give them the skills that they can take back to Africa, and their companies will grow an awful lot faster than most of ours here in the West.
And then you and I can help make sure that for Africa, the 21st century is their century.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
An elderly woman named Rosalie was sitting in her nursing home when her room suddenly burst to life with twirling fabrics.
Through the elaborate drapings, she could make out animals, children, and costumed characters.
Rosalie was alarmed, not by the intrusion, but because she knew this entourage was an extremely detailed hallucination.
Her cognitive function was excellent, and she had not taken any medications that might cause hallucinations.
Strangest of all, had a real-life crowd of circus performers burst into her room, she wouldn’t have been able to see them: she was completely blind.
Rosalie had developed a condition known as Charles Bonnet Syndrome, in which patients with either impaired vision or total blindness suddenly hallucinate whole scenes in vivid color.
These hallucinations appear suddenly, and can last for mere minutes or recur for years.
We still don’t fully understand what causes them to come and go, or why certain patients develop them when others don’t.
We do know from fMRI studies that these hallucinations activate the same brain areas as sight, areas that are not activated by imagination.
Many other hallucinations, including smells, sights, and sounds, also involve the same brain areas as real sensory experiences.
Because of this, the cerebral cortex is thought to play a part in hallucinations.
This thin layer of grey matter covers the entire cerebrum, with different areas processing information from each of our senses.
But even in people with completely unimpaired senses, the brain constructs the world we perceive from incomplete information.
For example, our eyes have blind spots where the optic nerve blocks part of the retina.
When the visual cortex processes light into coherent images, it fills in these blind spots with information from the surrounding area.
Occasionally, we might notice a glitch, but most of the time we’re none the wiser.
When the visual cortex is deprived of input from the eyes, even temporarily, the brain still tries to create a coherent picture, but the limits of its abilities become a lot more obvious.
The full-blown hallucinations of Charles Bonnet Syndrome are one example.
Because Charles Bonnet Syndrome only occurs in people who had normal vision and then lost their sight, not those who were born blind, scientists think the brain uses remembered images to compensate for the lack of new visual input.
And the same is true for other senses.
People with hearing loss often hallucinate music or voices, sometimes as elaborate as the cacophony of an entire marching band.
In addition to sensory deprivation, recreational and therapeutic drugs, conditions like epilepsy and narcolepsy, and psychiatric disorders like schizophrenia, are a few of the many known causes of hallucinations, and we’re still finding new ones.
Some of the most notorious hallucinations are associated with drugs like LSD and psilocybin.
Their hallmark effects include the sensation that dry objects are wet and that surfaces are breathing.
At higher doses, the visual world can appear to melt, dissolve into swirls, or burst into fractal-like patterns.
Evidence suggests these drugs also act on the cerebral cortex.
But while visual impairment typically only causes visual hallucinations, and hearing loss auditory ones, substances like LSD cause perceptual disturbances across all the senses.
That’s likely because they activate receptors in a broad range of brain areas, including the cortical regions for all the senses.
LSD and psilocybin both function like serotonin in the brain, binding directly to one type of serotonin receptor in particular.
While serotonin’s role in the brain is complex and poorly understood, it likely plays an important part in integrating information from the eyes, nose, ears, and other sensory organs.
So one theory is that LSD and psilocybin cause hallucinations by disrupting the signaling involved in sensory integration.
Hallucinations associated with schizophrenia may share a similar mechanism with those caused by LSD and psilocybin.
Patients with schizophrenia often have elevated levels of serotonin in the brain.
And antipsychotic drugs relieve symptoms of schizophrenia by blocking the same serotonin receptors LSD and psilocybin bind to.
And, in some cases, these drugs can even relieve the hallucinations of patients with Charles Bonnet Syndrome.
We’re still a long way from understanding all the different causes and interconnected mechanisms of hallucinations.
But it’s clear that hallucinatory experiences are much more closely tied to ordinary perception than we once thought.
And by studying hallucinations, we stand to learn a great deal about how our brains construct the world we see, hear, smell, and touch.
As we learn more, we’ll likely come to appreciate just how subjective and individual each person’s island universe of perception really is.
Since the time of Homer, ancient stories told of fierce warriors dwelling beyond the Mediterranean world, striking fear into the mightiest empires of antiquity.
Their exploits were recounted by many epic poets.
They fought in the legendary Trojan War and their grand army invaded Athens.
Jason and the Argonauts passed by their shores, barely avoiding their deadly arrows.
These formidable fighters faced off against the greatest champions of myth: Heracles, Theseus, and Achilles.
And every single one of these warriors was a woman.
The war-loving Amazons, "the equals of men" in courage and skill, were familiar to everyone in ancient Greece.
Amazon battle scenes decorated the Parthenon on the Athenian Acropolis; paintings and statues of Amazons adorned temples and public spaces.
Little girls played with Amazon dolls, and Amazons were a favorite subject on Greek vase paintings.
In Greek art and literature, they were depicted as daring and desirable, but also terrifying and deadly, and doomed to die at the hands of Greek heroes.
Were Amazons merely figures of myth, or something more?
It was long assumed that they were imaginary, like the cyclops and centaurs.
But curiously enough, stories from ancient Egypt, Persia, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, and China also featured Amazon-like warrior women.
And Amazons were described in ancient historical accounts, not just myths.
Writers like Herodotus, Plato, and Strabo never doubted their existence.
So who were the real women warriors known as Amazons?
Ancient historians located the Amazon homeland in Scythia, the vast territory stretching from the Black Sea across the steppes of Central Asia.
This immense region was populated by nomadic tribes whose lives centered on horses, archery, and warfare.
Their culture flourished for about 1,000 years beginning around 800 BC.
Feared by Greeks, Persians, and the Chinese, the Scythians left no written records. But we can find clues in how their neighbors described them, as well as in archaeology.
Scythians' ancestors were the first to ride horses and they invented the recurve bow.
And, because a female mounted archer could be as fast and as deadly as a male, all children were trained to ride and shoot.
Women hunted and fought alongside men, using the same weapons.
The harsh landscape and their nomadic lifestyle created its own form of equality.
This amazed the ancient Greeks, whose women led restricted indoor lives.
The earliest stories of the Scythians, and Amazons, may have been exaggerated rumors.
But as the Greeks began to trade around the Black Sea and further east, their portrayals became more realistic.
Early depictions of Amazons showed them with Greek weapons and armor.
But in later representations, they wielded bows and battle-axes, rode horses, and wore pointed caps and patterned trousers characteristic of steppe nomads.
Until recently, no one was sure how strong the links were between Scythians and the Amazons of Greek myth.
But recent archaeological discoveries have provided ample evidence.
More than 1,000 ancient Scythian kurgans, or burial mounds, have been excavated, containing skeletons and weapons.
Archaeologists had previously assumed that weapons could only belong to male warriors.
But modern DNA analysis so far has revealed that about 300 skeletons buried with weapons belong to females ranging in age from 10 to 45, and more are being found every year.
The women's skeletons show battle injuries: ribs slashed by swords, skulls bashed by battle-axes, and arrows embedded in bones.
In classical art and writings, the fearsome Amazons were always portrayed as brave and heroic.
In male-dominated classical Greece, however, the very idea of strong women who gloried in freedom and war aroused mixed feelings.
And yet, the Greeks were also drawn to egalitarian ideals.
Is it possible that the mythic realm of thrilling Amazon tales was a way to imagine women and men as equal companions?
Travel with me to some of the most beautiful spots in cities around the world: Rome's Spanish steps; the historic neighborhoods of Paris and Shanghai; the rolling landscape of Central Park; the tight-knit blocks of Tokyo or Fez; the wildly sloping streets of the favelas of Rio de Janeiro; the dizzying step wells of Jaipur; the arched pedestrian bridges of Venice.
Now let's go to some newer cities.
Six downtowns built across six continents in the 20th century.
Why do none of these places have any of the charming characteristics of our older cities?
Or let's go to six suburbs built on six continents in the 20th century.
Why do none of them have any of the lyrical qualities that we associate with the places that we cherish the most?
Now, maybe you think I'm just being nostalgic -- why does it matter?
Who cares if there is this creeping sameness besetting our planet?
Well, it matters because most people around the world are gravitating to urban areas globally.
And how we design those urban areas could well determine whether we thrive or not as a species.
So, we already know that people who live in transit-rich areas, live in apartment buildings, have a far lower carbon footprint than their suburban counterparts.
So maybe one lesson from that is if you love nature, you shouldn't live in it.
(Laughter) But I think the dry statistics of what's known as transit-oriented development only tells part of the story.
Because cities, if they're going to attract people, have to be great.
They have to be powerful magnets with distinctive appeal to bring in all those new green urbanites.
And this is not just an aesthetic issue, mind you.
This is an issue of international consequence.
Because today, every day, literally hundreds of thousands of people are moving into a city somewhere, mainly in the Global South.
And when you think about that, ask yourself: Are they condemned to live in the same bland cities we built in the 20th century, or can we offer them something better?
And to answer that question, you have to unpack how we got here in the first place.
First: mass production.
Just like consumer goods and chain stores, we mass-produce glass and steel and concrete and asphalt and drywall, and we deploy them in mind-numbingly similar ways across the planet.
Second: regulation.
So, take cars, for instance.
Cars travel at very high speeds.
They're susceptible to human error.
So when we're asked, as architects, to design a new street, we have to look at drawings like this, that tell us how high a curb needs to be, that pedestrians need to be over here and vehicles over there, a loading zone here, a drop-off there.
What the car really did in the 20th century is it created this carved-up, segregated landscape.
Or take the ladder fire truck -- you know, those big ladder trucks that are used to rescue people from burning buildings?
Those have such a wide turning radius, that we have to deploy an enormous amount of pavement, of asphalt, to accommodate them.
Or take the critically important wheelchair.
A wheelchair necessitates a landscape of minimal slopes and redundant vertical circulation.
So wherever there's a stair, there has to be an elevator or a ramp.
Now, don't get me wrong, please -- I am all for pedestrian safety, firefighting and certainly, wheelchair access.
Both of my parents were in wheelchairs at the end of their lives, so I understand very much that struggle.
But we also have to acknowledge that all of these well-intentioned rules, they had the tremendous unintended consequence of making illegal the ways in which we used to build cities.
Similarly illegal: at the end of the 19th century, right after the elevator was invented, we built these charming urban buildings, these lovely buildings, all over the world, from Italy to India.
And they had maybe 10 or 12 apartments in them.
They had one small elevator and a staircase that wrapped them and a light well.
And not only were they charming buildings that were cost-effective, they were communal -- you ran into your neighbor on that stairwell.
Well, you can't build this, either.
By contrast, today, when we have to build a major new apartment building somewhere, we have to build lots and lots of elevators and lots of fire stairs, and we have to connect them with these long, anonymous, dreary corridors.
Now, developers -- when they're confronted with the cost of all of that common infrastructure, they have to spread that cost over more apartments, so they want to build bigger buildings.
What that results in is the thud, the dull thud of the same apartment building being built in every city across the world.
And this is not only creating physical sameness, it's creating social sameness, because these buildings are more expensive to build, and it helped to create an affordability crisis in cities all over the world, including places like Vancouver.
Now, I said there was a third reason for all this sameness, and that's really a psychological one.
It's a fear of difference, and architects hear this all the time from their clients: "If I try that new idea, will I be sued?
Will I be mocked?
Better safe than sorry."
And all of these things have conspired together to blanket our planet with a homogeneity that I think is deeply problematic.
So how can we do the opposite?
How can we go back to building cities that are physically and culturally varied again?
How can we build cities of difference?
I would argue that we should start by injecting into the global the local.
This is already happening with food, for instance.
You just look at the way in which craft beer has taken on corporate beer.
Or, how many of you still eat Wonder Bread?
I'd bet most of you don't.
And I bet you don't because you don't want processed food in your life.
So if you don't want processed food, why would you want processed cities?
Why would you want these mass-produced, bleached places where all of us have to live and work every day?
(Applause) So, technology was a big part of the problem in the 20th century.
When we invented the automobile, what happened is, the world all bent towards the invention.
And we recreated our landscape around it.
In the 21st century, technology can be part of the solution -- if it bends to the needs of the world.
So what do I mean by that?
Take the autonomous vehicle.
I don't think the autonomous vehicle is exciting because it's a driverless car.
That, to me, only implies that there's even more congestion on the roads, frankly.
I think what's exciting about the autonomous vehicle is the promise -- and I want to stress the word "promise," given the recent accident in Arizona -- the promise that we could have these small, urban vehicles that could safely comingle with pedestrians and bicycles.
That would enable us to design humane streets again, streets without curbs, maybe streets like the wooden walkways on Fire Island.
Or maybe we could design streets with the cobblestone of the 21st century, something that captures kinetic energy, melts snow, helps you with your fitness when you walk.
Or remember those big ladder fire trucks?
What if we could replace them and all the asphalt that comes with them with drones and robots that could rescue people from burning buildings?
And if you think that's outlandish, you'd be amazed to know how much of that technology is already being used today in rescue activity.
But now I'd like you to really imagine with me.
Imagine if we could design the hovercraft wheelchair.
Right?
An invention that would not only allow equal access, but would enable us to build the Italian hill town of the 21st century.
I think you'd be amazed to know that just a few of these inventions, responsive to human need, would completely transform the way we could build our cities.
Now, I bet you're also thinking: "We don't have kinetic cobblestones or flying wheelchairs yet, so what can we do about this problem with today's technology?"
And my inspiration for that question comes from a very different city, the city of Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia.
I have clients there who have asked us to design a 21st-century open-air village that's sustainably heated using today's technology, in the heart of their downtown.
And that's to cope with their frigid winters.
And the project is both poetry and prose.
The poetry is really about evoking the local: the mountainous terrain, using colors to pick up the spectacular light, understanding how to interpret the nomadic traditions that animate the nation of Mongolia.
The prose has been the development of a catalogue of buildings, of small buildings that are fairly affordable, using local construction materials and technology that can still provide new forms of housing, new workspace, new shops and cultural buildings, like a theater or a museum -- even a haunted house.
While working on this in our office, we've realized that we're building upon the work of our colleagues, including architect Tatiana Bilbao, working in Mexico City; Pritzker laureate Alejandro Aravena, working in Chile; and recent Pritzker winner Balkrishna Doshi, working in India.
And all of them are building spectacular new forms of affordable housing, but they're also building cities of difference, because they're building cities that respond to local communities, local climates and local construction methods.
We're doubling down on that idea, we're researching a new model for our growing cities with gentrification pressures, that could build upon that late-19th-century model with that center core, but a prototype that could shape-shift in response to local needs and local building materials.
All of these ideas, to me, are nostalgia-free.
They all tell me that we can build cities that can grow, but grow in a way that reflects the diverse residents that live in those cities; grow in a way that can accommodate all income groups, all colors, creeds, genders.
We could build such spectacular cities that we could disincentivize sprawl and actually protect nature.
We can grow cities that are high-tech, but also respond to the timeless cultural needs of the human spirit.
I'm convinced that we can build cities of difference that help to create the global mosaic to which so many of us aspire.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So when I was eight years old, a new girl came to join the class, and she was so impressive, as the new girl always seems to be.
She had vast quantities of very shiny hair and a cute little pencil case, super strong on state capitals, just a great speller.
And I just curdled with jealousy that year, until I hatched my devious plan.
So one day I stayed a little late after school, a little too late, and I lurked in the girls' bathroom.
When the coast was clear, I emerged, crept into the classroom, and took from my teacher's desk the grade book.
And then I did it.
I fiddled with my rival's grades, just a little, just demoted some of those A's.
All of those A's. (Laughter) And I got ready to return the book to the drawer, when hang on, some of my other classmates had appallingly good grades too.
So, in a frenzy, I corrected everybody's marks, not imaginatively.
I gave everybody a row of D's and I gave myself a row of A's, just because I was there, you know, might as well.
And I am still baffled by my behavior.
I don't understand where the idea came from.
I don't understand why I felt so great doing it.
I felt great.
I don't understand why I was never caught.
I mean, it should have been so blatantly obvious.
I was never caught.
But most of all, I am baffled by, why did it bother me so much that this little girl, this tiny little girl, was so good at spelling?
Jealousy baffles me.
It's so mysterious, and it's so pervasive.
We know babies suffer from jealousy.
We know primates do. Bluebirds are actually very prone.
We know that jealousy is the number one cause of spousal murder in the United States.
And yet, I have never read a study that can parse to me its loneliness or its longevity or its grim thrill.
For that, we have to go to fiction, because the novel is the lab that has studied jealousy in every possible configuration.
In fact, I don't know if it's an exaggeration to say that if we didn't have jealousy, would we even have literature?
Well no faithless Helen, no "Odyssey."
No jealous king, no "Arabian Nights."
No Shakespeare.
There goes high school reading lists, because we're losing "Sound and the Fury," we're losing "Gatsby," "Sun Also Rises," we're losing "Madame Bovary," "Anna K."
No jealousy, no Proust. And now, I mean, I know it's fashionable to say that Proust has the answers to everything, but in the case of jealousy, he kind of does.
This year is the centennial of his masterpiece, "In Search of Lost Time," and it's the most exhaustive study of sexual jealousy and just regular competitiveness, my brand, that we can hope to have. (Laughter) And we think about Proust, we think about the sentimental bits, right?
We think about a little boy trying to get to sleep.
We think about a madeleine moistened in lavender tea.
We forget how harsh his vision was.
We forget how pitiless he is.
I mean, these are books that Virginia Woolf said were tough as cat gut.
I don't know what cat gut is, but let's assume it's formidable.
Let's look at why they go so well together, the novel and jealousy, jealousy and Proust.
Is it something as obvious as that jealousy, which boils down into person, desire, impediment, is such a solid narrative foundation?
I don't know. I think it cuts very close to the bone, because let's think about what happens when we feel jealous.
When we feel jealous, we tell ourselves a story.
We tell ourselves a story about other people's lives, and these stories make us feel terrible because they're designed to make us feel terrible.
As the teller of the tale and the audience, we know just what details to include, to dig that knife in. Right?
Jealousy makes us all amateur novelists, and this is something Proust understood.
In the first volume, Swann's Way, the series of books, Swann, one of the main characters, is thinking very fondly of his mistress and how great she is in bed, and suddenly, in the course of a few sentences, and these are Proustian sentences, so they're long as rivers, but in the course of a few sentences, he suddenly recoils and he realizes, "Hang on, everything I love about this woman, somebody else would love about this woman.
Everything that she does that gives me pleasure could be giving somebody else pleasure, maybe right about now."
And this is the story he starts to tell himself, and from then on, Proust writes that every fresh charm Swann detects in his mistress, he adds to his "collection of instruments in his private torture chamber."
Now Swann and Proust, we have to admit, were notoriously jealous.
You know, Proust's boyfriends would have to leave the country if they wanted to break up with him.
But you don't have to be that jealous to concede that it's hard work. Right?
Jealousy is exhausting.
It's a hungry emotion. It must be fed.
And what does jealousy like?
Jealousy likes information.
Jealousy likes details.
Jealousy likes the vast quantities of shiny hair, the cute little pencil case.
Jealousy likes photos.
That's why Instagram is such a hit. (Laughter) Proust actually links the language of scholarship and jealousy.
When Swann is in his jealous throes, and suddenly he's listening at doorways and bribing his mistress' servants, he defends these behaviors.
He says, "You know, look, I know you think this is repugnant, but it is no different from interpreting an ancient text or looking at a monument."
He says, "They are scientific investigations with real intellectual value."
Proust is trying to show us that jealousy feels intolerable and makes us look absurd, but it is, at its crux, a quest for knowledge, a quest for truth, painful truth, and actually, where Proust is concerned, the more painful the truth, the better.
Grief, humiliation, loss: These were the avenues to wisdom for Proust.
He says, "A woman whom we need, who makes us suffer, elicits from us a gamut of feelings far more profound and vital than a man of genius who interests us."
Is he telling us to just go and find cruel women?
No. I think he's trying to say that jealousy reveals us to ourselves.
And does any other emotion crack us open in this particular way?
Does any other emotion reveal to us our aggression and our hideous ambition and our entitlement?
Does any other emotion teach us to look with such peculiar intensity?
Freud would write about this later.
One day, Freud was visited by this very anxious young man who was consumed with the thought of his wife cheating on him.
And Freud says, it's something strange about this guy, because he's not looking at what his wife is doing.
Because she's blameless; everybody knows it.
The poor creature is just under suspicion for no cause.
But he's looking for things that his wife is doing without noticing, unintentional behaviors.
Is she smiling too brightly here, or did she accidentally brush up against a man there?
[Freud] says that the man is becoming the custodian of his wife's unconscious.
The novel is very good on this point.
The novel is very good at describing how jealousy trains us to look with intensity but not accuracy.
In fact, the more intensely jealous we are, the more we become residents of fantasy.
And this is why, I think, jealousy doesn't just provoke us to do violent things or illegal things.
Jealousy prompts us to behave in ways that are wildly inventive.
Now I'm thinking of myself at eight, I concede, but I'm also thinking of this story I heard on the news.
A 52-year-old Michigan woman was caught creating a fake Facebook account from which she sent vile, hideous messages to herself for a year.
For a year. A year.
And she was trying to frame her ex-boyfriend's new girlfriend, and I have to confess when I heard this, I just reacted with admiration.
(Laughter) Because, I mean, let's be real.
What immense, if misplaced, creativity. Right?
This is something from a novel.
This is something from a Patricia Highsmith novel.
Now Highsmith is a particular favorite of mine.
She is the very brilliant and bizarre woman of American letters.
She's the author of "Strangers on a Train" and "The Talented Mr. Ripley," books that are all about how jealousy, it muddles our minds, and once we're in the sphere, in that realm of jealousy, the membrane between what is and what could be can be pierced in an instant.
Take Tom Ripley, her most famous character.
Now, Tom Ripley goes from wanting you or wanting what you have to being you and having what you once had, and you're under the floorboards, he's answering to your name, he's wearing your rings, emptying your bank account.
That's one way to go.
But what do we do? We can't go the Tom Ripley route.
I can't give the world D's, as much as I would really like to, some days.
And it's a pity, because we live in envious times.
We live in jealous times.
I mean, we're all good citizens of social media, aren't we, where the currency is envy?
Does the novel show us a way out? I'm not sure.
So let's do what characters always do when they're not sure, when they are in possession of a mystery.
Let's go to 221B Baker Street and ask for Sherlock Holmes.
When people think of Holmes, they think of his nemesis being Professor Moriarty, right, this criminal mastermind.
But I've always preferred [Inspector] Lestrade, who is the rat-faced head of Scotland Yard who needs Holmes desperately, needs Holmes' genius, but resents him.
Oh, it's so familiar to me.
So Lestrade needs his help, resents him, and sort of seethes with bitterness over the course of the mysteries.
But as they work together, something starts to change, and finally in "The Adventure of the Six Napoleons," once Holmes comes in, dazzles everybody with his solution, Lestrade turns to Holmes and he says, "We're not jealous of you, Mr. Holmes.
We're proud of you."
And he says that there's not a man at Scotland Yard who wouldn't want to shake Sherlock Holmes' hand.
It's one of the few times we see Holmes moved in the mysteries, and I find it very moving, this little scene, but it's also mysterious, right?
It seems to treat jealousy as a problem of geometry, not emotion.
You know, one minute Holmes is on the other side from Lestrade.
The next minute they're on the same side.
Suddenly, Lestrade is letting himself admire this mind that he's resented.
Could it be so simple though?
What if jealousy really is a matter of geometry, just a matter of where we allow ourselves to stand in relation to another?
Well, maybe then we wouldn't have to resent somebody's excellence.
We could align ourselves with it.
But I like contingency plans.
So while we wait for that to happen, let us remember that we have fiction for consolation.
Fiction alone demystifies jealousy.
Fiction alone domesticates it, invites it to the table.
And look who it gathers: sweet Lestrade, terrifying Tom Ripley, crazy Swann, Marcel Proust himself.
We are in excellent company.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So last year, on the Fourth of July, experiments at the Large Hadron Collider discovered the Higgs boson.
It was a historical day.
There's no doubt that from now on, the Fourth of July will be remembered not as the day of the Declaration of Independence, but as the day of the discovery of the Higgs boson.
Well, at least, here at CERN.
But for me, the biggest surprise of that day was that there was no big surprise.
In the eye of a theoretical physicist, the Higgs boson is a clever explanation of how some elementary particles gain mass, but it seems a fairly unsatisfactory and incomplete solution.
Too many questions are left unanswered.
The Higgs boson does not share the beauty, the symmetry, the elegance, of the rest of the elementary particle world.
For this reason, the majority of theoretical physicists believe that the Higgs boson could not be the full story.
We were expecting new particles and new phenomena accompanying the Higgs boson.
Instead, so far, the measurements coming from the LHC show no signs of new particles or unexpected phenomena.
Of course, the verdict is not definitive.
In 2015, the LHC will almost double the energy of the colliding protons, and these more powerful collisions will allow us to explore further the particle world, and we will certainly learn much more.
But for the moment, since we have found no evidence for new phenomena, let us suppose that the particles that we know today, including the Higgs boson, are the only elementary particles in nature, even at energies much larger than what we have explored so far.
Let's see where this hypothesis is going to lead us.
We will find a surprising and intriguing result about our universe, and to explain my point, let me first tell you what the Higgs is about, and to do so, we have to go back to one tenth of a billionth of a second after the Big Bang.
And according to the Higgs theory, at that instant, a dramatic event took place in the universe.
Space-time underwent a phase transition.
It was something very similar to the phase transition that occurs when water turns into ice below zero degrees.
But in our case, the phase transition is not a change in the way the molecules are arranged inside the material, but is about a change of the very fabric of space-time.
During this phase transition, empty space became filled with a substance that we now call Higgs field.
And this substance may seem invisible to us, but it has a physical reality.
It surrounds us all the time, just like the air we breathe in this room.
And some elementary particles interact with this substance, gaining energy in the process.
And this intrinsic energy is what we call the mass of a particle, and by discovering the Higgs boson, the LHC has conclusively proved that this substance is real, because it is the stuff the Higgs bosons are made of.
And this, in a nutshell, is the essence of the Higgs story.
But this story is far more interesting than that.
By studying the Higgs theory, theoretical physicists discovered, not through an experiment but with the power of mathematics, that the Higgs field does not necessarily exist only in the form that we observe today.
Just like matter can exist as liquid or solid, so the Higgs field, the substance that fills all space-time, could exist in two states.
Besides the known Higgs state, there could be a second state in which the Higgs field is billions and billions times denser than what we observe today, and the mere existence of another state of the Higgs field poses a potential problem.
This is because, according to the laws of quantum mechanics, it is possible to have transitions between two states, even in the presence of an energy barrier separating the two states, and the phenomenon is called, quite appropriately, quantum tunneling.
Because of quantum tunneling, I could disappear from this room and reappear in the next room, practically penetrating the wall.
But don't expect me to actually perform the trick in front of your eyes, because the probability for me to penetrate the wall is ridiculously small.
You would have to wait a really long time before it happens, but believe me, quantum tunneling is a real phenomenon, and it has been observed in many systems.
For instance, the tunnel diode, a component used in electronics, works thanks to the wonders of quantum tunneling.
But let's go back to the Higgs field.
If the ultra-dense Higgs state existed, then, because of quantum tunneling, a bubble of this state could suddenly appear in a certain place of the universe at a certain time, and it is analogous to what happens when you boil water.
Bubbles of vapor form inside the water, then they expand, turning liquid into gas.
In the same way, a bubble of the ultra-dense Higgs state could come into existence because of quantum tunneling.
The bubble would then expand at the speed of light, invading all space, and turning the Higgs field from the familiar state into a new state.
Is this a problem? Yes, it's a big a problem.
We may not realize it in ordinary life, but the intensity of the Higgs field is critical for the structure of matter.
If the Higgs field were only a few times more intense, we would see atoms shrinking, neutrons decaying inside atomic nuclei, nuclei disintegrating, and hydrogen would be the only possible chemical element in the universe.
And the Higgs field, in the ultra-dense Higgs state, is not just a few times more intense than today, but billions of times, and if space-time were filled by this Higgs state, all atomic matter would collapse.
No molecular structures would be possible, no life.
So, I wonder, is it possible that in the future, the Higgs field will undergo a phase transition and, through quantum tunneling, will be transformed into this nasty, ultra-dense state?
In other words, I ask myself, what is the fate of the Higgs field in our universe?
And the crucial ingredient necessary to answer this question is the Higgs boson mass.
And experiments at the LHC found that the mass of the Higgs boson is about 126 GeV.
This is tiny when expressed in familiar units, because it's equal to something like 10 to the minus 22 grams, but it is large in particle physics units, because it is equal to the weight of an entire molecule of a DNA constituent.
So armed with this information from the LHC, together with some colleagues here at CERN, we computed the probability that our universe could quantum tunnel into the ultra-dense Higgs state, and we found a very intriguing result.
Our calculations showed that the measured value of the Higgs boson mass is very special.
It has just the right value to keep the universe hanging in an unstable situation.
The Higgs field is in a wobbly configuration that has lasted so far but that will eventually collapse.
So according to these calculations, we are like campers who accidentally set their tent at the edge of a cliff.
And eventually, the Higgs field will undergo a phase transition and matter will collapse into itself.
So is this how humanity is going to disappear?
I don't think so.
Our calculation shows that quantum tunneling of the Higgs field is not likely to occur in the next 10 to the 100 years, and this is a very long time.
It's even longer than the time it takes for Italy to form a stable government.
(Laughter) Even so, we will be long gone by then.
In about five billion years, our sun will become a red giant, as large as the Earth's orbit, and our Earth will be kaput, and in a thousand billion years, if dark energy keeps on fueling space expansion at the present rate, you will not even be able to see as far as your toes, because everything around you expands at a rate faster than the speed of light.
So it is really unlikely that we will be around to see the Higgs field collapse.
But the reason why I am interested in the transition of the Higgs field is because I want to address the question, why is the Higgs boson mass so special?
Why is it just right to keep the universe at the edge of a phase transition?
Theoretical physicists always ask "why" questions.
More than how a phenomenon works, theoretical physicists are always interested in why a phenomenon works in the way it works.
We think that this these "why" questions can give us clues about the fundamental principles of nature.
And indeed, a possible answer to my question opens up new universes, literally.
It has been speculated that our universe is only a bubble in a soapy multiverse made out of a multitude of bubbles, and each bubble is a different universe with different fundamental constants and different physical laws.
And in this context, you can only talk about the probability of finding a certain value of the Higgs mass.
Then the key to the mystery could lie in the statistical properties of the multiverse.
It would be something like what happens with sand dunes on a beach.
In principle, you could imagine to find sand dunes of any slope angle in a beach, and yet, the slope angles of sand dunes are typically around 30, 35 degrees.
And the reason is simple: because wind builds up the sand, gravity makes it fall.
As a result, the vast majority of sand dunes have slope angles around the critical value, near to collapse.
And something similar could happen for the Higgs boson mass in the multiverse.
In the majority of bubble universes, the Higgs mass could be around the critical value, near to a cosmic collapse of the Higgs field, because of two competing effects, just as in the case of sand.
My story does not have an end, because we still don't know the end of the story.
This is science in progress, and to solve the mystery, we need more data, and hopefully, the LHC will soon add new clues to this story.
Just one number, the Higgs boson mass, and yet, out of this number we learn so much.
I started from a hypothesis, that the known particles are all there is in the universe, even beyond the domain explored so far.
From this, we discovered that the Higgs field that permeates space-time may be standing on a knife edge, ready for cosmic collapse, and we discovered that this may be a hint that our universe is only a grain of sand in a giant beach, the multiverse.
But I don't know if my hypothesis is right.
That's how physics works: A single measurement can put us on the road to a new understanding of the universe or it can send us down a blind alley.
But whichever it turns out to be, there is one thing I'm sure of: The journey will be full of surprises.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My work focuses on the connection of both thinking about our community life being part of the environment where architecture grows from the natural local conditions and traditions.
Today I brought two recent projects as an example of this.
Both projects are in emerging countries, one in Ethiopia and another one in Tunisia.
And also they have in common that the different analyses from different perspectives becomes an essential part of the final piece of architecture.
The first example started with an invitation to design a multistory shopping mall in Ethiopia's capital city Addis Ababa.
And this is the type of building we were shown as an example, to my team and myself, of what we had to design.
At first, the first thing I thought was, I want to run away.
(Laughter) After seeing a few of these buildings -- there are many in the city -- we realized that they have three very big points.
First, these buildings, they are almost empty because they have very large shops where people cannot afford to buy things.
Second, they need tons of energy to perform because of the skin treatment with glass that creates heat in the inside, and then you need a lot of cooling.
In a city where this shouldn't happen because they have really mild weather that ranges from 20 to 25 degrees the whole year.
And third is that their image has nothing to do with Africa and with Ethiopia.
It is a pity in a place that has such rich culture and traditions.
Also during our first visit to Ethiopia, I was really captivated by the old merkato that is this open-air structure where thousands of people, they go and buy things every day from small vendors.
And also it has this idea of the public space that uses the outdoors to create activity.
So I thought, this is what I really want to design, not a shopping mall.
But the question was how we could do a multistory, contemporary building with these principles.
The next challenge was when we looked at the site, that is, in a really growing area of the city, where most of these buildings that you see in the image, they were not there.
And it's also between two parallel streets that don't have any connection for hundreds of meters.
So the first thing we did was to create a connection between these two streets, putting all the entrances of the building.
And this extends with an inclined atrium that creates an open-air space in the building that self-protects itself with its own shape from the sun and the rain.
And around this void we placed this idea of the market with small shops, that change in each floor because of the shape of the void.
I also thought, how to close the building?
And I really wanted to find a solution that would respond to the local climate conditions.
And I started thinking about the textile like a shell made of concrete with perforations that would let the air in, and also the light, but in a filtered way.
And then the inspiration came from these beautiful patterns of the Ethiopian women's dresses.
That they have fractal geometry properties and this helped me to shape the whole facade.
And we are building that with these small prefabricated pieces that are the windows that let the air and the light in a controlled way inside the building.
And this is complemented by these small colored glasses that use the light from the inside of the building to light up the building at night.
With these ideas it was not easy first to convince the developers because they were like, "This is not a shopping mall. We didn't ask for that."
But then we all realized that this idea of the market happened to be a lot more profitable than the idea of the shopping mall because basically they had more shops to sell.
And also that the idea of the facade was much, much cheaper, not only because of the material compared with the glass, but also because we didn't need to have air conditioning anymore.
So we created some budget savings that we used to implement the project.
And the first implementation was to think about how we could make the building self-sufficient in terms of energy in a city that has electricity cuts almost every day.
So we created a huge asset by placing photovoltaics there on the roof.
And then under those panels we thought about the roof like a new public space with gathering areas and bars that would create this urban oasis.
And these porches on the roof, all together they collect the water to reuse for sanitation on the inside.
Hopefully by the beginning of next year, because we are already on the fifth floor of the construction.
The second example is a master plan of 2,000 apartments and facilities in the city of Tunis.
And for doing such a big project, the biggest project I've ever designed, I really needed to understand the city of Tunis, but also its surroundings and the tradition and culture.
During that analysis I paid special attention to the medina that is this 1,000-year-old structure that used to be closed by a wall, opened by twelve different gates, connected by almost straight lines.
When I went to the site, the first design operation we did was to extend the existing streets, creating 12 initial blocks similar in size and characteristics to the ones we have in Barcelona and other cities in Europe with these courtyards.
On top of that, we selected some strategic points reminded of this idea of the gates and connecting them by straight lines, and this modified this initial pattern.
And the last operation was to think about the cell, the small cell of the project, like the apartment, as an essential part of the master plan.
And for that I thought, what would be the best orientation in the Mediterranean climate for an apartment?
And it's north-south, because it creates a thermal difference between both sides of the house and then a natural ventilation.
So we overlap a pattern that makes sure that most of the apartments are perfectly oriented in that direction.
And this is the result that is almost like a combination of the European block and the Arab city.
It has these blocks with courtyards, and then on the ground floor you have all these connections for the pedestrians.
And also it responds to the local regulations that establish a higher density on the upper levels and a lower density on the ground floor.
And it also reinforces this idea of the gates.
The volume has this connecting shape that shades itself with three different types of apartments and also lets the light go on the ground floor in a very dense neighborhood And in the courtyards there are the different facilities, such as a gym and a kindergarten and close by, a series of commercial [spaces] that bring activity to the ground floor.
The roof, which is my favorite space of the project is almost like giving back to the community the space taken by the construction.
And it's where all the neighbors, they can go up and socialize, and do activities such as having a two-kilometer run in the morning, jumping from one building to another.
These two examples, they have a common approach in the design process.
And also, they are in emerging countries where you can see the cities literally growing.
In these cities, the impact of architecture in people's lives of today and tomorrow changes the local communities and economies at the same speed as the buildings grow.
For this reason, I see even more importance to look at architecture finding simple but affordable solutions that enhance the relationship between the community and the environment and that aim to connect nature and people.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Have you ever asked yourselves why it is that companies, the really cool companies, the innovative ones, the creative, new economy-type companies -- Apple, Google, Facebook -- are coming out of one particular country, the United States of America?
Usually when I say this, someone says, "Spotify!
That's Europe." But, yeah.
It has not had the impact that these other companies have had.
Now what I do is I'm an economist, and I actually study the relationship between innovation and economic growth at the level of the company, the industry and the nation, and I work with policymakers worldwide, especially in the European Commission, but recently also in interesting places like China, and I can tell you that that question is on the tip of all of their tongues: Where are the European Googles?
What is the secret behind the Silicon Valley growth model, which they understand is different from this old economy growth model?
And what is interesting is that often, even if we're in the 21st century, we kind of come down in the end to these ideas of market versus state.
It's talked about in these modern ways, but the idea is that somehow, behind places like Silicon Valley, the secret have been different types of market-making mechanisms, the private initiative, whether this be about a dynamic venture capital sector that's actually able to provide that high-risk finance to these innovative companies, the gazelles as we often call them, which traditional banks are scared of, or different types of really successful commercialization policies which actually allow these companies to bring these great inventions, their products, to the market and actually get over this really scary Death Valley period in which many companies instead fail.
But what really interests me, especially nowadays and because of what's happening politically around the world, is the language that's used, the narrative, the discourse, the images, the actual words.
So we often are presented with the kind of words like that the private sector is also much more innovative because it's able to think out of the box.
They are more dynamic.
Think of Steve Jobs' really inspirational speech to the 2005 graduating class at Stanford, where he said to be innovative, you've got to stay hungry, stay foolish.
Right? So these guys are kind of the hungry and foolish and colorful guys, right?
And in places like Europe, it might be more equitable, we might even be a bit better dressed and eat better than the U.S., but the problem is this damn public sector.
It's a bit too big, and it hasn't actually allowed these things like dynamic venture capital and commercialization to actually be able to really be as fruitful as it could.
And even really respectable newspapers, some that I'm actually subscribed to, the words they use are, you know, the state as this Leviathan. Right?
This monster with big tentacles.
They're very explicit in these editorials.
They say, "You know, the state, it's necessary to fix these little market failures when you have public goods or different types of negative externalities like pollution, but you know what, what is the next big revolution going to be after the Internet?
We all hope it might be something green, or all of this nanotech stuff, and in order for that stuff to happen," they say -- this was a special issue on the next industrial revolution -- they say, "the state, just stick to the basics, right?
Fund the infrastructure. Fund the schools.
Even fund the basic research, because this is popularly recognized, in fact, as a big public good which private companies don't want to invest in, do that, but you know what?
Leave the rest to the revolutionaries."
Those colorful, out-of-the-box kind of thinkers.
They're often called garage tinkerers, because some of them actually did some things in garages, even though that's partly a myth.
And so what I want to do with you in, oh God, only 10 minutes, is to really think again this juxtaposition, because it actually has massive, massive implications beyond innovation policy, which just happens to be the area that I often talk with with policymakers.
It has huge implications, even with this whole notion that we have on where, when and why we should actually be cutting back on public spending and different types of public services which, of course, as we know, are increasingly being outsourced because of this juxtaposition.
Right? I mean, the reason that we need to maybe have free schools or charter schools is in order to make them more innovative without being emburdened by this heavy hand of the state curriculum, or something.
So these kind of words are constantly, these juxtapositions come up everywhere, not just with innovation policy.
And so to think again, there's no reason that you should believe me, so just think of some of the smartest revolutionary things that you have in your pockets and do not turn it on, but you might want to take it out, your iPhone.
Ask who actually funded the really cool, revolutionary thinking-out-of-the-box things in the iPhone.
What actually makes your phone a smartphone, basically, instead of a stupid phone?
So the Internet, which you can surf the web anywhere you are in the world; GPS, where you can actually know where you are anywhere in the world; the touchscreen display, which makes it also a really easy-to-use phone for anybody.
These are the very smart, revolutionary bits about the iPhone, and they're all government-funded.
And the point is that the Internet was funded by DARPA, U.S. Department of Defense.
GPS was funded by the military's Navstar program.
Even Siri was actually funded by DARPA.
The touchscreen display was funded by two public grants by the CIA and the NSF to two public university researchers at the University of Delaware.
Now, you might be thinking, "Well, she's just said the word 'defense' and 'military' an awful lot," but what's really interesting is that this is actually true in sector after sector and department after department.
So the pharmaceutical industry, which I am personally very interested in because I've actually had the fortune to study it in quite some depth, is wonderful to be asking this question about the revolutionary versus non-revolutionary bits, because each and every medicine can actually be divided up on whether it really is revolutionary or incremental.
So the new molecular entities with priority rating are the revolutionary new drugs, whereas the slight variations of existing drugs -- Viagra, different color, different dosage -- are the less revolutionary ones.
And it turns out that a full 75 percent of the new molecular entities with priority rating are actually funded in boring, Kafka-ian public sector labs.
This doesn't mean that Big Pharma is not spending on innovation.
They do. They spend on the marketing part.
They spend on the D part of R&amp;D.
They spend an awful lot on buying back their stock, which is quite problematic.
In fact, companies like Pfizer and Amgen recently have spent more money in buying back their shares to boost their stock price than on R&amp;D, but that's a whole different TED Talk which one day I'd be fascinated to tell you about.
Now, what's interesting in all of this is the state, in all these examples, was doing so much more than just fixing market failures.
It was actually shaping and creating markets.
It was funding not only the basic research, which again is a typical public good, but even the applied research.
It was even, God forbid, being a venture capitalist.
So these SBIR and SDTR programs, which give small companies early-stage finance have not only been extremely important compared to private venture capital, but also have become increasingly important.
Why? Because, as many of us know, V.C. is actually quite short-term.
They want their returns in three to five years.
Innovation takes a much longer time than that, 15 to 20 years.
And so this whole notion -- I mean, this is the point, right?
Who's actually funding the hard stuff?
Of course, it's not just the state.
The private sector does a lot.
But the narrative that we've always been told is the state is important for the basics, but not really providing that sort of high-risk, revolutionary thinking out of the box.
In all these sectors, from funding the Internet to doing the spending, but also the envisioning, the strategic vision, for these investments, it was actually coming within the state.
The nanotechnology sector is actually fascinating to study this, because the word itself, nanotechnology, came from within government.
And so there's huge implications of this.
First of all, of course I'm not someone, this old-fashioned person, market versus state.
What we all know in dynamic capitalism is that what we actually need are public-private partnerships.
But the point is, by constantly depicting the state part as necessary but actually -- pffff -- a bit boring and often a bit dangerous kind of Leviathan, I think we've actually really stunted the possibility to build these public-private partnerships in a really dynamic way.
Even the words that we often use to justify the "P" part, the public part -- well, they're both P's -- with public-private partnerships is in terms of de-risking.
What the public sector did in all these examples I just gave you, and there's many more, which myself and other colleagues have been looking at, is doing much more than de-risking.
It's kind of been taking on that risk. Bring it on.
It's actually been the one thinking out of the box.
But also, I'm sure you all have had experience with local, regional, national governments, and you're kind of like, "You know what, that Kafka-ian bureaucrat, I've met him."
That whole juxtaposition thing, it's kind of there.
Well, there's a self-fulfilling prophecy.
By talking about the state as kind of irrelevant, boring, it's sometimes that we actually create those organizations in that way.
So what we have to actually do is build these entrepreneurial state organizations.
DARPA, that funded the Internet and Siri, actually thought really hard about this, how to welcome failure, because you will fail.
You will fail when you innovative.
One out of 10 experiments has any success.
And the V.C. guys know this, and they're able to actually fund the other losses from that one success.
And this brings me, actually, probably, to the biggest implication, and this has huge implications beyond innovation.
If the state is more than just a market fixer, if it actually is a market shaper, and in doing that has had to take on this massive risk, what happened to the reward?
We all know, if you've ever taken a finance course, the first thing you're taught is sort of the risk-reward relationship, and so some people are foolish enough or probably smart enough if they have time to wait, to actually invest in stocks, because they're higher risk which over time will make a greater reward than bonds, that whole risk-reward thing.
Well, where's the reward for the state of having taken on these massive risks and actually been foolish enough to have done the Internet?
The Internet was crazy.
It really was. I mean, the probability of failure was massive.
You had to be completely nuts to do it, and luckily, they were.
Now, we don't even get to this question about rewards unless you actually depict the state as this risk-taker.
And the problem is that economists often think, well, there is a reward back to the state. It's tax.
You know, the companies will pay tax, the jobs they create will create growth so people who get those jobs and their incomes rise will come back to the state through the tax mechanism.
Well, unfortunately, that's not true.
Okay, it's not true because many of the jobs that are created go abroad.
Globalization, and that's fine. We shouldn't be nationalistic.
Let the jobs go where they have to go, perhaps.
I mean, one can take a position on that.
But also these companies that have actually had this massive benefit from the state -- Apple's a great example.
They even got the first -- well, not the first, but 500,000 dollars actually went to Apple, the company, through this SBIC program, which predated the SBIR program, as well as, as I said before, all the technologies behind the iPhone.
And yet we know they legally, as many other companies, pay very little tax back.
So what we really need to actually rethink is should there perhaps be a return-generating mechanism that's much more direct than tax. Why not?
It could happen perhaps through equity.
This, by the way, in the countries that are actually thinking about this strategically, countries like Finland in Scandinavia, but also in China and Brazil, they're retaining equity in these investments.
Sitra funded Nokia, kept equity, made a lot of money, it's a public funding agency in Finland, which then funded the next round of Nokias.
The Brazilian Development Bank, which is providing huge amounts of funds today to clean technology, they just announced a $56 billion program for the future on this, is retaining equity in these investments.
So to put it provocatively, had the U.S. government thought about this, and maybe just brought back just something called an innovation fund, you can bet that, you know, if even just .05 percent of the profits from what the Internet produced had come back to that innovation fund, there would be so much more money to spend today on green technology.
Instead, many of the state budgets which in theory are trying to do that are being constrained.
But perhaps even more important, we heard before about the one percent, the 99 percent.
If the state is thought about in this more strategic way, as one of the lead players in the value creation mechanism, because that's what we're talking about, right?
Who are the different players in creating value in the economy, and is the state's role, has it been sort of dismissed as being a backseat player?
If we can actually have a broader theory of value creation and allow us to actually admit what the state has been doing and reap something back, it might just be that in the next round, and I hope that we all hope that the next big revolution will in fact be green, that that period of growth will not only be smart, innovation-led, not only green, but also more inclusive, so that the public schools in places like Silicon Valley can actually also benefit from that growth, because they have not.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was in New York during Hurricane Sandy, and this little white dog called Maui was staying with me.
Half the city was dark because of a power cut, and I was living on the dark side.
Now, Maui was terrified of the dark, so I had to carry him up the stairs, actually down the stairs first, for his walk, and then bring him back up.
I was also hauling gallons of bottles of water up to the seventh floor every day.
And through all of this, I had to hold a torch between my teeth.
The stores nearby were out of flashlights and batteries and bread.
For a shower, I walked 40 blocks to a branch of my gym.
But these were not the major preoccupations of my day.
It was just as critical for me to be the first person in at a cafe nearby with extension cords and chargers to juice my multiple devices.
I started to prospect under the benches of bakeries and the entrances of pastry shops for plug points.
I wasn't the only one.
Even in the rain, people stood between Madison and 5th Avenue under their umbrellas charging their cell phones from outlets on the street.
Nature had just reminded us that it was stronger than all our technology, and yet here we were, obsessed about being wired.
I think there's nothing like a crisis to tell you what's really important and what's not, and Sandy made me realize that our devices and their connectivity matter to us right up there with food and shelter.
The self as we once knew it no longer exists, and I think that an abstract, digital universe has become a part of our identity, and I want to talk to you about what I think that means.
I'm a novelist, and I'm interested in the self because the self and fiction have a lot in common.
They're both stories, interpretations.
You and I can experience things without a story.
We might run up the stairs too quickly and we might get breathless.
But the larger sense that we have of our lives, the slightly more abstract one, is indirect.
Our story of our life is based on direct experience, but it's embellished.
A novel needs scene after scene to build, and the story of our life needs an arc as well.
It needs months and years.
Discrete moments from our lives are its chapters.
But the story is not about these chapters.
It's the whole book.
It's not only about the heartbreak and the happiness, the victories and the disappointments, but it's because how because of these, and sometimes, more importantly, in spite of these, we find our place in the world and we change it and we change ourselves.
Our story, therefore, needs two dimensions of time: a long arc of time that is our lifespan, and the timeframe of direct experience that is the moment.
Now the self that experiences directly can only exist in the moment, but the one that narrates needs several moments, a whole sequence of them, and that's why our full sense of self needs both immersive experience and the flow of time.
Now, the flow of time is embedded in everything, in the erosion of a grain of sand, in the budding of a little bud into a rose.
Without it, we would have no music.
Our own emotions and state of mind often encode time, regret or nostalgia about the past, hope or dread about the future.
I think that technology has altered that flow of time.
The overall time that we have for our narrative, our lifespan, has been increasing, but the smallest measure, the moment, has shrunk.
It has shrunk because our instruments enable us in part to measure smaller and smaller units of time, and this in turn has given us a more granular understanding of the material world, and this granular understanding has generated reams of data that our brains can no longer comprehend and for which we need more and more complicated computers.
All of this to say that the gap between what we can perceive and what we can measure is only going to widen.
Science can do things with and in a picosecond, but you and I are never going to have the inner experience of a millionth of a millionth of a second.
You and I answer only to nature's rhythm and flow, to the sun, the moon and the seasons, and this is why we need that long arc of time with the past, the present and the future to see things for what they are, to separate signal from noise and the self from sensations.
We need time's arrow to understand cause and effect, not just in the material world, but in our own intentions and our motivations.
What happens when that arrow goes awry?
What happens when time warps?
So many of us today have the sensation that time's arrow is pointing everywhere and nowhere at once.
This is because time doesn't flow in the digital world in the same way that it does in the natural one.
We all know that the Internet has shrunk space as well as time.
Far away over there is now here.
News from India is a stream on my smartphone app whether I'm in New York or New Delhi.
And that's not all.
Your last job, your dinner reservations from last year, your former friends, lie on a flat plain with today's friends, because the Internet also archives, and it warps the past.
With no distinction left between the past, the present and the future, and the here or there, we are left with this moment everywhere, this moment that I'll call the digital now.
Just how can we prioritize in the landscape of the digital now?
This digital now is not the present, because it's always a few seconds ahead, with Twitter streams that are already trending and news from other time zones.
This isn't the now of a shooting pain in your foot or the second that you bite into a pastry or the three hours that you lose yourself in a great book.
This now bears very little physical or psychological reference to our own state.
Its focus, instead, is to distract us at every turn on the road.
Every digital landmark is an invitation to leave what you are doing now to go somewhere else and do something else.
Are you reading an interview by an author?
Why not buy his book? Tweet it. Share it.
Like it. Find other books exactly like his.
Find other people reading those books.
Travel can be liberating, but when it is incessant, we become permanent exiles without repose.
Choice is freedom, but not when it's constantly for its own sake.
Not just is the digital now far from the present, but it's in direct competition with it, and this is because not just am I absent from it, but so are you.
Not just are we absent from it, but so is everyone else.
And therein lies its greatest convenience and horror.
I can order foreign language books in the middle of the night, shop for Parisian macarons, and leave video messages that get picked up later.
At all times, I can operate at a different rhythm and pace from you, while I sustain the illusion that I'm tapped into you in real time.
Sandy was a reminder of how such an illusion can shatter.
There were those with power and water, and those without.
There are those who went back to their lives, and those who are still displaced after so many months.
For some reason, technology seems to perpetuate the illusion for those who have it that everyone does, and then, like an ironic slap in the face, it makes it true.
For example, it's said that there are more people in India with access to cell phones than toilets.
Now if this rift, which is already so great in many parts of the world, between the lack of infrastructure and the spread of technology, isn't somehow bridged, there will be ruptures between the digital and the real.
For us as individuals who live in the digital now and spend most of our waking moments in it, the challenge is to live in two streams of time that are parallel and almost simultaneous.
How does one live inside distraction?
We might think that those younger than us, those who are born into this, will adapt more naturally.
Possibly, but I remember my childhood.
I remember my grandfather revising the capitals of the world with me.
Buda and Pest were separated by the Danube, and Vienna had a Spanish riding school.
If I were a child today, I could easily learn this information with apps and hyperlinks, but it really wouldn't be the same, because much later, I went to Vienna, and I went to the Spanish riding school, and I could feel my grandfather right beside me.
Night after night, he took me up on the terrace, on his shoulders, and pointed out Jupiter and Saturn and the Great Bear to me.
And even here, when I look at the Great Bear, I get back that feeling of being a child, hanging onto his head and trying to balance myself on his shoulder, and I can get back that feeling of being a child again.
What I had with my grandfather was wrapped so often in information and knowledge and fact, but it was about so much more than information or knowledge or fact.
Time-warping technology challenges our deepest core, because we are able to archive the past and some of it becomes hard to forget, even as the current moment is increasingly unmemorable.
We want to clutch, and we are left instead clutching at a series of static moments.
They're like soap bubbles that disappear when we touch them.
By archiving everything, we think that we can store it, but time is not data.
It cannot be stored.
You and I know exactly what it means like to be truly present in a moment.
It might have happened while we were playing an instrument, or looking into the eyes of someone we've known for a very long time.
At such moments, our selves are complete.
The self that lives in the long narrative arc and the self that experiences the moment become one.
The present encapsulates the past and a promise for the future.
The present joins a flow of time from before and after.
I first experienced these feelings with my grandmother.
I wanted to learn to skip, and she found an old rope and she tucked up her sari and she jumped over it.
I wanted to learn to cook, and she kept me in the kitchen, cutting, cubing and chopping for a whole month.
My grandmother taught me that things happen in the time they take, that time can't be fought, and because it will pass and it will move, we owe the present moment our full attention.
Attention is time.
One of my yoga instructors once said that love is attention, and definitely from my grandmother, love and attention were one and the same thing.
The digital world cannibalizes time, and in doing so, I want to suggest that what it threatens is the completeness of ourselves.
It threatens the flow of love.
But we don't need to let it.
We can choose otherwise.
We've seen again and again just how creative technology can be, and in our lives and in our actions, we can choose those solutions and those innovations and those moments that restore the flow of time instead of fragmenting it.
We can slow down and we can tune in to the ebb and flow of time.
We can choose to take time back.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Three years ago, I was standing about a hundred yards from Chernobyl nuclear reactor number four.
My Geiger counter dosimeter, which measures radiation, was going berserk, and the closer I got, the more frenetic it became, and frantic. My God.
I was there covering the 25th anniversary of the world's worst nuclear accident, as you can see by the look on my face, reluctantly so, but with good reason, because the nuclear fire that burned for 11 days back in 1986 released 400 times as much radiation as the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, and the sarcophagus, which is the covering over reactor number four, which was hastily built 27 years ago, now sits cracked and rusted and leaking radiation.
So I was filming.
I just wanted to get the job done and get out of there fast.
But then, I looked into the distance, and I saw some smoke coming from a farmhouse, and I'm thinking, who could be living here?
I mean, after all, Chernobyl's soil, water and air, are among the most highly contaminated on Earth, and the reactor sits at the the center of a tightly regulated exclusion zone, or dead zone, and it's a nuclear police state, complete with border guards.
You have to have dosimeter at all times, clicking away, you have to have a government minder, and there's draconian radiation rules and constant contamination monitoring.
The point being, no human being should be living anywhere near the dead zone.
But they are.
It turns out an unlikely community of some 200 people are living inside the zone.
They're called self-settlers.
And almost all of them are women, the men having shorter lifespans in part due to overuse of alcohol, cigarettes, if not radiation.
Hundreds of thousands of people were evacuated at the time of the accident, but not everybody accepted that fate.
The women in the zone, now in their 70s and 80s, are the last survivors of a group who defied authorities and, it would seem, common sense, and returned to their ancestral homes inside the zone.
They did so illegally.
As one woman put it to a soldier who was trying to evacuate her for a second time, "Shoot me and dig the grave.
Otherwise, I'm going home."
Now why would they return to such deadly soil?
I mean, were they unaware of the risks or crazy enough to ignore them, or both?
The thing is, they see their lives and the risks they run decidedly differently.
Now around Chernobyl, there are scattered ghost villages, eerily silent, strangely charming, bucolic, totally contaminated.
Many were bulldozed under at the time of the accident, but a few are left like this, kind of silent vestiges to the tragedy.
Others have a few residents in them, one or two "babushkas," or "babas," which are the Russian and Ukrainian words for grandmother.
Another village might have six or seven residents.
So this is the strange demographic of the zone -- isolated alone together.
And when I made my way to that piping chimney I'd seen in the distance, I saw Hanna Zavorotnya, and I met her.
She's the self-declared mayor of Kapavati village, population eight.
(Laughter) And she said to me, when I asked her the obvious, "Radiation doesn't scare me. Starvation does."
And you have to remember, these women have survived the worst atrocities of the 20th century.
Stalin's enforced famines of the 1930s, the Holodomor, killed millions of Ukrainians, and they faced the Nazis in the '40s, who came through slashing, burning, raping, and in fact many of these women were shipped to Germany as forced labor.
So when a couple decades into Soviet rule, Chernobyl happened, they were unwilling to flee in the face of an enemy that was invisible.
So they returned to their villages and are told they're going to get sick and die soon, but five happy years, their logic goes, is better than 10 stuck in a high rise on the outskirts of Kiev, separated from the graves of their mothers and fathers and babies, the whisper of stork wings on a spring afternoon.
For them, environmental contamination may not be the worst sort of devastation.
It turns out this holds true for other species as well.
Wild boar, lynx, moose, they've all returned to the region in force, the very real, very negative effects of radiation being trumped by the upside of a mass exodus of humans.
The dead zone, it turns out, is full of life.
And there is a kind of heroic resilience, a kind of plain-spoken pragmatism to those who start their day at 5 a.m.
pulling water from a well and end it at midnight poised to beat a bucket with a stick and scare off wild boar that might mess with their potatoes, their only company a bit of homemade moonshine vodka.
And there's a patina of simple defiance among them.
"They told us our legs would hurt, and they do. So what?"
I mean, what about their health?
The benefits of hardy, physical living, but an environment made toxic by a complicated, little-understood enemy, radiation.
It's incredibly difficult to parse.
Health studies from the region are conflicting and fraught.
The World Health Organization puts the number of Chernobyl-related deaths at 4,000, eventually.
Greenpeace and other organizations put that number in the tens of thousands.
Now everybody agrees that thyroid cancers are sky high, and that Chernobyl evacuees suffer the trauma of relocated peoples everywhere: higher levels of anxiety, depression, alcoholism, unemployment and, importantly, disrupted social networks.
Now, like many of you, I have moved maybe 20, 25 times in my life.
Home is a transient concept.
I have a deeper connection to my laptop than any bit of soil.
So it's hard for us to understand, but home is the entire cosmos of the rural babushka, and connection to the land is palpable.
And perhaps because these Ukrainian women were schooled under the Soviets and versed in the Russian poets, aphorisms about these ideas slip from their mouths all the time.
"If you leave, you die."
"Those who left are worse off now.
They are dying of sadness."
"Motherland is motherland. I will never leave."
What sounds like faith, soft faith, may actually be fact, because the surprising truth -- I mean, there are no studies, but the truth seems to be that these women who returned to their homes and have lived on some of the most radioactive land on Earth for the last 27 years, have actually outlived their counterparts who accepted relocation, by some estimates up to 10 years.
How could this be?
Here's a theory: Could it be that those ties to ancestral soil, the soft variables reflected in their aphorisms, actually affect longevity?
The power of motherland so fundamental to that part of the world seems palliative.
Home and community are forces that rival even radiation.
Now radiation or not, these women are at the end of their lives.
In the next decade, the zone's human residents will be gone, and it will revert to a wild, radioactive place, full only of animals and occasionally daring, flummoxed scientists.
But the spirit and existence of the babushkas, whose numbers have been halved in the three years I've known them, will leave us with powerful new templates to think about and grapple with, about the relative nature of risk, about transformative connections to home, and about the magnificent tonic of personal agency and self-determination.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was about 10 years old on a camping trip with my dad in the Adirondack Mountains, a wilderness area in the northern part of New York State.
It was a beautiful day.
The forest was sparkling.
The sun made the leaves glow like stained glass, and if it weren't for the path we were following, we could almost pretend we were the first human beings to ever walk that land.
We got to our campsite.
It was a lean-to on a bluff looking over a crystal, beautiful lake, when I discovered a horror.
Behind the lean-to was a dump, maybe 40 feet square with rotting apple cores and balled-up aluminum foil, and a dead sneaker.
And I was astonished, I was very angry, and I was deeply confused.
The campers who were too lazy to take out what they had brought in, who did they think would clean up after them?
That question stayed with me, and it simplified a little.
Who cleans up after us?
However you configure or wherever you place the us, who cleans up after us in Istanbul?
Who cleans up after us in Rio or in Paris or in London?
Here in New York, the Department of Sanitation cleans up after us, to the tune of 11,000 tons of garbage and 2,000 tons of recyclables every day.
I wanted to get to know them as individuals.
I wanted to understand who takes the job.
What's it like to wear the uniform and bear that burden?
So I started a research project with them.
I rode in the trucks and walked the routes and interviewed people in offices and facilities all over the city, and I learned a lot, but I was still an outsider.
I needed to go deeper.
So I took the job as a sanitation worker.
I didn't just ride in the trucks now. I drove the trucks.
And I operated the mechanical brooms and I plowed the snow.
It was a remarkable privilege and an amazing education.
Everyone asks about the smell.
It's there, but it's not as prevalent as you think, and on days when it is really bad, you get used to it rather quickly.
The weight takes a long time to get used to.
I knew people who were several years on the job whose bodies were still adjusting to the burden of bearing on your body tons of trash every week.
Then there's the danger.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, sanitation work is one of the 10 most dangerous occupations in the country, and I learned why.
You're in and out of traffic all day, and it's zooming around you.
It just wants to get past you, so it's often the motorist is not paying attention.
That's really bad for the worker.
And then the garbage itself is full of hazards that often fly back out of the truck and do terrible harm.
I also learned about the relentlessness of trash.
When you step off the curb and you see a city from behind a truck, you come to understand that trash is like a force of nature unto itself.
It never stops coming.
It's also like a form of respiration or circulation.
It must always be in motion.
And then there's the stigma.
You put on the uniform, and you become invisible until someone is upset with you for whatever reason like you've blocked traffic with your truck, or you're taking a break too close to their home, or you're drinking coffee in their diner, and they will come and scorn you, and tell you that they don't want you anywhere near them.
I find the stigma especially ironic, because I strongly believe that sanitation workers are the most important labor force on the streets of the city, for three reasons.
They are the first guardians of public health.
If they're not taking away trash efficiently and effectively every day, it starts to spill out of its containments, and the dangers inherent to it threaten us in very real ways.
Diseases we've had in check for decades and centuries burst forth again and start to harm us.
The economy needs them.
If we can't throw out the old stuff, we have no room for the new stuff, so then the engines of the economy start to sputter when consumption is compromised.
I'm not advocating capitalism, I'm just pointing out their relationship.
And then there's what I call our average, necessary quotidian velocity.
By that I simply mean how fast we're used to moving in the contemporary day and age.
We usually don't care for, repair, clean, carry around our coffee cup, our shopping bag, our bottle of water.
We use them, we throw them out, we forget about them, because we know there's a workforce on the other side that's going to take it all away.
So I want to suggest today a couple of ways to think about sanitation that will perhaps help ameliorate the stigma and bring them into this conversation of how to craft a city that is sustainable and humane.
Their work, I think, is kind of liturgical.
They're on the streets every day, rhythmically.
They wear a uniform in many cities.
You know when to expect them.
And their work lets us do our work.
They are almost a form of reassurance.
The flow that they maintain keeps us safe from ourselves, from our own dross, our cast-offs, and that flow must be maintained always no matter what.
On the day after September 11 in 2001, I heard the growl of a sanitation truck on the street, and I grabbed my infant son and I ran downstairs and there was a man doing his paper recycling route like he did every Wednesday.
And I tried to thank him for doing his work on that day of all days, but I started to cry.
And he looked at me, and he just nodded, and he said, "We're going to be okay.
We're going to be okay."
It was a little while later that I started my research with sanitation, and I met that man again.
His name is Paulie, and we worked together many times, and we became good friends.
I want to believe that Paulie was right.
We are going to be okay.
But in our effort to reconfigure how we as a species exist on this planet, we must include and take account of all the costs, including the very real human cost of the labor.
And we also would be well informed to reach out to the people who do that work and get their expertise on how do we think about, how do we create systems around sustainability that perhaps take us from curbside recycling, which is a remarkable success across 40 years, across the United States and countries around the world, and lift us up to a broader horizon where we're looking at other forms of waste that could be lessened from manufacturing and industrial sources.
Municipal waste, what we think of when we talk about garbage, accounts for three percent of the nation's waste stream.
It's a remarkable statistic.
So in the flow of your days, in the flow of your lives, next time you see someone whose job is to clean up after you, take a moment to acknowledge them.
Take a moment to say thank you.
(Applause)
In December of 2010, the city of Apatzingán in the coastal state of Michoacán, in Mexico, awoke to gunfire.
For two straight days, the city became an open battlefield between the federal forces and a well-organized group, presumably from the local criminal organization, La Familia Michoacana, or the Michoacán family.
The citizens didn't only experience incessant gunfire but also explosions and burning trucks used as barricades across the city, so truly like a battlefield.
After these two days, and during a particularly intense encounter, it was presumed that the leader of La Familia Michoacana, Nazario Moreno, was killed.
In response to this terrifying violence, the mayor of Apatzingán decided to call the citizens to a march for peace.
The idea was to ask for a softer approach to criminal activity in the state.
And so, the day of the scheduled procession, thousands of people showed up.
As the mayor was preparing to deliver the speech starting the march, his team noticed that, while half of the participants were appropriately dressed in white, and bearing banners asking for peace, the other half was actually marching in support of the criminal organization and its now-presumed-defunct leader.
Shocked, the mayor decided to step aside rather than participate or lead a procession that was ostensibly in support of organized crime.
And so his team stepped aside.
The two marches joined together, and they continued their path towards the state capital.
This story of horrific violence followed by a fumbled approach by federal and local authorities as they tried to engage civil society, who has been very well engaged by a criminal organization, is a perfect metaphor for what's happening in Mexico today, where we see that our current understanding of drug violence and what leads to it is probably at the very least incomplete.
If you decided to spend 30 minutes trying to figure out what's going on with drug violence in Mexico by, say, just researching online, the first thing you would find out is that while the laws state that all Mexican citizens are equal, there are some that are more and there are some that are much less equal than others, because you will quickly find out that in the past six years anywhere between 60 and 100,000 people have lost their lives in drug-related violence.
To put these numbers in perspective, this is eight times larger than the number of casualties in the Iraq and Afghanistan wars combined.
It's also shockingly close to the number of people who have died in the Syrian civil war, which is an active civil war.
This is happening just south of the border.
Now as you're reading, however, you will be maybe surprised that you will quickly become numb to the numbers of deaths, because you will see that these are sort of abstract numbers of faceless, nameless dead people.
Implicitly or explicitly, there is a narrative that all the people who are dying were somehow involved in the drug trade, and we infer this because they were either tortured or executed in a professional manner, or, most likely, both.
And so clearly they were criminals because of the way they died.
And so the narrative is that somehow these people got what they were deserved.
They were part of the bad guys.
And that creates some form of comfort for a lot of people.
However, while it's easier to think of us, the citizens, the police, the army, as the good guys, and them, the narcos, the carteles, as the bad guys, if you think about it, the latter are only providing a service to the former.
Whether we like it or not, the U.S. is the largest market for illegal substances in the world, accounting for more than half of global demand.
It shares thousands of miles of border with Mexico that is its only route of access from the South, and so, as the former dictator of Mexico, Porfirio Diaz, used to say, "Poor Mexico, so far from God and so close to the United States."
The U.N. estimates that there are 55 million users of illegal drugs in the United States.
Using very, very conservative assumptions, this yields a yearly drug market on the retail side of anywhere between 30 and 150 billion dollars.
If we assume that the narcos only have access to the wholesale part, which we know is false, that still leaves you with yearly revenues of anywhere between 15 billion and 60 billion dollars.
To put these numbers in perspective, Microsoft has yearly revenues of 60 billion dollars.
And it so happens that this is a product that, because of its nature, a business model to address this market requires you to guarantee to your producers that their product will be reliably placed in the markets where it is consumed.
And the only way to do this, because it's illegal, is to have absolute control of the geographic corridors that are used to transport drugs.
Hence the violence.
If you look at a map of cartel influence and violence, you will see that it almost perfectly aligns with the most efficient routes of transportation from the south to the north.
The only thing that the cartels are doing is that they're trying to protect their business.
It's not only a multi-billion dollar market, but it's also a complex one.
For example, the coca plant is a fragile plant that can only grow in certain latitudes, and so it means that a business model to address this market requires you to have decentralized, international production, that by the way needs to have good quality control, because people need a good high that is not going to kill them and that is going to be delivered to them when they need it.
And so that means they need to secure production and quality control in the south, and you need to ensure that you have efficient and effective distribution channels in the markets where these drugs are consumed.
I urge you, but only a little bit, because I don't want to get you in trouble, to just ask around and see how difficult it would be to get whatever drug you want, wherever you want it, whenever you want it, anywhere in the U.S., and some of you may be surprised to know that there are many dealers that offer a service where if you send them a text message, they guarantee delivery of the drug in 30 minutes or less.
Think about this for a second.
Think about the complexity of the distribution network that I just described.
It's very difficult to reconcile this with the image of faceless, ignorant goons that are just shooting each other, very difficult to reconcile.
Now, as a business professor, and as any business professor would tell you, an effective organization requires an integrated strategy that includes a good organizational structure, good incentives, a solid identity and good brand management.
This leads me to the second thing that you would learn in your 30-minute exploration of drug violence in Mexico.
Because you would quickly realize, and maybe be confused by the fact, that there are three organizations that are constantly named in the articles.
You will hear about Los Zetas, the Knights Templar, which is the new brand for the Familia Michoacana that I spoke about at the beginning, and the Sinaloa Federation.
You will read that Los Zetas is this assortment of sociopaths that terrify the cities that they enter and they silence the press, and this is somewhat true, or mostly true.
But this is the result of a very careful branding and business strategy.
You see, Los Zetas is not just this random assortment of individuals, but was actually created by another criminal organization, the Gulf Cartel, that used to control the eastern corridor of Mexico.
When that corridor became contested, they decided that they wanted to recruit a professional enforcement arm.
So they recruited Los Zetas: an entire unit of elite paratroopers from the Mexican Army.
They were incredibly effective as enforcers for the Gulf Cartel, so much so that at some point, they decided to just take over the operations, which is why I ask you to never keep tigers as pets, because they grow up.
Because the Zetas organization was founded in treason, they lost some of the linkages to the production and distribution in the most profitable markets like cocaine, but what they did have, and this is again based on their military origin, was a perfectly structured chain of command with a very clear hierarchy and a very clear promotion path that allowed them to supervise and operate across many, many markets very effectively, which is the essence of what a chain of command seeks to do.
And so because they didn't have access to the more profitable drug markets, this pushed them and gave them the opportunity to diversify into other forms of crime.
That includes kidnapping, prostitution, local drug dealing and human trafficking, including of migrants that go from the south to the U.S.
So what they currently run is truly and quite literally a franchise business.
They focus most of their recruiting on the army, and they very openly advertise for better salaries, better benefits, better promotion paths, not to mention much better food, than what the army can deliver.
The way they operate is that when they arrive in a locality, they let people know that they are there, and they go to the most powerful local gang and they say, "I offer you to be the local representative of the Zeta brand."
If they agree -- and you don't want to know what happens if they don't -- they train them and they supervise them on how to run the most efficient criminal operation for that town, in exchange for royalties.
This kind of business model obviously depends entirely on having a very effective brand of fear, and so Los Zetas carefully stage acts of violence that are spectacular in nature, especially when they arrive first in a city, but again, that's just a brand strategy.
I'm not saying they're not violent, but what I am saying is that even though you will read that they are the most violent of all, when you count, when you do the body count, they're actually all the same.
In contrast to them, the Knights Templar that arose in Michoacán emerged in reaction to the incursion of the Zetas into the state of Michoacán.
Michoacán is a geographically strategic state because it has one of the largest ports in Mexico, and it has very direct routes to the center of Mexico, which then gives you direct access to the U.S.
The Knights Templar realized very quickly that they couldn't face the Zetas on violence alone, and so they developed a strategy as a social enterprise.
They brand themselves as representative of and protecting of the citizens of Michoacán against organized crime.
Their brand of social enterprise means that they require a lot of civic engagement, so they invest heavily in providing local services, like dealing with home violence, going after petty criminals, treating addicts, and keeping drugs out of the local markets where they are, and, of course, protecting people from other criminal organizations.
Now, they kill a lot of people too, but when they kill them, they provide very careful narratives and descriptions for why they did them, through newspaper insertions, YouTube videos, and billboards that explain that the people who were killed were killed because they represented a threat not to us, as an organization, of course, but to you, as citizens.
And so we're actually here to protect you.
They, as social enterprises do, have created a moral and ethical code that they advertise around, and they have very strict recruiting practices.
And here you have the types of explanations that they provide for some of their actions.
They have actually retained access to the profitable drug trade, but the way they do it is, because they control all of Michoacán, and they control the Port of Lázaro Cárdenas, they leverage that to, for example, trade copper from Michoacán that is legally created and legally extracted with illegal ephedrine from China which is a critical precursor for methamphetamines that they produce, and then they have partnerships with larger organizations like the Sinaloa Federation that place their products in the U.S.
Finally, the Sinaloa Federation.
When you read about them, you will often read about them with an undertone of reverence and admiration, because they are the most integrated and the largest of all the Mexican organizations, and, many people argue, the world.
They started as just sort of a transport organization that specialized in smuggling between the U.S.
and the Mexican borders, but now they have grown into a truly integrated multinational that has partnerships in production in the south and partnerships in global distribution across the planet.
They have cultivated a brand of professionalism, business acumen and innovation.
They have designed new drug products and new drug processes.
They have designed narco-tunnels that go across the border, and you can see that these are not "The Shawshank Redemption" types.
They have invented narco-submarines and boats that are not detected by radar.
They have invented drones to transport drugs, catapults, you name it.
One of the leaders of the Sinaloa Federation actually made it to the Forbes list.
[#701 Joaquin Guzman Loera] Like any multinational would, they have specialized and focused only in the most profitable part of the business, which is high-margin drugs like cocaine, heroine, methamphetamines.
Like any traditional Latin American multinational would, the way they control their operations is through family ties.
When they're entering a new market, they send a family member to supervise it, or, if they're partnering with a new organization, they create a family tie, either through marriages or other types of ties.
Like any other multinational would, they protect their brand by outsourcing the more questionable parts of the business model, like for example, when they have to engage in violence against other criminal organizations, they recruit gangs and other smaller players to do the dirty work for them, and they try to separate their operations and their violence and be very discrete about this.
To further strengthen their brand, they actually have professional P.R. firms that shape how the press talks about them.
They have professional videographers on staff.
They have incredibly productive ties with the security organizations on both sides of the border.
And so, differences aside, what these three organizations share is on the one hand, a very clear understanding that institutions cannot be imposed from the top, but rather they are built from the bottom up one interaction at a time.
They have created extremely coherent structures that they use to show the inconsistencies in government policies.
And so what I want you to remember from this talk are three things.
The first one is that drug violence is actually the result of a huge market demand and an institutional setup that forces the servicing of this market to necessitate violence to guarantee delivery routes.
The second thing I want you to remember is that these are sophisticated, coherent organizations that are business organizations, and analyzing them and treating them as such is probably a much more useful approach.
The third thing I want you to remember is that even though we're more comfortable with this idea of "them," a set of bad guys separated from us, we are actually accomplices to them, either through our direct consumption or through our acceptance of the inconsistency between our policies of prohibition and our actual behavior of tolerance or even encouragement of consumption.
These organizations service, recruit from, and operate within our communities, so necessarily, they are much more integrated within them than we are comfortable acknowledging.
And so to me the question is not whether these dynamics will continue the way they have.
We see that the nature of this phenomenon guarantees that they will.
The question is whether we are willing to continue our support of a failed strategy based on our stubborn, blissful, voluntary ignorance at the cost of the deaths of thousands of our young.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a neuroscientist with a mixed background in physics and medicine.
My lab at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology focuses on spinal cord injury, which affects more than 50,000 people around the world every year, with dramatic consequences for affected individuals, whose life literally shatters in a matter of a handful of seconds.
And for me, the Man of Steel, Christopher Reeve, has best raised the awareness on the distress of spinal cord injured people.
And this is how I started my own personal journey in this field of research, working with the Christopher and Dana Reeve Foundation.
I still remember this decisive moment.
It was just at the end of a regular day of work with the foundation.
Chris addressed us, the scientists and experts, "You have to be more pragmatic.
When leaving your laboratory tomorrow, I want you to stop by the rehabilitation center to watch injured people fighting to take a step, struggling to maintain their trunk.
And when you go home, think of what you are going to change in your research on the following day to make their lives better."
These words, they stuck with me.
This was more than 10 years ago, but ever since, my laboratory has followed the pragmatic approach to recovery after spinal cord injury.
And my first step in this direction was to develop a new model of spinal cord injury that would more closely mimic some of the key features of human injury while offering well-controlled experimental conditions.
And for this purpose, we placed two hemisections on opposite sides of the body.
They completely interrupt the communication between the brain and the spinal cord, thus leading to complete and permanent paralysis of the leg.
But, as observed, after most injuries in humans, there is this intervening gap of intact neural tissue through which recovery can occur.
But how to make it happen?
Well, the classical approach consists of applying intervention that would promote the growth of the severed fiber to the original target.
And while this certainly remained the key for a cure, this seemed extraordinarily complicated to me.
To reach clinical fruition rapidly, it was obvious: I had to think about the problem differently.
It turned out that more than 100 years of research on spinal cord physiology, starting with the Nobel Prize Sherrington, had shown that the spinal cord, below most injuries, contained all the necessary and sufficient neural networks to coordinate locomotion, but because input from the brain is interrupted, they are in a nonfunctional state, like kind of dormant.
My idea: We awaken this network.
And at the time, I was a post-doctoral fellow in Los Angeles, after completing my Ph.D. in France, where independent thinking is not necessarily promoted.
(Laughter) I was afraid to talk to my new boss, but decided to muster up my courage.
I knocked at the door of my wonderful advisor, Reggie Edgerton, to share my new idea.
He listened to me carefully, and responded with a grin.
"Why don't you try?"
And I promise to you, this was such an important moment in my career, when I realized that the great leader believed in young people and new ideas.
And this was the idea: I'm going to use a simplistic metaphor to explain to you this complicated concept.
Imagine that the locomotor system is a car.
The engine is the spinal cord.
The transmission is interrupted. The engine is turned off.
How could we re-engage the engine?
First, we have to provide the fuel; second, press the accelerator pedal; third, steer the car.
It turned out that there are known neural pathways coming from the brain that play this very function during locomotion.
My idea: Replace this missing input to provide the spinal cord with the kind of intervention that the brain would deliver naturally in order to walk.
For this, I leveraged 20 years of past research in neuroscience, first to replace the missing fuel with pharmacological agents that prepare the neurons in the spinal cord to fire, and second, to mimic the accelerator pedal with electrical stimulation.
So here imagine an electrode implanted on the back of the spinal cord to deliver painless stimulation.
It took many years, but eventually we developed an electrochemical neuroprosthesis that transformed the neural network in the spinal cord from dormant to a highly functional state.
Immediately, the paralyzed rat can stand.
As soon as the treadmill belt starts moving, the animal shows coordinated movement of the leg, but without the brain.
Here what I call "the spinal brain" cognitively processes sensory information arising from the moving leg and makes decisions as to how to activate the muscle in order to stand, to walk, to run, and even here, while sprinting, instantly stand if the treadmill stops moving.
This was amazing.
I was completely fascinated by this locomotion without the brain, but at the same time so frustrated.
This locomotion was completely involuntary.
The animal had virtually no control over the legs.
Clearly, the steering system was missing.
And it then became obvious from me that we had to move away from the classical rehabilitation paradigm, stepping on a treadmill, and develop conditions that would encourage the brain to begin voluntary control over the leg.
With this in mind, we developed a completely new robotic system to support the rat in any direction of space.
Imagine, this is really cool.
So imagine the little 200-gram rat attached at the extremity of this 200-kilo robot, but the rat does not feel the robot.
The robot is transparent, just like you would hold a young child during the first insecure steps.
Let me summarize: The rat received a paralyzing lesion of the spinal cord.
The electrochemical neuroprosthesis enabled a highly functional state of the spinal locomotor networks.
The robot provided the safe environment to allow the rat to attempt anything to engage the paralyzed legs.
And for motivation, we used what I think is the most powerful pharmacology of Switzerland: fine Swiss chocolate.
(Laughter) Actually, the first results were very, very, very disappointing.
Here is my best physical therapist completely failing to encourage the rat to take a single step, whereas the same rat, five minutes earlier, walked beautifully on the treadmill.
We were so frustrated.
But you know, one of the most essential qualities of a scientist is perseverance.
We insisted. We refined our paradigm, and after several months of training, the otherwise paralyzed rat could stand, and whenever she decided, initiated full weight-bearing locomotion to sprint towards the rewards.
This is the first recovery ever observed of voluntary leg movement after an experimental lesion of the spinal cord leading to complete and permanent paralysis.
In fact -- (Applause) Thank you.
In fact, not only could the rat initiate and sustain locomotion on the ground, they could even adjust leg movement, for example, to resist gravity in order to climb a staircase.
I can promise you this was such an emotional moment in my laboratory.
It took us 10 years of hard work to reach this goal.
But the remaining question was, how?
I mean, how is it possible?
And here, what we found was completely unexpected.
This novel training paradigm encouraged the brain to create new connections, some relay circuits that relay information from the brain past the injury and restore cortical control over the locomotor networks below the injury.
And here, you can see one such example, where we label the fibers coming from the brain in red.
This blue neuron is connected with the locomotor center, and what this constellation of synaptic contacts means is that the brain is reconnected with the locomotor center with only one relay neuron.
But the remodeling was not restricted to the lesion area.
It occurred throughout the central nervous system, including in the brain stem, where we observed up to 300-percent increase in the density of fibers coming from the brain.
We did not aim to repair the spinal cord, yet we were able to promote one of the more extensive remodeling of axonal projections ever observed in the central nervous system of adult mammal after an injury.
And there is a very important message hidden behind this discovery.
They are the result of a young team of very talented people: physical therapists, neurobiologists, neurosurgeons, engineers of all kinds, who have achieved together what would have been impossible by single individuals.
This is truly a trans-disciplinary team.
They are working so close to each other that there is horizontal transfer of DNA.
We are creating the next generation of M.D.'s and engineers capable of translating discoveries all the way from bench to bedside.
And me?
I am only the maestro who orchestrated this beautiful symphony.
Now, I am sure you are all wondering, aren't you, will this help injured people?
Me too, every day.
The truth is that we don't know enough yet.
This is certainly not a cure for spinal cord injury, but I begin to believe that this may lead to an intervention to improve recovery and people's quality of life.
I would like you all to take a moment and dream with me.
Imagine a person just suffered a spinal cord injury.
After a few weeks of recovery, we will implant a programmable pump to deliver a personalized pharmacological cocktail directly to the spinal cord.
At the same time, we will implant an electrode array, a sort of second skin covering the area of the spinal cord controlling leg movement, and this array is attached to an electrical pulse generator that delivers stimulations that are tailored to the person's needs.
This defines a personalized electrochemical neuroprosthesis that will enable locomotion during training with a newly designed supporting system.
And my hope is that after several months of training, there may be enough remodeling of residual connection to allow locomotion without the robot, maybe even without pharmacology or stimulation.
My hope here is to be able to create the personalized condition to boost the plasticity of the brain and the spinal cord.
And this is a radically new concept that may apply to other neurological disorders, what I termed "personalized neuroprosthetics," where by sensing and stimulating neural interfaces, I implanted throughout the nervous system, in the brain, in the spinal cord, even in peripheral nerves, based on patient-specific impairments.
But not to replace the lost function, no -- to help the brain help itself.
And I hope this enticed your imagination, because I can promise to you this is not a matter of whether this revolution will occur, but when.
And remember, we are only as great as our imagination, as big as our dream.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The two most likely largest inventions of our generation are the Internet and the mobile phone.
They've changed the world.
However, largely to our surprise, they also turned out to be the perfect tools for the surveillance state.
It turned out that the capability to collect data, information and connections about basically any of us and all of us is exactly what we've been hearing throughout of the summer through revelations and leaks about Western intelligence agencies, mostly U.S. intelligence agencies, watching over the rest of the world.
We've heard about these starting with the revelations from June 6.
Edward Snowden started leaking information, top secret classified information, from the U.S. intelligence agencies, and we started learning about things like PRISM and XKeyscore and others.
And these are examples of the kinds of programs U.S. intelligence agencies are running right now, against the whole rest of the world.
And if you look back about the forecasts on surveillance by George Orwell, well it turns out that George Orwell was an optimist.
(Laughter) We are right now seeing a much larger scale of tracking of individual citizens than he could have ever imagined.
And this here is the infamous NSA data center in Utah.
Due to be opened very soon, it will be both a supercomputing center and a data storage center.
You could basically imagine it has a large hall filled with hard drives storing data they are collecting.
And it's a pretty big building.
How big? Well, I can give you the numbers -- 140,000 square meters -- but that doesn't really tell you very much.
Maybe it's better to imagine it as a comparison.
You think about the largest IKEA store you've ever been in.
This is five times larger.
How many hard drives can you fit in an IKEA store?
Right? It's pretty big.
We estimate that just the electricity bill for running this data center is going to be in the tens of millions of dollars a year.
And this kind of wholesale surveillance means that they can collect our data and keep it basically forever, keep it for extended periods of time, keep it for years, keep it for decades.
And this opens up completely new kinds of risks to us all.
And what this is is that it is wholesale blanket surveillance on everyone.
Well, not exactly everyone, because the U.S. intelligence only has a legal right to monitor foreigners.
They can monitor foreigners when foreigners' data connections end up in the United States or pass through the United States.
And monitoring foreigners doesn't sound too bad until you realize that I'm a foreigner and you're a foreigner.
In fact, 96 percent of the planet are foreigners.
(Laughter) Right?
So it is wholesale blanket surveillance of all of us, all of us who use telecommunications and the Internet.
But don't get me wrong: There are actually types of surveillance that are okay.
I love freedom, but even I agree that some surveillance is fine.
If the law enforcement is trying to find a murderer, or they're trying to catch a drug lord or trying to prevent a school shooting, and they have leads and they have suspects, then it's perfectly fine for them to tap the suspect's phone, and to intercept his Internet communications.
I'm not arguing that at all, but that's not what programs like PRISM are about.
They are not about doing surveillance on people that they have reason to suspect of some wrongdoings.
They're about doing surveillance on people they know are innocent.
So the four main arguments supporting surveillance like this, well, the first of all is that whenever you start discussing about these revelations, there will be naysayers trying to minimize the importance of these revelations, saying that we knew all this already, we knew it was happening, there's nothing new here.
And that's not true. Don't let anybody tell you that we knew this already, because we did not know this already.
Our worst fears might have been something like this, but we didn't know this was happening.
Now we know for a fact it's happening.
We didn't know about this. We didn't know about PRISM.
We didn't know about XKeyscore. We didn't know about Cybertrans.
We didn't know about DoubleArrow.
We did not know about Skywriter -- all these different programs run by U.S. intelligence agencies.
But now we do.
And we did not know that U.S. intelligence agencies go to extremes such as infiltrating standardization bodies to sabotage encryption algorithms on purpose.
And what that means is that you take something which is secure, an encryption algorithm which is so secure that if you use that algorithm to encrypt one file, nobody can decrypt that file.
Even if they take every single computer on the planet just to decrypt that one file, it's going to take millions of years.
So that's basically perfectly safe, uncrackable.
You take something which is that good and then you weaken it on purpose, making all of us less secure as an end result.
A real-world equivalent would be that intelligence agencies would force some secret pin code into every single house alarm so they could get into every single house because, you know, bad people might have house alarms, but it will also make all of us less secure as an end result.
Backdooring encryption algorithms just boggles the mind.
But of course, these intelligence agencies are doing their job.
This is what they have been told to do: do signals intelligence, monitor telecommunications, monitor Internet traffic.
That's what they're trying to do, and since most, a very big part of the Internet traffic today is encrypted, they're trying to find ways around the encryption.
One way is to sabotage encryption algorithms, which is a great example about how U.S. intelligence agencies are running loose.
They are completely out of control, and they should be brought back under control.
So what do we actually know about the leaks?
Everything is based on the files leaked by Mr. Snowden.
The very first PRISM slides from the beginning of June detail a collection program where the data is collected from service providers, and they actually go and name the service providers they have access to.
They even have a specific date on when the collection of data began for each of the service providers.
So for example, they name the collection from Microsoft started on September 11, 2007, for Yahoo on the March 12, 2008, and then others: Google, Facebook, Skype, Apple and so on.
And every single one of these companies denies.
They all say that this simply isn't true, that they are not giving backdoor access to their data.
Yet we have these files.
So is one of the parties lying, or is there some other alternative explanation?
And one explanation would be that these parties, these service providers, are not cooperating.
Instead, they've been hacked.
That would explain it. They aren't cooperating. They've been hacked.
In this case, they've been hacked by their own government.
That might sound outlandish, but we already have cases where this has happened, for example, the case of the Flame malware which we strongly believe was authored by the U.S. government, and which, to spread, subverted the security of the Windows Update network, meaning here, the company was hacked by their own government.
And there's more evidence supporting this theory as well.
Der Spiegel, from Germany, leaked more information about the operations run by the elite hacker units operating inside these intelligence agencies.
Inside NSA, the unit is called TAO, Tailored Access Operations, and inside GCHQ, which is the U.K. equivalent, it's called NAC, Network Analysis Centre.
And these recent leaks of these three slides detail an operation run by this GCHQ intelligence agency from the United Kingdom targeting a telecom here in Belgium.
And what this really means is that an E.U. country's intelligence agency is breaching the security of a telecom of a fellow E.U. country on purpose, and they discuss it in their slides completely casually, business as usual.
Here's the primary target, here's the secondary target, here's the teaming.
They probably have a team building on Thursday evening in a pub.
They even use cheesy PowerPoint clip art like, you know, "Success," when they gain access to services like this.
What the hell?
And then there's the argument that okay, yes, this might be going on, but then again, other countries are doing it as well.
All countries spy.
And maybe that's true.
Many countries spy, not all of them, but let's take an example.
Let's take, for example, Sweden.
I'm speaking of Sweden because Sweden has a little bit of a similar law to the United States.
When your data traffic goes through Sweden, their intelligence agency has a legal right by the law to intercept that traffic.
All right, how many Swedish decisionmakers and politicians and business leaders use, every day, U.S.-based services, like, you know, run Windows or OSX, or use Facebook or LinkedIn, or store their data in clouds like iCloud or Skydrive or DropBox, or maybe use online services like Amazon web services or sales support?
And the answer is, every single Swedish business leader does that every single day.
And then we turn it around.
How many American leaders use Swedish webmails and cloud services?
And the answer is zero.
So this is not balanced.
It's not balanced by any means, not even close.
And when we do have the occasional European success story, even those, then, typically end up being sold to the United States.
Like, Skype used to be secure.
It used to be end-to-end encrypted.
Then it was sold to the United States.
Today, it no longer is secure.
So once again, we take something which is secure and then we make it less secure on purpose, making all of us less secure as an outcome.
And then the argument that the United States is only fighting terrorists.
It's the war on terror.
You shouldn't worry about it.
Well, it's not the war on terror.
Yes, part of it is war on terror, and yes, there are terrorists, and they do kill and maim, and we should fight them, but we know through these leaks that they have used the same techniques to listen to phone calls of European leaders, to tap the email of residents of Mexico and Brazil, to read email traffic inside the United Nations Headquarters and E.U. Parliament, and I don't think they are trying to find terrorists from inside the E.U. Parliament, right?
It's not the war on terror.
Part of it might be, and there are terrorists, but are we really thinking about terrorists as such an existential threat that we are willing to do anything at all to fight them?
Are the Americans ready to throw away the Constituion and throw it in the trash just because there are terrorists?
And the same thing with the Bill of Rights and all the amendments and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the E.U. conventions on human rights and fundamental freedoms and the press freedom?
Do we really think terrorism is such an existential threat, we are ready to do anything at all?
But people are scared about terrorists, and then they think that maybe that surveillance is okay because they have nothing to hide.
Feel free to survey me if that helps.
And whoever tells you that they have nothing to hide simply hasn't thought about this long enough.
(Applause) Because we have this thing called privacy, and if you really think that you have nothing to hide, please make sure that's the first thing you tell me, because then I know that I should not trust you with any secrets, because obviously you can't keep a secret.
But people are brutally honest with the Internet, and when these leaks started, many people were asking me about this.
And I have nothing to hide.
I'm not doing anything bad or anything illegal.
Yet, I have nothing that I would in particular like to share with an intelligence agency, especially a foreign intelligence agency.
And if we indeed need a Big Brother, I would much rather have a domestic Big Brother than a foreign Big Brother.
And when the leaks started, the very first thing I tweeted about this was a comment about how, when you've been using search engines, you've been potentially leaking all that to U.S. intelligence.
And two minutes later, I got a reply by somebody called Kimberly from the United States challenging me, like, why am I worried about this?
What am I sending to worry about this? Am I sending naked pictures or something?
And my answer to Kimberly was that what I'm sending is none of your business, and it should be none of your government's business either.
Because that's what it's about. It's about privacy.
Privacy is nonnegotiable.
It should be built in to all the systems we use.
(Applause) And one thing we should all understand is that we are brutally honest with search engines.
You show me your search history, and I'll find something incriminating or something embarrassing there in five minutes.
We are more honest with search engines than we are with our families.
Search engines know more about you than your family members know about you.
And this is all the kind of information we are giving away, we are giving away to the United States.
And surveillance changes history.
We know this through examples of corrupt presidents like Nixon.
Imagine if he would have had the kind of surveillance tools that are available today.
And let me actually quote the president of Brazil, Ms. Dilma Rousseff.
She was one of the targets of NSA surveillance.
Her email was read, and she spoke at the United Nations Headquarters, and she said, "If there is no right to privacy, there can be no true freedom of expression and opinion, and therefore, there can be no effective democracy."
That's what it's about.
Privacy is the building block of our democracies.
And to quote a fellow security researcher, Marcus Ranum, he said that the United States is right now treating the Internet as it would be treating one of its colonies.
So we are back to the age of colonization, and we, the foreign users of the Internet, we should think about Americans as our masters.
So Mr. Snowden, he's been blamed for many things.
Some are blaming him for causing problems for the U.S. cloud industry and software companies with these revelations -- and blaming Snowden for causing problems for the U.S. cloud industry would be the equivalent of blaming Al Gore for causing global warming.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, what is there to be done?
Should we worry. No, we shouldn't worry.
We should be angry, because this is wrong, and it's rude, and it should not be done.
But that's not going to really change the situation.
What's going to change the situation for the rest of the world is to try to steer away from systems built in the United States.
And that's much easier said than done.
How do you do that?
A single country, any single country in Europe cannot replace and build replacements for the U.S.-made operating systems and cloud services.
But maybe you don't have to do it alone.
Maybe you can do it together with other countries.
The solution is open source.
By building together open, free, secure systems, we can go around such surveillance, and then one country doesn't have to solve the problem by itself.
It only has to solve one little problem.
And to quote a fellow security researcher, Haroon Meer, one country only has to make a small wave, but those small waves together become a tide, and the tide will lift all the boats up at the same time, and the tide we will build with secure, free, open-source systems, will become the tide that will lift all of us up and above the surveillance state.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So why do we learn mathematics?
Essentially, for three reasons: calculation, application, and last, and unfortunately least in terms of the time we give it, inspiration.
Mathematics is the science of patterns, and we study it to learn how to think logically, critically and creatively, but too much of the mathematics that we learn in school is not effectively motivated, and when our students ask, "Why are we learning this?"
then they often hear that they'll need it in an upcoming math class or on a future test.
But wouldn't it be great if every once in a while we did mathematics simply because it was fun or beautiful or because it excited the mind?
Now, I know many people have not had the opportunity to see how this can happen, so let me give you a quick example with my favorite collection of numbers, the Fibonacci numbers. (Applause) Yeah! I already have Fibonacci fans here.
That's great.
Now these numbers can be appreciated in many different ways.
From the standpoint of calculation, they're as easy to understand as one plus one, which is two.
Then one plus two is three, two plus three is five, three plus five is eight, and so on.
Indeed, the person we call Fibonacci was actually named Leonardo of Pisa, and these numbers appear in his book "Liber Abaci," which taught the Western world the methods of arithmetic that we use today.
In terms of applications, Fibonacci numbers appear in nature surprisingly often.
The number of petals on a flower is typically a Fibonacci number, or the number of spirals on a sunflower or a pineapple tends to be a Fibonacci number as well.
In fact, there are many more applications of Fibonacci numbers, but what I find most inspirational about them are the beautiful number patterns they display.
Let me show you one of my favorites.
Suppose you like to square numbers, and frankly, who doesn't? (Laughter) Let's look at the squares of the first few Fibonacci numbers.
So one squared is one, two squared is four, three squared is nine, five squared is 25, and so on.
Now, it's no surprise that when you add consecutive Fibonacci numbers, you get the next Fibonacci number. Right?
That's how they're created.
But you wouldn't expect anything special to happen when you add the squares together.
But check this out.
One plus one gives us two, and one plus four gives us five.
And four plus nine is 13, nine plus 25 is 34, and yes, the pattern continues.
In fact, here's another one.
Suppose you wanted to look at adding the squares of the first few Fibonacci numbers.
Let's see what we get there.
So one plus one plus four is six.
Add nine to that, we get 15.
Add 25, we get 40.
Add 64, we get 104.
Now look at those numbers.
Those are not Fibonacci numbers, but if you look at them closely, you'll see the Fibonacci numbers buried inside of them.
Do you see it? I'll show it to you.
Six is two times three, 15 is three times five, 40 is five times eight, two, three, five, eight, who do we appreciate?
(Laughter) Fibonacci! Of course.
Now, as much fun as it is to discover these patterns, it's even more satisfying to understand why they are true.
Let's look at that last equation.
Why should the squares of one, one, two, three, five and eight add up to eight times 13?
I'll show you by drawing a simple picture.
We'll start with a one-by-one square and next to that put another one-by-one square.
Together, they form a one-by-two rectangle.
Beneath that, I'll put a two-by-two square, and next to that, a three-by-three square, beneath that, a five-by-five square, and then an eight-by-eight square, creating one giant rectangle, right?
Now let me ask you a simple question: what is the area of the rectangle?
Well, on the one hand, it's the sum of the areas of the squares inside it, right?
Just as we created it.
It's one squared plus one squared plus two squared plus three squared plus five squared plus eight squared. Right?
That's the area.
On the other hand, because it's a rectangle, the area is equal to its height times its base, and the height is clearly eight, and the base is five plus eight, which is the next Fibonacci number, 13. Right?
So the area is also eight times 13.
Since we've correctly calculated the area two different ways, they have to be the same number, and that's why the squares of one, one, two, three, five and eight add up to eight times 13.
Now, if we continue this process, we'll generate rectangles of the form 13 by 21, 21 by 34, and so on.
Now check this out.
If you divide 13 by eight, you get 1.625.
And if you divide the larger number by the smaller number, then these ratios get closer and closer to about 1.618, known to many people as the Golden Ratio, a number which has fascinated mathematicians, scientists and artists for centuries.
Now, I show all this to you because, like so much of mathematics, there's a beautiful side to it that I fear does not get enough attention in our schools.
We spend lots of time learning about calculation, but let's not forget about application, including, perhaps, the most important application of all, learning how to think.
If I could summarize this in one sentence, it would be this: Mathematics is not just solving for x, it's also figuring out why.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, stepping down out of the bus, I headed back to the corner to head west en route to a braille training session.
It was the winter of 2009, and I had been blind for about a year.
Things were going pretty well.
Safely reaching the other side, I turned to the left, pushed the auto-button for the audible pedestrian signal, and waited my turn.
As it went off, I took off and safely got to the other side.
Stepping onto the sidewalk, I then heard the sound of a steel chair slide across the concrete sidewalk in front of me.
I know there's a cafe on the corner, and they have chairs out in front, so I just adjusted to the left to get closer to the street.
As I did, so slid the chair.
I just figured I'd made a mistake, and went back to the right, and so slid the chair in perfect synchronicity.
Now I was getting a little anxious.
I went back to the left, and so slid the chair, blocking my path of travel.
Now, I was officially freaking out.
So I yelled, "Who the hell's out there? What's going on?"
Just then, over my shout, I heard something else, a familiar rattle.
It sounded familiar, and I quickly considered another possibility, and I reached out with my left hand, as my fingers brushed against something fuzzy, and I came across an ear, the ear of a dog, perhaps a golden retriever.
Its leash had been tied to the chair as her master went in for coffee, and she was just persistent in her efforts to greet me, perhaps get a scratch behind the ear.
Who knows, maybe she was volunteering for service.
(Laughter) But that little story is really about the fears and misconceptions that come along with the idea of moving through the city without sight, seemingly oblivious to the environment and the people around you.
So let me step back and set the stage a little bit.
On St. Patrick's Day of 2008, I reported to the hospital for surgery to remove a brain tumor.
The surgery was successful.
Two days later, my sight started to fail.
On the third day, it was gone.
Immediately, I was struck by an incredible sense of fear, of confusion, of vulnerability, like anybody would.
But as I had time to stop and think, I actually started to realize I had a lot to be grateful for.
In particular, I thought about my dad, who had passed away from complications from brain surgery.
He was 36. I was seven at the time.
So although I had every reason to be fearful of what was ahead, and had no clue quite what was going to happen, I was alive.
My son still had his dad.
And besides, it's not like I was the first person ever to lose their sight.
I knew there had to be all sorts of systems and techniques and training to have to live a full and meaningful, active life without sight.
So by the time I was discharged from the hospital a few days later, I left with a mission, a mission to get out and get the best training as quickly as I could and get on to rebuilding my life.
Within six months, I had returned to work.
My training had started.
I even started riding a tandem bike with my old cycling buddies, and was commuting to work on my own, walking through town and taking the bus.
It was a lot of hard work.
But what I didn't anticipate through that rapid transition was the incredible experience of the juxtaposition of my sighted experience up against my unsighted experience of the same places and the same people within such a short period of time.
From that came a lot of insights, or outsights, as I called them, things that I learned since losing my sight.
These outsights ranged from the trival to the profound, from the mundane to the humorous.
As an architect, that stark juxtaposition of my sighted and unsighted experience of the same places and the same cities within such a short period of time has given me all sorts of wonderful outsights of the city itself.
Paramount amongst those was the realization that, actually, cities are fantastic places for the blind.
And then I was also surprised by the city's propensity for kindness and care as opposed to indifference or worse.
And then I started to realize that it seemed like the blind seemed to have a positive influence on the city itself.
That was a little curious to me.
Let me step back and take a look at why the city is so good for the blind.
Inherent with the training for recovery from sight loss is learning to rely on all your non-visual senses, things that you would otherwise maybe ignore.
It's like a whole new world of sensory information opens up to you.
I was really struck by the symphony of subtle sounds all around me in the city that you can hear and work with to understand where you are, how you need to move, and where you need to go.
Similarly, just through the grip of the cane, you can feel contrasting textures in the floor below, and over time you build a pattern of where you are and where you're headed.
Similarly, just the sun warming one side of your face or the wind at your neck gives you clues about your alignment and your progression through a block and your movement through time and space.
But also, the sense of smell.
Some districts and cities have their own smell, as do places and things around you, and if you're lucky, you can even follow your nose to that new bakery that you've been looking for.
All this really surprised me, because I started to realize that my unsighted experienced was so far more multi-sensory than my sighted experience ever was.
What struck me also was how much the city was changing around me.
When you're sighted, everybody kind of sticks to themselves, you mind your own business.
Lose your sight, though, and it's a whole other story.
And I don't know who's watching who, but I have a suspicion that a lot of people are watching me.
And I'm not paranoid, but everywhere I go, I'm getting all sorts of advice: Go here, move there, watch out for this.
A lot of the information is good.
Some of it's helpful. A lot of it's kind of reversed.
You've got to figure out what they actually meant.
Some of it's kind of wrong and not helpful.
But it's all good in the grand scheme of things.
But one time I was in Oakland walking along Broadway, and came to a corner.
I was waiting for an audible pedestrian signal, and as it went off, I was just about to step out into the street, when all of a sudden, my right hand was just gripped by this guy, and he yanked my arm and pulled me out into the crosswalk and was dragging me out across the street, speaking to me in Mandarin.
(Laughter) It's like, there was no escape from this man's death grip, but he got me safely there.
What could I do?
But believe me, there are more polite ways to offer assistance.
We don't know you're there, so it's kind of nice to say "Hello" first.
"Would you like some help?"
But while in Oakland, I've really been struck by how much the city of Oakland changed as I lost my sight.
I liked it sighted. It was fine.
It's a perfectly great city.
But once I lost my sight and was walking along Broadway, I was blessed every block of the way.
"Bless you, man."
"Go for it, brother."
"God bless you."
I didn't get that sighted.
(Laughter) And even without sight, I don't get that in San Francisco.
And I know it bothers some of my blind friends, it's not just me.
Often it's thought that that's an emotion that comes up out of pity.
I tend to think that it comes out of our shared humanity, out of our togetherness, and I think it's pretty cool.
In fact, if I'm feeling down, I just go to Broadway in downtown Oakland, I go for a walk, and I feel better like that, in no time at all.
But also that it illustrates how disability and blindness sort of cuts across ethnic, social, racial, economic lines.
Disability is an equal-opportunity provider.
Everybody's welcome.
In fact, I've heard it said in the disability community that there are really only two types of people: There are those with disabilities, and there are those that haven't quite found theirs yet.
It's a different way of thinking about it, but I think it's kind of beautiful, because it is certainly far more inclusive than the us-versus-them or the abled-versus-the-disabled, and it's a lot more honest and respectful of the fragility of life.
So my final takeaway for you is that not only is the city good for the blind, but the city needs us.
And I'm so sure of that that I want to propose to you today that the blind be taken as the prototypical city dwellers when imagining new and wonderful cities, and not the people that are thought about after the mold has already been cast.
It's too late then.
So if you design a city with the blind in mind, you'll have a rich, walkable network of sidewalks with a dense array of options and choices all available at the street level.
If you design a city with the blind in mind, sidewalks will be predictable and will be generous.
The space between buildings will be well-balanced between people and cars.
In fact, cars, who needs them?
If you're blind, you don't drive. (Laughter) They don't like it when you drive. (Laughter) If you design a city with the blind in mind, you design a city with a robust, accessible, well-connected mass transit system that connects all parts of the city and the region all around.
If you design a city with the blind in mind, there'll be jobs, lots of jobs.
Blind people want to work too.
They want to earn a living.
So, in designing a city for the blind, I hope you start to realize that it actually would be a more inclusive, a more equitable, a more just city for all.
And based on my prior sighted experience, it sounds like a pretty cool city, whether you're blind, whether you have a disability, or you haven't quite found yours yet.
So thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to talk to you about a story about a small town kid.
I don't know his name, but I do know his story.
He lives in a small village in southern Somalia.
His village is near Mogadishu.
Drought drives the small village into poverty and to the brink of starvation.
With nothing left for him there, he leaves for the big city, in this case, Mogadishu, the capital of Somalia.
When he arrives, there are no opportunities, no jobs, no way forward.
He ends up living in a tent city on the outskirts of Mogadishu.
Maybe a year passes, nothing.
One day, he's approached by a gentleman who offers to take him to lunch, then to dinner, to breakfast.
He meets this dynamic group of people, and they give him a break.
He's given a bit of money to buy himself some new clothes, money to send back home to his family.
He is introduced to this young woman.
He eventually gets married.
He starts this new life.
He has a purpose in life.
One beautiful day in Mogadishu, under an azure blue sky, a car bomb goes off.
That small town kid with the big city dreams was the suicide bomber, and that dynamic group of people were al Shabaab, a terrorist organization linked to al Qaeda.
So how does the story of a small town kid just trying to make it big in the city end up with him blowing himself up?
He was waiting.
He was waiting for an opportunity, waiting to begin his future, waiting for a way forward, and this was the first thing that came along.
This was the first thing that pulled him out of what we call waithood.
And his story repeats itself in urban centers around the world.
It is the story of the disenfranchised, unemployed urban youth who sparks riots in Johannesburg, sparks riots in London, who reaches out for something other than waithood.
For young people, the promise of the city, the big city dream is that of opportunity, of jobs, of wealth, but young people are not sharing in the prosperity of their cities.
Often it's youth who suffer from the highest unemployment rates.
By 2030, three out of five people living in cities will be under the age of 18.
If we do not include young people in the growth of our cities, if we do not provide them opportunities, the story of waithood, the gateway to terrorism, to violence, to gangs, will be the story of cities 2.0.
And in my city of birth, Mogadishu, 70 percent of young people suffer from unemployment.
70 percent don't work, don't go to school.
They pretty much do nothing.
I went back to Mogadishu last month, and I went to visit Madina Hospital, the hospital I was born in.
I remember standing in front of that bullet-ridden hospital thinking, what if I had never left?
What if I had been forced into that same state of waithood?
Would I have become a terrorist?
I'm not really sure about the answer.
My reason for being in Mogadishu that month was actually to host a youth leadership and entrepreneurship summit.
I brought together about 90 young Somali leaders.
We sat down and brainstormed on solutions to the biggest challenges facing their city.
One of the young men in the room was Aden.
He went to university in Mogadishu, graduated.
There were no jobs, no opportunities.
I remember him telling me, because he was a college graduate, unemployed, frustrated, that he was the perfect target for al Shabaab and other terrorist organizations, to be recruited.
They sought people like him out.
But his story takes a different route.
In Mogadishu, the biggest barrier to getting from point A to point B are the roads.
Twenty-three years of civil war have completely destroyed the road system, and a motorbike can be the easiest way to get around.
Aden saw an opportunity and seized it.
He started a motorbike company.
He began renting out motorbikes to local residents who couldn't normally afford them.
He bought 10 bikes, with the help of family and friends, and his dream is to eventually expand to several hundred within the next three years.
How is this story different?
What makes his story different?
I believe it is his ability to identify and seize a new opportunity.
It's entrepreneurship, and I believe entrepreneurship can be the most powerful tool against waithood.
It empowers young people to be the creators of the very economic opportunities they are so desperately seeking.
And you can train young people to be entrepreneurs.
I want to talk to you about a young man who attended one of my meetings, Mohamed Mohamoud, a florist.
He was helping me train some of the young people at the summit in entrepreneurship and how to be innovative and how to create a culture of entrepreneurship.
He's actually the first florist Mogadishu has seen in over 22 years, and until recently, until Mohamed came along, if you wanted flowers at your wedding, you used plastic bouquets shipped from abroad.
If you asked someone, "When was the last time you saw fresh flowers?"
for many who grew up under civil war, the answer would be, "Never."
So Mohamed saw an opportunity.
He started a landscaping and design floral company.
He created a farm right outside of Mogadishu, and started growing tulips and lilies, which he said could survive the harsh Mogadishu climate.
And he began delivering flowers to weddings, creating gardens at homes and businesses around the city, and he's now working on creating Mogadishu's first public park in 22 years.
There's no public park in Mogadishu.
He wants to create a space where families, young people, can come together, and, as he says, smell the proverbial roses.
And he doesn't grow roses because they use too much water, by the way.
So the first step is to inspire young people, and in that room, Mohamed's presence had a really profound impact on the youth in that room.
They had never really thought about starting up a business.
They've thought about working for an NGO, working for the government, but his story, his innovation, really had a strong impact on them.
He forced them to look at their city as a place of opportunity.
He empowered them to believe that they could be entrepreneurs, that they could be change makers.
By the end of the day, they were coming up with innovative solutions to some of the biggest challenges facing their city.
They came up with entrepreneurial solutions to local problems.
So inspiring young people and creating a culture of entrepreneurship is a really great step, but young people need capital to make their ideas a reality.
They need expertise and mentorship to guide them in developing and launching their businesses.
Connect young people with the resources they need, provide them the support they need to go from ideation to creation, and you will create catalysts for urban growth.
For me, entrepreneurship is more than just starting up a business.
It's about creating a social impact.
Mohamed is not simply selling flowers.
I believe he is selling hope.
His Peace Park, and that's what he calls it, when it's created, will actually transform the way people see their city.
Aden hired street kids to help rent out and maintain those bikes for him.
He gave them the opportunity to escape the paralysis of waithood.
These young entrepreneurs are having a tremendous impact in their cities.
So my suggestion is, turn youth into entrepreneurs, incubate and nurture their inherent innovation, and you will have more stories of flowers and Peace Parks than of car bombs and waithood.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How many of you have been to Oklahoma City?
Raise your hand. Yeah?
How many of you have not been to Oklahoma City and have no idea who I am? (Laughter) Most of you. Let me give you a little bit of background.
Oklahoma City started in the most unique way imaginable.
Back on a spring day in 1889, the federal government held what they called a land run.
They literally lined up the settlers along an imaginary line, and they fired off a gun, and the settlers roared across the countryside and put down a stake, and wherever they put down that stake, that was their new home.
And at the end of the very first day, the population of Oklahoma City had gone from zero to 10,000, and our planning department is still paying for that.
The citizens got together on that first day and elected a mayor.
And then they shot him.
(Laughter) That's not really all that funny -- (Laughter) -- but it allows me to see what type of audience I'm dealing with, so I appreciate the feedback.
The 20th century was fairly kind to Oklahoma City.
Our economy was based on commodities, so the price of cotton or the price of wheat, and ultimately the price of oil and natural gas.
And along the way, we became a city of innovation.
The shopping cart was invented in Oklahoma City.
(Applause) The parking meter, invented in Oklahoma City.
You're welcome.
Having an economy, though, that relates to commodities can give you some ups and some downs, and that was certainly the case in Oklahoma City's history.
In the 1970s, when it appeared that the price of energy would never retreat, our economy was soaring, and then in the early 1980s, it cratered quickly.
The price of energy dropped.
Our banks began to fail.
Before the end of the decade, 100 banks had failed in the state of Oklahoma.
There was no bailout on the horizon.
Our banking industry, our oil and gas industry, our commercial real estate industry, were all at the bottom of the economic scale.
Young people were leaving Oklahoma City in droves for Washington and Dallas and Houston and New York and Tokyo, anywhere where they could find a job that measured up to their educational attainment, because in Oklahoma City, the good jobs just weren't there.
But along at the end of the '80s came an enterprising businessman who became mayor named Ron Norick.
Ron Norick eventually figured out that the secret to economic development wasn't incentivizing companies up front, it was about creating a place where businesses wanted to locate, and so he pushed an initiative called MAPS that basically was a penny-on-the-dollar sales tax to build a bunch of stuff.
It built a new sports arena, a new canal downtown, it fixed up our performing arts center, a new baseball stadium downtown, a lot of things to improve the quality of life.
And the economy indeed seemed to start showing some signs of life.
The next mayor came along.
He started MAPS for Kids, rebuilt the entire inner city school system, all 75 buildings either built anew or refurbished.
And then, in 2004, in this rare collective lack of judgment bordering on civil disobedience, the citizens elected me mayor.
Now the city I inherited was just on the verge of coming out of its slumbering economy, and for the very first time, we started showing up on the lists.
Now you know the lists I'm talking about.
The media and the Internet love to rank cities.
And in Oklahoma City, we'd never really been on lists before.
So I thought it was kind of cool when they came out with these positive lists and we were on there.
We weren't anywhere close to the top, but we were on the list, we were somebody.
Best city to get a job, best city to start a business, best downtown -- Oklahoma City.
And then came the list of the most obese cities in the country.
And there we were.
Now I like to point out that we were on that list with a lot of really cool places.
(Laughter) Dallas and Houston and New Orleans and Atlanta and Miami.
You know, these are cities that, typically, you're not embarrassed to be associated with.
But nonetheless, I didn't like being on the list.
And about that time, I got on the scales.
And I weighed 220 pounds.
And then I went to this website sponsored by the federal government, and I typed in my height, I typed in my weight, and I pushed Enter, and it came back and said "obese."
I thought, "What a stupid website."
(Laughter) "I'm not obese. I would know if I was obese."
And then I started getting honest with myself about what had become my lifelong struggle with obesity, and I noticed this pattern, that I was gaining about two or three pounds a year, and then about every 10 years, I'd drop 20 or 30 pounds.
And then I'd do it again.
And I had this huge closet full of clothes, and I could only wear a third of it at any one time, and only I knew which part of the closet I could wear.
But it all seemed fairly normal, going through it.
Well, I finally decided I needed to lose weight, and I knew I could because I'd done it so many times before, so I simply stopped eating as much.
I had always exercised.
