Well, they're terrible advice.
These are some of the best poker players in the world right now.
Do they look like people who live purely off feelings and intuitions?
(Laughter) Look at them!
Obviously, these guys are about slow, careful analysis, and that's because the game has outgrown the days where pure street smarts and people-reading can get you to the top.
And that's because our intuitions aren't nearly as perfect as we'd like to believe.
I mean, it'd be great, whenever we're in a tough spot, to just have an answer appear to us from some magical source of inspiration.
But in reality, our gut is extremely vulnerable to all kinds of wishful thinking and biases.
So then, what is our gut good for?
Well, all the studies I've read conclude that it's best-suited for everyday things that we have lots and lots of experience in, like how we just know that our friend is mad at us before we've even said anything to them, or whether we can fit our car into a tight parking spot.
But when it comes to the really big stuff, like what's our career path going to be or who should we marry, why should we assume that our intuitions are better calibrated for these than slow, proper analysis?
I mean, they don't have any data to be based off.
So my third lesson is, while we shouldn't ignore our intuitions, we shouldn't overprivilege them either.
And I'd like to summarize these three lessons today with my own set of memes, with more of a poker-player twist.
"Success is sweetest when you achieve it across a large sample size."
(Laughter) "Your gut is your friend and so is a cost-benefit analysis.
(Laughter) "The future is unknown, but you can damn well try and estimate it."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to invite you to come along on a visit to a dark continent.
It is the continent hidden under the surface of the earth.
It is largely unexplored, poorly understood, and the stuff of legends.
But it is made also of dramatic landscapes like this huge underground chamber, and it is rich with surprising biological and mineralogical worlds.
Thanks to the efforts of intrepid voyagers in the last three centuries -- actually, we know also thanks to satellite technology, of course -- we know almost every single square meter of our planet's surface.
However, we know still very little about what is hidden inside the earth.
Because a cave landscape, like this deep shaft in Italy, is hidden, the potential of cave exploration -- the geographical dimension -- is poorly understood and unappreciated.
Because we are creatures living on the surface, our perception of the inner side of the planet is in some ways skewed, as is that of the depth of the oceans or of the upper atmosphere.
However, since systematic cave exploration started about one century ago, we know actually that caves exist in every continent of the world.
A single cave system, like Mammoth Cave, which is in Kentucky, can be as long as more than 600 kilometers.
And an abyss like Krubera Voronya, which is in the Caucasus region, actually the deepest cave explored in the world, can go as far as more than 2,000 meters below the surface.
That means a journey of weeks for a cave explorer.
Caves form in karstic regions.
So karstic regions are areas of the world where the infiltrating water along cracks, fractures, can easily dissolve soluble lithologies, forming a drainage system of tunnels, conduits -- a three-dimensional network, actually.
Karstic regions cover almost 20 percent of the continents' surface, and we know actually that speleologists in the last 50 years have explored roughly 30,000 kilometers of cave passages around the world, which is a big number.
But geologists have estimated that what is still missing, to be discovered and mapped, is something around 10 million kilometers.
That means that for each meter of a cave that we already know, that we have explored, there are still some tens of kilometers of undiscovered passages.
That means that this is really an endless continent, and we will never be able to explore it completely.
And this estimation is made without considering other types of caves, like, for example, inside glaciers or even volcanic caves, which are not karstic, but are formed by lava flows.
And if we have a look at other planets like, for example, Mars, you will see that this characteristic is not so specific of our home planet.
However, I will show to you now that we do not need to go to Mars to explore alien worlds.
I'm a speleologist, that means a cave explorer.
And I started with this passion when I was really young in the mountains not far from my hometown in North Italy, in the karstic regions of the Alps and the Dolomites.
But soon, the quest for exploration brought me to the farthest corner of the planet, searching for new potential entrances of this undiscovered continent.
And in 2009, I had the opportunity to visit the tepui table mountains, which are in the Orinoco and Amazon basins.
These massifs enchanted me from the first time I saw them.
They are surrounded by vertical, vertiginous rock walls with silvery waterfalls that are lost in the forest.
They really inspired in me a sense of wilderness, with a soul older than millions and millions of years.
And this dramatic landscape inspired among other things also Conan Doyle's "The Lost World" novel in 1912.
And they are, really, a lost world.
Scientists consider those mountains as islands in time, being separated from the surrounding lowlands since tens of millions of years ago.
They are surrounded by up to 1,000-meter-high walls, resembling a fortress, impregnable by humans.
And, in fact, only a few of these mountains have been climbed and explored on their top.
These mountains contain also a scientific paradox: They are made by quartz, which is a very common mineral on the earth's crust, and the rock made up by quartz is called quartzite, and quartzite is one of the hardest and least soluble minerals on earth.
So we do not expect at all to find a cave there.
Despite this, in the last 10 years, speleologists from Italy, Slovakia, Czech Republic, and, of course, Venezuela and Brazil, have explored several caves in this area.
So how can it be possible?
To understand this contradiction, we have to consider the time factor, because the history of the tepuis is extremely long, starting about 1.6 billion years ago with the formation of the rock, and then evolving with the uplift of the region 150 million years ago, after the disruption of the Pangaea supercontinent and the opening of the Atlantic Ocean.
So you can imagine that the water had tens or even hundreds of millions of years to sculpt the strangest forms on the tepuis' surfaces, but also to open the fractures and form stone cities, rock cities, fields of towers which are characterized in the famous landscape of the tepuis.
But nobody could have imagined what was happening inside a mountain in so long a time frame.
And so I was focusing in 2010 on one of those massifs, the Auyán-tepui, which is very famous because it hosts Angel Falls, which is the highest waterfall in the world -- about 979 meters of vertical drop.
And I was searching for hints of the existence of cave systems through satellite images, and finally we identified an area of collapses of the surface -- so, big boulders, rock piles -- and that means that there was a void below.
It was a clear indication that there was something inside the mountain.
So we did several attempts to reach this area, by land and with a helicopter, but it was really difficult because -- you have to imagine that these mountains are covered by clouds most of the year, by fog.
There are strong winds, and there are almost 4,000 millimeters of rainfall per year, so it's really, really difficult to find good conditions.
And only in 2013 we finally landed on the spot and we started the exploration of the cave.
The cave is huge.
It's a huge network under the surface of the tepui plateau, and in only ten days of expedition, we explored more than 20 kilometers of cave passages.
And it's a huge network of underground rivers, channels, big rooms, extremely deep shafts.
So it's really an incredible place.
And we named it Imawarì Yeuta.
That means, in the Pemón indigenous language, "The House of the Gods."
You have to imagine that indigenous people have never been there.
It was impossible for them to reach this area.
However, there were legends about the existence of a cave in the mountain.
So when we started the exploration, we had to explore with a great respect, both because of the religious beliefs of the indigenous people, but also because it was really a sacred place, because no human had entered there before.
So we had to use special protocols to not contaminate the environment with our presence, and we tried also to share with the community, with the indigenous community, our discoveries.
And the caves represent, really, a snapshot of the past.
The time needed for their formation could be as long as 50 or even 100 million years, which makes them possibly the oldest caves that we can explore on earth.
What you can find there is really evidence of a lost world.
When you enter a quartzite cave, you have to completely forget what you know about caves -- classic limestone caves or the touristic caves that you can visit in several places in the world.
Because what seems a simple stalactite here is not made by calcium carbonate, but is made by opal, and one of those stalactites can require tens of millions of years to be formed.
But you can find even stranger forms, like these mushrooms of silica growing on a boulder.
And you can imagine our talks when we were exploring the cave.
We were the first entering and discovering those unknown things, things like those monster eggs.
And we were a bit scared because it was all a discovery, and we didn't want to find a dinosaur.
We didn't find a dinosaur.
(Laughter) Anyway, actually, we know that this kind of formation, after several studies, we know that these kinds of formations are living organisms.
They are bacterial colonies using silica to build mineral structures resembling stromatolites.
Stromatolites are some of the oldest forms of life that we can find on earth.
And here in the tepuis, the interesting thing is that these bacteria colonies have evolved in complete isolation from the external surface, and without being in contact with humans.
They have never been in contact with humans.
So the implications for science are enormous, because here you could find, for example, microbes that could be useful to resolve diseases in medicine, or you could find even a new kind of material with unknown properties.
And, in fact, we discovered in the cave a new mineral structure for science, which is rossiantonite, a phosphate-sulfate.
So whatever you find in the cave, even a small cricket, has evolved in the dark in complete isolation.
And, really, everything that you can feel in the cave are real connections between the biological and the mineralogical world.
So as we explore this dark continent and discover its mineralogical and biological diversity and uniqueness, we will find probably clues about the origin of life on our planet and on the relationship and evolution of life in relationship with the mineral world.
What seems only a dark, empty environment could be in reality a chest of wonders full of useful information.
With a team of Italian, Venezuelan and Brazilian speleologists, which is called La Venta Teraphosa, we will be back soon to Latin America, because we want to explore other tepuis in the farthest areas of the Amazon.
There are still very unknown mountains, like Marahuaca, which is almost 3,000 meters high above sea level, or Aracà, which is in the upper region of Rio Negro in Brazil.
And we suppose that we could find there even bigger cave systems, and each one with its own undiscovered world.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Francesco. Give me that to start so we don't forget.
Francesco, you said we don't need to go to Mars to find alien life, and indeed, last time we spoke, you were in Sardinia and you were training European astronauts.
So what do you, a speleologist, tell and teach to the astronauts?
Francesco Sauro: Yeah, we are -- it's a program of training for not only European, but also NASA, Roskosmos, JAXA astronauts, in a cave.
So they stay in a cave for about one week in isolation.
They have to work together in a real, real dangerous environment, and it's a real alien environment for them because it's unusual.
It's always dark. They have to do science. They have a lot of tasks.
And it's very similar to a journey to Mars or the International Space Station.
BG: In principle. FS: Yes.
BG: I want to go back to one of the pictures that was in your slide show, and it's just representative of the other photos -- Weren't those photos amazing? Yeah?
Audience: Yeah!
(Applause) FS: I have to thank the photographers from the team La Venta, because all of those photos are from the photographers.
BG: You bring, actually, photographers with you in the expedition.
They're professionals, they're speleologists and photographers.
But when I look at these pictures, I wonder: there is zero light down there, and yet they look incredibly well-exposed.
How do you take these pictures?
How do your colleagues, the photographers, take these pictures?
FS: Yeah. They are working in a darkroom, basically, so you can open the shutter of the camera and use the lights to paint the environment.
BG: So you're basically -- FS: Yes. You can even keep the shutter open for one minute and then paint the environment.
The final result is what you want to achieve.
BG: You spray the environment with light and that's what you get.
Maybe we can try this at home someday, I don't know.
(Laughter) BG: Francesco, grazie. FS: Grazie.
(Applause)
Hi. I'm going to ask you to raise your arms and wave back, just the way I am -- kind of a royal wave.
You can mimic what you can see.
You can program the hundreds of muscles in your arm.
Soon, you'll be able to look inside your brain and program, control the hundreds of brain areas that you see there.
I'm going to tell you about that technology.
People have wanted to look inside the human mind, the human brain, for thousands of years.
Well, coming out of the research labs just now, for our generation, is the possibility to do that.
People envision this as being very difficult.
You had to take a spaceship, shrink it down, inject it into the bloodstream.
It was terribly dangerous. (Laughter) You could be attacked by white blood cells in the arteries.
But now, we have a real technology to do this.
We're going to fly into my colleague Peter's brain.
We're going to do it non-invasively using MRI.
We don't have to inject anything. We don't need radiation.
We will be able to fly into the anatomy of Peter's brain -- literally, fly into his body -- but more importantly, we can look into his mind.
When Peter moves his arm, that yellow spot you see there is the interface to the functioning of Peter's mind taking place.
Now you've seen before that with electrodes you can control robotic arms, that brain imaging and scanners can show you the insides of brains.
What's new is that that process has typically taken days or months of analysis.
We've collapsed that through technology to milliseconds, and that allows us to let Peter to look at his brain in real time as he's inside the scanner.
He can look at these 65,000 points of activation per second.
If he can see this pattern in his own brain, he can learn how to control it.
There have been three ways to try to impact the brain: the therapist's couch, pills and the knife.
This is a fourth alternative that you are soon going to have.
We all know that as we form thoughts, they form deep channels in our minds and in our brains.
Chronic pain is an example. If you burn yourself, you pull your hand away.
But if you're still in pain in six months' or six years' time, it's because these circuits are producing pain that's no longer helping you.
If we can look at the activation in the brain that's producing the pain, we can form 3D models and watch in real time the brain process information, and then we can select the areas that produce the pain.
So put your arms back up and flex your bicep.
Now imagine that you will soon be able to look inside your brain and select brain areas to do that same thing.
What you're seeing here is, we've selected the pathways in the brain of a chronic pain patient.
This may shock you, but we're literally reading this person's brain in real time.
They're watching their own brain activation, and they're controlling the pathway that produces their pain.
They're learning to flex this system that releases their own endogenous opiates.
As they do it, in the upper left is a display that's yoked to their brain activation of their own pain being controlled.
When they control their brain, they can control their pain.
This is an investigational technology, but, in clinical trials, we're seeing a 44 to 64 percent decrease in chronic pain patients.
This is not "The Matrix." You can only do this to yourself. You take control.
I've seen inside my brain. You will too, soon.
When you do, what do you want to control?
You will be able to look at all the aspects that make you yourself, all your experiences.
These are some of the areas we're working on today that I don't have time to go into in detail.
But I want to leave with you the big question.
We are the first generation that's going to be able to enter into, using this technology, the human mind and brain.
Where will we take it?
A few years ago, I broke into my own house.
I had just driven home, it was around midnight in the dead of Montreal winter, I had been visiting my friend, Jeff, across town, and the thermometer on the front porch read minus 40 degrees -- and don't bother asking if that's Celsius or Fahrenheit, minus 40 is where the two scales meet -- it was very cold.
And as I stood on the front porch fumbling in my pockets, I found I didn't have my keys.
In fact, I could see them through the window, lying on the dining room table where I had left them.
So I quickly ran around and tried all the other doors and windows, and they were locked tight.
I thought about calling a locksmith -- at least I had my cellphone, but at midnight, it could take a while for a locksmith to show up, and it was cold.
I couldn't go back to my friend Jeff's house for the night because I had an early flight to Europe the next morning, and I needed to get my passport and my suitcase.
So, desperate and freezing cold, I found a large rock and I broke through the basement window, cleared out the shards of glass, I crawled through, I found a piece of cardboard and taped it up over the opening, figuring that in the morning, on the way to the airport, I could call my contractor and ask him to fix it.
This was going to be expensive, but probably no more expensive than a middle-of-the-night locksmith, so I figured, under the circumstances, I was coming out even.
Now, I'm a neuroscientist by training and I know a little bit about how the brain performs under stress.
It releases cortisol that raises your heart rate, it modulates adrenaline levels and it clouds your thinking.
So the next morning, when I woke up on too little sleep, worrying about the hole in the window, and a mental note that I had to call my contractor, and the freezing temperatures, and the meetings I had upcoming in Europe, and, you know, with all the cortisol in my brain, my thinking was cloudy, but I didn't know it was cloudy because my thinking was cloudy.
(Laughter) And it wasn't until I got to the airport check-in counter, that I realized I didn't have my passport.
(Laughter) So I raced home in the snow and ice, 40 minutes, got my passport, raced back to the airport, I made it just in time, but they had given away my seat to someone else, so I got stuck in the back of the plane, next to the bathrooms, in a seat that wouldn't recline, on an eight-hour flight.
Well, I had a lot of time to think during those eight hours and no sleep.
(Laughter) And I started wondering, are there things that I can do, systems that I can put into place, that will prevent bad things from happening?
Or at least if bad things happen, will minimize the likelihood of it being a total catastrophe.
So I started thinking about that, but my thoughts didn't crystallize until about a month later.
I was having dinner with my colleague, Danny Kahneman, the Nobel Prize winner, and I somewhat embarrassedly told him about having broken my window, and, you know, forgotten my passport, and Danny shared with me that he'd been practicing something called prospective hindsight.
(Laughter) It's something that he had gotten from the psychologist Gary Klein, who had written about it a few years before, also called the pre-mortem.
Now, you all know what the postmortem is.
Whenever there's a disaster, a team of experts come in and they try to figure out what went wrong, right?
Well, in the pre-mortem, Danny explained, you look ahead and you try to figure out all the things that could go wrong, and then you try to figure out what you can do to prevent those things from happening, or to minimize the damage.
So what I want to talk to you about today are some of the things we can do in the form of a pre-mortem.
Some of them are obvious, some of them are not so obvious.
I'll start with the obvious ones.
Around the home, designate a place for things that are easily lost.
Now, this sounds like common sense, and it is, but there's a lot of science to back this up, based on the way our spatial memory works.
There's a structure in the brain called the hippocampus, that evolved over tens of thousands of years, to keep track of the locations of important things -- where the well is, where fish can be found, that stand of fruit trees, where the friendly and enemy tribes live.
The hippocampus is the part of the brain that in London taxicab drivers becomes enlarged.
It's the part of the brain that allows squirrels to find their nuts.
And if you're wondering, somebody actually did the experiment where they cut off the olfactory sense of the squirrels, and they could still find their nuts.
They weren't using smell, they were using the hippocampus, this exquisitely evolved mechanism in the brain for finding things.
But it's really good for things that don't move around much, not so good for things that move around.
So this is why we lose car keys and reading glasses and passports.
So in the home, designate a spot for your keys -- a hook by the door, maybe a decorative bowl.
For your passport, a particular drawer.
For your reading glasses, a particular table.
If you designate a spot and you're scrupulous about it, your things will always be there when you look for them.
What about travel?
Take a cell phone picture of your credit cards, your driver's license, your passport, mail it to yourself so it's in the cloud.
If these things are lost or stolen, you can facilitate replacement.
Now these are some rather obvious things.
Remember, when you're under stress, the brain releases cortisol.
Cortisol is toxic, and it causes cloudy thinking.
So part of the practice of the pre-mortem is to recognize that under stress you're not going to be at your best, and you should put systems in place.
And there's perhaps no more stressful a situation than when you're confronted with a medical decision to make.
And at some point, all of us are going to be in that position, where we have to make a very important decision about the future of our medical care or that of a loved one, to help them with a decision.
And so I want to talk about that.
And I'm going to talk about a very particular medical condition.
But this stands as a proxy for all kinds of medical decision-making, and indeed for financial decision-making, and social decision-making -- any kind of decision you have to make that would benefit from a rational assessment of the facts.
So suppose you go to your doctor and the doctor says, "I just got your lab work back, your cholesterol's a little high."
Now, you all know that high cholesterol is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular disease, heart attack, stroke.
And so you're thinking having high cholesterol isn't the best thing, and so the doctor says, "You know, I'd like to give you a drug that will help you lower your cholesterol, a statin."
And you've probably heard of statins, you know that they're among the most widely prescribed drugs in the world today, you probably even know people who take them.
And so you're thinking, "Yeah! Give me the statin."
But there's a question you should ask at this point, a statistic you should ask for that most doctors don't like talking about, and pharmaceutical companies like talking about even less.
It's for the number needed to treat.
Now, what is this, the NNT?
It's the number of people that need to take a drug or undergo a surgery or any medical procedure before one person is helped.
And you're thinking, what kind of crazy statistic is that?
The number should be one.
My doctor wouldn't prescribe something to me if it's not going to help.
But actually, medical practice doesn't work that way.
And it's not the doctor's fault, if it's anybody's fault, it's the fault of scientists like me.
We haven't figured out the underlying mechanisms well enough.
But GlaxoSmithKline estimates that 90 percent of the drugs work in only 30 to 50 percent of the people.
So the number needed to treat for the most widely prescribed statin, what do you suppose it is?
How many people have to take it before one person is helped?
300.
This is according to research by research practitioners Jerome Groopman and Pamela Hartzband, independently confirmed by Bloomberg.com.
I ran through the numbers myself.
300 people have to take the drug for a year before one heart attack, stroke or other adverse event is prevented.
Now you're probably thinking, "Well, OK, one in 300 chance of lowering my cholesterol.
Why not, doc? Give me the prescription anyway."
But you should ask at this point for another statistic, and that is, "Tell me about the side effects." Right?
So for this particular drug, the side effects occur in five percent of the patients.
And they include terrible things -- debilitating muscle and joint pain, gastrointestinal distress -- but now you're thinking, "Five percent, not very likely it's going to happen to me, I'll still take the drug."
But wait a minute.
Remember under stress you're not thinking clearly.
So think about how you're going to work through this ahead of time, so you don't have to manufacture the chain of reasoning on the spot.
300 people take the drug, right? One person's helped, five percent of those 300 have side effects, that's 15 people.
You're 15 times more likely to be harmed by the drug than you are to be helped by the drug.
Now, I'm not saying whether you should take the statin or not.
I'm just saying you should have this conversation with your doctor.
Medical ethics requires it, it's part of the principle of informed consent.
You have the right to have access to this kind of information to begin the conversation about whether you want to take the risks or not.
Now you might be thinking I've pulled this number out of the air for shock value, but in fact it's rather typical, this number needed to treat.
For the most widely performed surgery on men over the age of 50, removal of the prostate for cancer, the number needed to treat is 49.
That's right, 49 surgeries are done for every one person who's helped.
And the side effects in that case occur in 50 percent of the patients.
They include impotence, erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence, rectal tearing, fecal incontinence.
And if you're lucky, and you're one of the 50 percent who has these, they'll only last for a year or two.
So the idea of the pre-mortem is to think ahead of time to the questions that you might be able to ask that will push the conversation forward.
You don't want to have to manufacture all of this on the spot.
And you also want to think about things like quality of life.
Because you have a choice oftentimes, do you I want a shorter life that's pain-free, or a longer life that might have a great deal of pain towards the end?
These are things to talk about and think about now, with your family and your loved ones.
You might change your mind in the heat of the moment, but at least you're practiced with this kind of thinking.
Remember, our brain under stress releases cortisol, and one of the things that happens at that moment is a whole bunch on systems shut down.
There's an evolutionary reason for this.
Face-to-face with a predator, you don't need your digestive system, or your libido, or your immune system, because if you're body is expending metabolism on those things and you don't react quickly, you might become the lion's lunch, and then none of those things matter.
Unfortunately, one of the things that goes out the window during those times of stress is rational, logical thinking, as Danny Kahneman and his colleagues have shown.
So we need to train ourselves to think ahead to these kinds of situations.
I think the important point here is recognizing that all of us are flawed.
We all are going to fail now and then.
The idea is to think ahead to what those failures might be, to put systems in place that will help minimize the damage, or to prevent the bad things from happening in the first place.
Getting back to that snowy night in Montreal, when I got back from my trip, I had my contractor install a combination lock next to the door, with a key to the front door in it, an easy to remember combination.
And I have to admit, I still have piles of mail that haven't been sorted, and piles of emails that I haven't gone through.
So I'm not completely organized, but I see organization as a gradual process, and I'm getting there.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A girl I've never met before changed my life and the life of thousands of other people.
I'm the CEO of DoSomething.org.
It's one of the largest organizations in the world for young people.
In fact it's bigger than the Boy Scouts in the United States.
And we're not homophobic.
(Laughter) And it's true -- the way we communicate with young people is by text, because that's how young people communicate.
So we'll run over 200 campaigns this year, things like collecting peanut butter for food pantries, or making Valentine's Day cards for senior citizens who are homebound.
And we'll text them.
And we'll have a 97 percent open rate.
It'll over-index Hispanic and urban.
We collected 200,000 jars of peanut butter and over 365,000 Valentine's Day cards.
This is big scale. OK -- (Applause) But there's one weird side effect.
Every time we send out a text message, we get back a few dozen text messages having nothing to do with peanut butter or hunger or senior citizens -- but text messages about being bullied, text messages about being addicted to pot.
And the worst message we ever got said exactly this: "He won't stop raping me.
It's my dad.
He told me not to tell anyone. Are you there?"
We couldn't believe this was happening.
We couldn't believe that something so horrific could happen to a human being, and that she would share it with us -- something so intimate, so personal.
And we realized we had to stop triaging this and we had to build a crisis text line for these people in pain.
So we launched Crisis Text Line, very quietly, in Chicago and El Paso -- just a few thousand people in each market.
And in four months, we were in all 295 area codes in America.
Just to put that into perspective, that's zero marketing and faster growth than when Facebook first launched.
(Applause) Text is unbelievably private.
No one hears you talking.
So we spike everyday at lunch time -- kids are sitting at the lunch table and you think that she's texting the cute boy across the hall, but she's actually texting us about her bulimia.
And we don't get the word "like" or "um" or hyperventilating or crying.
We just get facts.
We get things like, "I want to die.
I have a bottle of pills on the desk in front of me."
And so the crisis counselor says, "How about you put those pills in the drawer while we text?"
And they go back and forth for a while.
And the crisis counselor gets the girl to give her her address, because if you're texting a text line, you want help.
So she gets the address and the counselor triggers an active rescue while they're texting back and forth.
And then it goes quiet -- 23 minutes with no response from this girl.
And the next message that comes in says -- it's the mom -- "I had no idea, and I was in the house, we're in an ambulance on our way to the hospital."
As a mom that one just -- The next message comes a month later.
"I just got out of the hospital.
I was diagnosed as bipolar, and I think I'm going to be OK."
(Applause) I would love to tell you that that's an unusual exchange, but we're doing on average 2.41 active rescues a day.
Thirty percent of our text messages are about suicide and depression -- huge.
The beautiful thing about Crisis Text Line is that these are strangers counseling other strangers on the most intimate issues, and getting them from hot moments to cold moments.
It's exciting, and I will tell you that we have done a total of more than 6.5 million text messages in less than two years.
(Applause) But the thing that really gets me hot and sweaty about this, the thing that really gets me psyched is the data: 6.5 million messages -- that's the volume, velocity and variety to provide a really juicy corpus.
We can do things like predictive work.
We can do all kinds of conclusions and learnings from that data set.
So we can be better, and the world can be better.
So how do we use the data to make us better?
Alright, chances are someone here, someone watching this has seen a therapist or a shrink at some point in time in your life -- you do not have to raise your hand.
(Laughter) How do you know that person's any good?
Oh, they have a degree from Harvard on the wall?
Are you sure he didn't graduate in the bottom 10 percent?
(Laughter) When my husband and I saw a marriage counselor, I thought she was a genius when she said, "I'll see you guys in two weeks -- but I need to see you next week, sir."
(Laughter) We have the data to know what makes a great counselor.
We know that if you text the words "numbs" and "sleeve," there's a 99 percent match for cutting.
We know that if you text in the words "mg" and "rubber band," there's a 99 percent match for substance abuse.
And we know that if you text in "sex," "oral" and "Mormon," you're questioning if you're gay.
Now that's interesting information that a counselor could figure out but that algorithm in our hands means that an automatic pop-up says, "99 percent match for cutting -- try asking one of these questions" to prompt the counselor.
Or "99 percent match for substance abuse, here are three drug clinics near the texter."
It makes us more accurate.
On the day that Robin Williams committed suicide, people flooded hotlines all over this country.
It was sad to see an icon, a funnyman, commit suicide, and there were three hour wait times on every phone hotline in the country.
We had a spike in volume also.
The difference was if you text us, "I want to die," or "I want to kill myself," the algorithm reads that, you're code orange, and you become number one in the queue.
So we can handle severity, not chronological.
(Applause) This data is also making the world better because I'm sitting on the world's first map of real-time crises.
Think about it: those 6.5 million messages, auto-tagging through natural language processes, all of these data points -- I can tell you that the worst day of the week for eating disorders: Monday.
The worst time of day for substance abuse: 5am.
And that Montana is a beautiful place to visit but you do not want to live there, because it is the number one state for suicidal ideation.
And we've made this data public and free and open.
We've pulled all the personally identifiable information.
And it's in a place called CrisisTrends.org.
Because I want schools to be able to see that Monday is the worst day for eating disorders, so that they can plan meals and guidance counselors to be there on Mondays.
And I want families to see that substance abuse questions spike at 5am.
I want somebody to take care of those Native American reservations in Montana.
(Applause) Data, evidence makes policy, research, journalism, policing, school boards -- everything better.
I don't think of myself as a mental health activist.
I think of myself as a national health activist.
I get really excited about this data, I'm a little nerdy.
Yeah, that sounded too girly.
I'm nerdy.
(Laughter) I love data.
And the only difference really between me and those people in hoodies down the road with their fat-funded companies, is that I'm not inspired by helping you find Chinese food at 2am in Dallas, or helping you touch your wrist and get a car immediately, or swipe right and get laid.
I'm inspired -- (Laughter, applause) I want to use tech and data to make the world a better place.
I want to use it to help that girl, who texted in about being raped by her father.
Because the truth is we never heard from her again.
And I hope that she is somewhere safe and healthy, and I hope that she sees this talk and she knows that her desperation and her courage inspired the creation of Crisis Text Line and inspires me every freaking day.
(Applause)
When I was a kid, my parents would tell me, "You can make a mess, but you have to clean up after yourself."
So freedom came with responsibility.
But my imagination would take me to all these wonderful places, where everything was possible.
So I grew up in a bubble of innocence -- or a bubble of ignorance, I should say, because adults would lie to us to protect us from the ugly truth.
And growing up, I found out that adults make a mess, and they're not very good at cleaning up after themselves.
Fast forward, I am an adult now, and I teach citizen science and invention at the Hong Kong Harbour School.
And it doesn't take too long before my students walk on a beach and stumble upon piles of trash.
So as good citizens, we clean up the beaches -- and no, he is not drinking alcohol, and if he is, I did not give it to him.
(Laughter) And so it's sad to say, but today more than 80 percent of the oceans have plastic in them.
It's a horrifying fact.
And in past decades, we've been taking those big ships out and those big nets, and we collect those plastic bits that we look at under a microscope, and we sort them, and then we put this data onto a map.
But that takes forever, it's very expensive, and so it's quite risky to take those big boats out.
So with my students, ages six to 15, we've been dreaming of inventing a better way.
So we've transformed our tiny Hong Kong classroom into a workshop.
And so we started building this small workbench, with different heights, so even really short kids can participate.
And let me tell you, kids with power tools are awesome and safe.
(Laughter) Not really.
And so, back to plastic.
We collect this plastic and we grind it to the size we find it in the ocean, which is very small because it breaks down.
And so this is how we work.
I let the imaginations of my students run wild.
And my job is to try to collect the best of each kid's idea and try to combine it into something that hopefully would work.
And so we have agreed that instead of collecting plastic bits, we are going to collect only the data.
So we're going to get an image of the plastic with a robot -- so robots, kids get very excited.
And the next thing we do -- we do what we call "rapid prototyping."
We are so rapid at prototyping that the lunch is still in the lunchbox when we're hacking it.
(Laughter) And we hack table lamps and webcams, into plumbing fixtures and we assemble that into a floating robot that will be slowly moving through water and through the plastic that we have there -- and this is the image that we get in the robot.
So we see the plastic pieces floating slowly through the sensor, and the computer on board will process this image, and measure the size of each particle, so we have a rough estimate of how much plastic there is in the water.
So we documented this invention step by step on a website for inventors called Instructables, in the hope that somebody would make it even better.
What was really cool about this project was that the students saw a local problem, and boom -- they are trying to immediately address it.
[I can investigate my local problem] But my students in Hong Kong are hyperconnected kids.
And they watch the news, they watch the Internet, and they came across this image.
This was a child, probably under 10, cleaning up an oil spill bare-handed, in the Sundarbans, which is the world's largest mangrove forest in Bangladesh.
So they were very shocked, because this is the water they drink, this is the water they bathe in, this is the water they fish in -- this is the place where they live.
And also you can see the water is brown, the mud is brown and oil is brown, so when everything is mixed up, it's really hard to see what's in the water.
But, there's a technology that's rather simple, that's called spectrometry, that allows you see what's in the water.
So we built a rough prototype of a spectrometer, and you can shine light through different substances that produce different spectrums, so that can help you identify what's in the water.
So we packed this prototype of a sensor, and we shipped it to Bangladesh.
So what was cool about this project was that beyond addressing a local problem, or looking at a local problem, my students used their empathy and their sense of being creative to help, remotely, other kids.
[I can investigate a remote problem] So I was very compelled by doing the second experiments, and I wanted to take it even further -- maybe addressing an even harder problem, and it's also closer to my heart.
So I'm half Japanese and half French, and maybe you remember in 2011 there was a massive earthquake in Japan.
It was so violent that it triggered several giant waves -- they are called tsunami -- and those tsunami destroyed many cities on the eastern coast of Japan.
More than 14,000 people died in an instant.
Also, it damaged the nuclear power plant of Fukushima, the nuclear power plant just by the water.
And today, I read the reports and an average of 300 tons are leaking from the nuclear power plant into the Pacific Ocean.
And today the whole Pacific Ocean has traces of contamination of cesium-137.
If you go outside on the West Coast, you can measure Fukushima everywhere.
But if you look at the map, it can look like most of the radioactivity has been washed away from the Japanese coast, and most of it is now -- it looks like it's safe, it's blue.
Well, reality is a bit more complicated than this.
So I've been going to Fukushima every year since the accident, and I measure independently and with other scientists, on land, in the river -- and this time we wanted to take the kids.
So of course we didn't take the kids, the parents wouldn't allow that to happen.
(Laughter) But every night we would report to "Mission Control" -- different masks they're wearing.
It could look like they didn't take the work seriously, but they really did because they're going to have to live with radioactivity their whole life.
And so what we did with them is that we'd discuss the data we collected that day, and talk about where we should be going next -- strategy, itinerary, etc...
And to do this, we built a very rough topographical map of the region around the nuclear power plant.
And so we built the elevation map, we sprinkled pigments to represent real-time data for radioactivity, and we sprayed water to simulate the rainfall.
And with this we could see that the radioactive dust was washing from the top of the mountain into the river system, and leaking into the ocean.
So it was a rough estimate.
But with this in mind, we organized this expedition, which was the closest civilians have been to the nuclear power plant.
We are sailing 1.5 kilometers away from the nuclear power plant, and with the help of the local fisherman, we are collecting sediment from the seabed with a custom sediment sampler we've invented and built.
We pack the sediment into small bags, we then dispatch them to hundreds of small bags that we send to different universities, and we produce the map of the seabed radioactivity, especially in estuaries where the fish will reproduce, and I will hope that we will have improved the safety of the local fishermen and of your favorite sushi.
(Laughter) You can see a progression here -- we've gone from a local problem to a remote problem to a global problem.
And it's been super exciting to work at these different scales, with also very simple, open-source technologies.
But at the same time, it's been increasingly frustrating because we have only started to measure the damage that we have done.
We haven't even started to try to solve the problems.
And so I wonder if we should just take a leap and try to invent better ways to do all these things.
And so the classroom started to feel a little bit small, so we found an industrial site in Hong Kong, and we turned it into the largest mega-space focused on social and environmental impact.
It's in central Hong Kong, and it's a place we can work with wood, metal, chemistry, a bit of biology, a bit of optics, basically you can build pretty much everything there.
And its a place where adults and kids can play together.
It's a place where kids' dreams can come true, with the help of adults, and where adults can be kids again.
Student: Acceleration! Acceleration!
Cesar Harada: We're asking questions such as, can we invent the future of mobility with renewable energy?
For example.
Or, can we help the mobility of the aging population by transforming very standard wheelchairs into cool, electric vehicles?
So plastic, oil and radioactivity are horrible, horrible legacies, but the very worst legacy that we can leave our children is lies.
We can no longer afford to shield the kids from the ugly truth because we need their imagination to invent the solutions.
So citizen scientists, makers, dreamers -- we must prepare the next generation that cares about the environment and people, and that can actually do something about it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to tell you three stories about the power of relationships to solve the deep and complex social problems of this century.
You know, sometimes it seems like all these problems of poverty, inequality, ill health, unemployment, violence, addiction -- they're right there in one person's life.
So I want to tell you about someone like this that I know.
I'm going to call her Ella.
Ella lives in a British city on a run down estate.
The shops are closed, the pub's gone, the playground's pretty desolate and never used, and inside Ella's house, the tension is palpable and the noise levels are deafening.
The TV's on at full volume.
One of her sons is fighting with one of her daughters.
Another son, Ryan, is keeping up this constant stream of abuse from the kitchen, and the dogs are locked behind the bedroom door and straining.
Ella is stuck.
She has lived with crisis for 40 years.
She knows nothing else, and she knows no way out.
She's had a whole series of abusive partners, and, tragically, one of her children has been taken into care by social services.
The three children that still live with her suffer from a whole range of problems, and none of them are in education.
And Ella says to me that she is repeating the cycle of her own mother's life before her.
But when I met Ella, there were 73 different services on offer for her and her family in the city where she lives, 73 different services run out of 24 departments in one city, and Ella and her partners and her children were known to most of them.
They think nothing of calling social services to try and mediate one of the many arguments that broke out.
And the family home was visited on a regular basis by social workers, youth workers, a health officer, a housing officer, a home tutor and the local policemen.
And the governments say that there are 100,000 families in Britain today like Ella's, struggling to break the cycle of economic, social and environmental deprivation.
And they also say that managing this problem costs a quarter of a million pounds per family per year and yet nothing changes.
None of these well-meaning visitors are making a difference.
This is a chart we made in the same city with another family like Ella's.
This shows 30 years of intervention in that family's life.
And just as with Ella, not one of these interventions is part of an overall plan.
There's no end goal in sight.
None of the interventions are dealing with the underlying issues.
These are just containment measures, ways of managing a problem.
One of the policemen says to me, "Look, I just deliver the message and then I leave."
So, I've spent time living with families like Ella's in different parts of the world, because I want to know: what can we learn from places where our social institutions just aren't working?
I want to know what it feels like to live in Ella's family.
I want to know what's going on and what we can do differently.
Well, the first thing I learned is that cost is a really slippery concept.
Because when the government says that a family like Ella's costs a quarter of a million pounds a year to manage, what it really means is that this system costs a quarter of a million pounds a year.
Because not one penny of this money actually touches Ella's family in a way that makes a difference.
Instead, the system is just like this costly gyroscope that spins around the families, keeping them stuck at its heart, exactly where they are.
And I also spent time with the frontline workers, and I learned that it is an impossible situation.
So Tom, who is the social worker for Ella's 14-year-old son Ryan, has to spend 86 percent of his time servicing the system: meetings with colleagues, filling out forms, more meetings with colleagues to discuss the forms, and maybe most shockingly, the 14 percent of the time he has to be with Ryan is spent getting data and information for the system.
So he says to Ryan, "How often have you been smoking? Have you been drinking?
When did you go to school?"
And this kind of interaction rules out the possibility of a normal conversation.
It rules out the possibility of what's needed to build a relationship between Tom and Ryan.
When we made this chart, the frontline workers, the professionals -- they stared at it absolutely amazed.
It snaked around the walls of their offices.
So many hours, so well meant, but ultimately so futile.
And there was this moment of absolute breakdown, and then of clarity: we had to work in a different way.
So in a really brave step, the leaders of the city where Ella lives agreed that we could start by reversing Ryan's ratio.
So everyone who came into contact with Ella or a family like Ella's would spend 80 percent of their time working with the families and only 20 percent servicing the system.
And even more radically, the families would lead and they would decide who was in a best position to help them.
So Ella and another mother were asked to be part of an interview panel, to choose from amongst the existing professionals who would work with them.
And many, many people wanted to join us, because you don't go into this kind of work to manage a system, you go in because you can and you want to make a difference.
So Ella and the mother asked everybody who came through the door, "What will you do when my son starts kicking me?"
And so the first person who comes in says, "Well, I'll look around for the nearest exit and I will back out very slowly, and if the noise is still going on, I'll call my supervisor."
And the mothers go, "You're the system. Get out of here!"
And then the next person who comes is a policeman, and he says, "Well, I'll tackle your son to the ground and then I'm not sure what I'll do."
And the mothers say, "Thank you."
So, they chose professionals who confessed they didn't necessarily have the answers, who said -- well, they weren't going to talk in jargon.
They showed their human qualities and convinced the mothers that they would stick with them through thick and thin, even though they wouldn't be soft with them.
So these new teams and the families were then given a sliver of the former budget, but they could spend the money in any way they chose.
And so one of the families went out for supper.
They went to McDonald's and they sat down and they talked and they listened for the first time in a long time.
Another family asked the team if they would help them do up their home.
And one mother took the money and she used it as a float to start a social enterprise.
And in a really short space of time, something new started to grow: a relationship between the team and the workers.
And then some remarkable changes took place.
Maybe it's not surprising that the journey for Ella has had some big steps backwards as well as forwards.
But today, she's completed an IT training course, she has her first paid job, her children are back in school, and the neighbors, who previously just hoped this family would be moved anywhere except next door to them, are fine.
They've made some new friendships.
And all the same people have been involved in this transformation -- same families, same workers.
But the relationship between them has been supported to change.
So I'm telling you about Ella because I think that relationships are the critical resource we have in solving some of these intractable problems.
But today, our relationships are all but written off by our politics, our social policies, our welfare institutions.
And I've learned that this really has to change.
So what do I mean by relationships?
I'm talking about the simple human bonds between us, a kind of authentic sense of connection, of belonging, the bonds that make us happy, that support us to change, to be brave like Ella and try something new.
And, you know, it's no accident that those who run and work in the institutions that are supposed to support Ella and her family don't talk about relationships, because relationships are expressly designed out of a welfare model that was drawn up in Britain and exported around the world.
The contemporaries of William Beveridge, who was the architect of the first welfare state and the author of the Beveridge Report, had little faith in what they called the average sensual or emotional man.
Instead, they trusted this idea of the impersonal system and the bureaucrat who would be detached and work in this system.
And the impact of Beveridge on the way the modern state sees social issues just can't be underestimated.
The Beveridge Report sold over 100,000 copies in the first weeks of publication alone.
People queued in the rain on a November night to get hold of a copy, and it was read across the country, across the colonies, across Europe, across the United States of America, and it had this huge impact on the way that welfare states were designed around the globe.
The cultures, the bureaucracies, the institutions -- they are global, and they've come to seem like common sense.
They've become so ingrained in us, that actually we don't even see them anymore.
And I think it's really important to say that in the 20th century, they were remarkably successful, these institutions.
They led to longer lifespans, the eradication of mass disease, mass housing, almost universal education.
But at the same time, Beveridge sowed the seeds of today's challenges.
So let me tell you a second story.
What do you think today is a bigger killer than a lifetime of smoking?
It's loneliness.
According to government statistics, one person over 60 -- one in three -- doesn't speak to or see another person in a week.
One person in 10, that's 850,000 people, doesn't speak to anyone else in a month.
And we're not the only people with this problem; this problem touches the whole of the Western world.
And it's even more acute in countries like China, where a process of rapid urbanization, mass migration, has left older people alone in the villages.
And so the services that Beveridge designed and exported -- they can't address this kind of problem.
Loneliness is like a collective relational challenge, and it can't be addressed by a traditional bureaucratic response.
So some years ago, wanting to understand this problem, I started to work with a group of about 60 older people in South London, where I live.
I went shopping, I played bingo, but mainly I was just observing and listening.
I wanted to know what we could do differently.
And if you ask them, people tell you they want two things.
They want somebody to go up a ladder and change a light bulb, or to be there when they come out of hospital.
They want on-demand, practical support.
And they want to have fun.
They want to go out, do interesting things with like-minded people, and make friends like we've all made friends at every stage of our lives.
So we rented a phone line, hired a couple of handymen, and started a service we called "Circle."
And Circle offers its local membership a toll-free 0 800 number that they can call on demand for any support.
And people have called us for so many reasons.
They've called because their pets are unwell, their DVD is broken, they've forgotten how to use their mobile phone, or maybe they are coming out of hospital and they want someone to be there.
And Circle also offers a rich social calendar -- knitting, darts, museum tours, hot air ballooning -- you name it.
But here's the interesting thing, the really deep change: over time, the friendships that have formed have begun to replace the practical offer.
So let me tell you about Belinda.
Belinda's a Circle member, and she was going into hospital for a hip operation, so she called her local Circle to say they wouldn't see her for a bit.
And Damon, who runs the local Circle, calls her back and says, "How can I help?"
And Belinda says, "Oh no, I'm fine -- Jocelyn is doing the shopping, Tony's doing the gardening, Melissa and Joe are going to come in and cook and chat."
So five Circle members had organized themselves to take care of Belinda.
And Belinda's 80, although she says that she feels 25 inside, but she also says that she felt stuck and pretty down when she joined Circle.
But the simple act of encouraging her to come along to that first event led to a process where natural friendships formed, friendships that today are replacing the need for expensive services.
It's relationships that are making the difference.
So I think that three factors have converged that enable us to put relationships at the heart and center of how we solve social problems today.
Firstly, the nature of the problems -- they've changed, and they require different solutions.
Secondly, the cost, human as much as financial, of doing business as usual.
And thirdly, technology.
I've talked about the first two factors.
It's technology that enables these approaches to scale and potentially now support thousands of people.
So the technology we've used is really simple, it's made up of available things like databases, mobile phones.
Circle has got this very simple system that underpins it, enables a small local team to support a membership of up to a thousand.
And you can contrast this with a neighborhood organization of the 1970s, when this kind of scale just wasn't possible, neither was the quality or the longevity that the spine of technology can provide.
So it's relationships underpinned by technology that can turn the Beveridge models on their heads.
The Beveridge models are all about institutions with finite resources, anonymously managing access.
In my work at the front line, I've seen again and again how up to 80 percent of resource is spent keeping people out.
So professionals have to administer these increasingly complex forms of administration that are basically about stopping people accessing the service or managing the queue.
And Circle, like the relational services that we and others have designed, inverts this logic.
What it says is, the more people, the more relationships, the stronger the solution.
So I want to tell you my third and final story, which is about unemployment.
In Britain, as in most places in the world, our welfare states were primarily designed to get people into work, to educate them for this, and to keep them healthy.
But here, too, the systems are failing.
And so the response has been to try and make these old systems even more efficient and transactional -- to speed up processing times, divide people into ever-smaller categories, try and target services at them more efficiently -- in other words, the very opposite of relational.
But guess how most people find work today?
Through word of mouth.
It turns out that in Britain today, most new jobs are not advertised.
So it's friends that tell you about a job, it's friends that recommend you for a job, and it's a rich and diverse social network that helps you find work.
Maybe some of you here this evening are thinking, "But I found my job through an advert," but if you think back, it was probably a friend that showed you the ad and then encouraged you to apply.
But not surprisingly, people who perhaps most need this rich and diverse network are those who are most isolated from it.
So knowing this, and also knowing about the costs and failure of current systems, we designed something new with relationships at its heart.
We designed a service that encourages people to meet up, people in and out of work, to work together in structured ways and try new opportunities.
And, well, it's very hard to compare the results of these new systems with the old transactional models, but it looks like, with our first 1,000 members, we outperformed existing services by a factor of three, at a fraction of the cost.
And here, too, we've used technology, but not to network people in the way that a social platform would do.
We've used it to bring people face to face and connect them with each other, building real relationships and supporting people to find work.
At the end of his life, in 1948, Beveridge wrote a third report.
And in it he said he had made a dreadful mistake.
He had left people and their communities out.
And this omission, he said, led to seeing people, and people starting to see themselves, within the categories of the bureaucracies and the institutions.
And human relationships were already withering.
But unfortunately, this third report was much less read than Beveridge's earlier work.
But today, we need to bring people and their communities back into the heart of the way we design new systems and new services, in an approach that I call "Relational Welfare."
We need to leave behind these old, transactional, unsuitable, outdated models, and we need to adopt instead the shared collective relational responses that can support a family like Ella's, that can address an issue like loneliness, that can support people into work and up the skills curve in a modern labor market, that can also address challenges of education, of health care systems, and so many more of those problems that are pressing on our societies.
It is all about relationships.
Relationships are the critical resource we have.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A year ago, we were invited by the Swiss Embassy in Berlin to present our art projects.
We are used to invitations, but this invitation really thrilled us.
The Swiss Embassy in Berlin is special.
It is the only old building in the government district that was not destroyed during the Second World War, and it sits right next to the Federal Chancellery.
No one is closer to Chancellor Merkel than the Swiss diplomats.
(Laughter) The government district in Berlin also contains the Reichstag -- Germany's parliament -- and the Brandenburg Gate, and right next to the gate there are other embassies, in particular the US and the British Embassy.
Although Germany is an advanced democracy, citizens are limited in their constitutional rights in its government district.
The right of assembly and the right to demonstrate are restricted there.
And this is interesting from an artistic point of view.
The opportunities to exercise participation and to express oneself are always bound to a certain order and always subject to a specific regulation.
With an awareness of the dependencies of these regulations, we can gain a new perspective.
The given terms and conditions shape our perception, our actions and our lives.
And this is crucial in another context.
Over the last couple of years, we learned that from the roofs of the US and the British Embassy, the secret services have been listening to the entire district, including the mobile phone of Angela Merkel.
The antennas of the British GCHQ are hidden in a white cylindrical radome, while the listening post of the American NSA is covered by radio transparent screens.
But how to address these hidden and disguised forces?
With my colleague, Christoph Wachter, we accepted the invitation of the Swiss Embassy.
And we used this opportunity to exploit the specific situation.
If people are spying on us, it stands to reason that they have to listen to what we are saying.
(Laughter) On the roof of the Swiss Embassy, we installed a series of antennas.
They weren't as sophisticated as those used by the Americans and the British.
(Laughter) They were makeshift can antennas, not camouflaged but totally obvious and visible.
The Academy of Arts joined the project, and so we built another large antenna on their rooftop, exactly between the listening posts of the NSA and the GCHQ.
(Laughter) Never have we been observed in such detail while building an art installation.
A helicopter circled over our heads with a camera registering each and every move we made, and on the roof of the US Embassy, security officers patrolled.
Although the government district is governed by a strict police order, there are no specific laws relating to digital communication.
Our installation was therefore perfectly legal, and the Swiss Ambassador informed Chancellor Merkel about it.
We named the project "Can You Hear Me?"
(Laughter) The antennas created an open and free Wi-Fi communication network in which anyone who wanted to would be able to participate using any Wi-Fi-enabled device without any hindrance, and be able to send messages to those listening on the frequencies that were being intercepted.
Text messages, voice chat, file sharing -- anything could be sent anonymously.
And people did communicate.
Over 15,000 messages were sent.
Here are some examples.
"Hello world, hello Berlin, hello NSA, hello GCHQ."
"NSA Agents, Do the Right Thing! Blow the whistle!"
"This is the NSA. In God we trust. All others we track!!!!!"
(Laughter) "#@nonymous is watching #NSA #GCHQ - we are part of your organizations.
# expect us. We will #shutdown" "This is the NSA's Achilles heel. Open Networks."
"Agents, what twisted story of yourself will you tell your grandchildren?"
"@NSA My neighbors are noisy. Please send a drone strike."
(Laughter) "Make Love, Not cyberwar."
We invited the embassies and the government departments to participate in the open network, too, and to our surprise, they did.
Files appeared on the network, including classified documents leaked from the parliamentary investigation commission, which highlights that the free exchange and discussion of vital information is starting to become difficult, even for members of a parliament.
We also organized guided tours to experience and sound out the power constellations on-site.
The tours visited the restricted zones around the embassies, and we discussed the potential and the highlights of communication.
If we become aware of the constellation, the terms and conditions of communication, it not only broadens our horizon, it allows us to look behind the regulations that limit our worldview, our specific social, political or aesthetic conventions.
Let's look at an actual example.
The fate of people living in the makeshift settlements on the outskirts of Paris is hidden and faded from view.
It's a vicious circle.
It's not poverty, not racism, not exclusion that are new.
What is new is how these realities are hidden and how people are made invisible in an age of global and overwhelming communication and exchange.
Such makeshift settlements are considered illegal, and therefore those living in them don't have a chance of making their voices heard.
On the contrary, every time they appear, every time they risk becoming visible, merely gives grounds for further persecution, expulsion and suppression.
What interested us was how we could come to know this hidden side.
We were searching for an interface and we found one.
It's not a digital interface, but a physical one: it's a hotel.
We named the project "Hotel Gelem."
Together with Roma families, we created several Hotel Gelems in Europe, for example, in Freiburg in Germany, in Montreuil near Paris, and also in the Balkans.
These are real hotels.
People can stay there.
But they aren't a commercial enterprise.
They are a symbol.
You can go online and ask for a personal invitation to come and live for a few days in the Hotel Gelem, in their homes, eating, working and living with the Roma families.
Here, the Roma families are not the travelers; the visitors are.
Here, the Roma families are not a minority; the visitors are.
The point is not to make judgments, but rather to find out about the context that determines these disparate and seemingly insurmountable contradictions.
In the world of globalization, the continents are drifting closer to each other.
Cultures, goods and people are in permanent exchange, but at the same time, the gap between the world of the privileged and the world of the excluded is growing.
We were recently in Australia.
For us, it was no problem to enter the country.
We have European passports, visas and air tickets.
But asylum seekers who arrive by boat in Australia are deported or taken to prison.
The interception of the boats and the disappearance of the people into the detention system are veiled by the Australian authorities.
These procedures are declared to be secret military operations.
After dramatic escapes from crisis zones and war zones, men, women and children are detained by Australia without trial, sometimes for years.
During our stay, however, we managed to reach out and work with asylum seekers who were imprisoned, despite strict screening and isolation.
From these contexts was born an installation in the art space of the Queensland University of Technology in Brisbane.
On the face of it, it was a very simple installation.
On the floor, a stylized compass gave the direction to each immigration detention center, accompanied by the distance and the name of the immigration facility.
But the exhibition step came in the form of connectivity.
Above every floor marking, there was a headset.
Visitors were offered the opportunity to talk directly to a refugee who was or had been imprisoned in a specific detention facility and engage in a personal conversation.
In the protected context of the art exhibition, asylum seekers felt free to talk about themselves, their story and their situation, without fear of consequences.
Visitors immersed themselves in long conversations about families torn apart, about dramatic escapes from war zones, about suicide attempts, about the fate of children in detention.
Emotions ran deep. Many wept.
Several revisited the exhibition.
It was a powerful experience.
Europe is now facing a stream of migrants.
The situation for the asylum seekers is made worse by contradictory policies and the temptation of militarized responses.
We have also established communication systems in remote refugee centers in Switzerland and Greece.
They are all about providing basic information -- weather forecasts, legal information, guidance.
But they are significant.
Information on the Internet that could ensure survival along dangerous routes is being censored, and the provision of such information is becoming increasingly criminalized.
This brings us back to our network and to the antennas on the roof of the Swiss Embassy in Berlin and the "Can You Hear Me?" project.
We should not take it for granted to be boundlessly connected.
We should start making our own connections, fighting for this idea of an equal and globally interconnected world.
This is essential to overcome our speechlessness and the separation provoked by rival political forces.
It is only in truly exposing ourselves to the transformative power of this experience that we can overcome prejudice and exclusion.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Mathias.
The other half of your artistic duo is also here.
Christoph Wachter, come onstage.
(Applause) First, tell me just a detail: the name of the hotel is not a random name.
Gelem means something specific in the Roma language.
Mathias Jud: Yes, "Gelem, Gelem" is the title of the Romani hymn, the official, and it means "I went a long way."
BG: That's just to add the detail to your talk.
But you two traveled to the island of Lesbos very recently, you're just back a couple of days ago, in Greece, where thousands of refugees are arriving and have been arriving over the last few months.
What did you see there and what did you do there?
Christoph Wachter: Well, Lesbos is one of the Greek islands close to Turkey, and during our stay, many asylum seekers arrived by boat on overcrowded dinghies, and after landing, they were left completely on their own.
They are denied many services.
For example, they are not allowed to buy a bus ticket or to rent a hotel room, so many families literally sleep in the streets.
And we installed networks there to allow basic communication, because I think, I believe, it's not only that we have to speak about the refugees, I think we need to start talking to them.
And by doing so, we can realize that it is about human beings, about their lives and their struggle to survive.
BG: And allow them to talk as well.
Christoph, thank you for coming to TED.
Mathias, thank you for coming to TED and sharing your story.
(Applause)
I come from Egypt, which is also called Umm al-Dunya, the Mother of the World.
It's a rich country filled with stories of rebellion, stories of civilizational triumph and downfall and the rich, religious, ethnic, cultural and linguistic diversity.
Growing up in such an environment, I became a strong believer in the power of storytelling.
As I searched for the medium with which to tell my story, I stumbled upon graphic design.
I would like to share with you a project of how graphic design can bring the Arabic language to life.
But first, let me tell you why I want to do this.
I believe that graphic design can change the world.
At least in my very own city of Cairo, it helped overthrow two separate dictators.
As you can see from those photos, the power and potential of graphic design as a tool for positive change is undeniably strong.
Egypt's 2011 revolution was also a grassroots design revolution.
Everyone became a creator.
People were the real designers and, just overnight, Cairo was flooded with posters, signage, graffiti.
Visual communication was the medium that spoke far louder than words when the population of over 90 million voices were suppressed for almost 30 years.
It was precisely this political and social suppression, coupled with decades of colonialism and miseducation that slowly eroded the significance of the Arabic script in the region.
All of these countries once used Arabic.
Now it's just the green and the blue.
To put it simply, the Arabic script is dying.
In postcolonial Arab countries functioning in an increasingly globalized world, it is a growing alarm that less and less people are using the Arabic script to communicate.
As I was studying my master's in Italy, I noticed myself missing Arabic.
I missed looking at the letters, digesting their meaning.
So one day, I walked into one of the biggest libraries in Italy in search of an Arabic book.
I was surprised to find that this is what they had under the category of "Arabic/Middle Eastern books."
(Laughter) Fear, terrorism and destruction.
One word: ISIS.
My heart ached that this is how we are portrayed to the world, even from a literary perspective.
I asked myself: Whatever happened to the world-renowned writers like Naguib Mahfouz, Khalil Gibran, iconic poets like Mutanabbi, Nizar Qabbani?
Think about this.
The cultural products of an entire region of the world, as rich, as diverse, have been deemed redundant, if not ignored altogether.
The cultural products of an entire region of the world have been barred from imparting any kind of real impact on global media productions and contemporary social discourse.
And then I reminded myself of my number one belief: design can change the world.
All you need is for someone to catch a glimpse of your work, feel, connect.
And so I started.
I thought about how can I stop the world from seeing us as evil, as terrorists of this planet, and start perceiving us as equals, fellow humans?
How can I save and honor the Arabic script and share it with other people, other cultures?
And then it hit me: What if I combined the two most significant symbols of innocence and Arab identity?
Maybe then people could resonate.
What's more pure, innocent and fun as LEGO?
It's a universal child's toy.
You play with them, you build with them, and with them, you imagine endless possibilities.
My eureka moment was to find a bilingual solution for Arabic education, because effective communication and education is the road to more tolerant communities.
However, the Arabic and Latin scripts do not only represent different worlds but also create technical difficulties for both Eastern and Western communities on a daily basis.
There are so many reasons why Arabic and Latin are different, but here are some of the main ones.
Yes, both use upward and downward strokes, but have completely different baselines.
Arabic tends to be more calligraphic and connectivity is important to the Arabic language, whose letters have to be mostly joined in order to articulate a given word.
It also uses an entirely different system of punctuation and diacritics.
But most importantly, Arabic has no capital letters.
Instead it has four different letter forms: initial, medial, isolated and final.
I want to introduce the Arabic language to young learners, foreign speakers, but most importantly help refugees integrate to their host societies through creating a bilingual learning system, a two-way flow of communication.
And I called it "Let's Play."
The idea is to simply create a fun and engaging way of learning Modern Standard Arabic through LEGO.
These are the two words. "Let's Play."
Every colored bar marks an Arabic letter.
As you can see, the letter is explained in form, sound and examples of words in function, in addition to the equivalent in Latin.
Together, they form a fun pocket book with the 29 Arabic letters and the four different forms, plus a 400-word dictionary.
So this is how the page looks like.
You have the letter, the transliteration in Latin and the description underneath.
I'll take you through the process.
So first in my tiny studio in Florence, I built the letters.
I photographed each letter separately, and then I retouched every letter and chose the correct color background and typefaces to use.
Ultimately, I created the full letter set, which is 29 letters times four different forms.
That's 116 letters build just in one week.
I believe that information should and can be fun, portable.
This book is the final product, which I would eventually like to publish and translate into as many languages in the world, so that Arabic teaching and learning becomes fun, easy and accessible globally.
With this book, I hope to save my nation's beautiful script.
(Applause) Thank you.
Working on this project was a form of visual meditation, like a Sufi dance, a prayer to a better planet.
One set of building blocks made two languages.
LEGO is just a metaphor.
It's because we are all made of the same building unit, is that I can see a future where the barriers between people all come tumbling down.
So no matter how ugly the world around us gets, or how many discouraging books on ISIS, the terrorist group, and not Isis, the ancient Egyptian goddess, continue to be published, I will keep building one colorful world.
Shukran, which means "thank you."
(Applause) Thank you. Thank you so much.
Thank you.
(Guitar music starts) (Music ends) (Applause) (Distorted guitar music starts) (Music ends) (Applause) (Ambient/guitar music starts) (Music ends) (Applause)
This is one of the most amazing animals on the face of the Earth.
This is a tapir.
Now this, this is a baby tapir, the cutest animal offspring in the animal kingdom.
(Laughter) By far.
There is no competition here.
I have dedicated the past 20 years of my life to the research and conservation of tapirs in Brazil, and it has been absolutely amazing.
But at the moment, I've been thinking really, really hard about the impact of my work.
I've been questioning myself about the real contributions I have made for the conservation of these animals I love so much.
Am I being effective in safeguarding their survival?
Am I doing enough?
I guess the big question here is, am I studying tapirs and contributing to their conservation, or am I just documenting their extinction?
The world is facing so many different conservation crises.
We all know that. It's all over the news every day.
Tropical forests and other ecosystems are being destroyed, climate change, so many species on the brink of extinction: tigers, lions, elephants, rhinos, tapirs.
This is the lowland tapir, the tapir species I work with, the largest terrestrial mammal of South America.
They're massive. They're powerful.
Adults can weigh up to 300 kilos.
That's half the size of a horse.
They're gorgeous.
Tapirs are mostly found in tropical forests such as the Amazon, and they absolutely need large patches of habitat in order to find all the resources they need to reproduce and survive.
But their habitat is being destroyed, and they have been hunted out of several parts of their geographic distribution.
And you see, this is very, very unfortunate because tapirs are extremely important for the habitats where they are found.
They're herbivores.
Fifty percent of their diet consists of fruit, and when they eat the fruit, they swallow the seeds, which they disperse throughout the habitat through their feces.
They play this major role in shaping and maintaining the structure and diversity of the forest, and for that reason, tapirs are known as gardeners of the forest.
Isn't that amazing?
If you think about it, the extinction of tapirs would seriously affect biodiversity as a whole.
I started my tapir work in 1996, still very young, fresh out of college, and it was a pioneer research and conservation program.
At that point, we had nearly zero information about tapirs, mostly because they're so difficult to study.
They're nocturnal, solitary, very elusive animals, and we got started getting very basic data about these animals.
But what is it that a conservationist does?
Well, first, we need data.
We need field research.
We need those long-term datasets to support conservation action, and I told you tapirs are very hard to study, so we have to rely on indirect methods to study them.
We have to capture and anesthetize them so that we can install GPS collars around their necks and follow their movements, which is a technique used by many other conservationists around the world.
And then we can gather information about how they use space, how they move through the landscape, what are their priority habitats, and so much more.
Next, we must disseminate what we learn.
We have to educate people about tapirs and how important these animals are.
And it's amazing how many people around the world do not know what a tapir is.
In fact, many people think this is a tapir.
Let me tell you, this is not a tapir.
(Laughter) This is a giant anteater.
Tapirs do not eat ants. Never. Ever.
And then next we have to provide training, capacity building.
It is our responsibility to prepare the conservationists of the future.
We are losing several conservation battles, and we need more people doing what we do, and they need the skills, and they need the passion to do that.
Ultimately, we conservationists, we must be able to apply our data, to apply our accumulated knowledge to support actual conservation action.
Our first tapir program took place in the Atlantic Forest in the eastern part of Brazil, one of the most threatened biomes in the world.
The destruction of the Atlantic Forest began in the early 1500s, when the Portuguese first arrived in Brazil, beginning European colonization in the eastern part of South America.
This forest was almost completely cleared for timber, agriculture, cattle ranching and the construction of cities, and today only seven percent of the Atlantic forest is still left standing.
And tapirs are found in very, very small, isolated, disconnected populations.
In the Atlantic Forest, we found out that tapirs move through open areas of pastureland and agriculture going from one patch of forest to patch of forest.
So our main approach in this region was to use our tapir data to identify the potential places for the establishment of wildlife corridors in between those patches of forest, reconnecting the habitat so that tapirs and many other animals could cross the landscape safely.
After 12 years in the Atlantic Forest, in 2008, we expanded our tapir conservation efforts to the Pantanal in the western part of Brazil near the border with Bolivia and Paraguay.
This is the largest continuous freshwater floodplain in the world, an incredible place and one of the most important strongholds for lowland tapirs in South America.
And working in the Pantanal has been extremely refreshing because we found large, healthy tapir populations in the area, and we have been able to study tapirs in the most natural conditions we'll ever find, very much free of threats.
In the Pantanal, besides the GPS collars, we are using another technique: camera traps.
This camera is equipped with a movement sensor and it photographs animals when they walk in front of it.
So thanks to these amazing devices, we have been able to gather precious information about tapir reproduction and social organization which are very important pieces of the puzzle when you're trying to develop those conservation strategies.
And right now, 2015, we are expanding our work once again to the Brazilian Cerrado, the open grasslands and shrub forests in the central part of Brazil.
Today this region is the very epicenter of economic development in my country, where natural habitat and wildlife populations are rapidly being eradicated by several different threats, including once again cattle ranching, large sugarcane and soybean plantations, poaching, roadkill, just to name a few.
And somehow, tapirs are still there, which gives me a lot of hope.
But I have to say that starting this new program in the Cerrado was a bit of a slap in the face.
When you drive around and you find dead tapirs along the highways and signs of tapirs wandering around in the middle of sugarcane plantations where they shouldn't be, and you talk to kids and they tell you that they know how tapir meat tastes because their families poach and eat them, it really breaks your heart.
The situation in the Cerrado made me realize -- it gave me the sense of urgency.
I am swimming against the tide.
It made me realize that despite two decades of hard work trying to save these animals, we still have so much work to do if we are to prevent them from disappearing.
We have to find ways to solve all these problems.
We really do, and you know what?
We really came to a point in the conservation world where we have to think out of the box.
We'll have to be a lot more creative than we are right now.
And I told you, roadkill is a big problem for tapirs in the Cerrado, so we just came up with the idea of putting reflective stickers on the GPS collars we put on the tapirs.
These are the same stickers used on big trucks to avoid collision.
Tapirs cross the highways after dark, so the stickers will hopefully help drivers see this shining thing crossing the highway, and maybe they will slow down a little bit.
For now, this is just a crazy idea.
We don't know. We'll see if it will reduce the amount of tapir roadkill.
But the point is, maybe this is the kind of stuff that needs to be done.
And although I'm struggling with all these questions in my mind right now, I have a pact with tapirs.
I know in my heart that tapir conservation is my cause.
This is my passion.
I am not alone.
I have this huge network of supporters behind me, and there is no way I'm ever going to stop.
I will continue doing this, most probably for the rest of my life.
And I'll keep doing this for Patrícia, my namesake, one of the first tapirs we captured and monitored in the Atlantic Forest many, many years ago; for Rita and her baby Vincent in the Pantanal.
And I'll keep doing this for Ted, a baby tapir we captured in December last year also in the Pantanal.
And I will keep doing this for the hundreds of tapirs that I've had the pleasure to meet over the years and the many others I know I will encounter in the future.
These animals deserve to be cared for.
They need me. They need us.
And you know? We human beings deserve to live in a world where we can get out there and see and benefit from not only tapirs but all the other beautiful species, now and in the future.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
I would like to demonstrate for the first time in public that it is possible to transmit a video from a standard off-the-shelf LED lamp to a solar cell with a laptop acting as a receiver.
There is no Wi-Fi involved, it's just light.
And you may wonder, what's the point?
And the point is this: There will be a massive extension of the Internet to close the digital divide, and also to allow for what we call "The Internet of Things" -- tens of billions of devices connected to the Internet.
In my view, such an extension of the Internet can only work if it's almost energy-neutral.
This means we need to use existing infrastructure as much as possible.
And this is where the solar cell and the LED come in.
I demonstrated for the first time, at TED in 2011, Li-Fi, or Light Fidelity.
Li-Fi uses off-the-shelf LEDs to transmit data incredibly fast, and also in a safe and secure manner.
Data is transported by the light, encoded in subtle changes of the brightness.
If we look around, we have many LEDs around us, so there's a rich infrastructure of Li-Fi transmitters around us.
But so far, we have been using special devices -- small photo detectors, to receive the information encoded in the data.
I wanted to find a way to also use existing infrastructure to receive data from our Li-Fi lights.
And this is why I have been looking into solar cells and solar panels.
A solar cell absorbs light and converts it into electrical energy.
This is why we can use a solar cell to charge our mobile phone.
But now we need to remember that the data is encoded in subtle changes of the brightness of the LED, so if the incoming light fluctuates, so does the energy harvested from the solar cell.
This means we have a principal mechanism in place to receive information from the light and by the solar cell, because the fluctuations of the energy harvested correspond to the data transmitted.
Of course the question is: can we receive very fast and subtle changes of the brightness, such as the ones transmitted by our LED lights?
And the answer to that is yes, we can.
We have shown in the lab that we can receive up to 50 megabytes per second from a standard, off-the-shelf solar cell.
And this is faster than most broadband connections these days.
Now let me show you in practice.
In this box is a standard, off-the-shelf LED lamp.
This is a standard, off-the-shelf solar cell; it is connected to the laptop.
And also we have an instrument here to visualize the energy we harvest from the solar cell.
And this instrument shows something at the moment.
This is because the solar cell already harvests light from the ambient light.
Now what I would like to do first is switch on the light, and I'll simply, only switch on the light, for a moment, and what you'll notice is that the instrument jumps to the right.
So the solar cell, for a moment, is harvesting energy from this artificial light source.
If I turn it off, we see it drops.
I turn it on ...
So we harvest energy with the solar cell.
But next I would like to activate the streaming of the video.
And I've done this by pressing this button.
So now this LED lamp here is streaming a video by changing the brightness of the LED in a very subtle way, and in a way that you can't recognize with your eye, because the changes are too fast to recognize.
But in order to prove the point, I can block the light of the solar cell.
So first you notice the energy harvesting drops and the video stops as well.
If I remove the blockage, the video will restart.
(Applause) And I can repeat that.
So we stop the transmission of the video and energy harvesting stops as well.
So that is to show that the solar cell acts as a receiver.
But now imagine that this LED lamp is a street light, and there's fog.
And so I want to simulate fog, and that's why I brought a handkerchief with me.
(Laughter) And let me put the handkerchief over the solar cell.
First you notice the energy harvested drops, as expected, but now the video still continues.
This means, despite the blockage, there's sufficient light coming through the handkerchief to the solar cell, so that the solar cell is able to decode and stream that information, in this case, a high-definition video.
What's really important here is that a solar cell has become a receiver for high-speed wireless signals encoded in light, while it maintains its primary function as an energy-harvesting device.
That's why it is possible to use existing solar cells on the roof of a hut to act as a broadband receiver from a laser station on a close by hill, or indeed, lamp post.
And It really doesn't matter where the beam hits the solar cell.
And the same is true for translucent solar cells integrated into windows, solar cells integrated into street furniture, or indeed, solar cells integrated into these billions of devices that will form the Internet of Things.
Because simply, we don't want to charge these devices regularly, or worse, replace the batteries every few months.
As I said to you, this is the first time I've shown this in public.
It's very much a lab demonstration, a prototype.
But my team and I are confident that we can take this to market within the next two to three years.
And we hope we will be able to contribute to closing the digital divide, and also contribute to connecting all these billions of devices to the Internet.
And all of this without causing a massive explosion of energy consumption -- because of the solar cells, quite the opposite.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So whenever I visit a school and talk to students, I always ask them the same thing: Why do you Google?
Why is Google the search engine of choice for you?
Strangely enough, I always get the same three answers.
One, "Because it works," which is a great answer; that's why I Google, too.
Two, somebody will say, "I really don't know of any alternatives."
It's not an equally great answer and my reply to that is usually, "Try to Google the word 'search engine,' you may find a couple of interesting alternatives."
And last but not least, thirdly, inevitably, one student will raise her or his hand and say, "With Google, I'm certain to always get the best, unbiased search result."
Certain to always get the best, unbiased search result.
Now, as a man of the humanities, albeit a digital humanities man, that just makes my skin curl, even if I, too, realize that that trust, that idea of the unbiased search result is a cornerstone in our collective love for and appreciation of Google.
I will show you why that, philosophically, is almost an impossibility.
But let me first elaborate, just a little bit, on a basic principle behind each search query that we sometimes seem to forget.
So whenever you set out to Google something, start by asking yourself this: "Am I looking for an isolated fact?"
What is the capital of France?
What are the building blocks of a water molecule?
Great -- Google away.
There's not a group of scientists who are this close to proving that it's actually London and H30.
You don't see a big conspiracy among those things.
We agree, on a global scale, what the answers are to these isolated facts.
But if you complicate your question just a little bit and ask something like, "Why is there an Israeli-Palestine conflict?"
You're not exactly looking for a singular fact anymore, you're looking for knowledge, which is something way more complicated and delicate.
And to get to knowledge, you have to bring 10 or 20 or 100 facts to the table and acknowledge them and say, "Yes, these are all true."
But because of who I am, young or old, black or white, gay or straight, I will value them differently.
And I will say, "Yes, this is true, but this is more important to me than that."
And this is where it becomes interesting, because this is where we become human.
This is when we start to argue, to form society.
And to really get somewhere, we need to filter all our facts here, through friends and neighbors and parents and children and coworkers and newspapers and magazines, to finally be grounded in real knowledge, which is something that a search engine is a poor help to achieve.
So, I promised you an example just to show you why it's so hard to get to the point of true, clean, objective knowledge -- as food for thought.
I will conduct a couple of simple queries, search queries.
We'll start with "Michelle Obama," the First Lady of the United States.
And we'll click for pictures.
It works really well, as you can see.
It's a perfect search result, more or less.
It's just her in the picture, not even the President.
How does this work?
Quite simple.
Google uses a lot of smartness to achieve this, but quite simply, they look at two things more than anything.
First, what does it say in the caption under the picture on each website?
Does it say "Michelle Obama" under the picture?
Pretty good indication it's actually her on there.
Second, Google looks at the picture file, the name of the file as such uploaded to the website.
Again, is it called "MichelleObama.jpeg"?
Pretty good indication it's not Clint Eastwood in the picture.
So, you've got those two and you get a search result like this -- almost.
Now, in 2009, Michelle Obama was the victim of a racist campaign, where people set out to insult her through her search results.
There was a picture distributed widely over the Internet where her face was distorted to look like a monkey.
And that picture was published all over.
And people published it very, very purposefully, to get it up there in the search results.
They made sure to write "Michelle Obama" in the caption and they made sure to upload the picture as "MichelleObama.jpeg," or the like.
You get why -- to manipulate the search result.
And it worked, too.
So when you picture-Googled for "Michelle Obama" in 2009, that distorted monkey picture showed up among the first results.
Now, the results are self-cleansing, and that's sort of the beauty of it, because Google measures relevance every hour, every day.
However, Google didn't settle for that this time, they just thought, "That's racist and it's a bad search result and we're going to go back and clean that up manually.
We are going to write some code and fix it," which they did.
And I don't think anyone in this room thinks that was a bad idea.
Me neither.
But then, a couple of years go by, and the world's most-Googled Anders, Anders Behring Breivik, did what he did.
This is July 22 in 2011, and a terrible day in Norwegian history.
This man, a terrorist, blew up a couple of government buildings walking distance from where we are right now in Oslo, Norway and then he traveled to the island of Utøya and shot and killed a group of kids.
Almost 80 people died that day.
And a lot of people would describe this act of terror as two steps, that he did two things: he blew up the buildings and he shot those kids.
It's not true.
It was three steps.
He blew up those buildings, he shot those kids, and he sat down and waited for the world to Google him.
And he prepared all three steps equally well.
And if there was somebody who immediately understood this, it was a Swedish web developer, a search engine optimization expert in Stockholm, named Nikke Lindqvist.
He's also a very political guy and he was right out there in social media, on his blog and Facebook.
And he told everybody, "If there's something that this guy wants right now, it's to control the image of himself.
Let's see if we can distort that.
Let's see if we, in the civilized world, can protest against what he did through insulting him in his search results."
And how?
He told all of his readers the following, "Go out there on the Internet, find pictures of dog poop on sidewalks -- find pictures of dog poop on sidewalks -- publish them in your feeds, on your websites, on your blogs.
Make sure to write the terrorist's name in the caption, make sure to name the picture file "Breivik.jpeg."
Let's teach Google that that's the face of the terrorist."
And it worked.
Two years after that campaign against Michelle Obama, this manipulation campaign against Anders Behring Breivik worked.
If you picture-Googled for him weeks after the July 22 events from Sweden, you'd see that picture of dog poop high up in the search results, as a little protest.
Strangely enough, Google didn't intervene this time.
They did not step in and manually clean those search results up.
So the million-dollar question, is there anything different between these two happenings here?
Is there anything different between what happened to Michelle Obama and what happened to Anders Behring Breivik?
Of course not.
It's the exact same thing, yet Google intervened in one case and not in the other.
Why?
Because Michelle Obama is an honorable person, that's why, and Anders Behring Breivik is a despicable person.
See what happens there?
An evaluation of a person takes place and there's only one power-player in the world with the authority to say who's who.
"We like you, we dislike you.
We believe in you, we don't believe in you.
You're right, you're wrong. You're true, you're false.
You're Obama, and you're Breivik."
That's power if I ever saw it.
So I'm asking you to remember that behind every algorithm is always a person, a person with a set of personal beliefs that no code can ever completely eradicate.
And my message goes out not only to Google, but to all believers in the faith of code around the world.
You need to identify your own personal bias.
You need to understand that you are human and take responsibility accordingly.
And I say this because I believe we've reached a point in time when it's absolutely imperative that we tie those bonds together again, tighter: the humanities and the technology.
Tighter than ever.
And, if nothing else, to remind us that that wonderfully seductive idea of the unbiased, clean search result is, and is likely to remain, a myth.
Thank you for your time.
(Applause)
I'm delighted to be here.
I'm honored by the invitation, and thanks.
I would love to talk about stuff that I'm interested in, but unfortunately, I suspect that what I'm interested in won't interest many other people.
First off, my badge says I'm an astronomer.
I would love to talk about my astronomy, but I suspect that the number of people who are interested in radiative transfer in non-gray atmospheres and polarization of light in Jupiter's upper atmosphere are the number of people who'd fit in a bus shelter.
So I'm not going to talk about that.
(Laughter) It would be just as much fun to talk about some stuff that happened in 1986 and 1987, when a computer hacker is breaking into our systems over at Lawrence Berkeley Labs.
And I caught the guys, and they turned out to be working for what was then the Soviet KGB, and stealing information and selling it.
And I'd love to talk about that -- and it'd be fun -- but, 20 years later ...
I find computer security, frankly, to be kind of boring.
It's tedious.
I'm -- The first time you do something, it's science.
The second time, it's engineering.
A third time, it's just being a technician.
I'm a scientist. Once I do something, I do something else.
So, I'm not going to talk about that.
Nor am I going to talk about what I think are obvious statements from my first book, "Silicon Snake Oil," or my second book, nor am I going to talk about why I believe computers don't belong in schools.
I feel that there's a massive and bizarre idea going around that we have to bring more computers into schools.
My idea is: no! No!
Get them out of schools, and keep them out of schools.
And I'd love to talk about this, but I think the argument is so obvious to anyone who's hung around a fourth grade classroom that it doesn't need much talking about -- but I guess I may be very wrong about that, and everything else that I've said.
So don't go back and read my dissertation.
It probably has lies in it as well.
Having said that, I outlined my talk about five minutes ago.
(Laughter) And if you look at it over here, the main thing I wrote on my thumb was the future.
I'm supposed to talk about the future, yes?
Oh, right. And my feeling is, asking me to talk about the future is bizarre, because I've got gray hair, and so, it's kind of silly for me to talk about the future.
In fact, I think that if you really want to know what the future's going to be, if you really want to know about the future, don't ask a technologist, a scientist, a physicist.
No! Don't ask somebody who's writing code.
No, if you want to know what society's going to be like in 20 years, ask a kindergarten teacher.
They know.
In fact, don't ask just any kindergarten teacher, ask an experienced one.
They're the ones who know what society is going to be like in another generation.
I don't. Nor, I suspect, do many other people who are talking about what the future will bring.
Certainly, all of us can imagine these cool new things that are going to be there.
But to me, things aren't the future.
What I ask myself is, what's society is going to be like, when the kids today are phenomenally good at text messaging and spend a huge amount of on-screen time, but have never gone bowling together?
Change is happening, and the change that is happening is not one that is in software.
But that's not what I'm going to talk about.
I'd love to talk about it, it'd be fun, but I want to talk about what I'm doing now. What am I doing now?
Oh -- the other thing that I think I'd like to talk about is right over here. Right over here.
Is that visible? What I'd like to talk about is one-sided things.
I would dearly love to talk about things that have one side.
Because I love Mobius loops. I not only love Mobius loops, but I'm one of the very few people, if not the only person in the world, that makes Klein bottles.
Right away, I hope that all of your eyes glaze over.
This is a Klein bottle.
For those of you in the audience who know, you roll your eyes and say, yup, I know all about it.
It's one sided. It's a bottle whose inside is its outside.
It has zero volume. And it's non-orientable.
It has wonderful properties.
If you take two Mobius loops and sew their common edge together, you get one of these, and I make them out of glass.
And I'd love to talk to you about this, but I don't have much in the way of ... things to say because -- (Laughter) (Chris Anderson: I've got a cold.) However, the "D" in TED of course stands for design.
Just two weeks ago I made -- you know, I've been making small, medium and big Klein bottles for the trade.
But what I've just made -- and I'm delighted to show you, first time in public here.
This is a Klein bottle wine bottle, which, although in four dimensions it shouldn't be able to hold any fluid at all, it's perfectly capable of doing so because our universe has only three spatial dimensions.
And because our universe is only three spatial dimensions, it can hold fluids.
So it's highly -- that one's the cool one.
That was a month of my life.
But although I would love to talk about topology with you, I'm not going to.
(Laughter) Instead, I'm going to mention my mom, who passed away last summer.
Had collected photographs of me, as mothers will do.
Could somebody put this guy up?
And I looked over her album and she had collected a picture of me, standing -- well, sitting -- in 1969, in front of a bunch of dials.
And I looked at it, and said, oh my god, that was me, when I was working at the electronic music studio!
As a technician, repairing and maintaining the electronic music studio at SUNY Buffalo. And wow!
Way back machine. And I said to myself, oh yeah!
And it sent me back.
Soon after that, I found in another picture that she had, a picture of me.
This guy over here of course is me.
This man is Robert Moog, the inventor of the Moog synthesizer, who passed away this past August.
Robert Moog was a generous, kind person, extraordinarily competent engineer.
A musician who took time from his life to teach me, a sophomore, a freshman at SUNY Buffalo.
He'd come up from Trumansburg to teach me not just about the Moog synthesizer, but we'd be sitting there -- I'm studying physics at the time. This is 1969, 70, 71.
We're studying physics, I'm studying physics, and he's saying, "That's a good thing to do.
Don't get caught up in electronic music if you're doing physics."
Mentoring me. He'd come up and spend hours and hours with me.
He wrote a letter of recommendation for me to get into graduate school.
In the background, my bicycle.
I realize that this picture was taken at a friend's living room.
Bob Moog came by and hauled a whole pile of equipment to show Greg Flint and I things about this.
We sat around talking about Fourier transforms, Bessel functions, modulation transfer functions, stuff like this.
Bob's passing this past summer has been a loss to all of us.
Anyone who's a musician has been profoundly influenced by Robert Moog.
(Applause) And I'll just say what I'm about to do. What I'm about to do -- I hope you can recognize that there's a distorted sine wave, almost a triangular wave upon this Hewlett-Packard oscilloscope.
Oh, cool. I can get to this place over here, right?
Kids. Kids is what I'm going to talk about -- is that okay?
It says kids over here, that's what I'd like to talk about.
I've decided that, for me at least, I don't have a big enough head.
So I think locally and I act locally.
I feel that the best way I can help out anything is to help out very, very locally.
So Ph.D. this, and degree there, and the yadda yadda.
I was talking about this stuff to some schoolteachers about a year ago.
And one of them, several of them would come up to me and say, "Well, how come you ain't teaching?"
And I said, "Well, I've taught graduate -- I've had graduate students, I've taught undergraduate classes."
No, they said, "If you're so into kids and all this stuff, how come you ain't over here on the front lines?
Put your money where you mouth is."
Is true. Is true. I teach eighth-grade science four days a week.
Not just showing up every now and then.
No, no, no, no, no. I take attendance.
I take lunch hour. (Applause) This is not -- no, no, no, this is not claps.
I strongly suggest that this is a good thing for each of you to do.
Not just show up to class every now and then.
Teach a solid week. Okay, I'm teaching three-quarters time, but good enough.
One of the things that I've done for my science students is to tell them, "Look, I'm going to teach you college-level physics.
No calculus, I'll cut out that.
You won't need to know trig.
But you will need to know eighth-grade algebra, and we're going to do serious experiments.
None of this open-to-chapter-seven-and-do-all-the-odd-problem-sets.
We're going to be doing genuine physics."
And that's one of the things I thought I'd do right now.
(High-pitched tone) Oh, before I even turn that on, one of the things that we did about three weeks ago in my class -- this is through the lens, and one of the things we used a lens for was to measure the speed of light.
My students in El Cerrito -- with my help, of course, and with the help of a very beat up oscilloscope -- measured the speed of light.
We were off by 25 percent. How many eighth graders do you know of who have measured the speed of light?
In addition to that, we've measured the speed of sound.
I'd love to measure the speed of light here.
I was all set to do it and I was thinking, "Aw man," I was just going to impose upon the powers that be, and measure the speed of light.
And I'm all set to do it. I'm all set to do it, but then it turns out that to set up here, you have like 10 minutes to set up!
And there's no time to do it.
So, next time, maybe, I'll measure the speed of light!
But meanwhile, let's measure the speed of sound!
Well, the obvious way to measure the speed of sound is to bounce sound off something and look at the echo.
But, probably -- one of my students, Ariel [unclear], said, "Could we measure the speed of light using the wave equation?"
And all of you know the wave equation is the frequency times the wavelength of any wave ...
is a constant. When the frequency goes up, the wavelength comes down. Wavelength goes up, frequency goes down. So, if we have a wave here -- over here, that's what's interesting -- as the pitch goes up, things get closer, pitch goes down, things stretch out.
Right? This is simple physics.
All of you know this from eighth grade, remember?
What they didn't tell you in physics -- in eighth-grade physics -- but they should have, and I wish they had, was that if you multiply the frequency times the wavelength of sound or light, you get a constant.
And that constant is the speed of sound.
So, in order to measure the speed of sound, all I've got to do is know its frequency. Well, that's easy.
I've got a frequency counter right here.
Set it up to around A, above A, above A. There's an A, more or less.
Now, so I know the frequency.
It's 1.76 kilohertz. I measure its wavelength.
All I need now is to flip on another beam, and the bottom beam is me talking, right?
So anytime I talk, you'd see it on the screen.
I'll put it over here, and as I move this away from the source, you'll notice the spiral.
The slinky moves. We're going through different nodes of the wave, coming out this way.
Those of you who are physicists, I hear you rolling your eyes, but bear with me. (Laughter) To measure the wavelength, all I need to do is measure the distance from here -- one full wave -- over to here.
From here to here is the wavelength of sound.
So, I'll put a measuring tape here, measuring tape here, move it back over to here.
I've moved the microphone 20 centimeters.
0.2 meters from here, back to here, 20 centimeters.
OK, let's go back to Mr. Elmo.
And we'll say the frequency is 1.76 kilohertz, or 1760.
The wavelength was 0.2 meters.
Let's figure out what this is.
(Laughter) (Applause) 1.76 times 0.2 over here is 352 meters per second.
If you look it up in the book, it's really 343.
But, here with kludgy material, and lousy drink -- we've been able to measure the speed of sound to -- not bad. Pretty good.
All of which comes to what I wanted to say.
Go back to this picture of me a million years ago.
It was 1971, the Vietnam War was going on, and I'm like, "Oh my God!"
I'm studying physics: Landau, Lipschitz, Resnick and Halliday.
I'm going home for a midterm. A riot's going on on campus.
There's a riot! Hey, Elmo's done: off.
There's a riot going on on campus, and the police are chasing me, right?
I'm walking across campus. Cop comes and looks at me and says, "You! You're a student."
Pulls out a gun. Goes boom!
And a tear gas canister the size of a Pepsi can goes by my head. Whoosh!
I get a breath of tear gas and I can't breathe.
This cop comes after me with a rifle.
He wants to clunk me over the head!
I'm saying, "I got to clear out of here!"
I go running across campus quick as I can. I duck into Hayes Hall.
It's one of these bell-tower buildings.
The cop's chasing me.
Chasing me up the first floor, second floor, third floor.
Chases me into this room.
The entranceway to the bell tower.
I slam the door behind me, climb up, go past this place where I see a pendulum ticking.
And I'm thinking, "Oh yeah, the square root of the length is proportional to its period." (Laughter) I keep climbing up, go back.
I go to a place where a dowel splits off.
There's a clock, clock, clock, clock.
The time's going backwards because I'm inside of it.
I'm thinking of Lorenz contractions and Einsteinian relativity.
I climb up, and there's this place, way in the back, that you climb up this wooden ladder.
I pop up the top, and there's a cupola.
A dome, one of these ten-foot domes.
I'm looking out and I'm seeing the cops bashing students' heads, shooting tear gas, and watching students throwing bricks.
And I'm asking, "What am I doing here? Why am I here?"
Then I remember what my English teacher in high school said.
Namely, that when they cast bells, they write inscriptions on them.
So, I wipe the pigeon manure off one of the bells, and I look at it.
I'm asking myself, "Why am I here?"
So, at this time, I'd like to tell you the words inscribed upon the Hayes Hall tower bells: "All truth is one.
In this light, may science and religion endeavor here for the steady evolution of mankind, from darkness to light, from narrowness to broad-mindedness, from prejudice to tolerance.
It is the voice of life, which calls us to come and learn."
Thank you very much.
Jenni Chang: When I told my parents I was gay, the first thing they said to me was, "We're bringing you back to Taiwan."
(Laughter) In their minds, my sexual orientation was America's fault.
The West had corrupted me with divergent ideas, and if only my parents had never left Taiwan, this would not have happened to their only daughter.
In truth, I wondered if they were right.
Of course, there are gay people in Asia, just as there are gay people in every part of the world.
But is the idea of living an "out" life, in the "I'm gay, this is my spouse, and we're proud of our lives together" kind of way just a Western idea?
If I had grown up in Taiwan, or any place outside of the West, would I have found models of happy, thriving LGBT people?
Lisa Dazols: I had similar notions.
As an HIV social worker in San Francisco, I had met many gay immigrants.
They told me their stories of persecution in their home countries, just for being gay, and the reasons why they escaped to the US.
I saw how this had beaten them down.
After 10 years of doing this kind of work, I needed better stories for myself.
I knew the world was far from perfect, but surely not every gay story was tragic.
JC: So as a couple, we both had a need to find stories of hope.
So we set off on a mission to travel the world and look for the people we finally termed as the "Supergays."
(Laughter) These would be the LGBT individuals who were doing something extraordinary in the world.
They would be courageous, resilient, and most of all, proud of who they were.
They would be the kind of person that I aspire to be.
Our plan was to share their stories to the world through film.
LD: There was just one problem.
We had zero reporting and zero filmmaking experience.
(Laughter) We didn't even know where to find the Supergays, so we just had to trust that we'd figure it all out along the way.
So we picked 15 countries in Asia, Africa and South America, countries outside the West that varied in terms of LGBT rights.
We bought a camcorder, ordered a book on how to make a documentary -- (Laughter) you can learn a lot these days -- and set off on an around-the-world trip.
JC: One of the first countries that we traveled to was Nepal.
Despite widespread poverty, a decade-long civil war, and now recently, a devastating earthquake, Nepal has made significant strides in the fight for equality.
One of the key figures in the movement is Bhumika Shrestha.
A beautiful, vibrant transgendered woman, Bhumika has had to overcome being expelled from school and getting incarcerated because of her gender presentation.
But, in 2007, Bhumika and Nepal's LGBT rights organization successfully petitioned the Nepali Supreme Court to protect against LGBT discrimination.
Here's Bhumika: (Video) BS: What I'm most proud of?
I'm a transgendered person.
I'm so proud of my life.
On December 21, 2007, the supreme court gave the decision for the Nepal government to give transgender identity cards and same-sex marriage.
LD: I can appreciate Bhumika's confidence on a daily basis.
Something as simple as using a public restroom can be a huge challenge when you don't fit in to people's strict gender expectations.
Traveling throughout Asia, I tended to freak out women in public restrooms.
They weren't used to seeing someone like me.
I had to come up with a strategy, so that I could just pee in peace.
(Laughter) So anytime I would enter a restroom, I would thrust out my chest to show my womanly parts, and try to be as non-threatening as possible.
Putting out my hands and saying, "Hello", just so that people could hear my feminine voice.
This all gets pretty exhausting, but it's just who I am.
I can't be anything else.
JC: After Nepal, we traveled to India.
On one hand, India is a Hindu society, without a tradition of homophobia.
On the other hand, it is also a society with a deeply patriarchal system, which rejects anything that threatens the male-female order.
When we spoke to activists, they told us that empowerment begins with ensuring proper gender equality, where the women's status is established in society.
And in that way, the status of LGBT people can be affirmed as well.
LD: There we met Prince Manvendra.
He's the world's first openly gay prince.
Prince Manvendra came out on the "Oprah Winfrey Show," very internationally.
His parents disowned him and accused him of bringing great shame to the royal family.
We sat down with Prince Manvendra and talked to him about why he decided to come out so very publicly.
Here he is: (Video) Prince Manvendra: I felt there was a lot of need to break this stigma and discrimination which is existing in our society.
And that instigated me to come out openly and talk about myself.
Whether we are gay, we are lesbian, we are transgender, bisexual or whatever sexual minority we come from, we have to all unite and fight for our rights.
Gay rights cannot be won in the court rooms, but in the hearts and the minds of the people.
JC: While getting my hair cut, the woman cutting my hair asked me, "Do you have a husband?"
Now, this was a dreaded question that I got asked a lot by locals while traveling.
When I explained to her that I was with a woman instead of a man, she was incredulous, and she asked me a lot of questions about my parents' reactions and whether I was sad that I'd never be able to have children.
I told her that there are no limitations to my life and that Lisa and I do plan to have a family some day.
Now, this woman was ready to write me off as yet another crazy Westerner.
She couldn't imagine that such a phenomenon could happen in her own country.
That is, until I showed her the photos of the Supergays that we interviewed in India.
She recognized Prince Manvendra from television and soon I had an audience of other hairdressers interested in meeting me.
(Laughter) And in that ordinary afternoon, I had the chance to introduce an entire beauty salon to the social changes that were happening in their own country.
LD: From India, we traveled to East Africa, a region known for intolerance towards LGBT people.
In Kenya, 89 percent of people who come out to their families are disowned.
Homosexual acts are a crime and can lead to incarceration.
In Kenya, we met the soft-spoken David Kuria.
David had a huge mission of wanting to work for the poor and improve his own government.
So he decided to run for senate.
He became Kenya's first openly gay political candidate.
David wanted to run his campaign without denying the reality of who he was.
But we were worried for his safety because he started to receive death threats.
(Video) David Kuria: At that point, I was really scared because they were actually asking for me to be killed.
And, yeah, there are some people out there who do it and they feel that they are doing a religious obligation.
JC: David wasn't ashamed of who he was.
Even in the face of threats, he stayed authentic.
LD: At the opposite end of the spectrum is Argentina.
Argentina's a country where 92 percent of the population identifies as Catholic.
Yet, Argentina has LGBT laws that are even more progressive than here in the US.
In 2010, Argentina became the first country in Latin America and the 10th in the world to adopt marriage equality.
There, we met María Rachid.
María was a driving force behind that movement.
María Rachid (Spanish): I always say that, in reality, the effects of marriage equality are not only for those couples that get married.
They are for a lot of people that, even though they may never get married, will be perceived differently by their coworkers, their families and neighbors, from the national state's message of equality.
I feel very proud of Argentina because Argentina today is a model of equality.
And hopefully soon, the whole world will have the same rights.
JC: When we made the visit to my ancestral lands, I wish I could have shown my parents what we found there.
Because here is who we met: (Video) One, two, three. Welcome gays to Shanghai!
(Laughter) A whole community of young, beautiful Chinese LGBT people.
Sure, they had their struggles.
But they were fighting it out.
In Shanghai, I had the chance to speak to a local lesbian group and tell them our story in my broken Mandarin Chinese.
In Taipei, each time we got onto the metro, we saw yet another lesbian couple holding hands.
And we learned that Asia's largest LGBT pride event happens just blocks away from where my grandparents live.
If only my parents knew.
LD: By the time we finished our not-so-straight journey around the world, (Laughter) we had traveled 50,000 miles and logged 120 hours of video footage.
We traveled to 15 countries and interviewed 50 Supergays.
Turns out, it wasn't hard to find them at all.
JC: Yes, there are still tragedies that happen on the bumpy road to equality.
And let's not forget that 75 countries still criminalize homosexuality today.
But there are also stories of hope and courage in every corner of the world.
What we ultimately took away from our journey is, equality is not a Western invention.
LD: One of the key factors in this equality movement is momentum, momentum as more and more people embrace their full selves and use whatever opportunities they have to change their part of the world, and momentum as more and more countries find models of equality in one another.
When Nepal protected against LGBT discrimination, India pushed harder.
When Argentina embraced marriage equality, Uruguay and Brazil followed.
When Ireland said yes to equality, (Applause) the world stopped to notice.
When the US Supreme Court makes a statement to the world that we can all be proud of.
(Applause) JC: As we reviewed our footage, what we realized is that we were watching a love story.
It wasn't a love story that was expected of me, but it is one filled with more freedom, adventure and love than I could have ever possibly imagined.
One year after returning home from our trip, marriage equality came to California.
And in the end, we believe, love will win out.
(Video) By the power vested in me, by the state of California and by God Almighty, I now pronounce you spouses for life.
You may kiss.
(Applause)
This is the Air Jordan 3 Black Cement.
This might be the most important sneaker in history.
First released in 1988, this is the shoe that started Nike marketing as we know it.
This is the shoe that propelled the entire Air Jordan lineage, and perhaps saved Nike.
The Air Jordan 3 Black Cement did for sneakers what the iPhone did for phones.
It's been re-released four times.
Every celebrity's been seen wearing it.
There's a site about what to wear with the Black Cement.
It's been right under your nose for decades and you never looked down.
And right about now, most of you are probably thinking, "Sneakers?"
(Laughter) Yes.
Yes, sneakers.
Some extraordinary things about sneakers and data and Nike and how they're all related, possibly, to the future of all online commerce.
In 2011, the last time the Jordan 3 Black Cement was released, at a retail of 160 dollars, it sold out globally in minutes.
And that's because people were camped outside of sneaker stores for days before it went on sale.
And just minutes after that, thousands of those pairs were on eBay for two and three times retail.
In fact, there's over 1,000 pairs on eBay right now, four years later.
But here's the thing: this happens every single Saturday.
Every week there's another release or two or three, and every shoe has a story as rich and compelling as the Jordan 3 Black Cement.
This is Nike building the marketplace for sneakerheads -- people who collect sneakers -- and my daughter.
(Laughter) That's an "I love Dad" T-shirt.
For the brands, sneakerheads are a very important demographic.
These are the tastemakers; these are the Apple fanboys.
Because who else is going to buy a pair of $8,000 Back to the Future sneakers?
(Laughter) Yeah, 8,000 dollars.
And while that's obviously the anomaly, the resell sneaker market is definitely not.
Thirty years in the making, what started as an underground culture of a few people who like sneakers just a bit too much -- (Laughter) Now we have sneaker addictions.
In a market where in the past 12 months, there have been over nine million pairs of shoes resold in the United States alone, at a value of 1.2 billion dollars.
And that's a conservative estimate -- I should know, I am a sneakerhead.
This is my collection.
In the pantheon of great collections, mine doesn't even register.
I have about 250 pairs, but trust me, I am small-time.
People have thousands.
I'm a very typical 37-year-old sneakerhead.
I grew up playing basketball when Michael Jordan played, I always wanted Air Jordans, my mother would never buy me Air Jordans, as soon as I got some money I bought Air Jordans -- literally, we all have the exact same story.
But here's where mine diverged.
After starting three companies, I took a job as a strategy consultant, when I very quickly realized that I didn't know the first thing about data.
But I learned, because I had to, and I liked it.
So I thought, I wonder if I could get ahold of some sneaker data, just to play with for my own amusement.
The goal was to develop a price guide, a real data-driven view of the market.
And four years later, we're analyzing over 25 million transactions, providing real-time analytics on thousands of sneakers.
Now sneakerheads check prices while camping out for releases.
Others have used the data to validate insurance claims.
And the top investment banks in the world now use resell data to analyze the retail footwear industry.
And here's the best part: sneakerheads have sneaker portfolios.
(Laughter) Sneakerheads can track the value of their collection over time, compare it to others, and have access to the same analytics you might for your online brokerage account.
So sneakerhead Dan builds his collection and identifies which 352 are his.
He can see it's worth 103,000 dollars -- frankly, a modest collection.
At the asset level, he can see gain-loss by shoe.
Here he's made over 600 dollars on one pair.
I have one of those.
(Laughter) So an unregulated 1.2 billion dollar industry that thrives as much on the street as it does online, and has spawned fundamental financial services for sneakers?
At some point I asked myself what's really going on in the market, and two comparisons started to emerge.
Are sneakers more like stocks or drugs?
(Laughter) In fact, one guy emailed to say he thought his 15-year-old son was selling drugs and later found out he was selling sneakers.
(Laughter) And now they use the data to do it together.
And that's because sneakers are an investment opportunity where none other exists.
And I don't just mean the kid selling sneakers instead of drugs.
How about all kids?
You have to be 18 to play the stock market.
I sold chewing gum in sixth grade, Blow Pops in ninth grade and collected baseball cards through high school.
The cards are long dead, and the candy market's usually quite local.
For a lot of people, sneakers are a legal and accessible investment opportunity -- a democratized stock market, but also unregulated.
Which is why the story you're probably most familiar with is people killing each other for sneakers.
And while that definitely happens and is tragic, it's not nearly the epidemic some media would have you believe.
In fact, it's a very small piece of a much bigger and better story.
So sneakers have clear similarities to both the stock exchange and the illegal drug trade, but perhaps the most fundamental is the existence of a central actor.
Someone is making the rules.
In the case of sneakers, that someone is Nike.
Let me walk you through some numbers.
The resell market, we know, is $1.2 billion.
Nike, including Jordan brand, accounts for 96 percent of all shoes sold on the secondary market.
Just complete domination.
Sneakerheads love Jordans.
And profit on the secondary market is about a third.
That means that sneakerheads made 380 million dollars selling Nikes last year.
Let's jump to retail for a second.
Skechers, earlier this year, became the number two footwear brand in the country, surpassing Adidas -- this was a big deal.
And in the 12 months ending in June, Skechers's net income was 209 million dollars.
That means that Nike's customers make almost twice as much profit as their closest competitor.
That -- (Laughter) How is that even possible?
The sneaker market is just supply and demand, but Nike's gotten very good at using supply -- limited sneakers -- and the distribution of those sneakers to their own benefit.
So it's really just supply.
Sneakerheads joke that as long as it's limited and Nike, they'll buy it.
Shoes that sell for 8,000 dollars do so because they're very rare.
It's no different than any other collectible market, only this isn't a market at all.
It's a false construct created by Nike -- ingeniously created by Nike, in the most positive sense -- to sell more shoes.
And in the process, it provided tens of thousands of people with life-long passions, myself included.
If Nike wanted to kill the resell market, they could do so tomorrow, all they have to do is release more shoes.
But we certainly don't want them to, nor is it in their best interest.
That's because unlike Apple, who will sell an iPhone to anyone who wants one, Nike doesn't make their money by just selling $200 sneakers.
They sell millions of shoes to millions of people for 60 dollars.
And sneakerheads are the ones who drive the marketing and the hype and the PR and the brand cachet, and enable Nike to sell millions of $60 sneakers.
It's marketing.
It's marketing the likes of which has never been seen before -- this isn't in any textbook.
For 15 years Nike has propped up an artificial commodities market, with a Facebook-level hyped IPO every single weekend.
Drive by any Footlocker at 8am on a Saturday morning, and there will be a line down the street and around the block, and sometimes those kids have been waiting there all week.
You know those crazy iPhone lines you see on the news every other year?
Nike lines happen 104 times more often.
So Nike sets the rules.
And they do so by controlling supply and distribution.
But once a pair leaves the retail channel, it's the Wild West.
There are very few -- if any -- legal, unregulated markets of this size.
So Nike is definitely not the stock exchange.
In fact, there is no central exchange.
By last count, there were 48 different online markets that I know of.
Some are eBay clones, some are mobile markets, and then you have consignment shops and brick-and-mortar stores, and sneaker conventions, and reseller sites, and Facebook and Instagram and Twitter -- literally, anywhere sneakerheads come into contact with each other, shoes will be bought and sold.
But that means no efficiencies, no transparency, sometimes not even authenticity.
Can you imagine if that's how stocks were bought?
What if the way to buy a share of Apple stock was to search over 100 places online and off, including every time you walk down the street just hoping to pass someone wearing some Apple stock?
Never knowing who had the best price, or even if the stock you were looking at was real.
That would surely make you say: [WTF?] Of course that's not how we buy stock.
But what if that's not how we need to buy sneakers either?
What if the inverse is true, and what if we could buy sneakers exactly the same way as we buy stock?
And what if it wasn't just sneakers, but any similar product, like watches and handbags and women's shoes, and any collectible, any seasonal item and any markdown item?
What if there was a stock market for commerce?
A stock market of things.
And not only could you buy in a much more educated and efficient manner, but you could engage in all the sophisticated financial transactions you can with the stock market.
Shorts and options and futures and well, maybe you see where this is going.
Maybe you want to invest in a stock market of things.
Because if you had invested in a pair of Air Jordan 3 Black Cement in 2011, you could either be wearing them onstage, (Laughter) or have earned 162 percent on your money -- double the S&amp;P and 20 percent more than Apple.
(Laughter) And that's why we're talking about sneakers.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Somewhere out there in that vast universe, there must surely be countless other planets teeming with life, but why don't we see any evidence of it?
Well, this is the famous question asked by Enrico Fermi in 1950: "Where is everybody?"
Conspiracy theorists claim that UFOs are visiting all the time and the reports are just being covered up, but honestly, they aren't very convincing.
But that leaves a real riddle.
In the past year, the Kepler space observatory has found hundreds of planets just around nearby stars, and if you extrapolate that data, it looks like there could be half a trillion planets just in our own galaxy.
If any one in 10,000 has conditions that might support a form of life, that's still 50 million possible life-harboring planets right here in the Milky Way.
So here's the riddle.
Countless other planets in our galaxy should have formed earlier and given life a chance to get underway billions or certainly many millions of years earlier than happened on Earth.
If just a few of them had spawned intelligent life and started creating technologies, those technologies would have had millions of years to grow in complexity and power.
On Earth, we've seen how dramatically technology can accelerate in just 100 years.
In millions of years, an intelligent alien civilization could easily have spread out across the galaxy, perhaps creating giant energy-harvesting artifacts, or fleets of colonizing spaceships, or glorious works of art that fill the night sky.
At the very least, you'd think they'd be revealing their presence, deliberately or otherwise, through electromagnetic signals of one kind or another.
And yet we see no convincing evidence of any of it.
Well, there are numerous possible answers, some of them quite dark.
Maybe a single, superintelligent civilization has indeed taken over the galaxy, and has imposed strict radio silence because it's paranoid of any potential competitors.
It's just sitting there ready to obliterate anything that becomes a threat.
Or maybe they're not that intelligent.
Or perhaps, the evolution of an intelligence capable of creating sophisticated technology is far rarer than we've assumed.
After all, it's only happened once on Earth in 4 billion years.
Maybe even that was incredibly lucky.
Maybe we are the first such civilization in our galaxy.
Or, perhaps, civilization carries with it the seeds of its own destruction through the inability to control the technologies it creates.
For a start, we're not looking that hard, and we're spending a pitiful amount of money on it.
Only a tiny fraction of the stars in our galaxy have really been looked at closely for signs of interesting signals.
And perhaps, we're not looking the right way.
Maybe as civilizations develop, they quickly discover communication technologies far more sophisticated and useful than electromagnetic waves.
Maybe all the action takes place inside the mysterious recently discovered dark matter, or dark energy, that appear to account for most of the universe's mass.
Perhaps intelligent civilizations come to realize that life is ultimately just complex patterns of information interacting with each other in a beautiful way, and that can happen more efficiently at a small scale.
So just as on Earth, clunky stereo systems have shrunk to beautiful, tiny iPods, maybe intelligent life itself, in order to reduce its footprint on the environment, has turned itself microscopic, so the Solar System might be teeming with aliens, and we're just not noticing them.
Well, okay, that's a crazy thought.
The aliens made me say it.
But it is cool that ideas do seem to have a life all of their own, and that they outlive their creators.
Well, within the next 15 years, we could start seeing real spectroscopic information from promising nearby planets that will reveal just how life-friendly they might be.
And meanwhile SETI, the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence, is now releasing its data to the public so that millions of citizen scientists, maybe including you, can bring the power of the crowd to join the search.
And here on Earth, amazing experiments are being done to try to create life from scratch, life that might be very different from the DNA forms we know.
All of this will help us understand whether the universe is teeming with life or, whether indeed, it's just us.
Either answer, in its own way, is awe-inspiring, because even if we are alone, the fact that we think and dream, and ask these questions might yet turn out to be one of the most important facts about the universe.
The quest for knowledge and understanding never gets dull.
It doesn't. It's actually the opposite.
The more you know, the more amazing the world seems.
And it's the crazy possibilities, the unanswered questions, that pull us forward.
(Music) Sometimes when I'm on a long plane flight, I gaze out at all those mountains and deserts and try to get my head around how vast our Earth is.
And then I remember that there's an object we see every day that would literally fit one million Earths inside it.
The sun seems impossibly big, but in the great scheme of things, it's a pinprick, one of about 400 billion stars in the Milky Way galaxy, which you can see on a clear night as a pale, white mist stretched across the sky.
And it gets worse.
There are maybe 100 billion galaxies detectable by our telescopes, so if each star was the size of a single grain of sand, just the Milky Way has enough stars to fill a 30 foot by 30 foot stretch of beach three feet deep with sand.
And the entire Earth doesn't have enough beaches to represent the stars in the overall universe.
Such a beach would continue for literally hundreds of millions of miles.
Holy Stephen Hawking, that is a lot of stars.
But he and other physicists now believe in a reality that is unimaginably bigger still.
I mean, first of all, the 100 billion galaxies within range of our telescopes are probably a minuscule fraction of the total.
Space itself is expanding at an accelerating pace. The vast majority of the galaxies are separating from us so fast that light from them may never reach us.
Still, our physical reality here on Earth is intimately connected to those distant, invisible galaxies.
We can think of them as part of our universe.
They make up a single, giant edifice, obeying the same physical laws and all made from the same types of atoms, electrons, protons, quarks, neutrinos that make up you and me.
However, recent theories in physics, including one called string theory, are now telling us there could be countless other universes, built on different types of particles, with different properties, obeying different laws.
Most of these universes could never support life, and might flash in and out of existence in a nanosecond, but nonetheless, combined they make up a vast multiverse of possible universes.
in up to 11 dimensions, featuring wonders beyond our wildest imagination.
And the leading version of string theory predicts a multiverse made of up to 10 to the 500 universes.
That's a one followed by 500 zeroes, a number so vast that if every atom in our observable universe had its own universe and all of the atoms in all of those universes each had their own universe, and you repeated that for two more cycles, you'd still be at a tiny fraction of the total -- namely, one trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillion trillionth.
But even that number is minuscule compared to another number: infinity.
Some physicists think the space-time continuum is literally infinite, and that it contains an infinite number of so-called pocket universes with varying properties.
How's your brain doing?
But quantum theory adds a whole new wrinkle.
I mean, the theory's been proven true beyond all doubt, but interpreting it is baffling.
And some physicists think you can only un-baffle it if you imagine that huge numbers of parallel universes are being spawned every moment, and many of these universes would actually be very like the world we're in, would include multiple copies of you.
In one such universe, you'd graduate with honors and marry the person of your dreams.
In another, not so much.
There are still some scientists who would say, hogwash.
The only meaningful answer to the question of how many universes there are is one, only one universe.
And a few philosophers and mystics might argue that even our own universe is an illusion.
So, as you can see, right now there is no agreement on this question, not even close.
All we know is, the answer is somewhere between zero and infinity.
Well, I guess we know one other thing: This is a pretty cool time to be studying physics.
We just might be undergoing the biggest paradigm shift in knowledge that humanity has ever seen.
Religion is more than belief.
It's power, and it's influence.
And that influence affects all of us, every day, regardless of your own belief.
Despite the enormous influence of religion on the world today, we hold them to a different standard of scrutiny and accountability than any other sector of our society.
For example, if there were a multinational organization, government or corporation today that said no female could be on a leadership board, not one woman could have a decision-making authority, not one woman could handle any financial matter, we would have outrage.
There would be sanctions.
And yet this is a common practice in almost every world religion today.
We accept things in our religious lives that we do not accept in our secular lives, and I know this because I've been doing it for three decades.
I was the type of girl that fought every form of gender discrimination growing up.
I played pickup basketball games with the boys and inserted myself.
I said I was going to be the first female President of the United States.
I have been fighting for the Equal Rights Amendment, which has been dead for 40 years.
I'm the first woman in both sides of my family to ever work outside the home and ever receive a higher education.
I never accepted being excluded because I was a woman, except in my religion.
Throughout all of that time, I was a part of a very patriarchal orthodox Mormon religion.
I grew up in an enormously traditional family.
I have eight siblings, a stay-at-home mother.
My father's actually a religious leader in the community.
And I grew up in a world believing that my worth and my standing was in keeping these rules that I'd known my whole life.
You get married a virgin, you never drink alcohol, you don't smoke, you always do service, you're a good kid.
Some of the rules we had were strict, but you followed the rules because you loved the people and you loved the religion and you believed.
Everything about Mormonism determined what you wore, who you dated, who you married.
It determined what underwear we wore.
I was the kind of religious where everyone I know donated 10 percent of everything they earned to the church, including myself.
From paper routes and babysitting, I donated 10 percent.
I was the kind of religious where I heard parents tell children when they're leaving on a two-year proselytizing mission that they would rather have them die than return home without honor, having sinned.
I was the type and the kind of religious where kids kill themselves every single year because they're terrified of coming out to our community as gay.
But I was also the kind of religious where it didn't matter where in the world I lived, I had friendship, instantaneous mutual aid.
This was where I felt safe. This is certainty and clarity about life.
I had help raising my little daughter.
So that's why I accepted without question that only men can lead, and I accepted without question that women can't have the spiritual authority of God on the Earth, which we call the priesthood.
And I allowed discrepancies between men and women in operating budgets, disciplinary councils, in decision-making capacities, and I gave my religion a free pass because I loved it.
Until I stopped, and I realized that I had been allowing myself to be treated as the support staff to the real work of men.
And I faced this contradiction in myself, and I joined with other activists in my community.
We've been working very, very, very hard for the last decade and more.
The first thing we did was raise consciousness.
You can't change what you can't see.
We started podcasting, blogging, writing articles.
I created lists of hundreds of ways that men and women are unequal in our community.
The next thing we did was build advocacy organizations.
We tried to do things that were unignorable, like wearing pants to church and trying to attend all-male meetings.
These seem like simple things, but to us, the organizers, they were enormously costly.
We lost relationships. We lost jobs.
We got hate mail on a daily basis.
We were attacked in social media and national press.
We received death threats.
We lost standing in our community. Some of us got excommunicated.
Most of us got put in front of a disciplinary council, and were rejected from the communities that we loved because we wanted to make them better, because we believed that they could be.
And I began to expect this reaction from my own people.
I know what it feels like when you feel like someone's trying to change you or criticize you.
But what utterly shocked me was throughout all of this work I received equal measures of vitriol from the secular left, the same vehemence as the religious right.
And what my secular friends didn't realize was that this religious hostility, these phrases of, "Oh, all religious people are crazy or stupid."
"Don't pay attention to religion."
"They're going to be homophobic and sexist."
What they didn't understand was that that type of hostility did not fight religious extremism, it bred religious extremism.
Those arguments don't work, and I know because I remember someone telling me that I was stupid for being Mormon.
And what it caused me to do was defend myself and my people and everything we believe in, because we're not stupid.
So criticism and hostility doesn't work, and I didn't listen to these arguments.
When I hear these arguments, I still continue to bristle, because I have family and friends.
These are my people, and I'm the first to defend them, but the struggle is real.
How do we respect someone's religious beliefs while still holding them accountable for the harm or damage that those beliefs may cause others?
It's a tough question. I still don't have a perfect answer.
My parents and I have been walking on this tightrope for the last decade.
They're intelligent people. They're lovely people.
And let me try to help you understand their perspective.
In Mormonism, we believe that after you die, if you keep all the rules and you follow all the rituals, you can be together as a family again.
And to my parents, me doing something as simple as having a sleeveless top right now, showing my shoulders, that makes me unworthy.
I won't be with my family in the eternities.
But even more, I had a brother die in a tragic accident at 15, and something as simple as this means we won't be together as a family.
And to my parents, they cannot understand why something as simple as fashion or women's rights would prevent me from seeing my brother again.
And that's the mindset that we're dealing with, and criticism does not change that.
And so my parents and I have been walking this tightrope, explaining our sides, respecting one another, but actually invalidating each other's very basic beliefs by the way we live our lives, and it's been difficult.
The way that we've been able to do that is to get past those defensive shells and really see the soft inside of unbelief and belief and try to respect each other while still holding boundaries clear.
The other thing that the secular left and the atheists and the orthodox and the religious right, what they all don't understand was why even care about religious activism?
I cannot tell you the hundreds of people who have said, "If you don't like religion, just leave."
Why would you try to change it?
Because what is taught on the Sabbath leaks into our politics, our health policy, violence around the world.
It leaks into education, military, fiscal decision-making.
These laws get legally and culturally codified.
In fact, my own religion has had an enormous effect on this nation.
For example, during Prop 8, my church raised over 22 million dollars to fight same-sex marriage in California.
Forty years ago, political historians will say, that if it wasn't for the Mormon opposition to the Equal Rights Amendment, we'd have an Equal Rights Amendment in our Constitution today.
How many lives did that affect?
And we can spend time fighting every single one of these little tiny laws and rules, or we can ask ourselves, why is gender inequality the default around the world?
Why is that the assumption?
Because religion doesn't just create the roots of morality, it creates the seeds of normality.
Religions can liberate or subjugate, they can empower or exploit, they can comfort or destroy, and the people that tip the scales over to the ethical and the moral are often not those in charge.
Religions can't be dismissed or ignored.
We need to take them seriously.
But it's not easy to influence a religion, like we just talked about.
But I'll tell you what my people have done.
My groups are small, there's hundreds of us, but we've had huge impact.
Right now, women's pictures are hanging in the halls next to men for the first time.
Women are now allowed to pray in our church-wide meetings, and they never were before in the general conferences.
As of last week, in a historic move, three women were invited down to three leadership boards that oversee the entire church.
We've seen perceptual shifts in the Mormon community that allow for talk of gender inequality.
We've opened up space, regardless of being despised, for more conservative women to step in and make real changes, and the words "women" and "the priesthood" can now be uttered in the same sentence.
I never had that.
My daughter and my nieces are inheriting a religion that I never had, that's more equal -- we've had an effect.
It wasn't easy standing in those lines trying to get into those male meetings.
There were hundreds of us, and one by one, when we got to the door, we were told, "I'm sorry, this meeting is just for men," and we had to step back and watch men get into the meeting as young as 12 years old, escorted and walked past us as we all stood in line.
But not one woman in that line will forget that day, and not one little boy that walked past us will forget that day.
If we were a multinational corporation or a government, and that had happened, there would be outrage, but we're just a religion.
We're all just part of religions.
We can't keep looking at religion that way, because it doesn't only affect me, it affects my daughter and all of your daughters and what opportunities they have, what they can wear, who they can love and marry, if they have access to reproductive healthcare.
We need to reclaim morality in a secular context that creates ethical scrutiny and accountability for religions all around the world, but we need to do it in a respectful way that breeds cooperation and not extremism.
And we can do it through unignorable acts of bravery, standing up for gender equality.
It's time that half of the world's population had voice and equality within our world's religions, churches, synagogues, mosques and shrines around the world.
I'm working on my people. What are you doing for yours?
(Applause)
How many times can you fold a piece of paper?
Assume that one had a piece of paper that was very fine, like the kind they typically use to print the Bible.
In reality, it seems like a piece of silk.
To qualify these ideas, let's say you have a paper that's one-thousandth of a centimeter in thickness.
That is 10 to the power of minus three centimeters, which equals .001 centimeters.
Let's also assume that you have a big piece of paper, like a page out of the newspaper.
Now we begin to fold it in half.
And another question: If you could fold the paper over and over, as many times as you wish, say 30 times, what would you imagine the thickness of the paper would be then?
Before you move on, I encourage you to actually think about a possible answer to this question.
OK.
After we have folded the paper once, it is now two thousandths of a centimeter in thickness.
If we fold it in half once again, the paper will become four thousandths of a centimeter.
With every fold we make, the paper doubles in thickness.
And if we continue to fold it again and again, always in half, we would confront the following situation after 10 folds.
Two to the power of 10, meaning that you multiply two by itself 10 times, is one thousand and 24 thousandths of a centimeter, which is a little bit over one centimeter.
Assume we continue folding the paper in half.
What will happen then?
If we fold it 17 times, we'll get a thickness of two to the power of 17, which is 131 centimeters, and that equals just over four feet.
If we were able to fold it 25 times, then we would get two to the power of 25, which is 33,554 centimeters, just over 1,100 feet.
It's worthwhile to stop here and reflect for a moment.
Folding a paper in half, even a paper as fine as that of the Bible, 25 times would give us a paper almost a quarter of a mile.
What do we learn?
This type of growth is called exponential growth, and as you see, just by folding a paper we can go very far, but very fast too.
Summarizing, if we fold a paper 25 times, the thickness is almost a quarter of a mile.
30 times, the thickness reaches 6.5 miles, which is about the average height that planes fly.
40 times, the thickness is nearly 7,000 miles, or the average GPS satellite's orbit.
48 times, the thickness is way over one million miles.
Now, if you think that the distance between the Earth and the Moon is less than 250,000 miles, then starting with a piece of Bible paper and folding it 45 times, we get to the Moon.
And if we double it one more time, we get back to Earth.
My wife is pregnant right now with our first child, and when people see her with her big baby bump, the first question people ask, almost without fail, is, "Is it a boy or is it a girl?"
Now, there are some assumptions behind that question that we take for granted because of our familiarity with our own human biology.
For human babies, we take it for granted that there's a 50/50 chance of either answer, boy or girl.
But why is it that way?
Well, the answer depends on the sex determination system that has evolved for our species.
You see, for most mammals, the sex of a baby is determined genetically with the XY chromosome system.
Mammals have a pair of sex chromosomes, one passed down from mom, and one from dad.
A pair of X's gives us a girl, and an X and a Y together gives us a boy.
Since females only have X's to pass on in their egg cells, and males can give either an X or a Y in their sperm cells, the sex is determined by the father and the chance of producing a male or a female is 50/50.
This system has worked well for mammals, but throughout the tree of life, we can see other systems that have worked just as well for other animals.
There are other groups of animals that also have genetic sex determination, but their systems can be pretty different from ours.
Birds and some reptiles have their sex genetically determined, but instead of the sex being determined by dad, their sex is determined by mom.
In those groups, a pair of Z sex chromosomes produces a male, so these males only have Z's to give.
However, in these animals, one Z and one W chromosome together, as a pair, produces a female.
In this system, the chance of a male or a female is still 50/50, it just depends on whether mom puts a Z or a W into her egg.
Certain groups have taken genetic sex determination in completely other directions.
Ants, for example, have one of the most interesting systems for determining sex, and because of it, if you are a male ant, you do not have a father.
In an ant colony, there are dramatic divisions of labor.
There are soldiers that defend the colony, there are workers that collect food, clean the nest and care for the young, and there's a queen and a small group of male reproductives.
Now, the queen will mate and then store sperm from the males.
And this is where the system gets really interesting.
If the queen uses the stored sperm to fertilize an egg, then that egg will grow up to become female.
However, if she lays an egg without fertilizing it, then that egg will still grow up to be an ant, but it will always be a male.
So you see, it's impossible for male ants to have fathers.
And male ants live their life like this, with only one copy of every gene, much like a walking sex cell.
This system is called a haplodiploid system, and we see it not only in ants, but also in other highly social insects like bees and wasps.
Since our own sex is determined by genes, and we do know of these other animals that have their sex determined by genes, it's easy to assume that for all animals the sex of their babies still must be determined by genetics.
However, for some animals, the question of whether it will be a boy or a girl has nothing to do with genes at all, and it can depend on something like the weather.
These are animals like alligators and most turtles.
In these animals, the sex of an embryo in a developing egg is determined by the temperature.
In these species, the sex of the baby is not yet determined when the egg is laid, and it remains undetermined until sometime in the middle of the overall development period, when a critical time is reached.
And during this time, the sex is completely determined by temperature in the nest.
In painted turtles, for example, warm temperatures above the critical temperature will produce females within the eggs, and cool temperatures will produce a male.
I'm not sure who came up with this mnemonic, but you can remember that when it comes to painted turtles, they are all hot chicks and cool dudes.
For some tropical fish, the question of will it be a boy or will it be a girl isn't settled until even later in life.
You see, clownfish all start out their lives as males, However, as they mature, they become female.
They also spend their lives in small groups with a strict dominance hierarchy where only the most dominant male and female reproduce.
And amazingly, if the dominant female in the group dies, the largest and most dominant male will then quickly become female and take her place, and all of the other males will move up one rank in the hierarchy.
In another very different ocean animal, the green spoonworm, the sex of the babies is determined by a completely different aspect of the environment.
For this species, it is simply a matter of where a larva happens to randomly fall on the sea floor.
If a larva lands on the open sea floor, then it will become a female.
But if it lands on top of a female, then it will become a male.
So for some species, the question of boy or girl is answered by genetics.
For others, it's answered by the environment.
And for others still, they don't even bother with the question at all.
Take whiptail lizards, for example.
For those desert lizards, the answer is easy.
It's a girl. It's always a girl.
They are a nearly all-female species, and although they still lay eggs, these eggs hatch out female clones of themselves.
So will it be a girl or will it be a boy?
Throughout the entire animal kingdom, it does really all depend on the system of sex determination.
For humans, that system is a genetic XY system.
And for me and my wife, we found out it's going to be a baby boy.
Why do we cringe when we hear "Shakespeare?"
If you ask me, it's usually because of his words.
All those thines and thous and therefores and wherefore-art-thous can be more than a little annoying.
But you have to wonder, why is he so popular?
Why have his plays been made and remade more than any other playwright?
It's because of his words.
Back in the late 1500s and early 1600s, that was the best tool that a person had, and there was a lot to talk about.
However, most of it was pretty depressing.
You know, with the Black Plague and all.
Shakespeare does use a lot of words.
One of his most impressive accomplishments is his use of insults.
They would unify the entire audience; and no matter where you sat, you could laugh at what was going on onstage.
Words, specifically dialogue in a drama setting, are used for many different reasons: to set the mood of the scene, to give some more atmosphere to the setting, and to develop relationships between characters.
Insults do this in a very short and sharp way.
Let's first go to "Hamlet."
Right before this dialogue, Polonius is the father of Ophelia, who is in love with Prince Hamlet.
King Claudius is trying to figure out why Prince Hamlet is acting so crazy since the king married Prince Hamlet's mother.
Polonius offers to use his daughter to get information from Prince Hamlet.
Then we go into Act II Scene 2.
Polonius: "Do you know me, my lord?"
Hamlet: "Excellent well. You're a fishmonger."
Polonius: "Not I, my lord."
Hamlet: "Then I would you were so honest a man."
Now, even if you did not know what "fishmonger" meant, you can use some contextual clues.
One: Polonius reacted in a negative way, so it must be bad.
Two: Fish smell bad, so it must be bad.
And three: "monger" just doesn't sound like a good word.
So from not even knowing the meaning, you're beginning to construct some characterization of the relationship between Hamlet and Polonius, which was not good.
But if you dig some more, "fishmonger" means a broker of some type, and in this setting, would mean like a pimp, like Polonius is brokering out his daughter for money, which he is doing for the king's favor.
This allows you to see that Hamlet is not as crazy as he's claiming to be, and intensifies the animosity between these two characters.
Want another example?
"Romeo and Juliet" has some of the best insults of any of Shakespeare's plays.
It's a play about two gangs, and the star-crossed lovers that take their own lives.
Well, with any fisticuffs you know that there is some serious smack talk going on.
And you are not disappointed.
In Act I Scene 1, right from the get-go we are shown the level of distrust and hatred the members of the two families, the Capulets and Montagues, meet.
Gregory: "I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list."
Sampson: "Nay, as they dare, I will bite my thumb at them, which is a disgrace to them, if they bear it."
Enter Abraham and Balthasar.
Abraham: "Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?"
Sampson: "I do bite my thumb, sir."
Abraham: "Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?"
Okay, so how does this development help us understand mood or character?
Well, let's break it down to the insult.
Biting your thumb today may not seem like a big deal, but Sampson says it is an insult to them.
If they take it so, it must have been one.
This begins to show us the level of animosity between even the men who work for the two Houses.
And you normally would not do anything to someone unless you wanted to provoke them into a fight, which is exactly what's about to happen.
Looking deeper, biting your thumb in the time in which the play was written is like giving someone the finger today.
A pretty strong feeling comes with that, so we now are beginning to feel the tension in the scene.
Later on in the scene, Tybalt, from the House of the Capulets, lays a good one on Benvolio from the House of the Montagues.
Tybalt: "What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Turn thee, Benvolio, and look upon thy death."
Benvolio: "I do but keep the peace; put up thy sword, or manage it to part these men with me."
Tybalt: "What, drawn and talk of peace!
I hate the word, as I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Have at thee, coward!"
Okay, heartless hinds.
We know that once again, it's not a good thing.
Both families hate each other, and this is just adding fuel to the fire.
But just how bad is this stinger?
A heartless hind is a coward, and calling someone that in front of his own men, and the rival family, means there's going to be a fight.
Tybalt basically calls out Benvolio, and in order to keep his honor, Benvolio has to fight.
This dialogue gives us a good look at the characterization between these two characters.
Tybalt thinks that the Montagues are nothing but cowardly dogs, and has no respect for them.
Once again, adding dramatic tension to the scene.
Okay, now here's a spoiler alert.
Tybalt's hotheadedness and severe hatred of the Montagues is what we literature people call his hamartia, or what causes his downfall.
Oh, yes.
He goes down at the hands of Romeo.
So when you're looking at Shakespeare, stop and look at the words, because they really are trying to tell you something.
Which is correct: "A dozen eggs is?" Or "A dozen eggs are?"
I remember being in elementary school, and my teachers making a big deal about the unit.
And I never really got that, until one day, I was in the grocery store, and I wanted to buy an apple, but I couldn't buy one apple.
I had to buy a whole bag of apples.
So I did. I bought one bag of apples, I took it home, I took one apple out of the bag, and I cut it up.
And then I ate one slice.
Which of these is the real "one"?
Well, they all are of course, and that's what my elementary teachers were trying to tell me.
Because this is the important idea behind whole number place value, decimal place value and fractions.
Our whole number system depends on being able to change units.
There are two ways to change units.
We can compose, and we can partition.
When we compose units, we take a bunch of things, we put them together to make a bigger thing, like a dozen eggs.
We take 12 eggs, put them together to make a group, and we call that group a dozen.
A dozen eggs is a composed unit.
Other examples of composed units include a deck of cards, a pair of shoes, a jazz quartet and of course, Barbie and Ken make a couple.
But think about a loaf of bread.
That's not a composed unit, because we don't get a bunch of slices from a bunch of different bakeries and put them together to make a loaf.
No, we start with a loaf of bread and we cut it into smaller pieces called slices, so each slice of bread is a partitioned unit.
Other examples of partitioned units include a square of a chocolate bar, a section of an orange and a slice of pizza.
The important thing about units is that once we've made a new unit, we can treat it just like we did the old unit.
We can compose composed units, and we can partition partitioned units.
Think about toaster pastries.
They come in packs of two, and then those packs get put together in sets of four to make a box.
So when I buy one box of toaster pastries, am I buying one thing, four things, or eight things?
It depends on the unit.
One box, four packs, eight pastries.
And when I share a slice of pizza with a friend, we have to cut "it" into two smaller pieces.
So a box of toaster pastries is composed of composed units, and when I split a slice of pizza, I'm partitioning a partitioned unit.
But what does that have to do with math?
In math, everything is certain.
Two plus two equals four, and one is just one.
One isn't always one.
Here's why: we start counting at one, and we count up to nine: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and then we get to 10, and in order to write 10, we write a one and a zero.
That one means that we have one group, and the zero helps us remember that it means one group, not one thing.
But 10, just like one, just like a dozen eggs, just like an egg, 10 is a unit.
And 10 tens make 100.
Is 100 one thing, 10 things or 100 things?
And that depends on what "one" is, it depends on what the unit is.
No matter what place that one is in, no matter how many things that one represents, one is.
Have you ever wondered what animals think and feel?
Let's start with a question: Does my dog really love me, or does she just want a treat?
Well, it's easy to see that our dog really loves us, easy to see, right, what's going on in that fuzzy little head.
What is going on?
Something's going on.
But why is the question always do they love us?
Why is it always about us?
Why are we such narcissists?
I found a different question to ask animals.
Who are you?
There are capacities of the human mind that we tend to think are capacities only of the human mind.
But is that true?
What are other beings doing with those brains?
What are they thinking and feeling?
Is there a way to know?
I think there is a way in.
I think there are several ways in.
We can look at evolution, we can look at their brains and we can watch what they do.
The first thing to remember is: our brain is inherited.
The first neurons came from jellyfish.
Jellyfish gave rise to the first chordates.
The first chordates gave rise to the first vertebrates.
The vertebrates came out of the sea, and here we are.
But it's still true that a neuron, a nerve cell, looks the same in a crayfish, a bird or you.
What does that say about the minds of crayfish?
Can we tell anything about that?
Well, it turns out that if you give a crayfish a lot of little tiny electric shocks every time it tries to come out of its burrow, it will develop anxiety.
If you give the crayfish the same drug used to treat anxiety disorder in humans, it relaxes and comes out and explores.
How do we show how much we care about crayfish anxiety?
Mostly, we boil them.
(Laughter) Octopuses use tools, as well as do most apes and they recognize human faces.
How do we celebrate the ape-like intelligence of this invertebrate?
Mostly boiled.
If a grouper chases a fish into a crevice in the coral, it will sometimes go to where it knows a moray eel is sleeping and it will signal to the moray, "Follow me," and the moray will understand that signal.
The moray may go into the crevice and get the fish, but the fish may bolt and the grouper may get it.
This is an ancient partnership that we have just recently found out about.
How do we celebrate that ancient partnership?
Mostly fried.
A pattern is emerging and it says a lot more about us than it does about them.
Sea otters use tools and they take time away from what they're doing to show their babies what to do, which is called teaching.
Chimpanzees don't teach.
Killer whales teach and killer whales share food.
When evolution makes something new, it uses the parts it has in stock, off the shelf, before it fabricates a new twist.
And our brain has come to us through the enormity of the deep sweep of time.
If you look at the human brain compared to a chimpanzee brain, what you see is we have basically a very big chimpanzee brain.
It's a good thing ours is bigger, because we're also really insecure.
(Laughter) But, uh oh, there's a dolphin, a bigger brain with more convolutions.
OK, maybe you're saying, all right, well, we see brains, but what does that have to say about minds?
Well, we can see the working of the mind in the logic of behaviors.
So these elephants, you can see, obviously, they are resting.
They have found a patch of shade under the palm trees under which to let their babies sleep, while they doze but remain vigilant.
We make perfect sense of that image just as they make perfect sense of what they're doing because under the arc of the same sun on the same plains, listening to the howls of the same dangers, they became who they are and we became who we are.
We've been neighbors for a very long time.
No one would mistake these elephants as being relaxed.
They're obviously very concerned about something.
What are they concerned about?
It turns out that if you record the voices of tourists and you play that recording from a speaker hidden in bushes, elephants will ignore it, because tourists never bother elephants.
But if you record the voices of herders who carry spears and often hurt elephants in confrontations at water holes, the elephants will bunch up and run away from the hidden speaker.
Not only do elephants know that there are humans, they know that there are different kinds of humans, and that some are OK and some are dangerous.
They have been watching us for much longer than we have been watching them.
They know us better than we know them.
We have the same imperatives: take care of our babies, find food, try to stay alive.
Whether we're outfitted for hiking in the hills of Africa or outfitted for diving under the sea, we are basically the same.
We are kin under the skin.
The elephant has the same skeleton, the killer whale has the same skeleton, as do we.
We see helping where help is needed.
We see curiosity in the young.
We see the bonds of family connections.
We recognize affection.
Courtship is courtship.
And then we ask, "Are they conscious?"
When you get general anesthesia, it makes you unconscious, which means you have no sensation of anything.
Consciousness is simply the thing that feels like something.
If you see, if you hear, if you feel, if you're aware of anything, you are conscious, and they are conscious.
Some people say well, there are certain things that make humans humans, and one of those things is empathy.
Empathy is the mind's ability to match moods with your companions.
It's a very useful thing.
If your companions start to move quickly, you have to feel like you need to hurry up.
We're all in a hurry now.
The oldest form of empathy is contagious fear.
If your companions suddenly startle and fly away, it does not work very well for you to say, "Jeez, I wonder why everybody just left."
(Laughter) Empathy is old, but empathy, like everything else in life, comes on a sliding scale and has its elaboration.
So there's basic empathy: you feel sad, it makes me sad.
I see you happy, it makes me happy.
Then there's something that I call sympathy, a little more removed: "I'm sorry to hear that your grandmother has just passed away.
I don't feel that same grief, but I get it; I know what you feel and it concerns me."
And then if we're motivated to act on sympathy, I call that compassion.
Far from being the thing that makes us human, human empathy is far from perfect.
We round up empathic creatures, we kill them and we eat them.
Now, maybe you say OK, well, those are different species.
That's just predation, and humans are predators.
But we don't treat our own kind too well either.
People who seem to know only one thing about animal behavior know that you must never attribute human thoughts and emotions to other species.
Well, I think that's silly, because attributing human thoughts and emotions to other species is the best first guess about what they're doing and how they're feeling, because their brains are basically the same as ours.
They have the same structures.
The same hormones that create mood and motivation in us are in those brains as well.
It is not scientific to say that they are hungry when they're hunting and they're tired when their tongues are hanging out, and then say when they're playing with their children and acting joyful and happy, we have no idea if they can possibly be experiencing anything.
That is not scientific.
So OK, so a reporter said to me, "Maybe, but how do you really know that other animals can think and feel?"
And I started to rifle through all the hundreds of scientific references that I put in my book and I realized that the answer was right in the room with me.
When my dog gets off the rug and comes over to me -- not to the couch, to me -- and she rolls over on her back and exposes her belly, she has had the thought, "I would like my belly rubbed.
I know that I can go over to Carl, he will understand what I'm asking.
I know I can trust him because we're family.
He'll get the job done, and it will feel good."
(Laughter) She has thought and she has felt, and it's really not more complicated than that.
But we see other animals and we say, "Oh look, killer whales, wolves, elephants: that's not how they see it."
That tall-finned male is L41.
He's 38 years old.
The female right on his left side is L22.
She's 44.
They've known each other for decades.
They know exactly who they are.
They know who their friends are.
They know who their rivals are.
Their life follows the arc of a career.
They know where they are all the time.
This is an elephant named Philo.
He was a young male.
This is him four days later.
Humans not only can feel grief, we create an awful lot of it.
We want to carve their teeth.
Why can't we wait for them to die?
Elephants once ranged from the shores of the Mediterranean Sea all the way down to the Cape of Good Hope.
In 1980, there were vast strongholds of elephant range in Central and Eastern Africa.
And now their range is shattered into little shards.
This is the geography of an animal that we are driving to extinction, a fellow being, the most magnificent creature on land.
Of course, we take much better care of our wildlife in the United States.
In Yellowstone National Park, we killed every single wolf.
We killed every single wolf south of the Canadian border, actually.
But in the park, park rangers did that in the 1920s, and then 60 years later they had to bring them back, because the elk numbers had gotten out of control.
And then people came.
People came by the thousands to see the wolves, the most accessibly visible wolves in the world.
And I went there and I watched this incredible family of wolves.
A pack is a family.
It has some breeding adults and the young of several generations.
And I watched the most famous, most stable pack in Yellowstone National Park.
And then, when they wandered just outside the border, two of their adults were killed, including the mother, which we sometimes call the alpha female.
The rest of the family immediately descended into sibling rivalry.
Sisters kicked out other sisters.
That one on the left tried for days to rejoin her family.
They wouldn't let her because they were jealous of her.
She was getting too much attention from two new males, and she was the precocious one.
That was too much for them.
She wound up wandering outside the park and getting shot.
The alpha male wound up being ejected from his own family.
As winter was coming in, he lost his territory, his hunting support, the members of his family and his mate.
We cause so much pain to them.
The mystery is, why don't they hurt us more than they do?
This whale had just finished eating part of a grey whale with his companions who had killed that whale.
Those people in the boat had nothing at all to fear.
This whale is T20.
He had just finished tearing a seal into three pieces with two companions.
The seal weighed about as much as the people in the boat.
They had nothing to fear.
They eat seals.
Why don't they eat us?
Why can we trust them around our toddlers?
Why is it that killer whales have returned to researchers lost in thick fog and led them miles until the fog parted and the researchers' home was right there on the shoreline?
And that's happened more than one time.
In the Bahamas, there's a woman named Denise Herzing, and she studies spotted dolphins and they know her.
She knows them very well. She knows who they all are.
They know her. They recognize the research boat.
When she shows up, it's a big happy reunion.
Except, one time showed up and they didn't want to come near the boat, and that was really strange.
And they couldn't figure out what was going on until somebody came out on deck and announced that one of the people onboard had died during a nap in his bunk.
How could dolphins know that one of the human hearts had just stopped?
Why would they care?
And why would it spook them?
These mysterious things just hint at all of the things that are going on in the minds that are with us on Earth that we almost never think about at all.
At an aquarium in South Africa was a little baby bottle-nosed dolphin named Dolly.
She was nursing, and one day a keeper took a cigarette break and he was looking into the window into their pool, smoking.
Dolly came over and looked at him, went back to her mother, nursed for a minute or two, came back to the window and released a cloud of milk that enveloped her head like smoke.
Somehow, this baby bottle-nosed dolphin got the idea of using milk to represent smoke.
When human beings use one thing to represent another, we call that art.
(Laughter) The things that make us human are not the things that we think make us human.
What makes us human is that, of all these things that our minds and their minds have, we are the most extreme.
We are the most compassionate, most violent, most creative and most destructive animal that has ever been on this planet, and we are all of those things all jumbled up together.
But love is not the thing that makes us human.
It's not special to us.
We are not the only ones who care about our mates.
We are not the only ones who care about our children.
Albatrosses frequently fly six, sometimes ten thousand miles over several weeks to deliver one meal, one big meal, to their chick who is waiting for them.
They nest on the most remote islands in the oceans of the world, and this is what it looks like.
Passing life from one generation to the next is the chain of being.
If that stops, it all goes away.
If anything is sacred, that is, and into that sacred relationship comes our plastic trash.
All of these birds have plastic in them now.
This is an albatross six months old, ready to fledge -- died, packed with red cigarette lighters.
This is not the relationship we are supposed to have with the rest of the world.
But we, who have named ourselves after our brains, never think about the consequences.
When we welcome new human life into the world, we welcome our babies into the company of other creatures.
We paint animals on the walls.
We don't paint cell phones.
We don't paint work cubicles.
We paint animals to show them that we are not alone.
We have company.
And every one of those animals in every painting of Noah's ark, deemed worthy of salvation is in mortal danger now, and their flood is us.
So we started with a question: Do they love us?
We're going to ask another question.
Are we capable of using what we have to care enough to simply let them continue?
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Meet our chemist, Harriet.
She has a chemical reaction that needs to occur more quickly.
A chemist has some processes at her disposal that can help her speed up her reaction, and she knows of five ways.
And to remember them, she thinks back to her days as a high school student, and the day she got a date for the dance.
She had lost track of time and was going to be late to class.
Unbeknownst to her, Harold, who was just around the corner, was running late, too.
They both sprinted to class and, as it happened, sprinted directly into one another.
Now, this was no small collision.
They ran squarely into one another in such a way that he knocked the books right out of her hand.
He kindly helped her re-collect her belongings, and politely offered to walk her to class.
And you'll never guess who went together to the dance later that year.
So as we can see from this example, the key to getting a date for the dance is to collide with someone and knock the books out of their hands.
Now, you're probably already aware that not all collisions lead to dates for the dance, thankfully.
The collisions must have two important characteristics: One, correct orientation that allows books to be knocked from one's hands; and two, enough energy to knock the books out.
Shortly after this incident, Harriet decided to tell me, her chemistry teacher, all about it.
I noticed some interesting parallels between her story and chemical reaction rates, which happened to be what she was studying in the hallway the day of the collision.
Harriet wanted to help all chemistry students and chemists remember how to speed up the rate of chemical reactions and I, being the nice guy that I am, decided to make it my mission to help create educational environments in which more book-dropping collisions can take place to increase future chemists' chances of getting a date for the dance.
In order to facilitate this improved dance-date-getting process, I propose five changes to all schools that parallel Harriet's five ways to increase chemical reaction rates.
First, I propose that we shrink the size of the hallways.
This will make it more difficult to safely navigate the hallways and will cause more collisions than in larger hallways.
And by increasing the number of collisions, we increase the likelihood that some of those collisions will have the correct alignment and enough energy to create a date to the dance.
Now, chemically speaking, this is equivalent to lowering the volume of a reaction vessel or a reaction mixture.
In doing so, the individual particles are closer together, and more collisions will occur.
More collisions means a greater likelihood that collisions with the appropriate energy and configuration will happen.
Second, I propose increasing the overall population of the school.
More students equals more collisions.
By increasing the number of particles available for collision, we create an environment where more collisions can take place.
Third, we must reduce the time allowed between classes -- heck, let's just cut it in half.
In doing so, students will need to move more quickly to get from one class to the next.
This increase in velocity will help make sure collisions have the appropriate amount of energy necessary to ensure book-dropping.
This is analogous to increasing the temperature of the reaction mixture.
Higher temperature means particles are moving faster.
Faster-moving particles means more energy, and a greater likelihood of the reaction-causing collision.
Fourth, students must stop traveling in packs.
By traveling in packs, the students on the outside of the pack insulate those in the middle from undergoing any collisions.
By splitting up, each student has more area exposed that is available for a collision from a passing student.
When particles travel in packs, the surface area is very small, and only the outside particles can collide.
However, by breaking up the clumps into individual particles, the total surface area is increased, and each particle has an exposed surface that can react.
Is this colliding and book-dropping too violent?
Then a matchmaker will help with this.
The matchmaker makes it easier for a couple to get together, by coordinating the match.
Our matchmaker is like a catalyst.
Chemical catalysts function by lowering the activation energy -- in other words, by lowering the energy required to start a reaction.
They do this by bringing two particles together and orienting them correctly in space so that the two can meet at the correct configuration and allow a reaction to take place.
So, to sum up: if a future chemist wants a date for the dance, he must collide with another person and knock the books out of their hands.
And if a chemist wants to make a chemical reaction occur, the particles must collide in the correct orientation with an appropriate amount of energy.
And both of these processes can be accelerated, using the five methods I've described.
Say you're at the beach, and you get sand in your eyes.
How do you know the sand is there?
You obviously can't see it, but if you are a normal, healthy human, you can feel it, that sensation of extreme discomfort, also known as pain.
Now, pain makes you do something, in this case, rinse your eyes until the sand is gone.
And how do you know the sand is gone?
Exactly. Because there's no more pain.
There are people who don't feel pain.
Now, that might sound cool, but it's not.
If you can't feel pain, you could get hurt, or even hurt yourself and never know it.
Pain is your body's early warning system.
It protects you from the world around you, and from yourself.
As we grow, we install pain detectors in most areas of our body.
These detectors are specialized nerve cells called nociceptors that stretch from your spinal cord to your skin, your muscles, your joints, your teeth and some of your internal organs.
Just like all nerve cells, they conduct electrical signals, sending information from wherever they're located back to your brain.
But, unlike other nerve cells, nociceptors only fire if something happens that could cause or is causing damage.
So, gently touch the tip of a needle.
You'll feel the metal, and those are your regular nerve cells.
But you won't feel any pain.
Now, the harder you push against the needle, the closer you get to the nociceptor threshold.
Push hard enough, and you'll cross that threshold and the nociceptors fire, telling your body to stop doing whatever you're doing.
But the pain threshold isn't set in stone.
Certain chemicals can tune nociceptors, lowering their threshold for pain.
When cells are damaged, they and other nearby cells start producing these tuning chemicals like crazy, lowering the nociceptors' threshold to the point where just touch can cause pain.
And this is where over-the-counter painkillers come in.
Aspirin and ibuprofen block production of one class of these tuning chemicals, called prostaglandins.
Let's take a look at how they do that.
When cells are damaged, they release a chemical called arachidonic acid.
And two enzymes called COX-1 and COX-2 convert this arachidonic acid into prostaglandin H2, which is then converted into a bunch of other chemicals that do a bunch of things, including raise your body temperature, cause inflammation and lower the pain threshold.
Now, all enzymes have an active site.
That's the place in the enzyme where the reaction happens.
The active sites of COX-1 and COX-2 fit arachidonic acid very cozily.
As you can see, there is no room to spare.
Now, it's in this active site that aspirin and ibuprofen do their work.
So, they work differently.
Aspirin acts like a spine from a porcupine.
It enters the active site and then breaks off, leaving half of itself in there, totally blocking that channel and making it impossible for the arachidonic acid to fit.
This permanently deactivates COX-1 and COX-2.
Ibuprofen, on the other hand, enters the active site, but doesn't break apart or change the enzyme.
COX-1 and COX-2 are free to spit it out again, but for the time that that ibuprofen is in there, the enzyme can't bind arachidonic acid, and can't do its normal chemistry.
But how do aspirin and ibuprofen know where the pain is?
Well, they don't.
Once the drugs are in your bloodstream, they are carried throughout your body, and they go to painful areas just the same as normal ones.
So that's how aspirin and ibuprofen work.
But there are other dimensions to pain.
Neuropathic pain, for example, is pain caused by damage to our nervous system itself; there doesn't need to be any sort of outside stimulus.
And scientists are discovering that the brain controls how we respond to pain signals.
For example, how much pain you feel can depend on whether you're paying attention to the pain, or even your mood.
Pain is an area of active research.
If we can understand it better, maybe we can help people manage it better.
(Music) The basic question is, does life exist beyond Earth?
Scientists who are called astrobiologists are trying to find that out right now.
Most astrobiologists are trying to figure out if there's microbial life on Mars, or in the ocean under the frozen surface of Jupiter's moon Europa, or in the liquid hydrocarbon lakes that we've found on Saturn's moon Titan.
But one group of astrobiologists works on SETI.
SETI is the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, and SETI researchers are trying to detect some evidence that intelligent creatures elsewhere have used technology to build a transmitter of some sort.
But how likely is it that they will manage to find a signal?
There are certainly no guarantees when it comes to SETI, but something called the Drake equation, named after Frank Drake, can help us organize our thinking about what might be required for successful detection.
If you've dealt with equations before, then you probably expect that there will be a solution to the equation, a right answer.
The Drake equation, however, is different, because there are so many unknowns.
It has no right answer.
As we learn more about our universe and our place within it, some of the unknowns get better known, and we can estimate an answer a bit better.
But there won't be a definite answer to the Drake equation until SETI succeeds or something else proves that Earthlings are the only intelligent species in our portion of the cosmos.
In the meantime, it is really useful to consider the unknowns.
The Drake equation attempts to estimate the number of technological civilizations in the Milky Way Galaxy -- we call that N -- with whom we could make contact, and it's usually written as: N equals R-star multiplied by f-sub-p multiplied by n-sub-e multiplied by f-sub-l multiplied by f-sub-i multiplied by f-sub-c and lastly, multiplied by capital L.
All those factors multiplied together help to estimate the number of technological civilizations that we might be able to detect right now.
R-star is the rate at which stars have been born in the Milky Way Galaxy over the last few billion years, so it's a number that is stars per year.
Our galaxy is 10 billion years old, and early in its history stars formed at a different rate.
All of the f-factors are fractions.
Each one must be less than or equal to one.
F-sub-p is the fraction of stars that have planets.
N-sub-e is the average number of habitable planets in any planetary system.
F-sub-l is the fraction of planets on which life actually begins and f-sub-i is the fraction of all those life forms that develop intelligence.
F-sub-c is the fraction of intelligent life that develops a civilization that decides to use some sort of transmitting technology.
And finally, L -- the longevity factor.
On average, how many years do those transmitters continue to operate?
Astronomers are now almost able to tell us what the product of the first three terms is.
We're now finding exoplanets almost everywhere.
The fractions dealing with life and intelligence and technological civilizations are ones that many, many experts ponder, but nobody knows for sure.
So far, we only know of one place in the universe where life exists, and that's right here on Earth.
In the next couple of decades, as we explore Mars and Europa and Titan, the discovery of any kind of life there will mean that life will be abundant in the Milky Way.
Because if life originated twice within this one Solar System, it means it was easy, and given similar conditions elsewhere, life will happen.
So the number two is a very important number here.
Scientists, including SETI researchers, often tend to make very crude estimates and acknowledge that there are very large uncertainties in these estimates, in order to make progress.
We think we know that R-star and n-sub-e are both numbers that are closer to 10 than, say, to one, and all the f-factors are less than one.
Some of them may be much less than one.
But of all these unknowns, the biggest unknown is L, so perhaps the most useful version of the Drake equation is simply to say that N is approximately equal to L.
The information in this equation is very clear.
Unless L is large, N will be small.
But, you know, you can also turn that around.
If SETI succeeds in detecting a signal in the near future, after examining only a small portion of the stars in the Milky Way, then we learn that L, on average, must be large.
Otherwise, we couldn't have succeeded so easily.
A physicist named Philip Morrison summarizes by saying that SETI is the archaeology of the future.
By this, he meant that because the speed of light is finite, any signals detected from distant technologies will be telling us about their past by the time they reach us.
But because L must be large for a successful detection, we also learn about our future, particularly that we can have a long future.
We've developed technologies that can send signals into space and humans to the moon, but we've also developed technologies that can destroy the environment, that can wage war with weapons and biological terrorism.
In the future, will our technology help stabilize our planet and our population, leading to a very long lifetime for us?
Or will we destroy our world and its inhabitants after only a brief appearance on the cosmic stage?
I encourage you to consider the unknowns in this equation.
Why don't you make your own estimates for these unknowns, and see what you come up with for N?
Compare that with the estimates made by Frank Drake, Carl Sagan, other scientists or your neighbors.
Remember, there's no right answer.
Not yet.
Sea turtles are miraculous.
First, they've been around since the late Jurassic, roughly 150 million years ago.
Cohorts of the dinosaurs, sea turtles have survived through the challenges of eons, existing still today, where many others have ended their evolutionary run.
Second, throughout the centuries and up till today, every living adult sea turtle has overcome the odds, existing as a consequence of chance, skill, and capability.
The gauntlet each sea turtle faces in the course of its lifetime goes thus: First, deposited as a clutch of leathery, ping-pong ball-sized eggs into a nesting pit dug by its mother high on the beach, of the 50 to 200 eggs laid, roughly 20 percent will never hatch.
Roughly a month and a half after having been laid, the surviving eggs hatch, and the young turtles, each small enough to fit in the palm of your hand, squirm to the surface, emerging from the sand en masse, and making their desperate dash for the sea.
Along the way, debris, pitfalls, crabs, gulls, raccoons, and other threats will claim roughly 50 percent of those who rose from the sand.
For those that actually reach the surf, they trade one set of threats for another, as they first face the repelling force of the waves, and then find a whole new host of predators awaiting them: Various fish, dolphins, sharks, and sea birds, as the young turtles come to the surface for air.
For their first few days of life, should they count themselves amongst the living, the vulnerable turtles swim frantically forward.
Ultimately, they will often look to settle in a patch of flotsam, preferably a patch of floating seaweed.
Now for the next several months, they will seek to avoid those that would eat them, find that which they might eat themselves, and not fall to the pressures of challenging weather or unfortunate currents.
In this phase, roughly 50 percent of those who reach the surf will perish.
Ultimately, with the passage of years, the survivors will increase in size, from that of a dinner plate at year one to that of a dinner table, in the case of one species at least, the leatherback, a decade or so later.
With size comes some measure of protection.
The only truly worrisome predators now are some of the larger shark species-- bulls, tigers, and whites -- and the occasional killer whale.
At approximately two decades of age, the survivors will be old enough themselves to breed, and continue the cycle which their very existence heralds.
Of those that began as eggs on a distant beach, now less than 10 percent remain, at least, those were the odds prior to significant human interference.
Over the past century, and in particular in the last several decades, human endeavors, from beach development to plastic refuse to poaching, long lines, nets, and even noxious chemicals, including oil, have upped the ante for sea turtles, causing their survival rate to drop to around one percent or less, from each nesting cycle.
It is this added human pressure which has pushed each of the eight sea turtle species into either a threatened or endangered state.
For while they have evolved to overcome a host of obstacles, the most recent has arisen so quickly and at such scale that the species find themselves overwhelmed.
So let's quickly recap this cycle of odds.
Using a hypothetical nesting season, for females may nest multiple times in a single year, of 1,000 eggs, for sake of ease.
1000 eggs laid.
800 hatch.
400 make it to the water.
200 progress toward adulthood.
20 survive to breeding age -- that is, without human interference.
Two survive to breeding age with human interference.
So a breeding adult sea turtle is the very embodiment of a long shot.
It is the exception, not the rule.
A jackpot.
It is, in a very real sense, a miracle.
It was April 8, 2003.
I was in Baghdad, covering the war in Iraq.
That day, Americans tanks started arriving in Baghdad.
We were just a few journalists in the Palestine Hotel, and, as happens in war, the fighting began to approach outside our windows.
Baghdad was covered in black smoke and oil.
It smelled awful.
Of course, I was supposed to be writing an article, but that's how it always goes -- you're supposed to be writing and something big happens.
So I was in my room on the 16th floor, writing and looking out the window every now and then to see what was happening.
Suddenly, there was a huge explosion.
During the previous three weeks, there had been shelling with half-ton missiles, but this time, the shock -- I felt it inside of me, and I thought, "It's very close.
So I went down to see what was happening.
I went down to the 15th floor to take a look.
And I saw people, journalists, screaming in the hallways.
I walked into a room and realized that it had been hit by a missile.
Someone had been wounded.
There was a man near the window, a cameraman named Taras Protsyuk, lying face-down.
Having worked in a hospital before, I wanted to help out.
So I turned him over.
And when I turned him over, I noticed that he was open from sternum to pubis, but I couldn't see anything, nothing at all.
All I saw was a white, pearly, shiny spot that blinded me, and I didn't understand what was going on.
Once the spot disappeared and I could see his wound, which was very serious, my buddies and I put a sheet underneath him, and we carried him onto an elevator that stopped at each of the 15 floors.
We put him in a car that took him to the hospital.
He died on the way to the hospital.
The Spanish cameraman José Couso, who was on the 14th floor and also hit -- because the shell had exploded between the two floors -- died on the operating table.
As soon as the car left, I went back.
There was that article I was supposed to write -- which I had to write.
And so -- I returned to the hotel lobby with my arms covered in blood, when one of the hotel gofers stopped me and asked me to pay the tax I hadn't paid for 10 days.
I told him to get lost.
And I said to myself: "Clear your head, put it all aside.
If you want to write, you need to put it all aside."
And that's what I did.
I went upstairs, wrote my article and sent it off.
Later, aside from the feeling of having lost my colleagues, something else was bothering me.
I kept seeing that shiny, pearly spot, and I couldn't understand what it meant.
And then, the war was over.
Later, I thought: "That's not possible. I can't just not know what happened."
Because it wasn't the first time, and it didn't only happen to me.
I have seen things like that happen to others in my 20 to 35 years of reporting.
I have seen things that had an effect on me too.
For example, there was this man I knew in Lebanon, a 25-year-old veteran who had been fighting for five years -- a real veteran -- who we would follow everywhere.
He would crawl in the dark with confidence -- he was a great soldier, a true soldier -- so we would follow him, knowing that we would be safe with him.
And one day, as I was told -- and I've seen him again since -- he was back in the camp, playing cards, when someone came in next door, and discharged their weapon.
As the gun went off, that blast, that one shot, made him duck quickly under the table, like a child.
He was shaking, panicking.
He ended up working as a croupier in a Beirut casino where I later found him, because he couldn't sleep, so it was quite a suitable job.
So I thought to myself, "What is this thing that can kill you without leaving any visible scars?
How does that happen?
What is this unknown thing?"
So I started to investigate -- that's all I know how to do.
I started to investigate by looking through books, reaching out to psychiatrists, going to museums, libraries, etc.
Finally, I discovered that some people knew about this -- often military psychiatrists -- and that what we were dealing with was called trauma.
Americans call it PTSD or traumatic neurosis.
It was something that existed, but that we never spoke about.
So, this trauma -- what is it?
Well, it's an encounter with death.
I don't know if you've ever had an experience with death -- I'm not talking about dead bodies, or someone's grandfather lying in a hospital bed, or someone who got hit by a car.
I'm talking about facing the void of death.
And that is something no one is supposed to see.
People used to say, "Neither the sun, nor death can be looked at with a steady eye."
A human being should not have to face the void of death.
But when that happens, it can remain invisible for a while -- days, weeks, months, sometimes years.
And then, at some point, it explodes, because it's something that has entered your brain -- a sort of window between an image and your mind -- that has penetrated your brain, staying there and taking up all the space inside.
And there are people -- men, women, who suddenly no longer sleep.
And they experience horrible anxiety attacks -- panic attacks, not just minor fears.
They suddenly don't want to sleep, because when they do, they have the same nightmare every night.
They see the same image every night.
For example, a soldier who enters a building and comes face to face with another soldier aiming at him.
He looks at the gun, straight down the barrel.
And this barrel suddenly becomes enormous, deformed.
It becomes fluffy, swallowing everything.
And he says -- later he will say, "I saw death.
And from then on, he knows he is dead.
It is not a perception -- he is convinced that he is dead.
In reality, someone came in, the guy left or didn't shoot, whatever, and he didn't actually get shot -- but to him, he died in that moment.
Or it can be the smell of a mass grave -- I saw a lot of that in Rwanda.
It can be the voice of a friend calling, and they're being slaughtered and there's nothing you can do.
You hear that voice, and you wake up every night -- for weeks, months -- in a trance-like state, anxious and terrified, like a child.
I have seen men cry -- just like children -- from seeing the same image.
So having that image of horror in your brain, seeing the void of death -- that analogue of horror which is hiding something -- will completely take over.
You cannot do anything, anything at all.
You cannot work anymore, you cannot love anymore.
You go home and don't recognize anyone.
You hide and don't leave the house, you lock yourself in, you become ill.
I know people who placed small cans outside their house with coins inside, in case someone tried to get in.
All of a sudden, you feel like you want to die or kill or hide or run away.
You want to be loved, but you hate everyone.
It's a feeling that seizes you entirely day in and day out, and you suffer tremendously.
And no one understands.
They say, "There's nothing wrong with you. You seem fine, you have no injuries.
You went to war, came back; you're fine."
After all, suicide is like updating your daily planner -- I'm already dead, I might as well commit suicide.
Some commit suicide, others end up under the bridge, drinking.
Everyone remembers that grandfather or uncle or neighbor who used to drink, never said a word, always in a bad mood, beat his wife and who would end up either sinking into alcoholism or dying.
And why do we not talk about this?
We don't talk about it because it's taboo.
It's not like we don't have the words to express the void of death.
But others don't want hear it.
The first time I returned from an assignment, They said, "Oh! He's back."
There was a fancy dinner -- white tablecloth, candles, guests.
"Tell us everything!"
After 20 minutes, people were giving me dirty looks, the hostess had her nose in the ashtray.
It was horrible and I realized I ruined the whole evening.
So I don't talk about it anymore.
People say outright: "Please, stop."
Is that a rare occurrence?
One third of the soldiers who died in Iraq -- well, not "died," let me re-phrase that -- one third of the US soldiers who went to Iraq suffer from PTSD.
In 1939, there were still 200,000 soldiers from the First World War that were being treated in British psychiatric hospitals.
In Vietnam, 54,000 people died -- Americans.
In 1987, the US government identified 102,000 -- twice as many -- 102,000 veterans who died from committing suicide.
Twice as many deaths by suicide than by combat in Vietnam.
So you see, this relates to everything, not just modern warfare, but also ancient wars -- you can read about it, the evidence is there.
So why do we not talk about it?
Why have we not talked about it?
The problem is that if you don't talk about it, you're heading for disaster.
The only way to heal -- and the good news here is that this is treatable -- think Munch's The Scream, Goya, etc. -- it's indeed treatable.
The only way to heal from this trauma, from this encounter with death that overwhelms, petrifies and kills you is to find a way to express it.
People used to say, "Language is the only thing that holds all of us together."
Without language, we're nothing.
It's the thing that makes us human.
In the face of such a horrible image -- a wordless image of oblivion that obsesses us -- the only way to cope with it is to put human words to it.
Because these people feel excluded from humanity.
No one wants to see them anymore and they don't want to see anyone.
They feel dirty, defiled, ashamed.
Someone said, "Doctor, I don't use the subway anymore because I'm afraid people will see the horror in my eyes."
Another guy thought he had a terrible skin disease and spent six months with dermatologists, going from doctor to doctor.
And then one day, they sent him to a psychiatrist.
During his second session, he told the psychiatrist he had a terrible skin disease from head to toe.
The psychiatrist asked, "Why are you in this state?"
And the man said, "Well, because I'm dead, so I must be rotting away."
So you see this is something that has a profound effect on people.
In order to heal, we need to talk about it.
The horror needs to be put into words -- human words, so we can organize it and talk about it again.
We have to look death in the face.
And if we can do that, if we can talk about these things, then step by step, by working it out verbally, we can reclaim our place in humanity.
And it is important.
So what does this mean?
It means that after a trauma, without question, we lose our "unbearable lightness of being," that sense of immortality that keeps us here -- meaning, if we're here, we almost feel like we're immortal, which we're not, but if we didn't believe that, we'd say, "What's the point of it all?"
But trauma survivors have lost that feeling of immortality.
They've lost their lightness.
So this means that if we manage to look death in the face, and actually confront it, rather than keep quiet and hide, like some of the men or women I know did, such as Michael from Rwanda, Carole from Iraq, Philippe from the Congo and other people I know, like Sorj Chalandon, now a great writer, who gave up field assignments after a trauma.
Five friends of mine committed suicide, they're the ones who did not survive the trauma.
So if we can look death in the face, if we, mortal humans, human mortals, understand that we are human and mortal, mortal and human, if we can confront death and identify it once again as the most mysterious place of all mysterious places, since no one has ever seen it -- if we can give it back this meaning, yes, we may die, survive and come back to life, but we'll come back stronger than before.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was in fourth grade, my teacher said to us one day: "There are as many even numbers as there are numbers."
"Really?", I thought.
But even numbers are only part of the whole numbers, all the odd numbers are left over, so there's got to be more whole numbers than even numbers, right?
To see what my teacher was getting at, let's first think about what it means for two sets to be the same size.
What do I mean when I say I have the same number of fingers on my right hand as I do on left hand?
Of course, I have five fingers on each, but it's actually simpler than that.
I don't have to count, I only need to see that I can match them up, one to one.
In fact, we think that some ancient people who spoke languages that didn't have words for numbers greater than three used this sort of magic.
For instance, if you let your sheep out of a pen to graze, you can keep track of how many went out by setting aside a stone for each one, and putting those stones back one by one when the sheep return, so you know if any are missing without really counting.
As another example of matching being more fundamental than counting, if I'm speaking to a packed auditorium, where every seat is taken and no one is standing, I know that there are the same number of chairs as people in the audience, even though I don't know how many there are of either.
So, what we really mean when we say that two sets are the same size is that the elements in those sets can be matched up one by one in some way.
My fourth grade teacher showed us the whole numbers laid out in a row, and below each we have its double.
As you can see, the bottom row contains all the even numbers, and we have a one-to-one match.
That is, there are as many even numbers as there are numbers.
But what still bothers us is our distress over the fact that even numbers seem to be only part of the whole numbers.
But does this convince you that I don't have the same number of fingers on my right hand as I do on my left?
Of course not.
It doesn't matter if you try to match the elements in some way and it doesn't work, that doesn't convince us of anything.
If you can find one way in which the elements of two sets do match up, then we say those two sets have the same number of elements.
Can you make a list of all the fractions?
And it's not obvious what to put first, or how to be sure all of them are on the list.
Nevertheless, there is a very clever way that we can make a list of all the fractions.
This was first done by Georg Cantor, in the late eighteen hundreds.
First, we put all the fractions into a grid.
For instance, you can find, say, 117/243, in the 117th row and 243rd column.
Now we make a list out of this by starting at the upper left and sweeping back and forth diagonally, skipping over any fraction, like 2/2, that represents the same number as one the we've already picked.
We get a list of all the fractions, which means we've created a one-to-one match between the whole numbers and the fractions, despite the fact that we thought maybe there ought to be more fractions.
OK, here's where it gets really interesting.
You may know that not all real numbers -- that is, not all the numbers on a number line -- are fractions.
The square root of two and pi, for instance.
Any number like this is called irrational.
Not because it's crazy, or anything, but because the fractions are ratios of whole numbers, and so are called rationals; meaning the rest are non-rational, that is, irrational.
Irrationals are represented by infinite, non-repeating decimals.
So, can we make a one-to-one match between the whole numbers and the set of all the decimals, both the rationals and the irrationals?
Cantor showed that you can't.
Look, suppose you claim you have made a list of all the decimals.
I'm going to show you that you didn't succeed, by producing a decimal that is not on your list.
I'll construct my decimal one place at a time.
For the first decimal place of my number, I'll look at the first decimal place of your first number.
If it's a one, I'll make mine a two; otherwise I'll make mine a one.
For the second place of my number, I'll look at the second place of your second number.
Again, if yours is a one, I'll make mine a two, and otherwise I'll make mine a one.
See how this is going?
Why? Could it be, say, your 143rd number?
No, because the 143rd place of my decimal is different from the 143rd place of your 143rd number.
I made it that way.
And, no matter what list you give me, I can do the same thing, and produce a decimal that's not on that list.
So we're faced with this astounding conclusion: The decimal numbers cannot be put on a list.
So, even though we're familiar with only a few irrationals, like square root of two and pi, the infinity of irrationals is actually greater than the infinity of fractions.
Someone once said that the rationals -- the fractions -- are like the stars in the night sky.
The irrationals are like the blackness.
Cantor also showed that, for any infinite set, forming a new set made of all the subsets of the original set represents a bigger infinity than that original set.
This means that, once you have one infinity, you can always make a bigger one by making the set of all subsets of that first set.
And then an even bigger one by making the set of all the subsets of that one.
And so, there are an infinite number of infinities of different sizes.
If these ideas make you uncomfortable, you are not alone.
Some of the greatest mathematicians of Cantor's day were very upset with this stuff.
They tried to make these different infinities irrelevant, to make mathematics work without them somehow.
Cantor was even vilified personally, and it got so bad for him that he suffered severe depression, and spent the last half of his life in and out of mental institutions.
But eventually, his ideas won out.
All research mathematicians accept these ideas, every college math major learns them, and I've explained them to you in a few minutes.
Some day, perhaps, they'll be common knowledge.
There's more.
We just pointed out that the set of decimal numbers -- that is, the real numbers -- is a bigger infinity than the set of whole numbers.
Cantor wondered whether there are infinities of different sizes between these two infinities.
He didn't believe there were, but couldn't prove it.
In 1900, the great mathematician David Hilbert listed the continuum hypothesis as the most important unsolved problem in mathematics.
The 20th century saw a resolution of this problem, but in a completely unexpected, paradigm-shattering way.
In the 1920s, Kurt Gödel showed that you can never prove that the continuum hypothesis is false.
Then, in the 1960s, Paul J. Cohen showed that you can never prove that the continuum hypothesis is true.
Taken together, these results mean that there are unanswerable questions in mathematics.
A very stunning conclusion.
Mathematics is rightly considered the pinnacle of human reasoning, but we now know that even mathematics has its limitations.
Still, mathematics has some truly amazing things for us to think about.
For much of the past century, architecture was under the spell of a famous doctrine.
"Form follows function" had become modernity's ambitious manifesto and detrimental straitjacket, as it liberated architecture from the decorative, but condemned it to utilitarian rigor and restrained purpose.
Of course, architecture is about function, but I want to remember a rewriting of this phrase by Bernard Tschumi, and I want to propose a completely different quality.
If form follows fiction, we could think of architecture and buildings as a space of stories -- stories of the people that live there, of the people that work in these buildings.
And we could start to imagine the experiences our buildings create.
In this sense, I'm interested in fiction not as the implausible but as the real, as the reality of what architecture means for the people that live in it and with it.
Our buildings are prototypes, ideas for how the space of living or how the space of working could be different, and what a space of culture or a space of media could look like today.
Our buildings are real; they're being built.
They're an explicit engagement in physical reality and conceptual possibility.
I think of our architecture as organizational structures.
At their core is indeed structural thinking, like a system: How can we arrange things in both a functional and experiential way?
How can we create structures that generate a series of relationships and narratives?
And how can fictive stories of the inhabitants and users of our buildings script the architecture, while the architecture scripts those stories at the same time?
And here comes the second term into play, what I call "narrative hybrids" -- structures of multiple simultaneous stories that unfold throughout the buildings we create.
So we could think of architecture as complex systems of relationships, both in a programmatic and functional way and in an experiential and emotive or social way.
This is the headquarters for China's national broadcaster, which I designed together with Rem Koolhaas at OMA.
When I first arrived in Beijing in 2002, the city planners showed us this image: a forest of several hundred skyscrapers to emerge in the central business district, except at that time, only a handful of them existed.
So we had to design in a context that we knew almost nothing about, except one thing: it would all be about verticality.
Of course, the skyscraper is vertical -- it's a profoundly hierarchical structure, the top always the best, the bottom the worst, and the taller you are, the better, so it seems.
And we wanted to ask ourselves, could a building be about a completely different quality?
Could it undo this hierarchy, and could it be about a system that is more about collaboration, rather than isolation?
So we took this needle and bent it back into itself, into a loop of interconnected activities.
Our idea was to bring all aspects of television-making into one single structure: news, program production, broadcasting, research and training, administration -- all into a circuit of interconnected activities where people would meet in a process of exchange and collaboration.
I still very much like this image.
It reminds one of biology classes, if you remember the human body with all its organs and circulatory systems, like at school.
And suddenly you think of architecture no longer as built substance, but as an organism, as a life form.
And as you start to dissect this organism, you can identify a series of primary technical clusters -- program production, broadcasting center and news.
Those are tightly intertwined with social clusters: meeting rooms, canteens, chat areas -- informal spaces for people to meet and exchange.
So the organizational structure of this building was a hybrid between the technical and the social, the human and the performative.
And of course, we used the loop of the building as a circulatory system, to thread everything together and to allow both visitors and staff to experience all these different functions in a great unity.
With 473,000 square meters, it is one of the largest buildings ever built in the world.
It has a population of over 10,000 people, and of course, this is a scale that exceeds the comprehension of many things and the scale of typical architecture.
So we stopped work for a while and sat down and cut 10,000 little sticks and glued them onto a model, just simply to confront ourselves with what that quantity actually meant.
But of course, it's not a number, it is the people, it is a community that inhabits the building, and in order to both comprehend this, but also script this architecture, we identified five characters, hypothetical characters, and we followed them throughout their day in a life in this building, thought of where they would meet, what they would experience.
So it was a way to script and design the building, but of course, also to communicate its experiences.
This was part of an exhibition with the Museum of Modern Art in both New York and Beijing.
This is the main broadcast control room, a technical installation so large, it can broadcast over 200 channels simultaneously.
And this is how the building stands in Beijing today.
Its first broadcast live was the London Olympics 2012, after it had been completed from the outside for the Beijing Olympics.
And you can see at the very tip of this 75-meter cantilever, those three little circles.
And they're indeed part of a public loop that goes through the building.
They're a piece of glass that you can stand on and watch the city pass by below you in slow motion.
The building has become part of everyday life in Beijing.
It is there.
It has also become a very popular backdrop for wedding photography.
(Laughter) But its most important moment is maybe sill this one.
"That's Beijing" is similar to "Time Out," a magazine that broadcasts what is happening in town during the week, and suddenly you see the building portrayed no longer as physical matter, but actually as an urban actor, as part of a series of personas that define the life of the city.
So architecture suddenly assumes the quality of a player, of something that writes stories and performs stories.
And I think that could be one of its primary meanings that we believe in.
But of course, there's another story to this building.
It is the story of the people that made it -- 400 engineers and architects that I was guiding over almost a decade of collaborative work that we spent together in scripting this building, in imagining its reality and ultimately getting it built in China.
This is a residential development in Singapore, large scale.
If we look at Singapore like most of Asia and more and more of the world, of course, it is dominated by the tower, a typology that indeed creates more isolation than connectedness, and I wanted to ask, how could we think about living, not only in terms of the privacy and individuality of ourselves and our apartment, but in an idea of a collective?
How could we think about creating a communal environment in which sharing things was as great as having your own?
The typical answer to the question -- we had to design 1,040 apartments -- would have looked like this: 24-story height limit given by the planning authorities, 12 towers with nothing but residual in between -- a very tight system that, although the tower isolates you, it doesn't even give you privacy, because you're so close to the next one, that it is very questionable what the qualities of this would be.
So I proposed to topple the towers, throw the vertical into the horizontal and stack them up, and what looks a bit random from the side, if you look from the viewpoint of the helicopter, you can see its organizational structure is actually a hexagonal grid, in which these horizontal building blocks are stacked up to create huge outdoor courtyards -- central spaces for the community, programmed with a variety of amenities and functions.
And you see that these courtyards are not hermetically sealed spaces.
They're open, permeable; they're interconnected.
We called the project "The Interlace," thinking that we interlace and interconnect the human beings and the spaces alike.
And the detailed quality of everything we designed was about animating the space and giving the space to the inhabitants.
And, in fact, it was a system where we would layer primarily communal spaces, stacked to more and more individual and private spaces.
So we would open up a spectrum between the collective and the individual.
A little piece of math: if we count all the green that we left on the ground, minus the footprint of the buildings, and we would add back the green of all the terraces, we have 112 percent green space, so more nature than not having built a building.
And of course this little piece of math shows you that we are multiplying the space available to those who live there.
This is, in fact, the 13th floor of one of these terraces.
So you see new datum planes, new grounds planes for social activity.
We paid a lot of attention to sustainability.
In the tropics, the sun is the most important thing to pay attention to, and, in fact, it is seeking protection from the sun.
We first proved that all apartments would have sufficient daylight through the year.
We then went on to optimize the glazing of the facades to minimize the energy consumption of the building.
But most importantly, we could prove that through the geometry of the building design, the building itself would provide sufficient shading to the courtyards so that those would be usable throughout the entire year.
We further placed water bodies along the prevailing wind corridors, so that evaporative cooling would create microclimates that, again, would enhance the quality of those spaces available for the inhabitants.
And it was the idea of creating this variety of choices, of freedom to think where you would want to be, where you would want to escape, maybe, within the own complexity of the complex in which you live.
But coming from Asia to Europe: a building for a German media company based in Berlin, transitioning from the traditional print media to the digital media.
And its CEO asked a few very pertinent questions: Why would anyone today still want to go to the office, because you can actually work anywhere?
And how could a digital identity of a company be embodied in a building?
We created not only an object, but at the center of this object we created a giant space, and this space was about the experience of a collective, the experience of collaboration and of togetherness.
Communication, interaction as the center of a space that in itself would float, like what we call the collaborative cloud, in the middle of the building, surrounded by an envelope of standard modular offices.
So with only a few steps from your quiet work desk, you could participate in the giant collective experience of the central space.
Finally, we come to London, a project commissioned by the London Legacy Development Corporation of the Mayor of London.
We were asked to undertake a study and investigate the potential of a site out in Stratford in the Olympic Park.
In the 19th century, Prince Albert had created Albertopolis.
And Boris Johnson thought of creating Olympicopolis.
The idea was to bring together some of Britain's greatest institutions, some international ones, and to create a new system of synergies.
Prince Albert, as yet, created Albertopolis in the 19th century, thought of showcasing all achievements of mankind, bringing arts and science closer together.
And he built Exhibition Road, a linear sequence of those institutions.
But of course, today's society has moved on from there.
We no longer live in a world in which everything is as clearly delineated or separated from each other.
We live in a world in which boundaries start to blur between the different domains, and in which collaboration and interaction becomes far more important than keeping separations.
So we wanted to think of a giant culture machine, a building that would orchestrate and animate the various domains, but allow them to interact and collaborate.
At the base of it is a very simple module, a ring module.
It can function as a double-loaded corridor, has daylight, has ventilation.
It can be glazed over and turned into a giant exhibitional performance space.
These modules were stacked together with the idea that almost any function could, over time, occupy any of these modules.
So institutions could shrink or contract, as, of course, the future of culture is, in a way, the most uncertain of all.
This is how the building sits, adjacent to the Aquatics Centre, opposite the Olympic Stadium.
And you can see how its cantilevering volumes project out and engage the public space and how its courtyards animate the public inside.
The idea was to create a complex system in which institutional entities could maintain their own identity, in which they would not be subsumed in a singular volume.
Here's a scale comparison to the Centre Pompidou in Paris.
It both shows the enormous scale and potential of the project, but also the difference: here, it is a multiplicity of a heterogeneous structure, in which different entities can interact without losing their own identity.
And it was this thought: to create an organizational structure that would allow for multiple narratives to be scripted -- for those in the educational parts that create and think culture; for those that present the visual arts, the dance; and for the public to be admitted into all of this with a series of possible trajectories, to script their own reading of these narratives and their own experience.
And I want to end on a project that is very small, in a way, very different: a floating cinema in the ocean of Thailand.
Friends of mine had founded a film festival, and I thought, if we think of the stories and narratives of movies, we should also think of the narratives of the people that watch them.
So I designed a small modular floating platform, based on the techniques of local fishermen, how they built their lobster and fish farms.
We collaborated with the local community and built, out of recycled materials of their own, this fantastical floating platform that gently moved in the ocean as we watched films from the British film archive, [1903] "Alice in Wonderland," for example.
The most primordial experiences of the audience merged with the stories of the movies.
So I believe that architecture exceeds the domain of physical matter, of the built environment, but is really about how we want to live our lives, how we script our own stories and those of others.
Thank you.
(Applause)
OK, today we're going to talk about the mole.
Now, I know what you're thinking: "I know what a mole is, it's a small furry creature that digs holes in the ground and destroys gardens."
And some of you might be thinking that it's a growth on your aunt's face with hairs sticking out of it.
Well, in this case, a mole is a concept that we use in chemistry to count molecules, atoms, just about anything extremely small.
Have you ever wondered how many atoms there are in the universe?
Or in your body? Or even in a grain of sand?
Scientists have wanted to answer that question, but how do you count something as small as an atom?
Well, in 1811, someone had an idea that if you had equal volumes of gases, at the same temperature and pressure, they would contain an equal number of particles.
His name was Lorenzo Romano Amedeo Carlo Avogadro.
I wonder how long it took him to sign autographs.
Unfortunately for Avogadro, most scientists didn't accept the idea of the atom, and there was no way to prove he was right.
There was no clear difference between atoms and molecules.
Most scientists looked at Avogadro's work as purely hypothetical, and didn't give it much thought.
But it turned out he was right! By late 1860, Avogadro was proven correct, and his work helped lay the foundation for the atomic theory. Unfortunately, Avogadro died in 1856.
Now the thing is that the amount of particles in even small samples is tremendous. For example, If you have a balloon of any gas at zero degrees Celcius, and at a pressure of one atmosphere, then you have precisely six hundred and two sextillion gas particles.
That is, you have six with 23 zeros after it particles of gas in the container.
Or in scientific notation, 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd particles.
This example is a little misleading, because gases take up a lot of space due to the high kinetic energy of the gas particles, and it leaves you thinking atoms are bigger than they really are.
Instead, think of water molecules.
If you pour 18.01 grams of water into a glass, which is 18.01 milliliters, which is like three and a half teaspoons of water, you'll have 602 sextillion molecules of water.
Since Lorenzo Romano - uh, never mind - Avogadro was the first one to come up with this idea, scientists named the number 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd after him.
It is simply known as Avogadros's number.
Now, back to the mole. Not that mole.
This mole. Yep, this number has a second name.
The mole. Chemists use the term mole to refer to the quantities that are at the magnitude of 602 sextillion.
This is known as a molar quantity.
Atoms and molecules are so small, that chemists have bundled them into groups called moles.
Moles are hard for students to understand because they have a hard time picturing the size of a mole, or of 602 sextillion.
It's just too big to wrap our brains around.
Remember our 18.01 milliliters of water?
Well, that's a mole of water.
But how much is that?
Exactly what does 602 sextillion look like?
Maybe this'll help.
Exchange the water particles for donuts.
If you had a mole of donuts, they would cover the entire earth to a depth of eight kilometers, which is about five miles.
You really need a lot of coffee for that.
If you had a mole of basketballs, you could create a new planet the size of the earth.
If you received a mole of pennies on the day you were born and spent a million dollars a second until the day you died at the age of 100, you would still have more than 99.99% of your money in the bank.
OK. Now we sort of have an idea how large the mole is.
So how do we use it?
You might be surprised to know that chemists use it the same way you use pounds to buy grapes, deli meat, or eggs.
When you go to the grocery store, you don't go to the deli counter and ask for 43 slices of salami, you buy your salami by the pound.
When you buy your eggs, you buy a dozen eggs.
When we hear the word dozen, we probably think of the number 12.
We also know that a pair is two, a baker's dozen is 13, a gross is 144, and a ream of paper is - anybody?
A ream is 500.
Well, a mole is really the same thing.
For a chemist, a mole conjures up the number 6.02 times 10 to the 23rd, not a fuzzy little animal. The only difference is that the other quantities are more familiar to us.
So there you have it - the story of the mole, Avogadro, basketballs, and how to buy salami at the grocery store.
When we talk, sometimes we say things directly.
"I'm going to the store, I'll be back in five minutes."
Other times though, we talk in a way that conjures up a small scene.
"It's raining cats and dogs out," we say, or "I was waiting for the other shoe to drop."
Metaphors are a way to talk about one thing by describing something else.
That may seem roundabout, but it's not.
Seeing and hearing and tasting are how we know anything first.
The philosopher William James described the world of newborn infants as a "buzzing and blooming confusion."
Abstract ideas are pale things compared to those first bees and blossoms.
Metaphors think with the imagination and the senses.
The hot chili peppers in them explode in the mouth and the mind.
They're also precise.
We don't really stop to think about a raindrop the size of an actual cat or dog, but as soon as I do, I realize that I'm quite certain the dog has to be a small one -- a cocker spaniel, or a dachshund -- and not a golden Lab or Newfoundland.
A metaphor isn't true or untrue in any ordinary sense.
Metaphors are art, not science, but they can still feel right or wrong.
A metaphor that isn't good leaves you confused.
You know what it means to feel like a square wheel, but not what it's like to be tired as a whale.
There's a paradox to metaphors.
They almost always say things that aren't true.
If you say, "there's an elephant in the room," there isn't an actual one, looking for the peanut dish on the table.
Metaphors get under your skin by ghosting right past the logical mind.
Plus, we're used to thinking in images.
Every night we dream impossible things.
And when we wake up, that way of thinking's still in us.
We take off our dream shoes, and button ourselves into our lives.
Some metaphors include the words "like" or "as."
"Sweet as honey," "strong as a tree."
Those are called similes.
A simile is a metaphor that admits it's making a comparison.
Similes tend to make you think.
Metaphors let you feel things directly.
Take Shakespeare's famous metaphor, "All the world's a stage."
Metaphors can also live in verbs.
Emily Dickinson begins a poem, "I saw no way -- the heavens were stitched --" and we know instantly what it would feel like if the sky were a fabric sewn shut.
They can live in adjectives, too.
"Still waters run deep," we say of someone quiet and thoughtful.
And the deep matters as much as the stillness and the water do.
One of the clearest places to find good metaphors is in poems.
Take this haiku by the 18th-century Japanese poet Issa.
"On a branch floating downriver, a cricket singing."
The first way to meet a metaphor is just to see the world through its eyes: an insect sings from a branch passing by in the middle of the river.
Even as you see that though, some part of you recognizes in the image a small portrait of what it's like to live in this world of change and time, our human fate is to vanish, as surely as that small cricket will, and still, we do what it does.
Sometimes a poem takes a metaphor and extends it, building on one idea in many ways.
Here's the beginning of Langston Hughes' famous poem "Mother to Son."
"Well, son, I'll tell you.
It's had tacks in it, and splinters, and boards torn up, and places with no carpet on the floor."
Langston Hughes is making a metaphor that compares a hard life to a wrecked house you still have to live in.
Those splinters and tacks feel real, they hurt your own feet and your own heart, but the mother is describing her life here, not her actual house.
And hunger, and cold, exhausting work and poverty are what's also inside those splinters.
Metaphors aren't always about our human lives and feelings.
The Chicago poet Carl Sandburg wrote, "The fog comes on little cat feet.
The comparison here is simple.
Fog is being described as a cat.
But a good metaphor isn't a puzzle, or a way to convey hidden meanings, it's a way to let you feel and know something differently.
No one who's heard this poem forgets it.
You see fog, and there's a small grey cat nearby.
Metaphors give words a way to go beyond their own meaning.
They're handles on the door of what we can know, and of what we can imagine.
Each door leads to some new house, and some new world that only that one handle can open.
What's amazing is this: by making a handle, you can make a world.
What if I could present you a story that you would remember with your entire body and not just with your mind?
My whole life as a journalist, I've really been compelled to try to make stories that can make a difference and maybe inspire people to care.
I've worked in print. I've worked in documentary.
I've worked in broadcast.
But it really wasn't until I got involved with virtual reality that I started seeing these really intense, authentic reactions from people that really blew my mind.
So the deal is that with VR, virtual reality, I can put you on scene in the middle of the story.
By putting on these goggles that track wherever you look, you get this whole-body sensation, like you're actually, like, there.
So five years ago was about when I really began to push the envelope with using virtual reality and journalism together.
And I wanted to do a piece about hunger.
Families in America are going hungry, food banks are overwhelmed, and they're often running out of food.
Now, I knew I couldn't make people feel hungry, but maybe I could figure out a way to get them to feel something physical.
So -- again, this is five years ago -- so doing journalism and virtual reality together was considered a worse-than-half-baked idea, and I had no funding.
Believe me, I had a lot of colleagues laughing at me.
And I did, though, have a really great intern, a woman named Michaela Kobsa-Mark.
And together we went out to food banks and started recording audio and photographs.
Until one day she came back to my office and she was bawling, she was just crying.
She had been on scene at a long line, where the woman running the line was feeling extremely overwhelmed, and she was screaming, "There's too many people!
There's too many people!"
And this man with diabetes doesn't get food in time, his blood sugar drops too low, and he collapses into a coma.
As soon as I heard that audio, I knew that this would be the kind of evocative piece that could really describe what was going on at food banks.
So here's the real line. You can see how long it was, right?
And again, as I said, we didn't have very much funding, so I had to reproduce it with virtual humans that were donated, and people begged and borrowed favors to help me create the models and make things as accurate as we could.
And then we tried to convey what happened that day with as much as accuracy as is possible.
(Video) Voice: There's too many people! There's too many people!
Voice: OK, he's having a seizure.
Voice: We need an ambulance.
Nonny de la Peña: So the man on the right, for him, he's walking around the body.
For him, he's in the room with that body.
Like, that guy is at his feet.
And even though, through his peripheral vision, he can see that he's in this lab space, he should be able to see that he's not actually on the street, but he feels like he's there with those people.
He's very cautious not to step on this guy who isn't really there, right?
So that piece ended up going to Sundance in 2012, a kind of amazing thing, and it was the first virtual reality film ever, basically.
And when we went, I was really terrified.
I didn't really know how people were going to react and what was going to happen.
And we showed up with this duct-taped pair of goggles.
(Video) Oh, you're crying. You're crying. Gina, you're crying.
So you can hear the surprise in my voice, right?
And this kind of reaction ended up being the kind of reaction we saw over and over and over: people down on the ground trying to comfort the seizure victim, trying to whisper something into his ear or in some way help, even though they couldn't.
And I had a lot of people come out of that piece saying, "Oh my God, I was so frustrated. I couldn't help the guy," and take that back into their lives.
So after this piece was made, the dean of the cinema school at USC, the University of Southern California, brought in the head of the World Economic Forum to try "Hunger," and he took off the goggles, and he commissioned a piece about Syria on the spot.
And I really wanted to do something about Syrian refugee kids, because children have been the worst affected by the Syrian civil war.
I sent a team to the border of Iraq to record material at refugee camps, basically an area I wouldn't send a team now, as that's where ISIS is really operating.
And then we also recreated a street scene in which a young girl is singing and a bomb goes off.
Now, when you're in the middle of that scene and you hear those sounds, and you see the injured around you, it's an incredibly scary and real feeling.
I've had individuals who have been involved in real bombings tell me that it evokes the same kind of fear.
[The civil war in Syria may seem far away] [until you experience it yourself.] (Girl singing) (Explosion) [Project Syria] [A virtual reality experience] NP: We were then invited to take the piece to the Victoria and Albert Museum in London.
And it wasn't advertised.
And we were put in this tapestry room.
There was no press about it, so anybody who happened to walk into the museum to visit it that day would see us with these crazy lights.
You know, maybe they would want to see the old storytelling of the tapestries.
They were confronted by our virtual reality cameras.
But a lot of people tried it, and over a five-day run we ended up with 54 pages of guest book comments, and we were told by the curators there that they'd never seen such an outpouring.
Things like, "It's so real," "Absolutely believable," or, of course, the one that I was excited about, "A real feeling as if you were in the middle of something that you normally see on the TV news."
So, it works, right? This stuff works.
And it doesn't really matter where you're from or what age you are -- it's really evocative.
Now, don't get me wrong -- I'm not saying that when you're in a piece you forget that you're here.
But it turns out we can feel like we're in two places at once.
We can have what I call this duality of presence, and I think that's what allows me to tap into these feelings of empathy.
Right?
So that means, of course, that I have to be very cautious about creating these pieces.
I have to really follow best journalistic practices and make sure that these powerful stories are built with integrity.
If we don't capture the material ourselves, we have to be extremely exacting about figuring out the provenance and where did this stuff come from and is it authentic?
Let me give you an example.
With this Trayvon Martin case, this is a guy, a kid, who was 17 years old and he bought soda and a candy at a store, and on his way home he was tracked by a neighborhood watchman named George Zimmerman who ended up shooting and killing him.
To make that piece, we got the architectural drawings of the entire complex, and we rebuilt the entire scene inside and out, based on those drawings.
All of the action is informed by the real 911 recorded calls to the police.
And interestingly, we broke some news with this story.
The forensic house that did the audio reconstruction, Primeau Productions, they say that they would testify that George Zimmerman, when he got out of the car, he cocked his gun before he went to give chase to Martin.
So you can see that the basic tenets of journalism, they don't really change here, right?
We're still following the same principles that we would always.
What is different is the sense of being on scene, whether you're watching a guy collapse from hunger or feeling like you're in the middle of a bomb scene.
And this is kind of what has driven me forward with these pieces, and thinking about how to make them.
We're trying to make this, obviously, beyond the headset, more available.
We're creating mobile pieces like the Trayvon Martin piece.
And these things have had impact.
I've had Americans tell me that they've donated, direct deductions from their bank account, money to go to Syrian children refugees.
And "Hunger in LA," well, it's helped start a new form of doing journalism that I think is going to join all the other normal platforms in the future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why are gas stations always built right next to other gas stations?
Why can I drive for a mile without finding a coffee shop and then stumble across three on the same corner?
Why do grocery stores, auto repair shops and restaurants always seem to exist in groups instead of being spread evenly throughout a community?
While there are several factors that might go into deciding where to place your business, clusters of similar companies can be explained by a very simple story called Hotelling's Model of Spatial Competition.
Imagine that you sell ice cream at the beach.
Your beach is one mile long and you have no competition.
Where would you place your cart in order to sell the most product?
In the middle.
The one-half-mile walk may be too far for some people at each end of the beach, but your cart serves as many people as possible.
One day you show up at work just as your cousin Teddy is arriving at the beach with his own ice cream cart.
In fact, he's selling exactly the same type of ice cream as you are.
In order to ensure that customers don't have to walk too far you set up your cart a quarter mile south of the beach center, right in the middle of your territory.
Teddy sets up a quarter mile north of the center, in the middle of Teddy territory.
With this agreement, everyone south of you buys ice cream from you.
Everyone north of Teddy buys from him, and the 50% of beachgoers in between walk to the closest cart.
No one walks more than a quarter of a mile, and both vendors sell to half of the beachgoers.
Game theorists consider this a socially optimal solution.
It minimizes the maximum number of steps any visitor must take in order to reach an ice cream cart.
The next day, when you arrive at work, Teddy has set up his cart in the middle of the beach.
You return to your location a quarter mile south of center and get the 25% of customers to the south of you.
Teddy still gets all of the customers north in Teddy territory, but now you split the 25% of people in between the two carts.
Day three of the ice cream wars, you get to the beach early, and set up right in the center of Teddy territory, assuming you'll serve the 75% of beachgoers to your south, leaving your cousin to sell to the 25% of customers to the north.
When Teddy arrives, he sets up just south of you stealing all of the southerly customers, and leaving you with a small group of people to the north.
Not to be outdone, you move 10 paces south of Teddy to regain your customers.
When you take a mid-day break, Teddy shuffles 10 paces south of you, and again, steals back all the customers to the far end of the beach.
Throughout the course of the day, both of you continue to periodically move south towards the bulk of the ice cream buyers, until both of you eventually end up at the center of the beach, back to back, each serving 50% of the ice-cream-hungry beachgoers.
At this point, you and your competitive cousin have reached what game theorists call a Nash Equilibrium - the point where neither of you can improve your position by deviating from your current strategy.
Your original strategy, where you were each a quarter mile from the middle of the beach, didn't last, because it wasn't a Nash Equilibrium.
Either of you could move your cart towards the other to sell more ice cream.
With both of you now in the center of the beach, you can't reposition your cart closer to your furthest customers without making your current customers worse off.
However, you no longer have a socially optimal solution, since customers at either end of the beach have to walk further than necessary to get a sweet treat.
Think about all the fast food chains, clothing boutiques, or mobile phone kiosks at the mall.
Customers may be better served by distributing services throughout a community, but this leaves businesses vulnerable to aggressive competition.
In the real world, customers come from more than one direction, and businesses are free to compete with marketing strategies, by differentiating their product line, and with price cuts, but at the heart of their strategy, companies like to keep their competition as close as possible.
There's something about caves -- a shadowy opening in a limestone cliff that draws you in.
As you pass through the portal between light and dark, you enter a subterranean world -- a place of perpetual gloom, of earthy smells, of hushed silence.
Long ago in Europe, ancient people also entered these underground worlds.
As witness to their passage, they left behind mysterious engravings and paintings, like this panel of humans, triangles and zigzags from Ojo Guareña in Spain.
You now walk the same path as these early artists.
And in this surreal, otherworldly place, it's almost possible to imagine that you hear the muffled footfall of skin boots on soft earth, or that you see the flickering of a torch around the next bend.
When I'm in a cave, I often find myself wondering what drove these people to go so deep to brave dangerous and narrow passageways to leave their mark?
In this video clip, that was shot half a kilometer, or about a third of a mile, underground, in the cave of Cudon in Spain, we found a series of red paintings on a ceiling in a previously unexplored section of the cave.
As we crawled forward, military-style, with the ceiling getting ever lower, we finally got to a point where the ceiling was so low that my husband and project photographer, Dylan, could no longer achieve focus on the ceiling with his DSLR camera.
So while he filmed me, I kept following the trail of red paint with a single light and a point-and-shoot camera that we kept for that type of occasion.
Half a kilometer underground.
Seriously.
What was somebody doing down there with a torch or a stone lamp?
(Laughter) I mean -- me, it makes sense, right?
But you know, this is the kind of question that I'm trying to answer with my research.
I study some of the oldest art in the world.
It was created by these early artists in Europe, between 10,000 and 40,000 years ago.
And the thing is that I'm not just studying it because it's beautiful, though some of it certainly is.
But what I'm interested in is the development of the modern mind, of the evolution of creativity, of imagination, of abstract thought, about what it means to be human.
While all species communicate in one way or another, only we humans have really taken it to another level.
Our desire and ability to share and collaborate has been a huge part of our success story.
Our modern world is based on a global network of information exchange made possible, in large part, by our ability to communicate -- in particular, using graphic or written forms of communication.
The thing is, though, that we've been building on the mental achievements of those that came before us for so long that it's easy to forget that certain abilities haven't already existed.
It's one of the things I find most fascinating about studying our deep history.
Those people didn't have the shoulders of any giants to stand on.
They were the original shoulders.
And while a surprising number of important inventions come out of that distant time, what I want to talk to you about today is the invention of graphic communication.
There are three main types of communication, spoken, gestural -- so things like sign language -- and graphic communication.
Spoken and gestural are by their very nature ephemeral.
It requires close contact for a message to be sent and received.
And after the moment of transmission, it's gone forever.
Graphic communication, on the other hand, decouples that relationship.
And with its invention, it became possible for the first time for a message to be transmitted and preserved beyond a single moment in place and time.
Europe is one of the first places that we start to see graphic marks regularly appearing in caves, rock shelters and even a few surviving open-air sites.
But this is not the Europe we know today.
This was a world dominated by towering ice sheets, three to four kilometers high, with sweeping grass plains and frozen tundra.
This was the Ice Age.
Over the last century, more than 350 Ice Age rock art sites have been found across the continent, decorated with animals, abstract shapes and even the occasional human like these engraved figures from Grotta dell'Addaura in Sicily.
They provide us with a rare glimpse into the creative world and imagination of these early artists.
Since their discovery, it's been the animals that have received the majority of the study like this black horse from Cullalvera in Spain, or this unusual purple bison from La Pasiega.
But for me, it was the abstract shapes, what we call geometric signs, that drew me to study the art.
The funny this is that at most sites the geometric signs far outnumber the animal and human images.
But when I started on this back in 2007, there wasn't even a definitive list of how many shapes there were, nor was there a strong sense of whether the same ones appeared across space or time.
Before I could even get started on my questions, my first step was to compile a database of all known geometric signs from all of the rock art sites.
The problem was that while they were well documented at some sites, usually the ones with the very nice animals, there was also a large number of them where it was very vague -- there wasn't a lot of description or detail.
Some of them hadn't been visited in half a century or more.
These were the ones that I targeted for my field work.
Over the course of two years, my faithful husband Dylan and I each spent over 300 hours underground, hiking, crawling and wriggling around 52 sites in France, Spain, Portugal and Sicily.
And it was totally worth it.
We found new, undocumented geometric signs at 75 percent of the sites we visited.
This is the level of accuracy I knew I was going to need if I wanted to start answering those larger questions.
So let's get to those answers.
Barring a handful of outliers, there are only 32 geometric signs.
Only 32 signs across a 30,000-year time span and the entire continent of Europe.
That is a very small number.
Now, if these were random doodles or decorations, we would expect to see a lot more variation, but instead what we find are the same signs repeating across both space and time.
Some signs start out strong, before losing popularity and vanishing, while other signs are later inventions.
But 65 percent of those signs stayed in use during that entire time period -- things like lines, rectangles triangles, ovals and circles like we see here from the end of the Ice Age, at a 10,000-year-old site high in the Pyrenees Mountains.
And while certain signs span thousands of kilometers, other signs had much more restricted distribution patterns, with some being limited to a single territory, like we see here with these divided rectangles that are only found in northern Spain, and which some researchers have speculated could be some sort of family or clan signs.
On a side note, there is surprising degree of similarity in the earliest rock art found all the way from France and Spain to Indonesia and Australia.
With many of the same signs appearing in such far-flung places, especially in that 30,000 to 40,000-year range, it's starting to seem increasingly likely that this invention actually traces back to a common point of origin in Africa.
But that I'm afraid, is a subject for a future talk.
So back to the matter at hand.
There could be no doubt that these signs were meaningful to their creators, like these 25,000-year-old bas-relief sculptures from La Roque de Venasque in France.
We might not know what they meant, but the people of the time certainly did.
The repetition of the same signs, for so long, and at so many sites tells us that the artists were making intentional choices.
If we're talking about geometric shapes, with specific, culturally recognized, agreed-upon meanings, than we could very well be looking at one of the oldest systems of graphic communication in the world.
I'm not talking about writing yet.
There's just not enough characters at this point to have represented all of the words in the spoken language, something which is a requirement for a full writing system.
Nor do we see the signs repeating regularly enough to suggest that they were some sort of alphabet.
But what we do have are some intriguing one-offs, like this panel from La Pasiega in Spain, known as "The Inscription," with its symmetrical markings on the left, possible stylized representations of hands in the middle, and what looks a bit like a bracket on the right.
The oldest systems of graphic communication in the world -- Sumerian cuneiform, Egyptian hieroglyphs, the earliest Chinese script, all emerged between 4,000 and 5,000 years ago, with each coming into existence from an earlier protosystem made up of counting marks and pictographic representations, where the meaning and the image were the same.
So a picture of a bird would really have represented that animal.
It's only later that we start to see these pictographs become more stylized, until they almost become unrecognizable and that we also start to see more symbols being invented to represent all those other missing words in language -- things like pronouns, adverbs, adjectives.
So knowing all this, it seems highly unlikely that the geometric signs from Ice Age Europe were truly abstract written characters.
Instead, what's much more likely is that these early artists were also making counting marks, maybe like this row of lines from Riparo di Za Minic in Sicily, as well as creating stylized representations of things from the world around them.
Could some of the signs be weaponry or housing?
Or what about celestial objects like star constellations?
Or maybe even rivers, mountains, trees -- landscape features, possibly like this black penniform surrounded by strange bell-shaped signs from the site of El Castillo in Spain.
The term penniform means "feather-shaped" in Latin, but could this actually be a depiction of a plant or a tree?
Some researchers have begun to ask these questions about certain signs at specific sites, but I believe the time has come to revisit this category as a whole.
The irony in all of this, of course, is that having just carefully classified all of the signs into a single category, I have a feeling that my next step will involve breaking it back apart as different types of imagery are identified and separated off.
Now don't get me wrong, the later creation of fully developed writing was an impressive feat in its own right.
But it's important to remember that those early writing systems didn't come out of a vacuum.
And that even 5,000 years ago, people were already building on something much older, with its origins stretching back tens of thousands of years -- to the geometric signs of Ice Age Europe and far beyond, to that point, deep in our collective history, when someone first came up with the idea of making a graphic mark, and forever changed the nature of how we communicate.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine a microscopic-sized ladder contained in the part of our brain that we'll label our subconscious.
The Ladder of Inference, which was first proposed by Harvard professor Chris Argyris, is the basis of this model.
Every time we interact with someone, that experience enters the ladder at the bottom.
That same experience zips up the ladder in the blink of an eye, exiting at the top.
This process happens thousands of times a day without us knowing it.
Let's focus on what happens on each rung of the ladder.
On the first rung, we have the raw data and observations of our experience.
This is very similar to what someone watching a video recording of our experience would see.
Moving up to the second rung, we filter in specific information and details from our experience.
We unknowingly filter based on our preferences, tendencies, and many other aspects that we believe are important.
On to the third rung.
We assign meaning to the information we have filtered through.
This is where we start to interpret what our information is telling us.
On our fourth rung, a very crucial thing happens.
We develop assumptions based on the meaning we created on the previous rung, and we start to blur the distinction between what is fact and what is story.
On the fifth rung, we develop conclusions based on our assumptions.
This is also where our emotional reactions are created.
On the sixth rung, we adjust our beliefs about the world around us, including the person or people involved in our experience of the moment.
On the seventh and final rung, we take action based on our adjusted beliefs.
Still with me? Great!
Let's take a real-life example and run it up the ladder to see how this all works.
Have you ever been cut off in a parking lot, signal light on as you steer toward your coveted spot, only to slam on your brakes at the last minute as someone pulls in front of you and steals your spot away?
Imagine that experience and notice all of the data and observations landing on the first rung of your ladder.
Now let's watch what we pay attention to on the second rung.
Who cares that it's sunny out and the birds are chirping?
The 50% off sign outside of your favorite store is meaningless.
You filter in the sensation of your grip tightening on the wheel, you feel your blood pressure rise, you hear the squeal of your brakes, and you notice the expression on the face of the other driver as he pulls in front of you and quickly looks away.
Time for our third rung.
Ever since you were young, your parents taught you the importance of waiting in line and taking your turn.
You live and die by the rule of first come, first served.
And now this guy has just stolen your spot.
Up to the fourth rung we go.
Watch closely as our assumptions take over and our story creates itself.
"That stupid jerk, didn't his parents teach him anything?
How could he not see my signal light?
Why does he think he's more important than anyone else?"
Jumping quickly to the fifth rung, we conclude that this guy is heartless, inconsiderate, he needs to be taught a lesson and put in his place.
We feel angry, frustrated, vindictive, justified.
On our sixth rung, we adjust our beliefs based on the experience.
"That's the last time I give in!
Next time someone tries to cut me off, tires will be smoking on the pavement as I squeal past them into my spot."
And finally our last rung: we take action.
We back up, pull up behind his car, honk our horn, and roll down our window to scream a few choice words as well.
Now imagine, he walks over quickly, apologizing.
His wife, who's almost due with their first baby, called him from inside the mall to say she is in labor and needs to get to the hospital immediately.
We're momentarily shocked, apologize profusely, and wish him luck as he rushes toward the entrance.
What just happened here?
In our parking lot example, our beliefs were short-circuited by the ladder of the other individual.
"My wife is in labor, I need to get there quick, there's a parking spot. Whew!
Oh, jeez, I cut someone off.
But what if we were able to short-circuit our ladders ourselves?
Proactively, by choice?
Guess what? We can!
Let's return to our unique human function of free will.
Next time you notice yourself reacting to your experience, pay focused attention to your ladder.
Ask yourself what beliefs are at play, where do they come from?
What data and observations did you filter in as a result of your beliefs, and why?
Are your assumptions valid and supported by facts?
Would a different set of assumptions create different feelings, and result in new and better conclusions and actions?
We all have our own unique ladder.
Be mindful of yours, and help others to see theirs.
The most important walls in western history aren't even in the West.
They surround the modern city of Istanbul, Constantinople as the Romans called it.
And for a thousand years, the fate of Europe depended on them.
Constantinople was designed to be the center of the world.
When the frontiers of the Roman Empire began to crumble in the 4th Century, the capital was moved to the cultured, wealthy, and still stable East.
There, at the crossroads between Europe and Asia, the hub of the major trade routes of the ancient world, the Emperor Constantine built his city.
This was the city of libraries and universities, 20 times the size of London or Paris at the time.
It contained the priceless knowledge of the classical world which was fading in the West.
To protect this masterpiece from its many enemies, Constantine's successors built the finest defensive fortifications ever made.
The first line of protection was a moat 60 feet wide and 22 feet deep, stretching all four miles from coast to coast.
Pipes from inside the city could fill it at the first sight of the enemy, and a short wall protected archers who could fire at the soaked soldiers trying to swim across.
Those who were lucky enough to clear the moat had to contend with an unceasing barrage from the 27 foot outer wall above.
Arrows, spears, or far worse, Greek fire -- an ancient form of napalm that would ignite on contact and couldn't be extinguished by water -- would rain down on them.
Squads of Roman defenders would carry portable flame throwers, spraying anyone trying to climb out of the moat.
The terrified victims would leap back, only to find that they still burned underwater.
At times, the Romans would also mount siphons onto the ramparts, and launch clay pots full of Greek fire from catapults at an invading army.
The front lines would turn into an inferno, making it appear as if the earth itself was on fire.
If, by some miracle, the outer wall was compromised, attackers would be faced with the final defense: the great inner wall.
These walls were wide enough to have four men ride side by side, allowing troops to be rushed wherever they were needed.
Attilla the Hun, destroyer of civilizations, who named himself the Scourge of God, took one look at them and turned around.
The Avars battled the walls uselessly til their catapults ran out of rocks.
The Turks tried to tunnel under them, but found the foundations too solid.
The Arabs tried to starve the city into submission, but ran out of food themselves and had to resort to cannibalism.
It took the guns of the modern world to finally bring them down.
In 1453, the Turks brought their super weapon: a monster cannon that could fire a 15 hundred pound stone ball over a mile.
Together with more than a hundred smaller guns, they kept up a steady bombardment day and night.
A section of the old walls collapsed, but even in their death throes they proved formidable.
The rubble absorbed the shock of the cannonballs better than the solid wall.
It took a month and a half of continuous blasting to finally open a breach.
The last Roman Emperor, Constantine the 11th, drew his sword and jumped into the gap to stop the onrushing horde, disappearing into legend.
The city was taken, and the Roman Empire finally disappeared.
But those broken walls had one last gift.
As the survivors fled the doomed city, they brought with them their precious books and their ancient traditions.
They traveled west to Italy, reintroduced the Greek language and learning to western Europe, and ignited the Renaissance.
Thanks to Constantinople's walls, that pile of brick and marble that guarded them for so long, we still have our classical past.
(Zombie sounds) Doctor 1: So, how did it get to be this way?
Doctor 2: Well, it's my professional opinion that the large gaping bite mark on its shoulder might have something to do with it.
D1: Thanks. I mean, what causes its behavioral abnormalities?
D2: Well, we know all behaviors are rooted in the brain, so I'd expect that something's gone terribly wrong probably in there.
D1: Thanks again, Doctor Obvious.
Let me be more specific.
What changes in the brain would have to occur in order to cause this kind of behavior?
D2: Hmm. Well, let's see.
The first thing I notice is how it moves.
Stiff legged, with long, lumbering steps, very slow and awkward.
Almost like what you'd see in Parkinson's disease.
Maybe something's wrong with his basal ganglia?
Those are a collection of deep brain regions that regulate movement, through a neurochemical called dopamine.
Although most people think of dopamine as the "happy" chemical of the brain, the dopamine-containing neurons in the basal ganglia die off in Parkinson's disease, that's what causes it.
Makes it more and more difficult to initiate actions.
D1: What?
Look again at how it moves. Stiff legs, long stance, These aren't Parkinsonian movements, Parkinson's patients take short, shuffling steps, and the posture's all wrong.
This looks to me like what happens when the cerebellum is damaged.
The cerebellum's a little cauliflower-shaped area in the back of your head, but don't let its size fool you.
That little guy contains almost half of the neurons in the entire brain.
Patients who suffer degeneration from this region, something called spino-cerebellar ataxia, show a lack of coordination that results in stiff legs, wide stance, and a lumbering walk.
My money's on the cerebellum.
D2: Touché. OK. So we've nailed its motor problems.
Now what about that whole groaning, lack of talking thing?
D1: Hmm. You know, it sounds kind of like expressive aphasia, or Broca's aphasia, which makes producing words difficult.
This is caused by damage to the inferior frontal gyrus, or possibly the anterior insula, both regions behind your temple on the left side of your head.
D2: I think you're only half right. Zombies definitely can't communicate, that's for sure.
But they don't seem to do a good job of understanding things either.
Watch this. Hey, Walker! Your father smelt of elderberries!
(Laughs) See? No reaction.
Either it's not a Monty Python fan, or it can't understand me.
I'd say this is like spot-on fluent Wernicke's aphasia, damage to an area at the junction of two of the brain's lobes, temporal and parietal, typically on the left side of the brain, is the culprit.
This area is physically connected to Broca's area, that you mentioned, by a massive bundle of neurofibers called the arcuate fasciculus.
I hypothesize that this massive bundle of connections is completely wiped out in a zombie.
It would be like taking out the superhighway between two cities.
One city that manufactures a product, and the other that ships it out to the rest of the world.
Without that highway, the product distribution just shuts down.
D1: So, basically it's a moot point to reason with a zombie, since they can't understand you, let alone talk back.
D2: (Laughs) I mean, you could try, man, but I'm going to stay on this side of the glass.
It's March the 17th in A.D. 73.
We're visiting ancient Rome to watch the Liberalia, an annual festival that celebrates the liberty of Rome's citizens.
We're looking in at a 17-year-old named Lucius Popidius Secundus.
He's not from a poor family, but he lives in the region known as the Subura, a poorer neighborhood in Rome, yet close to the center of the city.
(Gong) The tenants of these apartments are crammed in, (Grunting) which poses considerable risk.
Fires are frequent and the smell of ash and smoke in the morning is not uncommon.
Lucius, who awoke at dawn, has family duties to perform today.
(Cheering) His 15-year-old brother is coming of age.
Half the children in ancient Rome die before they reach adulthood, so this is a particularly important milestone.
Lucius watches his brother stand in his new toga before the household shrine with its protective deities, as he places his bulla, a protective amulet, in the shrine with a prayer of thanks.
The bulla had worked. It had protected him.
Unlike many others, he had survived to become an adult.
At 17, Lucius has almost completed his education.
He has learned to speak well, make public speeches, and how to read and write both Latin and Greek.
His father has taught him the types of things you can't learn in the classroom: how to run, how to swim, and how to fight.
Lucius could choose, at 17, to become a military tribune and command soldiers on the edge of the Empire.
But in other ways, Lucius is still a child.
He's not trusted to arrange business deals.
His father will take care of that until he is 25.
And Dad will arrange Lucius' marriage to a girl 10 years younger.
His dad has his eye on a family with a 7-year-old daughter.
Back to the Liberalia.
As Lucius leaves with his family, the shops are open as the population goes about its business.
The streets are full of itinerant traders selling trinkets and people bustling from place to place.
Large wagons are not allowed in the city until after the ninth hour but the streets are still crowded.
Fathers and uncles take the kids to the Forum Augustus to see statues of Rome's famous warriors like Aeneas, who led Rome's ancestors, the Trojans, to Italy.
And Romulus, Rome's founder.
And all the great generals of the Republic from more than 100 years earlier.
Lovingly, we can imagine fathers and guardians with their now adult children remembering stories of Rome's glory and re-telling the good deeds and sayings of the great men of the past: lessons on how to live well, and to overcome the follies of youth.
There is a sense of history in this place, relevant to their present.
Romans made an empire without end in time and space.
(Thump) Rome was destined to be eternal through warfare.
Wars were a fact of life, even in A.D. 73.
There are campaigns in the north of England and into Scotland, to the north of the River Danube into Romania, and on the frontier between Syria and Iraq to the east.
It's now the eighth hour -- time to head for the baths.
Lucius and his family head up the Via Lata, the wide street, to the Campus Martius, and the enormous Baths of Agrippa.
The family members leave the clients and freedmen outside, and enter the baths with their peer group.
Baths would change from dark, steamy rooms to light ones.
The Romans had perfected window glass.
Everyone moves from the cold room to the tepid room and to the very hot room.
(Man) Oops!
More than an hour later, the bathers leave massaged, oiled, (Whistling) and have been scraped down with a strigil to remove the remaining dirt.
At the ninth hour, seven hours after they left home, the men return for a celebratory dinner.
Dinner is an intimate affair, with nine people reclining around the low table.
Slaves attend to their every need if the diners, through gestures, demand more food and wine.
As the day closes, we can hear the rumble of wagons outside.
The clients and freedmen, with a meal of robust -- if inferior -- food inside them, shuffle off to the now tepid baths before returning to their apartment blocks.
Back at Lucius' house, the drinking continues into the night.
Lucius and his stepbrother don't look too well.
A slave stands by in case either of them needs to vomit.
With hindsight, we know Lucius' future.
In 20 years' time, the Emperor Vespasian's youngest son, Domitian, as emperor, will enact a reign of terror.
Will Lucius survive?
(Drums)
(Video) Announcer: 10 seconds.
Five, four, three, two, one.
Official top.
Plus one, two, three, four, five six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
Guillaume Néry, France.
Constant weight, 123 meters, three minutes and 25 seconds.
National record attempt.
70 meters.
[123 meters] (Applause) (Video) Judge: White card. Guillaume Néry! National record!
Guillaume Néry: Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you very much, thanks for the warm welcome.
That dive you just watched is a journey -- a journey between two breaths.
A journey that takes place between two breaths -- the last one before diving into the water, and the first one, coming back to the surface.
That dive is a journey to the very limits of human possibility, a journey into the unknown.
But it's also, and above all, an inner journey, where a number of things happen, physiologically as well as mentally.
And that's why I'm here today, to share my journey with you and to take you along with me.
So, we start with the last breath.
(Breathing in) (Breathing out) As you noticed, that last breath in is slow, deep and intense.
It ends with a special technique called the carp, which allows me to store one to two extra liters of air in my lungs by compressing it.
When I leave the surface, I have about 10 liters of air in my lungs.
As soon as I leave the surface the first mechanism kicks in: the diving reflex.
The first thing the diving reflex does is make your heart rate drop.
My heart beat will drop from about 60-70 per minute to about 30-40 beats per minute in a matter of seconds; almost immediately.
Next, the diving reflex causes peripheral vasoconstriction, which means that the blood flow will leave the body's extremities to feed the most important organs: the lungs, the heart and the brain.
This mechanism is innate.
I cannot control it.
If you go underwater, even if you've never done it before, you'll experience the exact same effects.
All human beings share this characteristic.
And what's extraordinary is that we share this instinct with marine mammals -- all marine mammals: dolphins, whales, sea lions, etc.
When they dive deep into the ocean, these mechanisms become activated, but to a greater extent.
And, of course, it works much better for them.
It's absolutely fascinating.
Right as I leave the surface, nature gives me a push in the right direction, allowing me to descend with confidence.
So as I dive deeper into the blue, the pressure slowly starts to squeeze my lungs.
And since it's the amount of air in my lungs that makes me float, the farther down I go, the more pressure there is on my lungs, the less air they contain and the easier it is for my body to fall.
And at one point, around 35 or 40 meters down, I don't even need to swim.
My body is dense and heavy enough to fall into the depths by itself, and I enter what's called the free fall phase.
The free fall phase is the best part of the dive.
It's the reason I still dive.
Because it feels like you're being pulled down and you don't need to do anything.
I can go from 35 meters to 123 meters without making a single movement.
I let myself be pulled by the depths, and it feels like I'm flying underwater.
It's truly an amazing feeling -- an extraordinary feeling of freedom.
And so I slowly continue sliding to the bottom.
40 meters down, 50 meters down, and between 50 and 60 meters, a second physiological response kicks in.
My lungs reach residual volume, below which they're not supposed to be compressed, in theory.
And this second response is called blood shift, or "pulmonary erection" in French.
I prefer "blood shift."
(Laughter) So blood shift -- how does it work?
The capillaries in the lungs become engorged with blood -- which is caused by the suction -- so the lungs can harden and protect the whole chest cavity from being crushed.
It prevents the two walls of the lungs from collapsing, from sticking together and caving in.
Thanks to this phenomenon, which we also share with marine mammals, I'm able to continue with my dive.
60, 70 meters down, I keep falling, faster and faster, because the pressure is crushing my body more and more.
Below 80 meters, the pressure becomes a lot stronger, and I start to feel it physically.
I really start to feel the suffocation.
You can see what it looks like -- not pretty at all.
The diaphragm is completely collapsed, the rib cage is squeezed in, and mentally, there is something going on as well.
You may be thinking, "This doesn't look enjoyable.
How do you do it?"
If I relied on my earthly reflexes -- what do we do above water when there's a problem?
We resist, we go against it.
Underwater, that doesn't work.
If you try that underwater, you might tear your lungs, spit up blood, develop an edema and you'll have to stop diving for a good amount of time.
So what you need to do, mentally, is to tell yourself that nature and the elements are stronger than you.
And so I let the water crush me.
I accept the pressure and go with it.
At this point, my body receives this information, and my lungs start relaxing.
I relinquish all control, and relax completely.
The pressure starts crushing me, and it doesn't feel bad at all.
I even feel like I'm in a cocoon, protected.
And the dive continues.
80, 85 meters down, 90, 100.
100 meters -- the magic number.
In every sport, it's a magic number.
For swimmers and athletes and also for us, free divers, it's a number everyone dreams of.
Everyone wishes one day to be able to get to 100 meters.
And it's a symbolic number for us, because in the 1970s, doctors and physiologists did their math, and predicted that the human body would not be able to go below 100 meters.
Below that, they said, the human body would implode.
And then the Frenchman, Jacques Mayol -- you all know him as the hero in "The Big Blue" -- came along and dived down to 100 meters.
He even reached 105 meters.
At that time, he was doing "no limits."
He'd use weights to descend faster and come back up with a balloon, just like in the movie.
Today, we go down 200 meters in no limit free diving.
I can do 123 meters by simply using muscle strength.
And in a way, it's all thanks to him, because he challenged known facts, and with a sweep of his hand, got rid of the theoretical beliefs and all the mental limits that we like to impose on ourselves.
He showed us that the human body has an infinite ability to adapt.
So I carry on with my dive.
105, 110, 115.
The bottom is getting closer.
120, 123 meters.
I'm at the bottom.
And now, I'd like to ask you to join me and put yourself in my place.
Close your eyes.
Imagine you get to 123 meters.
The surface is far, far away.
You're alone.
There's hardly any light.
It's cold -- freezing cold.
The pressure is crushing you completely -- 13 times stronger than on the surface.
And I know what you're thinking: "This is horrible.
What the hell am I doing here?
He's insane."
But no.
That's not what I think when I'm down there.
When I'm at the bottom, I feel good.
I get this extraordinary feeling of well-being.
Maybe it's because I've completely released all tensions and let myself go.
I feel great, without the need to breathe.
Although, you'd agree, I should be worried.
I feel like a tiny dot, a little drop of water, floating in the middle of the ocean.
And each time, I picture the same image.
[The Pale Blue Dot] It's that small dot the arrow is pointing to.
Do you know what it is?
It's planet Earth.
Planet Earth, photographed by the Voyager probe, from 4 billion kilometers away.
And it shows that our home is that small dot over there, floating in the middle of nothing.
That's how I feel when I'm at the bottom, at 123 meters.
I feel like a small dot, a speck of dust, stardust, floating in the middle of the cosmos, in the middle of nothing, in the immensity of space.
It's a fascinating sensation, because when I look up, down, left, right, in front, behind, I see the same thing: the infinite deep blue.
Nowhere else on Earth you can experience this -- looking all around you, and seeing the same thing.
It's extraordinary.
And at that moment, I still get that feeling each time, building up inside of me -- the feeling of humility.
Looking at this picture, I feel very humble -- just like when I'm all the way down at the bottom -- because I'm nothing, I'm a little speck of nothingness lost in all of time and space.
And it still is absolutely fascinating.
I decide to go back to the surface, because this is not where I belong.
I belong up there, on the surface.
So I start heading back up.
I get something of a shock at the very moment when I decide to go up.
First, because it takes a huge effort to tear yourself away from the bottom.
It pulled you down on the way in, and will do the same on the way up.
You have to swim twice as hard.
Then, I'm hit with another phenomenon known as narcosis.
I don't know if you've heard of that.
It's called nitrogen narcosis.
It's something that happens to scuba divers, but it can happen to free divers.
It's caused by nitrogen dissolving in the blood, which causes confusion between the conscious and unconscious mind.
A flurry of thoughts goes spinning through your head.
You can't control them, and you shouldn't try to -- you have to let it happen.
The more you try to control it, the harder it is to manage.
Then, a third thing happens: the desire to breathe.
I'm not a fish, I'm a human being, and the desire to breathe reminds me of that fact.
Around 60, 70 meters, you start to feel the need to breathe.
And with everything else that's going on, you can very easily lose your ground and start to panic.
When that happens, you think, "Where's the surface?
I want to go up. I want to breathe now."
You should not do that.
Never look up to the surface -- not with your eyes, or your mind.
You should never picture yourself up there.
You have to stay in the present.
I look at the rope right in front of me, leading me back to the surface.
And I focus on that, on the present moment.
Because if I think about the surface, I panic.
And if I panic, it's over.
Time goes faster this way.
And at 30 meters: deliverance.
The safety divers, my guardian angels, join me.
They leave the surface, we meet at 30 meters, and they escort me for the final few meters, where potential problems could arise.
Every time I see them, I think to myself, "It's thanks to you."
It's thanks to them, my team, that I'm here.
It brings back the sense of humility.
Without my team, without all the people around me, the adventure into the deep would be impossible.
A journey into the deep is above all a group effort.
So I'm happy to finish my journey with them, because I wouldn't be here if it weren't for them.
20 meters, 10 meters, my lungs slowly return to their normal volume.
Buoyancy pushes me up to the surface.
Five meters below the surface, I start to breathe out, so that as soon as I get to the surface all I do is breathe in.
And so I arrive at the surface.
(Breathing in) Air floods into my lungs.
It's like being born again, a relief.
It feels good.
Though the journey was extraordinary, I do need to feel those small oxygen molecules fueling my body.
It's an extraordinary sensation, but at the same time it's traumatizing.
It's a shock to the system, as you can you imagine.
I go from complete darkness to the light of day, from the near-silence of the depths to the commotion up top.
In terms of touch, I go from the soft, velvety feeling of the water, to air rubbing across my face.
In terms of smell, there is air rushing into my lungs.
And in return, my lungs open up.
They were completely squashed just 90 seconds ago, and now, they've opened up again.
So all of this affects quite a lot of things.
I need a few seconds to come back, and to feel "all there" again.
But that needs to happen quickly, because the judges are there to verify my performance; I need to show them I'm in perfect physical condition.
You saw in the video, I was doing a so-called exit protocol.
Once at the surface, I have 15 seconds to take off my nose clip, give this signal and say (English) "I am OK."
Plus, you need to be bilingual.
(Laughter) On top of everything -- that's not very nice.
Once the protocol is completed, the judges show me a white card, and that's when the joy starts.
I can finally celebrate what has just happened.
So, the journey I've just described to you is a more extreme version of free diving.
Luckily, it's far from just that.
For the past few years, I've been trying to show another side of free diving, because the media mainly talks about competitions and records.
But free diving is more than just that.
It's about being at ease in the water.
It's extremely beautiful, very poetic and artistic.
So my wife and I decided to film it and try to show another side of it, mostly to make people want to go into the water.
Let me show you some images to finish my story.
It's a mix of beautiful underwater photos.
(Music) I'd like you to know that if one day you try to stop breathing, you'll realize that when you stop breathing, you stop thinking, too.
It calms your mind.
Today, in the 21st century, we're under so much pressure.
Our minds are overworked, we think at a million miles an hour, we're always stressed.
Being able to free dive lets you, just for a moment, relax your mind.
Holding your breath underwater means giving yourself the chance to experience weightlessness.
It means being underwater, floating, with your body completely relaxed, letting go of all your tensions.
This is our plight in the 21st century: our backs hurt, our necks hurt, everything hurts, because we're stressed and tense all the time.
But when you're in the water, you let yourself float, as if you were in space.
You let yourself go completely.
It's an extraordinary feeling.
You can finally get in touch with your body, mind and spirit.
Everything feels better, all at once.
Learning how to free dive is also about learning to breathe correctly.
We breathe with our first breath at birth, up until our last one.
Breathing gives rhythm to our lives.
Learning how to breathe better is learning how to live better.
Holding your breath in the sea, not necessarily at 100 meters, but maybe at two or three, putting on your goggles, a pair of flippers, means you can go see another world, another universe, completely magical.
You can see little fish, seaweed, the flora and fauna, you can watch it all discreetly, sliding underwater, looking around, and coming back to the surface, leaving no trace.
It's an amazing feeling to become one with nature like that.
And if I may say one more thing, holding your breath, being in the water, finding this underwater world -- it's all about connecting with yourself.
You heard me talk a lot about the body's memory that dates back millions of years, to our marine origins.
The day you get back into the water, when you hold your breath for a few seconds, you will reconnect with those origins.
And I guarantee it's absolute magic.
I encourage you to try it out.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most people have heard of the Electoral College during presidential election years.
But what exactly is the Electoral College?
Simply said, it is a group of people appointed by each state who formally elect the President and Vice President of the United States.
To understand how this process began and how it continues today, we can look at the Constitution of the United States: article two, section one, clause two of the constitution.
It specifies how many electors each state is entitled to have.
Since 1964, there have been 538 electors in each presidential election.
How do they decide on the number 538?
Well, the number of electors is equal to the total voting membership of the United States Congress.
435 representatives, plus 100 senators, and 3 electors from the District of Columbia.
Essentially, the Democratic candidate and Republican candidate are each trying to add up the electors in every state so that they surpass 270 electoral votes, or just over half the 538 votes, and win the presidency.
So how do states even get electoral votes?
Each state receives a particular number of electors based on population size.
The census is conducted every 10 years, so every time the census happens, states might gain or lose a few electoral votes.
Let's say you're a voter in California, a state with 55 electoral votes.
If your candidate wins in California, they get all 55 of the state's electoral votes.
If your candidate loses, they get none.
This is why many presidential candidates want to win states like Texas, Florida, and New York.
If you currently add up the electoral votes of those three states, you would have 96 electoral votes.
Even if a candidate won North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Wyoming, Vermont, New Hampshire. Connecticut and West Virginia, they would only gain 31 electoral votes total from those eight states.
Here is where it can get a little tricky.
On a rare occasion, like in the year 2000, someone can win the popular vote but fail to gain 270 electoral votes.
This means that the winner may have won and collected their electoral votes by small margins, winning just enough states with just enough electoral votes, but the losing candidate may have captured large voter margins in the remaining states.
If this is the case, the very large margins secured by the losing candidate in the other states would add up to over 50% of the ballots cast nationally.
Therefore, the losing candidate may have gained more than 50% of the ballots cast by voters, but failed to gain 270 of the electoral votes.
Some critics of the electoral college argue the system gives an unfair advantage to states with large numbers of electoral votes.
Think of it this way.
It is possible for a candidate to not get a single person's vote -- not one vote -- in 39 states, or the District of Columbia, yet be elected president by winning the popular vote in just 11 of these 12 states: California, New York, Texas, Florida, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, Michigan, New Jersey, North Carolina, Georgia or Virginia.
This is why both parties pay attention to these states.
However, others argue that the electoral college protects small states such as Rhode Island, Vermont and New Hampshire, and even geographically large states with small populations like Alaska, Wyoming and the Dakotas.
That's because a candidate can't completely ignore small states, because in a close election, every electoral vote counts.
There are certain states that have a long history of voting for a particular party.
These are known as "safe states."
For the past four election cycles -- in 1996, 2000, 2004 and 2008 -- Democrats could count on states like Oregon, Maryland, Michigan and Massachusetts, whereas the Republicans could count on states like Mississippi, Alabama, Kansas and Idaho.
States that are teetering between between parties are called "swing states."
In the past four election cycles, Ohio and Florida have been swing states, twice providing electoral votes for a Democratic candidate, and twice providing electoral votes for a Republican candidate.
Think about it. Do you live in a safe state?
If so, is it a Democratic or Republican safe state?
Do you live in a swing state?
Are your neighboring states swing or safe?
Is the population in your state increasing or decreasing?
And do not forget, when you are watching the electoral returns on election night every four years and the big map of the United States is on the screen, know that the magic number is 270 and start adding.
The universe contains about 100 billion galaxies.
Each of those galaxies contains about 100 billion stars.
Many of those stars have planets orbiting them.
So how do we look for life in all that immensity?
It's like searching for a needle in trillions of haystacks.
We might want to focus our search on planets that we know can support life as we know it -- what we call habitable worlds.
What do such planets look like?
To answer that question, we don't look out there.
Instead, we look at ourselves. At Earth.
Because this is the one planet in the universe that we know for certain is habitable.
When we look at Earth from space, we see a blue, watery world.
It's no coincidence that three quarters of the surface is covered by oceans.
Because of its unique chemical and physical properties, water is absolutely essential for all life as we know it.
And so we get especially excited about other worlds on which water is abundant.
Fortunately, water is very common in the universe.
But life needs water in the form of liquid, not ice, and not vapor, and that's a little bit less common.
For a planet to have liquid water at its surface, three things are important.
First, the planet needs to be large enough that the force of gravity keeps the water molecules from flying off into space.
For example, Mars is smaller than Earth, and so has less gravity, and that's one important reason that Mars has a very thin atmosphere, and no oceans at its surface.
Second, the planet needs to have an atmosphere. Why?
Because without an atmosphere, the planet is in a vacuum, and liquid water isn't stable in a vacuum.
For example, our moon has no atmosphere, and so if you spill some water on the moon, it will either boil away as vapor, or freeze solid to make ice.
Without the pressure of an atmosphere, liquid water can't survive.
Third, the planet needs to be at the right distance from its star.
Too close, and the surface temperature will exceed the boiling point of water, and oceans will turn to vapor.
Too far, and the surface temperature will fall below the freezing point of water, causing the oceans to turn to ice.
Fire or ice. For life as we know it, neither will suffice.
You can imagine that the perfect zone where water stays liquid looks kind of like a belt around a star.
We call that belt the habitable zone.
So when we search for habitable worlds, we definitely want to look for planets in the habitable zones around their stars.
Those regions are the best bets to find planets like Earth.
But while habitable zones are a pretty good place to begin the search for planets with life, there are a couple of complications.
First, a planet isn't necessarily habitable just because it's in the habitable zone.
Consider the planet Venus in our solar system.
If you were an alien astronomer, you'd think Venus is a pretty good bet for life.
It's the right size, it has an atmosphere, and it's in the habitable zone of our sun.
An alien astronomer might see it as Earth's twin.
But Venus is not habitable, at least not at its surface.
Not by life as we know it. It's too hot.
That's because Venus' atmosphere is full of carbon dioxide, an important greenhouse gas.
In fact, its atmosphere is almost entirely carbon dioxide, and is almost 100 times thicker than our own.
As a result, the temperature on Venus is hot enough to melt lead, and the planet is dry as a bone.
So finding planets of the right size and distance from their stars is only a beginning.
We also want to know about the makeup of their atmospheres.
The second complication emerges when we look a little more deeply at planet Earth.
In the last 30 years, we've discovered microbes living in all sorts of extreme environments.
We find them in fissures of rock miles beneath our feet, in boiling waters of the ocean floor, in acidic waters of thermal springs, and in cloud droplets miles above our heads.
These so-called extremophiles aren't rare.
Some scientists estimate that the mass of microbes living deep underground equals the mass of all the life at Earth's surface.
These subterranean microbes don't need oceans or sunshine.
These discoveries suggest that Earth-like planets may be only the tip of the astrobiological iceberg.
It's possible that life might persist in aquifers beneath the surface of Mars.
Microbes may thrive on Jupiter's moon Europa, where liquid water ocean probably lies beneath the icy crust.
Another ocean beneath the surface of Saturn's moon Enceladus is the source of geysers erupting into space.
Could these geysers be raining microbes?
Could we fly through them to find out?
And what about life as we don't know it, using a liquid other than water?
Maybe we are the crazy creatures living in an unusual and extreme environment.
Maybe the real habitable zone is so large that there are billions of needles in those trillions of haystacks.
Maybe in the big scheme of things, Earth is only one of many different kinds of habitable worlds.
The only way to find out is to go out and explore.
Literary critic Northrop Frye once observed that in our primitive days, our literary heroes were -- well, nearly gods, and as civilization advanced, they came down the mountain of the gods, so to speak, and became more human, more flawed, less heroic.
From the divine heroes like Hercules, down the mountain below the miraculous but mortal heroes such as Beowulf, the great leaders such as King Arthur, and the great but flawed heroes like Macbeth or Othello.
Below even the unlikely but eventual heroes such as Harry Potter, Luke Skywalker, or Hiccup, until we reach the bottom and meet the anti-hero.
Contrary to the sound, the anti-hero is not the villain, not the antagonist.
The anti-hero is actually the main character in some contemporary works of literature.
Guy Montag in "Fahrenheit 451," Winston Smith in "1984," who unwittingly ends up challenging those in power -- that is, those who abuse their power to brainwash the populace to believe that the ills of society have been eliminated.
Ideally, those who challenge the establishment should be wise, confident, brave, physically strong, with a type of charisma that inpires followers.
The anti-hero, however, at best demonstrates a few underdeveloped traits, at worst, is totally inept.
The story of the anti-hero usually unfolds something like this.
The anti-hero initially conforms, ignorantly accepting the established views, a typical, unquestioning, brainwashed member of society.
The anti-hero struggles to conform, all the while starting to object, perhaps finding other outsiders with whom to voice his questions, and naïvely, unwisely, sharing those questions with an authority figure.
The anti-hero openly challenges society, and tries to fight against the lies and tactics used to oppress the populace.
This step, for the anti-hero, is seldom a matter of brave, wise and heroic opposition.
Maybe the anti-hero fights and succeeds in destroying the oppressive government, with a lot of impossible luck.
Perhaps he or she runs away, escapes to fight another day.
All too often though, the anti-hero is killed, or brainwashed to return to conformity with the masses.
No heroic triumph here, no brave individual standing up against impersonal institutions of a modern world, inspiring others to fight, or resourcefully outwitting and outgunning the massive army of the evil empire.
Our storytelling ancestors calmed our fears of powerlessness by giving us Hercules and other heroes strong enough to fight off the demons and monsters that we suspected haunted the night beyond our campfires.
But eventually, we realized the monsters did not lie out there, they reside inside of us.
Beowulf's greatest enemy was mortality.
Othello's, jealousy.
Hiccup, self-doubt.
And in the tales of the ineffectual anti-hero, in the stories of Guy Montag and Winston Smith, lie the warnings of contemporary storytellers playing on very primitive fears: that we are not strong enough to defeat the monsters.
Only this time, not the monsters chased away by the campfire, but the very monsters who built the campfire in the first place.
She's only a few feet away.
The closer he gets, the more nervous he becomes, the budding zit on his nose growing bigger and bigger until it practically eclipses his face.
She looks at him hovering nearby, sees the massive zit, and giggles.
He slumps away, feeling sick.
Stress can sure make a mess, and it happens to both teens and adults.
But how does it happen?
Let's rewind to before the zit, to before Justin even sees his crush.
Already late for school, Justin got to class just in time to hear the teacher say "pop quiz."
He hadn't done his homework the night before, and felt more unprepared than the ambushed World War II soldiers he was supposed to write about.
A sudden rush of panic swept over his body, leaving him with sweaty palms, a foggy mind and a racing heart.
He stumbled out of class in a daze, and ran straight into his all-time crush, spiking up his stress.
Stress is a general biological response to a potential danger.
In primitive caveman terms, stress can make you fight for your life, or run for your life, if, for example, you're confronted by a hungry saber-tooth tiger.
Special chemicals called stress hormones run through your body, giving you more oxygen and power to run away from danger or to face it and fight for your life, hence the term "fight or flight."
But when you don't fight, or take flight, you face the plight.
When we're taking final exams, sitting in traffic or pondering pollution, we internalize stress.
It all begins in the brain.
The hypothalamus, the master controller of your hormones, releases something called corticotropin-releasing hormone.
This triggers the pituitary gland, a pea-sized gland found at the base of the brain, to release adrenocorticotropic hormone which then stimulates the adrenal gland sitting on top of the kidneys to release cortisol, the major stress hormone.
These natural chemicals are a great help when you need to run away quickly, or do superhuman feats of courage, but when you're simply sitting, these stress hormones collect in the body and affect your overall health.
Stress hormones increase inflammation in the body, suppress the immune system, which makes you more susceptible to infection by acne-causing bacteria, and can even increase oil production in the skin.
And this is the perfect storm for forming a pimple.
Cortisol is a major stress hormone involved in making skin cells churn out oily lipids from special glands called sebaceous glands.
But when there's too much of these oily lipids, called sebum, they can plug up the swollen, inflamed pores and trap the pesky, acne-causing bacteria inside, where they set up house and thrive.
Add a dash of inflammatory neuropeptides released by the nervous system when you're -- well, nervous -- and angry zits follow.
To make matters worse, Justin is a boy, meaning he's got more testosterone than girls.
Testosterone is another hormone that increases oil production in the skin.
So, his already oily skin, together with a boost in oil and inflammation from stress, is the perfect environment for bacteria to swell, swell, swell up into a major zit.
So what could've Justin done to avoid the big pimple?
Stressful situations are unavoidable.
But we can try to change our responses so that we're not so stressed in the end.
And had he been confident in approaching her, she might not have noticed the pimple, or he might not have had one.
Dialogue gives a story color, makes it exciting and moves it forward.
Romeo: O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Juliet: What satisfaction canst thou have tonight?
Romeo: The exchange of thy love's faithful vows for mine.
Without dialogue: (cricket sounds) So what goes into writing effective dialogue?
Well, there are social skills: making friends, solving conflicts, being pleasant and polite.
We won't be using any of those today.
Instead, we'll be working on -- let's call them "anti-social skills."
If you're a writer, you may already have a few of these.
The first is eavesdropping.
If you're riding a bus and hear an interesting conversation, you could write it all down.
Of course, when you write fiction, you're not describing real people, you're making up characters.
But sometimes the words you overhear can give you ideas.
"I did not," says one person.
"I saw you," the other replies.
Who might be saying those words?
Maybe it's two kids in a class, and the boy thinks the girl pushed him.
Maybe it's a couple, but one of them is a vampire, and the woman vampire saw the man flirting with a zombie.
Or maybe not.
Maybe the characters are a teenager and his mother, and they're supposed to be vegetarians, but the mother saw him eating a burger.
So let's say you've decided on some characters.
This is anti-social skill number two: start pretending they're real.
What are they like? Where are they from? What music do they listen to?
Spend some time with them.
If you're on a bus, think about what they might be doing if they were there too.
Would they talk on the phone, listen to music, draw pictures, sleep?
What we say depends on who we are.
An older person might speak differently than a younger person.
Someone from the south might speak differently than someone from the north.
Once you know your characters, you can figure out how they talk.
At this stage, it's helpful to use anti-social skill number three: muttering to yourself.
When you speak your character's words, you can hear whether they sound natural, and fix them if necessary.
Remember, most people are usually pretty informal when they speak.
They use simple language and contractions.
So, "Do not attempt to lie to me" sounds more natural as "Don't try to lie to me."
Also keep it short.
People tend to speak in short bursts, not lengthy speeches.
And let the dialogue do the work.
Ask yourself: do I really need that adverb?
For instance, "'Your money or your life,' she said threateningly."
Here, "threateningly" is redundant, so you can get rid of it.
But if the words and the actions don't match, an adverb can be helpful.
"'Your money or your life,' she said lovingly."
So, to recap: First, eavesdrop. Next, pretend imaginary people are real.
Finally, mutter to yourself, and write it all down.
You already have everything you need.
This is fictional dialogue, or "How to Hear Voices in Your Head."
The periodic table is instantly recognizable.
It's not just in every chemistry lab worldwide, it's found on t-shirts, coffee mugs, and shower curtains.
But the periodic table isn't just another trendy icon.
It's a massive slab of human genius, up there with the Taj Mahal, the Mona Lisa, and the ice cream sandwich -- and the table's creator, Dmitri Mendeleev, is a bonafide science hall-of-famer.
But why? What's so great about him and his table?
Is it because he made a comprehensive list of the known elements?
Nah, you don't earn a spot in science Valhalla just for making a list.
Besides, Mendeleev was far from the first person to do that.
Is it because Mendeleev arranged elements with similar properties together?
Not really, that had already been done too.
So what was Mendeleev's genius?
Let's look at one of the first versions of the periodic table from around 1870.
Here we see elements designated by their two-letter symbols arranged in a table.
Check out the entry of the third column, fifth row.
There's a dash there.
From that unassuming placeholder springs the raw brilliance of Mendeleev.
That dash is science.
By putting that dash there, Dmitri was making a bold statement.
He said -- and I'm paraphrasing here -- Y'all haven't discovered this element yet. In the meantime, I'm going to give it a name.
It's one step away from aluminum, so we'll call it eka-aluminum, "eka" being Sanskrit for one.
Nobody's found eka-aluminum yet, so we don't know anything about it, right?
Wrong! Based on where it's located, I can tell you all about it.
First of all, an atom of eka-aluminum has an atomic weight of 68, about 68 times heavier than a hydrogen atom.
When eka-aluminum is isolated, you'll see it's a solid metal at room temperature.
It's shiny, it conducts heat really well, it can be flattened into a sheet, stretched into a wire, but its melting point is low. Like, freakishly low.
Oh, and a cubic centimeter of it will weigh six grams.
Mendeleev could predict all of these things simply from where the blank spot was, and his understanding of how the elements surrounding it behave.
A few years after this prediction, a French guy named Paul Emile Lecoq de Boisbaudran discovered a new element in ore samples and named it gallium after Gaul, the historical name for France.
Gallium is one step away from aluminum on the periodic table.
It's eka-aluminum. So were Mendeleev's predictions right?
Gallium's atomic weight is 69.72.
A cubic centimeter of it weighs 5.9 grams.
it's a solid metal at room temperature, but it melts at a paltry 30 degrees Celcius, 85 degrees Fahrenheit.
It melts in your mouth and in your hand.
Not only did Mendeleev completely nail gallium, he predicted other elements that were unknown at the time: scandium, germanium, rhenium.
The element he called eka-manganese is now called technetium.
Technetium is so rare it couldn't be isolated until it was synthesized in a cyclotron in 1937, almost 70 years after Dmitri predicted its existence, 30 years after he died.
Dmitri died without a Nobel Prize in 1907, but he wound up receiving a much more exclusive honor.
In 1955, scientists at UC Berkeley successfully created 17 atoms of a previously undiscovered element.
This element filled an empty spot in the perodic table at number 101, and was officially named Mendelevium in 1963.
There have been well over 800 Nobel Prize winners, but only 15 scientists have an element named after them.
So the next time you stare at a periodic table, whether it's on the wall of a university classroom or on a five-dollar coffee mug, Dmitri Mendeleev, the architect of the periodic table, will be staring back.
Chris Anderson: Perhaps we could start by just telling us about your country.
It's three dots there on the globe. Those dots are pretty huge.
I think each one is about the size of California.
Tell us about Kiribati.
Anote Tong: Well, let me first begin by saying how deeply grateful I am for this opportunity to share my story with people who do care.
I think I've been sharing my story with a lot of people who don't care too much.
But Kiribati is comprised of three groups of islands: the Gilbert Group on the west, we have the Phoenix Islands in the middle, and the Line Islands in the east.
And quite frankly, Kiribati is perhaps the only country that is actually in the four corners of the world, because we are in the Northern Hemisphere, in the Southern Hemisphere, and also in the east and the west of the International Date Line.
These islands are entirely made up of coral atolls, and on average about two meters above sea level.
And so this is what we have.
Usually not more than two kilometers in width.
And so, on many occasions, I've been asked by people, "You know, you're suffering, why don't you move back?"
They don't understand.
They have no concept of what it is that's involved.
With the rising sea, they say, "Well, you can move back."
And so this is what I tell them.
If we move back, we will fall off on the other side of the ocean. OK?
But these are the kinds of issues that people don't understand.
CA: So certainly this is just a picture of fragility there.
When was it that you yourself realized that there might be impending peril for your country?
AT: Well, the story of climate change has been one that has been going on for quite a number of decades.
And when I came into office in 2003, I began talking about climate change at the United Nations General Assembly, but not with so much passion, because then there was still this controversy among the scientists whether it was human-induced, whether it was real or it wasn't.
But I think that that debate was fairly much concluded in 2007 with the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, which made a categorical statement that it is real, it's human-induced, and it's predicting some very serious scenarios for countries like mine.
And so that's when I got very serious.
In the past, I talked about it.
We were worried.
But when the scenarios, the predictions came in 2007, it became a real issue for us.
CA: Now, those predictions are, I think, that by 2100, sea levels are forecast to rise perhaps three feet.
There's scenarios where it's higher than that, for sure, but what would you say to a skeptic who said, "What's three feet?
You're on average six feet above sea level.
What's the problem?"
AT: Well, I think it's got to be understood that a marginal rise in sea level would mean a loss of a lot of land, because much of the land is low.
And quite apart from that, we are getting the swells at the moment.
So it's not about getting two feet.
I think what many people do not understand is they think climate change is something that is happening in the future.
Well, we're at the very bottom end of the spectrum.
It's already with us.
We have communities who already have been dislocated.
They have had to move, and every parliament session, I'm getting complaints from different communities asking for assistance to build seawalls, to see what we can do about the freshwater lens because it's being destroyed, and so in my trips to the different islands, I'm seeing evidence of communities which are now having to cope with the loss of food crops, the contamination of the water lenses, and I see these communities perhaps leaving, having to relocate, within five to 10 years.
CA: And then, I think the country suffered its first cyclone, and this is connected, yes? What happened here?
AT: Well, we're on the equator, and I'm sure many of you understand that when you're on the equator, it's supposed to be in the doldrums. We're not supposed to get the cyclones.
We create them, and then we send them either north or south.
(Laughter) But they aren't supposed to come back.
But for the first time, at the beginning of this year, the Cyclone Pam, which destroyed Vanuatu, and in the process, the very edges of it actually touched our two southernmost islands, and all of Tuvalu was underwater when Hurricane Pam struck.
But for our two southernmost islands, we had waves come over half the island, and so this has never happened before.
It's a new experience.
And I've just come back from my own constituency, and I've seen these beautiful trees which had been there for decades, they've been totally destroyed.
So this is what's happening, but when we talk about the rising sea level, we think it's something that happens gradually.
It comes with the winds, it comes with the swells, and so they can be magnified, but what we are beginning to witness is the change in the weather pattern, which is perhaps the more urgent challenge that we will face sooner than perhaps the rising sea level.
CA: So the country is already seeing effects now.
As you look forward, what are your options as a country, as a nation?
AT: Well, I've been telling this story every year.
I think I visit a number of -- I've been traveling the world to try and get people to understand.
We have a plan, we think we have a plan.
And on one occasion, I think I spoke in Geneva and there was a gentleman who was interviewing me on something like this, and I said, "We are looking at floating islands," and he thought it was funny, but somebody said, "No, this is not funny. These people are looking for solutions."
And so I have been looking at floating islands.
The Japanese are interested in building floating islands.
But, as a country, we have made a commitment that no matter what happens, we will try as much as possible to stay and continue to exist as a nation.
What that will take, it's going to be something quite significant, very, very substantial.
Either we live on floating islands, or we have to build up the islands to continue to stay out of the water as the sea level rises and as the storms get more severe.
But even that, it's going to be very, very difficult to get the kind of resourcing that we would need.
CA: And then the only recourse is some form of forced migration.
AT: Well, we are also looking at that because in the event that nothing comes forward from the international community, we are preparing, we don't want to be caught like what's happening in Europe.
OK? We don't want to mass migrate at some point in time.
We want to be able to give the people the choice today, those who choose and want to do that, to migrate.
We don't want something to happen that they are forced to migrate without having been prepared to do so.
Of course, our culture is very different, our society is very different, and once we migrate into a different environment, a different culture, there's a whole lot of adjustments that are required.
CA: Well, there's forced migration in your country's past, and I think just this week, just yesterday or the day before yesterday, you visited these people.
What happened here? What's the story here?
AT: Yes, and I'm sorry, I think somebody was asking why we were sneaking off to visit that place.
I had a very good reason, because we have a community of Kiribati people living in that part of the Solomon Islands, but these were people who were relocated from the Phoenix Islands, in fact, in the 1960s.
There was serious drought, and the people could not continue to live on the island, and so they were moved to live here in the Solomon Islands.
And so yesterday it was very interesting to meet with these people.
They didn't know who I was. They hadn't heard of me.
Some of them later recognized me, but I think they were very happy.
Later they really wanted to have the opportunity to welcome me formally.
But I think what I saw yesterday was very interesting because here I see our people.
I spoke in our language, and of course they spoke back, they replied, but their accent, they are beginning not to be able to speak Kiribati properly.
I saw them, there was this lady with red teeth.
She was chewing betel nuts, and it's not something we do in Kiribati.
We don't chew betel nuts.
I met also a family who have married the local people here, and so this is what is happening.
As you go into another community, there are bound to be changes.
There is bound to be a certain loss of identity, and this is what we will be looking for in the future if and when we do migrate.
CA: It must have been just an extraordinarily emotional day because of these questions about identity, the joy of seeing you and perhaps an emphasized sense of what they had lost.
And it's very inspiring to hear you say you're going to fight to the end to try to preserve the nation in a location.
AT: This is our wish.
Nobody wants ever to leave their home, and so it's been a very difficult decision for me.
As a leader, you don't make plans to leave your island, your home, and so I've been asked on a number of occasions, "So how do you feel?"
And it doesn't feel good at all.
It's an emotional thing, and I've tried to live with it, and I know that on occasions, I'm accused of not trying to solve the problem because I can't solve the problem.
It's something that's got to be done collectively.
Climate change is a global phenomenon, and as I've often argued, unfortunately, the countries, when we come to the United Nations -- I was in a meeting with the Pacific Island Forum countries where Australia and New Zealand are also members, and we had an argument.
There was a bit of a story in the news because they were arguing that to cut emissions, it would be something that they're unable to do because it would affect the industries.
And so here I was saying, OK, I hear you, I understand what you're saying, but try also to understand what I'm saying because if you do not cut your emissions, then our survival is on the line.
And so it's a matter for you to weigh this, these moral issues.
It's about industry as opposed to the survival of a people.
CA: You know, I ask you yesterday what made you angry, and you said, "I don't get angry." But then you paused.
I think this made you angry.
AT: I'd refer you to my earlier statement at the United Nations.
I was very angry, very frustrated and then depressed.
There was a sense of futility that we are fighting a fight that we have no hope of winning.
I had to change my approach.
I had to become more reasonable because I thought people would listen to somebody who was rational, but I remain radically rational, whatever that is.
(Laughter) CA: Now, a core part of your nation's identity is fishing.
I think you said pretty much everyone is involved in fishing in some way.
AT: Well, we eat fish every day, every day, and I think there is no doubt that our rate of consumption of fish is perhaps the highest in the world.
We don't have a lot of livestock, so it's fish that we depend on.
CA: So you're dependent on fish, both at the local level and for the revenues that the country receives from the global fishing business for tuna, and yet despite that, a few years ago you took a very radical step.
Can you tell us about that?
I think something happened right here in the Phoenix Islands.
AT: Let me give some of the background of what fish means for us.
We have one of the largest tuna fisheries remaining in the world.
In the Pacific, I think we own something like 60 percent of the remaining tuna fisheries, and it remains relatively healthy for some species, but not all.
And Kiribati is one of the three major resource owners, tuna resource owners.
And at the moment, we have been getting something like 80 to 90 percent of our revenue from access fees, license fees.
CA: Of your national revenue.
AT: National revenue, which drives everything that we do in governments, hospitals, schools and what have you.
But we decided to close this, and it was a very difficult decision.
I can assure you, politically, locally, it was not easy, but I was convinced that we had to do this in order to ensure that the fishery remains sustainable.
There had been some indications that some of the species, in particular the bigeye, was under serious threat.
The yellowfin was also heavily fished.
Skipjack remains healthy.
And so we had to do something like that, and so that was the reason I did that.
Another reason why I did that was because I had been asking the international community that in order to deal with climate change, in order to fight climate change, there has got to be sacrifice, there has got to be commitment.
So in asking the international community to make a sacrifice, I thought we ourselves need to make that sacrifice.
And so we made the sacrifice.
And forgoing commercial fishing in the Phoenix Islands protected area would mean a loss of revenue.
We are still trying to assess what that loss would be because we actually closed it off at the beginning of this year, and so we will see by the end of this year what it means in terms of the lost revenue.
CA: So there's so many things playing into this.
On the one hand, it may prompt healthier fisheries.
I mean, how much are you able to move the price up that you charge for the remaining areas?
AT: The negotiations have been very difficult, but we have managed to raise the cost of a vessel day.
For any vessel to come in to fish for a day, we have raised the fee from -- it was $6,000 and $8,000, now to $10,000, $12,000 per vessel day.
And so there's been that significant increase.
But at the same time, what's important to note is, whereas in the past these fishing boats might be fishing in a day and maybe catch 10 tons, now they're catching maybe 100 tons because they've become so efficient.
And so we've got to respond likewise.
We've got to be very, very careful because the technology has so improved.
There was a time when the Brazilian fleet moved from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
They couldn't.
They started experimenting if they could, per se.
But now they've got ways of doing it, and they've become so efficient.
CA: Can you give us a sense of what it's like in those negotiations?
Because you're up against companies that have hundreds of millions of dollars at stake, essentially.
How do you hold the line?
Is there any advice you can give to other leaders who are dealing with the same companies about how to get the most for your country, get the most for the fish?
What advice would you give?
AT: Well, I think we focus too often on licensing in order to get the rate of return, because what we are getting from license fees is about 10 percent of the landed value of the catch on the side of the wharf, not in the retail shops.
And we only get about 10 percent.
What we have been trying to do over the years is actually to increase our participation in the industry, in the harvesting, in the processing, and eventually, hopefully, the marketing.
They're not easy to penetrate, but we are working towards that, and yes, the answer would be to enhance.
In order to increase our rate of return, we have to become more involved.
And so we've started doing that, and we have to restructure the industry.
We've got to tell these people that the world has changed.
Now we want to produce the fish ourselves.
CA: And meanwhile, for your local fishermen, they are still able to fish, but what is business like for them?
Is it getting harder? Are the waters depleted?
Or is that being run on a sustainable basis?
AT: For the artisanal fishery, we do not participate in the commercial fishing activity except only to supply the domestic market.
The tuna fishery is really entirely for the foreign market, mostly here in the US, Europe, Japan.
So I am a fisherman, very much, and I used to be able to catch yellowfin.
Now it's very, very rare to be able to catch yellowfin because they are being lifted out of the water by the hundreds of tons by these purse seiners.
CA: So here's a couple of beautiful girls from your country.
I mean, as you think about their future, what message would you have for them and what message would you have for the world?
AT: Well, I've been telling the world that we really have to do something about what is happening to the climate because for us, it's about the future of these children.
I have 12 grandchildren, at least.
I think I have 12, my wife knows.
(Laughter) And I think I have eight children.
It's about their future.
Every day I see my grandchildren, about the same age as these young girls, and I do wonder, and I get angry sometimes, yes I do.
I wonder what is to become of them.
And so it's about them that we should be telling everybody, that it's not about their own national interest, because climate change, regrettably, unfortunately, is viewed by many countries as a national problem. It's not.
And this is the argument we got into recently with our partners, the Australians and New Zealanders, because they said, "We can't cut any more."
This is what one of the leaders, the Australian leader, said, that we've done our part, we are cutting back.
I said, What about the rest? Why don't you keep it?
If you could keep the rest of your emissions within your boundaries, within your borders, we'd have no question.
You can go ahead as much as you like.
But unfortunately, you're sending it our way, and it's affecting the future of our children.
And so surely I think that is the heart of the problem of climate change today.
We will be meeting in Paris at the end of this year, but until we can think of this as a global phenomenon, because we create it, individually, as nations, but it affects everybody else, and yet, we refuse to do anything about it, and we deal with it as a national problem, which it is not -- it is a global issue, and it's got to be dealt with collectively.
CA: People are incredibly bad at responding to graphs and numbers, and we shut our minds to it.
Somehow, to people, we're slightly better at responding to that sometimes.
And it seems like it's very possible that your nation, despite, actually because of the intense problems you face, you may yet be the warning light to the world that shines most visibly, most powerfully.
I just want to thank you, I'm sure, on behalf of all of us, for your extraordinary leadership and for being here.
Mr. President, thank you so much.
AT: Thank you.
(Applause)
I am going to start with a challenge.
I want you to imagine each of these two scenes in as much detail as you can.
Scene number one: "They gave us a hearty welcome."
Well, who are the people who are giving a hearty welcome?
What are they wearing?
What are they drinking?
OK, scene two: "They gave us a cordial reception."
How are these people standing?
What expressions are on their faces?
What are they wearing and drinking?
Fix these pictures in your mind's eye and then jot down a sentence or two to describe them.
We'll come back to them later.
Now on to our story.
In the year 400 C.E.
the Celts in Britain were ruled by Romans.
This had one benefit for the Celts: the Romans protected them from the barbarian Saxon tribes of Northern Europe.
But then the Roman Empire began to crumble, and the Romans withdrew from Britain.
With the Romans gone, the Germanic tribes, the Angles, Saxons, Jutes, and Frisians quickly sailed across the water, did away with the Celts, and formed kingdoms in the British Isles.
For several centuries, these tribes lived in Britain, and their Germanic language, Anglo Saxon, became the common language, what we call Old English.
Although modern English speakers may think Old English sounds like a different language, if you look and listen closely, you'll find many words that are recognizable.
For example, here is what the Lord's Prayer looks like in Old English.
At first glance, it may look unfamiliar, but update the spelling a bit, and you'll see many common English words.
So the centuries passed with Britains happily speaking Old English, but in the 700's, a series of Viking invasions began, which continued until a treaty split the island in half.
On one side were the Saxons.
On the other side were the Danes who spoke a language called Old Norse.
As Saxons fell in love with their cute Danish neighbors and marriages blurred the boundaries, Old Norse mixed with Old English, and many Old Norse words like freckle, leg, root, skin, and want are still a part of our language.
300 years later, in 1066, the Norman conquest brought war again to the British Isles.
The Normans were Vikings who settled in France.
They had abandoned the Viking language and culture in favor of a French lifestyle, but they still fought like Vikings.
They placed a Norman king on the English throne and for three centuries, French was the language of the British royalty.
Society in Britain came to have two levels: French-speaking aristocracy and Old English-speaking peasants.
The French also brought many Roman Catholic clergymen with them who added Latin words to the mix.
Old English adapted and grew as thousands of words flowed in, many having to do with government, law, and aristocracy.
Words like council, marriage, sovereign, govern, damage, and parliament.
As the language expanded, English speakers quickly realized what to do if they wanted to sound sophisticated: they would use words that had come from French or Latin.
Anglo Saxon words seemed so plain like the Anglo Saxon peasants who spoke them.
Let's go back to the two sentences you thought about earlier.
When you pictured the hearty welcome, did you see an earthy scene with relatives hugging and talking loudly?
Were they drinking beer?
Were they wearing lumberjack shirts and jeans?
And what about the cordial reception?
I bet you pictured a far more classy and refined crowd.
Blazers and skirts, wine and caviar.
Why is this?
How is it that phrases that are considered just about synonymous by the dictionary can evoke such different pictures and feelings?
"Hearty" and "welcome" are both Saxon words.
"Cordial" and "reception" come from French.
The connotation of nobility and authority has persisted around words of French origin.
And the connotation of peasantry, real people, salt of the Earth, has persisted around Saxon words.
Even if you never heard this history before, the memory of it persists in the feelings evoked by the words you speak.
On some level, it's a story you already knew because whether we realize it consciously or only subconsciously, our history lives in the words we speak and hear.
We all start life as one single cell.
Then that cell divides and we are two cells, then four, then eight.
Cells form tissues, tissues form organs, organs form us.
These cell divisions, by which we go from a single cell to 100 trillion cells, are called growth.
And growth seems like a simple thing because when we think of it, we typically think of someone getting taller or, later in life, wider, but to cells, growth isn't simple.
Cell division is an intricate chemical dance that's part individual, part community-driven.
And in a neighborhood of 100 trillion cells, some times things go wrong.
Maybe an individual cell's set of instructions, or DNA, gets a typo, what we call a mutation.
Most of the time, the cell senses mistakes and shuts itself down, or the system detects a troublemaker and eliminates it.
But, enough mutations can bypass the fail-safes, driving the cell to divide recklessly.
That one rogue cell becomes two, then four, then eight.
At every stage, the incorrect instructions are passed along to the cells' offspring.
Weeks, months, or years after that one rogue cell transformed, you might see your doctor about a lump in your breast.
Difficulty going to the bathroom could reveal a problem in your intestine, prostate, or bladder.
Or, a routine blood test might count too many white cells or elevated liver enzymes.
Your doctor delivers the bad news: it's cancer.
From here your strategy will depend on where the cancer is and how far it's progressed.
If the tumor is slow-growing and in one place, surgery might be all you need, if anything.
If the tumor is fast-growing or invading nearby tissue, your doctor might recommend radiation or surgery followed by radiation.
If the cancer has spread, or if it's inherently everywhere like a leukemia, your doctor will most likely recommend chemotherapy or a combination of radiation and chemo.
Radiation and most forms of chemo work by physically shredding the cells' DNA or disrupting the copying machinery.
But neither radiation nor chemotherapeutic drugs target only cancer cells.
Radiation hits whatever you point it at, and your blood stream carries chemo-therapeutics all over your body.
So, what happens when different cells get hit?
Let's look at a healthy liver cell, a healthy hair cell, and a cancerous cell.
The healthy liver cell divides only when it is stressed; the healthy hair cell divides frequently; and the cancer cell divides even more frequently and recklessly.
When you take a chemotherapeutic drug, it will hit all of these cells.
And remember that the drugs work typically by disrupting cell division.
So, every time a cell divides, it opens itself up to attack, and that means the more frequently a cell divides, the more likely the drug is to kill it.
So, remember that hair cell?
It divides frequently and isn't a threat.
And, there are other frequently dividing cells in your body like skin cells, gut cells, and blood cells.
So the list of unpleasant side effects of cancer treatment parallels these tissue types: hair loss, skin rashes, nausea, vomiting, fatigue, weight loss, and pain.
That makes sense because these are the cells that get hit the hardest.
So, in the end, it is all about growth.
Cancer hijacks cells' natural division machinery and forces them to put the pedal to the metal, growing rapidly and recklessly.
But, using chemotherapeutic drugs, we take advantage of that aggressiveness, and we turn cancer's main strength into a weakness.
Picture this: your friend and you are watching a sitcom and a sassy sidekick walks into a room, carrying a four-tiered wedding cake.
He trips, falls, and face-plants into the cake.
Your friend doubles over with laughter and says, "It's so ridiculous! So ironic!"
Well, quick, what do you do?
Do you laugh along with the laugh track and let this grievous misinterpretation of irony go?
Or, do you throw caution to the wind and explain the true meaning of irony?
If you're me, you choose the latter.
Unfortunately, irony has been completely misunderstood.
We tend to throw out that term whenever we see something funny or coincidental.
And while many examples of true irony can be funny, that is not the driving factor of being ironic.
A situation is only ironic if what happens is the exact opposite of what was expected.
If you expect A, but get B, then you have irony.
Let's take the slap-stick cake situation as an example.
When someone walks in precariously balancing something that shouldn't be carried alone, trips, falls, and makes a mess, it is funny, but it's not ironic.
In fact, you probably expect someone who is single-handedly carrying a huge cake to trip.
When he does, reality aligns with expectations, and so that is not irony.
But what if the sassy sidekick walked in wearing a gold medal that he'd won at the cake walking event at the Atlanta Olympics in 1996?
What if that sidekick was a professional cake carrier?
Then, maybe there would have been a reasonable expectation that he would have been more skilled when carrying a ridiculously large cake.
Then, when that reasonable expectation was not met by the tripping sidekick, irony would have been exemplified.
Another example.
A senior citizen texting and blogging.
The common and reasonable expectation of more mature men and women is that they don't like or know technology, that they have a hard time turning on a computer, or that they have the old brick cell phones from the 1980s.
One should not expect them to be connected, high-tech, or savvy enough to text or to be blogging, which must seem like some sort of newfangled thing that "back in my day," they never had.
So when Granny pulls out her smart phone to post pictures of her dentures or her grandkids, irony ensues.
Reasonable expectations of the situation are not met.
That is irony.
So while the cake dropper might not be ironic, there are all kinds of situations in life that are.
Go out, and find those true examples of irony.
Your company launches a search for an open position.
The applications start rolling in, and the qualified candidates are identified.
Now the choosing begins.
Person A: Ivy League, 4.0, flawless resume, great recommendations.
All the right stuff.
Person B: state school, fair amount of job hopping, and odd jobs like cashier and singing waitress.
But remember -- both are qualified.
So I ask you: who are you going to pick?
My colleagues and I created very official terms to describe two distinct categories of candidates.
We call A "the Silver Spoon," the one who clearly had advantages and was destined for success.
And we call B "the Scrapper," the one who had to fight against tremendous odds to get to the same point.
You just heard a human resources director refer to people as Silver Spoons and Scrappers -- (Laughter) which is not exactly politically correct and sounds a bit judgmental.
But before my human resources certification gets revoked -- (Laughter) let me explain.
A resume tells a story.
And over the years, I've learned something about people whose experiences read like a patchwork quilt, that makes me stop and fully consider them before tossing their resumes away.
A series of odd jobs may indicate inconsistency, lack of focus, unpredictability.
Or it may signal a committed struggle against obstacles.
At the very least, the Scrapper deserves an interview.
To be clear, I don't hold anything against the Silver Spoon; getting into and graduating from an elite university takes a lot of hard work and sacrifice.
But if your whole life has been engineered toward success, how will you handle the tough times?
One person I hired felt that because he attended an elite university, there were certain assignments that were beneath him, like temporarily doing manual labor to better understand an operation.
Eventually, he quit.
But on the flip side, what happens when your whole life is destined for failure and you actually succeed?
I want to urge you to interview the Scrapper.
I know a lot about this because I am a Scrapper.
Before I was born, my father was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia, and he couldn't hold a job in spite of his brilliance.
Our lives were one part "Cuckoo's Nest," one part "Awakenings" and one part "A Beautiful Mind."
(Laughter) I'm the fourth of five children raised by a single mother in a rough neighborhood in Brooklyn, New York.
We never owned a home, a car, a washing machine, and for most of my childhood, we didn't even have a telephone.
So I was highly motivated to understand the relationship between business success and Scrappers, because my life could easily have turned out very differently.
As I met successful business people and read profiles of high-powered leaders, I noticed some commonality.
Many of them had experienced early hardships, anywhere from poverty, abandonment, death of a parent while young, to learning disabilities, alcoholism and violence.
The conventional thinking has been that trauma leads to distress, and there's been a lot of focus on the resulting dysfunction.
But during studies of dysfunction, data revealed an unexpected insight: that even the worst circumstances can result in growth and transformation.
A remarkable and counterintuitive phenomenon has been discovered, which scientists call Post Traumatic Growth.
In one study designed to measure the effects of adversity on children at risk, among a subset of 698 children who experienced the most severe and extreme conditions, fully one-third grew up to lead healthy, successful and productive lives.
In spite of everything and against tremendous odds, they succeeded.
One-third.
Take this resume.
This guy's parents give him up for adoption.
He never finishes college.
He job-hops quite a bit, goes on a sojourn to India for a year, and to top it off, he has dyslexia.
Would you hire this guy?
His name is Steve Jobs.
In a study of the world's most highly successful entrepreneurs, it turns out a disproportionate number have dyslexia.
In the US, 35 percent of the entrepreneurs studied had dyslexia.
What's remarkable -- among those entrepreneurs who experience post traumatic growth, they now view their learning disability as a desirable difficulty which provided them an advantage because they became better listeners and paid greater attention to detail.
They don't think they are who they are in spite of adversity, they know they are who they are because of adversity.
They embrace their trauma and hardships as key elements of who they've become, and know that without those experiences, they might not have developed the muscle and grit required to become successful.
One of my colleagues had his life completely upended as a result of the Chinese Cultural Revolution in 1966.
At age 13, his parents were relocated to the countryside, the schools were closed and he was left alone in Beijing to fend for himself until 16, when he got a job in a clothing factory.
But instead of accepting his fate, he made a resolution that he would continue his formal education.
Eleven years later, when the political landscape changed, he heard about a highly selective university admissions test.
He had three months to learn the entire curriculum of middle and high school.
So, every day he came home from the factory, took a nap, studied until 4am, went back to work and repeated this cycle every day for three months.
He did it, he succeeded.
His commitment to his education was unwavering, and he never lost hope.
Today, he holds a master's degree, and his daughters each have degrees from Cornell and Harvard.
Scrappers are propelled by the belief that the only person you have full control over is yourself.
When things don't turn out well, Scrappers ask, "What can I do differently to create a better result?"
Scrappers have a sense of purpose that prevents them from giving up on themselves, kind of like if you've survived poverty, a crazy father and several muggings, you figure, "Business challenges? -- (Laughter) Really?
Piece of cake. I got this."
(Laughter) And that reminds me -- humor.
Scrappers know that humor gets you through the tough times, and laughter helps you change your perspective.
And finally, there are relationships.
People who overcome adversity don't do it alone.
Somewhere along the way, they find people who bring out the best in them and who are invested in their success.
Having someone you can count on no matter what is essential to overcoming adversity.
I was lucky.
In my first job after college, I didn't have a car, so I carpooled across two bridges with a woman who was the president's assistant.
She watched me work and encouraged me to focus on my future and not dwell on my past.
Along the way I've met many people who've provided me brutally honest feedback, advice and mentorship.
These people don't mind that I once worked as a singing waitress to help pay for college.
(Laughter) I'll leave you with one final, valuable insight.
Companies that are committed to diversity and inclusive practices tend to support Scrappers and outperform their peers.
According to DiversityInc, a study of their top 50 companies for diversity outperformed the S&amp;P 500 by 25 percent.
So back to my original question.
Who are you going to bet on: Silver Spoon or Scrapper?
I say choose the underestimated contender, whose secret weapons are passion and purpose.
Hire the Scrapper.
(Applause)
People often think the word "doubt" spelling is a little crazy because of the letter "b".
Since it doesn't spell a sound, most folks can't figure out what it's doing there.
But in spite of what most of us learn in school, sound is &lt;i&gt;never&lt;/i&gt; the most important aspect of spelling an English word.
A word's meaning and history need to come first.
To doubt means to question, to waver, to hesitate.
As a noun, it means uncertainty or confusion.
The present-day English word "doubt" started as a Latin word, "dubitare".
It first moved from Latin into French where it lost both its "buh" sound and its letter "b".
And then it came into English in the 13th century.
About 100 years later, scribes who wrote English but also knew Latin, started to reinsert the "b" into the word's spelling, even though no one pronounced it that way.
But why would they do this?
Why would anyone in their right mind reinsert a silent letter into a spelling?
Well, because they knew Latin, the scribes understood that the root of "doubt" had a "b" in it.
Over time, even as fewer literate people knew Latin, the "b" was kept because it marked important, meaningful connections to other related words, like "dubious" and "indubitalbly," which were subsequently borrowed into English from the same Latin root, "dubitare".
Understanding these historical connections not only helped us to spell "doubt," but also to understand the meaning of these more sophisticated words.
But the story doesn't end there.
If we look even deeper, we can see beyond the shadow of a doubt, just how revealing that "b" can be.
There are only two base words in all of English that have the letters "d-o-u-b": one is doubt, and the other is double.
We can build lots of other words on each of these bases, like doubtful and doubtless, or doublet, and redouble, and doubloon.
It turns out that if we look into their history, we can see that they both derive from the same Latin forms.
The meaning of double, two, is reflected in a deep understanding of doubt.
See, when we doubt, when we hesitate, we second guess ourselves.
When we have doubts about something, when we have questions or confusion, we are of two minds.
Historically, before English began to borrow words from French, it already had a word for doubt.
That Old English word was "tweogan," a word whose relationship to "two" is clear in its spelling as well.
So the next time you are in doubt about why English spelling works the way it does, take a second look.
What you find just might make you do a double-take.
One of the most striking properties about life is that it has color.
To understand the phenomenon of color, it helps to think about light as a wave.
But, before we get to that, let's talk a little bit about waves in general.
Imagine you're sitting on a boat on the ocean watching a cork bob up and down in the water.
The first thing you notice about the motion is that it repeats itself.
The cork traces the same path over and over again... up and down, up and down.
This repetitive or periodic motion is characteristic of waves.
Then you notice something else...
using a stopwatch, you measure the time it takes for the piece of cork to go over its highest position down to its lowest and then back up again.
Suppose this takes two seconds.
To use the physics jargon, you've measured the period of the waves that cork is bobbing on.
That is, how long it takes a wave to go through its full range of motion once.
The same information can be expressed in a different way by calculating the wave's frequency.
Frequency, as the name suggest, tells you how frequent the waves are.
That is, how many of them go by in one second.
If you know how many seconds one full wave takes, then it's easy to work out how many waves go by in one second.
In this case, since each wave takes 2 seconds, the frequency is 0.5 waves per second.
So enough about bobbing corks... What about light and color?
If light is a wave, then it must have a frequency. Right?
Well... yes, it does.
And it turns out that we already have a name for the frequency of the light that our eyes detect.
It's called color.
That's right. Color is nothing more than a measure of how quickly the light waves are waving.
If our eyes were quick enough, we might be able to observe this periodic motion directly, like we can with the cork and the ocean.
But the frequency of the light we see is so high, it waves up and down about 400 million million times a second, that we can't possibly see it as a wave. But we can tell, by looking at its color, what its frequency is.
The lowest frequency light that we can see is red and the highest frequency is purple.
In between all the other frequencies form a continuous band of color, called the visible spectrum.
So, what if you had a yellow pencil sitting on your desk?
Well, the sun emits all colors of light, so light of all colors is hitting your pencil.
The pencil looks yellow because it reflects yellow light more than it reflects the other colors.
What happens to the blue, purple and red light?
They get absorbed and the energy they are carrying is turned into heat.
It is similar with objects of other colors.
Blue things reflect blue light, red things reflect red light and so on.
White objects reflect all colors of light, while black things do exactly the opposite and absorb at all frequencies.
This - by the way - is why it's uncomfortable to wear your favorite Metallica t-shirt on a sunny day.
Being human, we each view ourselves as a unique and independent individual, but we're never alone!
Millions of microscopic beings inhabit our bodies, and no two bodies are the same.
Each is a different habitat for microbial communities: from the arid deserts of our skin, to the villages on our lips, and the cities in our mouths.
Even every tooth is its own distinctive neighborhood, and our guts are teaming metropolises of interacting microbes.
And in these bustling streets of our guts, we see a constant influx of food, and every microbe has a job to do.
Here's a cellulolytic bacteria, for example.
Their one job is to break down cellulose, a common compound in vegetables, into sugars.
Those simple sugars then move along to the respirators, another set of microbes that snatch up these simple sugars and burn them as fuel.
As food travels through our digestive tract, it reaches the fermentors who extract energy from these sugars by converting them into chemicals, like alcohol and hydrogen gas, which they spew out as waste products.
Deeper in the depths of our gut city, the syntrophs eke out a living off the fermenters' trash.
At each step of this process, energy is released, and that energy is absorbed by the cells of the digestive tract.
This city we just saw is different in everyone.
Every person has a unique and diverse community of gut microbes that can process food in different ways.
One person's gut microbes may be capable of releasing only a fraction of the calories that another person's gut microbes can extract.
So, what determines the membership of our gut microbial community?
Well, things like our genetic makeup and the microbes we encounter throughout our lives can contribute to our microbial ecosystems.
The food we eat also influences which microbes live in our gut.
For example, food made of complex molecules, like an apple, requires a lot of different microbial workers to break it down.
But, if a food is made of simple molecules, like a lollipop, some of these workers are put out of a job.
Those workers leave the city, never to return.
What doesn't function well are gut microbial communities with only a few different types of workers.
For example, humans who suffer from diseases like diabetes or chronic gut inflamation typically have less microbial variety in their guts.
We don't fully understand the best way to manage our individual microbial societies, but it is likely that lifestyle changes, such as eating a varied diet of complex, plant-based foods, can help revitalize our microbial ecosystems in our gut and across the entire landscape of our body.
So, we are really not alone in our body.
Our bodies are homes to millions of different microbes, and we need them just as much as they need us.
As we learn more about how our microbes interact with each other and with our bodies, we will reveal how we can nurture this complex, invisible world that shapes our personal identity, our health, and our well-being.
You might have heard that light is a kind of wave and that the color of an object is related to the frequency of light waves it reflects.
High-frequency light waves look violet, low-frequency light waves look red, and in-between frequencies look yellow, green, orange, and so on.
You might call this idea physical color because it says that color is a physical property of light itself.
It's not dependent on human perception.
And, while this isn't wrong, it isn't quite the whole story either.
For instance, you might have seen this picture before.
As you can see, the region where the red and green lights overlap is yellow.
When you think about it, this is pretty weird.
Because light is a wave, two different frequencies shouldn't interact with each other at all, they should just co-exist like singers singing in harmony.
So, in this yellow looking region, two different kinds of light waves are present: one with a red frequency, and one with a green frequency.
There is no yellow light present at all.
So, how come this region, where the red and green lights mix, looks yellow to us?
To understand this, you have to understand a little bit about biology, in particular, about how humans see color.
Light perception happens in a paper-thin layer of cells, called the retina, that covers the back of your eyeball.
In the retina, there are two different types of light-detecting cells: rods and cones.
The rods are used for seeing in low-light conditions, and there is only one kind of those.
The cones, however, are a different story.
There three kinds of cone cells that roughly correspond to the colors red, green, and blue.
When you see a color, each cone sends its own distinct signal to your brain.
For example, suppose that yellow light, that is real yellow light, with a yellow frequency, is shining on your eye.
You don't have a cone specifically for detecting yellow, but yellow is kind of close to green and also kind of close to red, so both the red and green cones get activated, and each sends a signal to your brain saying so.
Of course, there is another way to activate the red cones and the green cones simultaneously: if both red light and green light are present at the same time.
The point is, your brain receives the same signal, regardless of whether you see light that has the yellow frequency or light that is a mixture of the green and red frequencies.
That's why, for light, red plus green equals yellow.
And, how come you can't detect colors when it's dark?
Well, the rod cells in your retina take over in low-light conditions.
You only have one kind of rod cell, and so there is one type of signal that can get sent to your brain: light or no light.
Having only one kind of light detector doesn't leave any room for seeing color.
There are infinitely many different physical colors, but, because we only have three kinds of cones, the brain can be tricked into thinking it's seeing any color by carefully adding together the right combination of just three colors: red, green, and blue.
This property of human vision is really useful in the real world.
For example, TV manufacturing.
Instead of having to put infinitely many colors in your TV set to simulate the real world, TV manufacturers only have to put three: red, green, and blue, which is lucky for them, really.
Now...
let's go back in time.
It's 1974.
There is the gallery somewhere in the world, and there is a young girl, age 23, standing in the middle of the space.
In the front of her is a table.
On the table there are 76 objects for pleasure and for pain.
Some of the objects are a glass of water, a coat, a shoe, a rose.
But also the knife, the razor blade, the hammer and the pistol with one bullet.
There are instructions which say, "I'm an object.
You can use everything on the table on me.
I'm taking all responsibility -- even killing me.
And the time is six hours."
The beginning of this performance was easy.
People would give me the glass of water to drink, they'd give me the rose.
But very soon after, there was a man who took the scissors and cut my clothes, and then they took the thorns of the rose and stuck them in my stomach.
Somebody took the razor blade and cut my neck and drank the blood, and I still have the scar.
The women would tell the men what to do.
And the men didn't rape me because it was just a normal opening, and it was all public, and they were with their wives.
They carried me around and put me on the table, and put the knife between my legs.
And somebody took the pistol and bullet and put it against my temple.
And another person took the pistol and they started a fight.
And after six hours were finished, I...
started walking towards the public.
I was a mess.
I was half-naked, I was full of blood and tears were running down my face.
And everybody escaped, they just ran away.
They could not confront myself, with myself as a normal human being.
And then -- what happened is I went to the hotel, it was at two in the morning.
And I looked at myself in the mirror, and I had a piece of gray hair.
Alright -- please take off your blindfolds.
Welcome to the performance world.
First of all, let's explain what the performance is.
So many artists, so many different explanations, but my explanation for performance is very simple.
Performance is a mental and physical construction that the performer makes in a specific time in a space in front of an audience and then energy dialogue happens.
The audience and the performer make the piece together.
And the difference between performance and theater is huge.
In the theater, the knife is not a knife and the blood is just ketchup.
In the performance, the blood is the material, and the razor blade or knife is the tool.
It's all about being there in the real time, and you can't rehearse performance, because you can't do many of these types of things twice -- ever.
Which is very important, the performance is -- you know, all human beings are always afraid of very simple things.
We're afraid of suffering, we're afraid of pain, we're afraid of mortality.
So what I'm doing -- I'm staging these kinds of fears in front of the audience.
I'm using your energy, and with this energy I can go and push my body as far as I can.
And then I liberate myself from these fears.
And I'm your mirror.
If I can do this for myself, you can do it for you.
After Belgrade, where I was born, I went to Amsterdam.
And you know, I've been doing performances since the last 40 years.
And here I met Ulay, and he was the person I actually fell in love with.
And we made, for 12 years, performances together.
You know the knife and the pistols and the bullets, I exchange into love and trust.
So to do this kind work you have to trust the person completely because this arrow is pointing to my heart.
So, heart beating and adrenaline is rushing and so on, is about trust, is about total trust to another human being.
Our relationship was 12 years, and we worked on so many subjects, both male and female energy.
And as every relationship comes to an end, ours went too.
We didn't make phone calls like normal human beings do and say, you know, "This is over."
We walked the Great Wall of China to say goodbye.
I started at the Yellow Sea, and he started from the Gobi Desert.
We walked, each of us, three months, two and a half thousand kilometers.
It was the mountains, it was difficult.
It was climbing, it was ruins.
It was, you know, going through the 12 Chinese provinces, this was before China was open in '87.
And we succeeded to meet in the middle to say goodbye.
And then our relationship stopped.
And now, it completely changed how I see the public.
And one very important piece I made in those days was "Balkan Baroque."
And this was the time of the Balkan Wars, and I wanted to create some very strong, charismatic image, something that could serve for any war at any time, because the Balkan Wars are now finished, but there's always some war, somewhere.
So here I am washing two and a half thousand dead, big, bloody cow bones.
You can't wash the blood, you never can wash shame off the wars.
So I'm washing this six hours, six days, and wars are coming off these bones, and becoming possible -- an unbearable smell.
But then something stays in the memory.
I want to show you the one who really changed my life, and this was the performance in MoMa, which I just recently made.
This performance -- when I said to the curator, "I'm just going to sit at the chair, and there will be an empty chair at the front, and anybody from the public can come and sit as long as they want."
The curator said to me, "That's ridiculous, you know, this is New York, this chair will be empty, nobody has time to sit in front of you."
(Laughter) But I sit for three months.
And I sit everyday, eight hours -- the opening of the museum -- and 10 hours on Friday when the museum is open 10 hours, and I never move.
And I removed the table and I'm still sitting, and this changed everything.
This performance, maybe 10 or 15 years ago -- nothing would have happened.
But the need of people to actually experience something different, the public was not anymore the group -- relation was one to one.
I was watching these people, they would come and sit in front of me, but they would have to wait for hours and hours and hours to get to this position, and finally, they sit.
And what happened?
They are observed by the other people, they're photographed, they're filmed by the camera, they're observed by me and they have nowhere to escape except in themselves.
And that makes a difference.
There was so much pain and loneliness, there's so much incredible things when you look in somebody else's eyes, because in the gaze with that total stranger, that you never even say one word -- everything happened.
And I understood when I stood up from that chair after three months, I am not the same anymore.
And I understood that I have a very strong mission, that I have to communicate this experience to everybody.
And this is how, for me, was born the idea to have an institute of immaterial performing arts.
Because thinking about immateriality, performance is time-based art.
It's not like a painting.
You have the painting on the wall, the next day it's there.
Performance, if you are missing it, you only have the memory, or the story of somebody else telling you, but you actually missed the whole thing.
So you have to be there.
And in my point, if you talk about immaterial art, music is the highest -- absolutely highest art of all, because it's the most immaterial.
And then after this is performance, and then everything else.
That's my subjective way.
This institute is going to happen in Hudson, upstate New York, and we are trying to build with Rem Koolhaas, an idea.
And it's very simple.
If you want to get experience, you have to give me your time.
You have to sign the contract before you enter the building, that you will spend there a full six hours, you have to give me your word of honor.
It's something so old-fashioned, but if you don't respect your own word of honor and you leave before -- that's not my problem.
But it's six hours, the experience.
And then after you finish, you get a certificate of accomplishment, so get home and frame it if you want.
(Laughter) This is orientation hall.
The public comes in, and the first thing you have to do is dress in lab coats.
It's this importance of stepping from being just a viewer into experimenter.
And then you go to the lockers and you put your watch, your iPhone, your iPod, your computer and everything digital, electronic.
And you are getting free time for yourself for the first time.
Because there is nothing wrong with technology, our approach to technology is wrong.
We are losing the time we have for ourselves.
This is an institute to actually give you back this time.
So what you do here, first you start slow walking, you start slowing down.
You're going back to simplicity.
After slow walking, you're going to learn how to drink water -- very simple, drinking water for maybe half an hour.
After this, you're going to the magnet chamber, where you're going to create some magnet streams on your body.
Then after this, you go to crystal chamber.
After crystal chamber, you go to eye-gazing chamber, after eye-gazing chamber, you go to a chamber where you are lying down.
So it's the three basic positions of the human body, sitting, standing and lying.
And slow walking.
And there is a sound chamber.
And then after you've seen all of this, and prepared yourself mentally and physically, then you are ready to see something with a long duration, like in immaterial art.
It can be music, it can be opera, it can be a theater piece, it can be film, it can be video dance.
You go to the long duration chairs because now you are comfortable.
In the long duration chairs, you're transported to the big place where you're going to see the work.
And if you fall asleep, which is very possible because it's been a long day, you're going to be transported to the parking lot.
(Laughter) And you know, sleeping is very important.
In sleeping, you're still receiving art.
So in the parking lot you stay for a certain amount of time, and then after this you just, you know, go back, you see more of the things you like to see or go home with your certificate.
So this institute right now is virtual.
Right now, I am just making my institute in Brazil, then it's going to be in Australia, then it's coming here, to Canada and everywhere.
And this is to experience a kind of simple method, how you go back to simplicity in your own life.
Counting rice will be another thing.
(Laughter) You know, if you count rice you can make life, too.
How to count rice for six hours?
It's incredibly important.
You know, you go through this whole range of being bored, being angry, being completely frustrated, not finishing the amount of rice you're counting.
And then this unbelievable amount of peace you get when satisfying work is finished -- or counting sand in the desert.
Or having the sound-isolated situation -- that you have headphones, that you don't hear anything, and you're just there together without sound, with the people experiencing silence, just the simple silence.
We are always doing things we like in our life.
And this is why you're not changing.
You do things in life -- it's just nothing happens if you always do things the same way.
But my method is to do things I'm afraid of, the things I fear, the things I don't know, to go to territory that nobody's ever been.
And then also to include the failure.
I think failure is important because if you go, if you experiment, you can fail.
If you don't go into that area and you don't fail, you are actually repeating yourself over and over again.
And I think that human beings right now need a change, and the only change to be made is a personal level change.
You have to make the change on yourself.
Because the only way to change consciousness and to change the world around us, is to start with yourself.
It's so easy to criticize how it's different, the things in the world and they're not right, and the governments are corrupted and there's hunger in the world and there's wars -- the killing.
But what we do on the personal level -- what is our contribution to this whole thing?
Can you turn to your neighbor, the one you don't know, and look at them for two full minutes in their eyes, right now?
(Chatter) I'm asking two minutes of your time, that's so little.
Breathe slowly, don't try to blink, don't be self-conscious.
Be relaxed.
And just look a complete stranger in your eyes, in his eyes.
(Silence) Thank you for trusting me.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Once upon a time in the magical and very round Land of Pi, there lived six swashbuckling musketeers.
There names were Parentheses, Exponents, Multiplication, Division, Addition, and Subtraction.
But each was known best by his or her mark: the two hands ready to catch a fly of Parentheses, the small and raised digits of Exponents, the mighty X of Multiplication, slash of Division, plus of Addition, and, well, you can guess the symbol by which little Subtraction was best known.
The Land of Pi was not necessarily the most peaceful place, and that's why the numbers of the kingdom needed the musketeers.
The Land of Pi had been ruled by the numbers as anarcho-syndicalist commune, each number with a vote, but, one powerful number from what we'll call the Imperial Senate, engineered a war between some robot things and the knights of the kingdom, and then installed himself as Supreme Emperor, and then Puff the Magic Digit Dragon ate him, and a princess or two, and, well, all the other numbers in the Land of Pi actually.
It was kind of a big day.
Anyway, the musketeers were called to action to save the Land of Pi from the voracious dragon.
They rode towards him on their valiant steeds and attacked.
First Multiplication, then Parentheses, but that didn't work.
The dragon continued eating people.
So Addition tried, but was thrown aside.
Exponents leaped at the beast and was quickly squashed.
Nothing was working.
The musketeers huddled and formulated a plan.
They would attack in sequence, but who should go first?
They bickered for a while, the dragon ate a few more princesses, and then they finally agreed.
They jumped into the first, smallest parentheses inside the great Puff the Digit Dragon.
Parentheses pointed out where to work first and protected Exponents, Multiplication, Division, Addition, and Subtraction while they diced and sliced.
First here, then, move over there, then there.
Look out! There's another set!
Parentheses pointed and Exponents took the lead.
Then, it was Multiplication, Division, Addition, and Subtraction, each in turn, always the same order.
P-E-M-D-A-S When they finished that set, they went to another, and another, always working inside the parentheses in PEMDAS order.
Pop! Pop! Pop! Pop! Pop!
PEMDAS, there is another spot!
Don't forget, there can be parentheses inside parentheses.
There's one!
And that tricky exponent.
There we go!
Finally, the PEMDAS Musketeers had whittled Puff down to his last fearsome roar.
But, having vanquished Puff the Magic Digit Dragon, all the empire's numbers sprang again from this tiny little number one, and they all lived happily ever after.
Except for the Emperor Number, which they threw into the mouth of an ancient nesting creature in the desert.
The End.
You look down and see a yellow pencil lying on your desk.
Your eyes, and then your brain, are collecting all sorts of information about the pencil: its size, color, shape, distance, and more.
But, how exactly does this happen?
The ancient Greeks were the first to think more or less scientifically about what light is and how vision works.
Some Greek philosophers, including Plato and Pythagoras, thought that light originated in our eyes and that vision happened when little, invisible probes were sent to gather information about far-away objects.
It took over a thousand years before the Arab scientist, Alhazen, figured out that the old, Greek theory of light couldn't be right.
In Alhazen's picture, your eyes don't send out invisible, intelligence-gathering probes, they simply collect the light that falls into them.
Alhazen's theory accounts for a fact that the Greek's couldn't easily explain: why it gets dark sometimes.
The idea is that very few objects actually emit their own light.
The special, light-emitting objects, like the sun or a lightbulb, are known as sources of light.
Most of the things we see, like that pencil on your desk, are simply reflecting light from a source rather than producing their own.
So, when you look at your pencil, the light that hits your eye actually originated at the sun and has traveled millions of miles across empty space before bouncing off the pencil and into your eye, which is pretty cool when you think about it.
But, what exactly is the stuff that is emitted from the sun and how do we see it?
Is it a particle, like atoms, or is it a wave, like ripples on the surface of a pond?
Scientists in the modern era would spend a couple of hundred years figuring out the answer to this question.
Isaac Newton was one of the earliest.
Newton believed that light is made up of tiny, atom-like particles, which he called corpuscles.
Using this assumption, he was able to explain some properties of light.
For example, refraction, which is how a beam of light appears to bend as it passes from air into water.
But, in science, even geniuses sometimes get things wrong.
In the 19th century, long after Newton died, scientists did a series of experiments that clearly showed that light can't be made up of tiny, atom-like particles.
For one thing, two beams of light that cross paths don't interact with each other at all.
If light were made of tiny, solid balls, then you would expect that some of the particles from Beam A would crash into some of the particles from Beam B.
If that happened, the two particles involved in the collision would bounce off in random directions.
But, that doesn't happen.
The beams of light pass right through each other as you can check for yourself with two laser pointers and some chalk dust.
For another thing, light makes interference patterns.
Interference patterns are the complicated undulations that happen when two wave patterns occupy the same space.
They can be seen when two objects disturb the surface of a still pond, and also when two point-like sources of light are placed near each other.
Only waves make interference patterns, particles don't.
And, as a bonus, understanding that light acts like a wave leads naturally to an explanation of what color is and why that pencil looks yellow.
So, it's settled then, light is a wave, right?
Not so fast!
In the 20th century, scientists did experiments that appear to show light acting like a particle.
For instance, when you shine light on a metal, the light transfers its energy to the atoms in the metal in discrete packets called quanta.
But, we can't just forget about properties like interference, either.
So these quanta of light aren't at all like the tiny, hard spheres Newton imagined.
This result, that light sometimes behaves like a particle and sometimes behaves like a wave, led to a revolutionary new physics theory called quantum mechanics.
So, after all that, let's go back to the question, "What is light?"
Well, light isn't really like anything we're used to dealing with in our everyday lives.
Sometimes it behaves like a particle and other times it behaves like a wave, but it isn't exactly like either.
What do horror movies and comedies have in common?
The two genres might seem totally different, but the reason they're both so popular is perhaps because what they have in common: their use of dramatic irony.
First, let's clarify.
There are three types of irony out there.
Situational irony is when you expect one thing, but get the opposite.
Verbal irony is when someone says something, but truly means the opposite.
Dramatic irony, though, is what we will be looking at right now.
Dramatic irony is when the audience seems to know more about an event, a situation, or a conversation than the characters in the movie, on the show, or in the book do.
The audience is in on a secret that the characters have missed.
This is a great story-telling device that creates tremendous emotion within that text.
Think about it for a moment.
How does it feel when, in a horror film, you know that the scary villain is hiding behind that door in the darkened room.
The music becomes eerie, the lighting creates complete shadows, this has to be bad for the hero!
Of course, though, that hero must enter the room to find the villain.
You feel tremendous tension and the suspense of knowing that someone will jump out and be scary, but you just don't know when.
That tension is dramatic irony: you know something more than the characters in the film.
Now, take the typical comedy.
There will probably be some type of "misunderstanding".
Again, we know more of what is going on than the characters do.
Picture two characters making a plan for a birthday surprise for their roommate while that roommate overhears the entire conversation from the hallway.
From there, confusion and misunderstanding occur, and the tension builds.
This isn't the same tension as the horror film since it is probably pretty funny as the character tries to figure out the whos and the whats, but it serves as a great example of the tension and suspense of dramatic irony.
This tension or suspense in both genres drives the story and keeps the plot progressing.
The audience wants, no, needs, to see the tension of the dramatic irony broken either by the scary person jumping out of the shadows or by someone finally revealing someone's true identity and clearing up the confusion.
So, when you feel like you are in on a secret, that is dramatic irony, a hallmark of all the great writers, from Shakespeare to Hitchcock.
It's often said that you can tell a lot about a person by looking at what's on their bookshelves.
What do my bookshelves say about me?
Well, when I asked myself this question a few years ago, I made an alarming discovery.
I'd always thought of myself as a fairly cultured, cosmopolitan sort of person.
But my bookshelves told a rather different story.
Pretty much all the titles on them were by British or North American authors, and there was almost nothing in translation.
Discovering this massive, cultural blind spot in my reading came as quite a shock.
And when I thought about it, it seemed like a real shame.
I knew there had to be lots of amazing stories out there by writers working in languages other than English.
And it seemed really sad to think that my reading habits meant I would probably never encounter them.
So, I decided to prescribe myself an intensive course of global reading.
2012 was set to be a very international year for the UK; it was the year of the London Olympics.
And so I decided to use it as my time frame to try to read a novel, short story collection or memoir from every country in the world.
And so I did.
And it was very exciting and I learned some remarkable things and made some wonderful connections that I want to share with you today.
But it started with some practical problems.
After I'd worked out which of the many different lists of countries in the world to use for my project, I ended up going with the list of UN-recognized nations, to which I added Taiwan, which gave me a total of 196 countries.
And after I'd worked out how to fit reading and blogging about, roughly, four books a week around working five days a week, I then had to face up to the fact that I might even not be able to get books in English from every country.
Only around 4.5 percent of the literary works published each year in the UK are translations, and the figures are similar for much of the English-speaking world.
Although, the proportion of translated books published in many other countries is a lot higher.
4.5 percent is tiny enough to start with, but what that figure doesn't tell you is that many of those books will come from countries with strong publishing networks and lots of industry professionals primed to go out and sell those titles to English-language publishers.
So, for example, although well over 100 books are translated from French and published in the UK each year, most of them will come from countries like France or Switzerland.
French-speaking Africa, on the other hand, will rarely ever get a look-in.
The upshot is that there are actually quite a lot of nations that may have little or even no commercially available literature in English.
Their books remain invisible to readers of the world's most published language.
But when it came to reading the world, the biggest challenge of all for me was that fact that I didn't know where to start.
Having spent my life reading almost exclusively British and North American books, I had no idea how to go about sourcing and finding stories and choosing them from much of the rest of the world.
I couldn't tell you how to source a story from Swaziland.
I wouldn't know a good novel from Namibia.
There was no hiding it -- I was a clueless literary xenophobe.
So how on earth was I going to read the world?
I was going to have to ask for help.
So in October 2011, I registered my blog, ayearofreadingtheworld.com, and I posted a short appeal online.
I explained who I was, how narrow my reading had been, and I asked anyone who cared to to leave a message suggesting what I might read from other parts of the planet.
Now, I had no idea whether anyone would be interested, but within a few hours of me posting that appeal online, people started to get in touch.
At first, it was friends and colleagues.
Then it was friends of friends.
And pretty soon, it was strangers.
Four days after I put that appeal online, I got a message from a woman called Rafidah in Kuala Lumpur.
She said she loved the sound of my project, could she go to her local English-language bookshop and choose my Malaysian book and post it to me?
I accepted enthusiastically, and a few weeks later, a package arrived containing not one, but two books -- Rafidah's choice from Malaysia, and a book from Singapore that she had also picked out for me.
Now, at the time, I was amazed that a stranger more than 6,000 miles away would go to such lengths to help someone she would probably never meet.
But Rafidah's kindness proved to be the pattern for that year.
Time and again, people went out of their way to help me.
Some took on research on my behalf, and others made detours on holidays and business trips to go to bookshops for me.
It turns out, if you want to read the world, if you want to encounter it with an open mind, the world will help you.
When it came to countries with little or no commercially available literature in English, people went further still.
Books often came from surprising sources.
My Panamanian read, for example, came through a conversation I had with the Panama Canal on Twitter.
Yes, the Panama Canal has a Twitter account.
And when I tweeted at it about my project, it suggested that I might like to try and get hold of the work of the Panamanian author Juan David Morgan.
I found Morgan's website and I sent him a message, asking if any of his Spanish-language novels had been translated into English.
And he said that nothing had been published, but he did have an unpublished translation of his novel "The Golden Horse."
He emailed this to me, allowing me to become one of the first people ever to read that book in English.
Morgan was by no means the only wordsmith to share his work with me in this way.
From Sweden to Palau, writers and translators sent me self-published books and unpublished manuscripts of books that hadn't been picked up by Anglophone publishers or that were no longer available, giving me privileged glimpses of some remarkable imaginary worlds.
I read, for example, about the Southern African king Ngungunhane, who led the resistance against the Portuguese in the 19th century; and about marriage rituals in a remote village on the shores of the Caspian sea in Turkmenistan.
I met Kuwait's answer to Bridget Jones.
(Laughter) And I read about an orgy in a tree in Angola.
But perhaps the most amazing example of the lengths that people were prepared to go to to help me read the world, came towards the end of my quest, when I tried to get hold of a book from the tiny, Portuguese-speaking African island nation of São Tomé and Príncipe.
Now, having spent several months trying everything I could think of to find a book that had been translated into English from the nation, it seemed as though the only option left to me was to see if I could get something translated for me from scratch.
Now, I was really dubious whether anyone was going to want to help with this, and give up their time for something like that.
But, within a week of me putting a call out on Twitter and Facebook for Portuguese speakers, I had more people than I could involve in the project, including Margaret Jull Costa, a leader in her field, who has translated the work of Nobel Prize winner José Saramago.
With my nine volunteers in place, I managed to find a book by a São Toméan author that I could buy enough copies of online.
Here's one of them.
And I sent a copy out to each of my volunteers.
They all took on a couple of short stories from this collection, stuck to their word, sent their translations back to me, and within six weeks, I had the entire book to read.
In that case, as I found so often during my year of reading the world, my not knowing and being open about my limitations had become a big opportunity.
When it came to São Tomé and Príncipe, it was a chance not only to learn something new and discover a new collection of stories, but also to bring together a group of people and facilitate a joint creative endeavor.
My weakness had become the project's strength.
The books I read that year opened my eyes to many things.
As those who enjoy reading will know, books have an extraordinary power to take you out of yourself and into someone else's mindset, so that, for a while at least, you look at the world through different eyes.
That can be an uncomfortable experience, particularly if you're reading a book from a culture that may have quite different values to your own.
But it can also be really enlightening.
Wrestling with unfamiliar ideas can help clarify your own thinking.
And it can also show up blind spots in the way you might have been looking at the world.
When I looked back at much of the English-language literature I'd grown up with, for example, I began to see how narrow a lot of it was, compared to the richness that the world has to offer.
And as the pages turned, something else started to happen, too.
Little by little, that long list of countries that I'd started the year with, changed from a rather dry, academic register of place names into living, breathing entities.
Now, I don't want to suggest that it's at all possible to get a rounded picture of a country simply by reading one book.
But cumulatively, the stories I read that year made me more alive than ever before to the richness, diversity and complexity of our remarkable planet.
It was as though the world's stories and the people who'd gone to such lengths to help me read them had made it real to me.
These days, when I look at my bookshelves or consider the works on my e-reader, they tell a rather different story.
It's the story of the power books have to connect us across political, geographical, cultural, social, religious divides.
It's the tale of the potential human beings have to work together.
And, it's testament to the extraordinary times we live in, where, thanks to the Internet, it's easier than ever before for a stranger to share a story, a worldview, a book with someone she may never meet, on the other side of the planet.
I hope it's a story I'm reading for many years to come.
And I hope many more people will join me.
If we all read more widely, there'd be more incentive for publishers to translate more books, and we would all be richer for that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So how many of you have a robot at home?
OK, I see about 20, 30 hands.
That's actually pretty good.
How many of you would want your own personal robot at home?
I know I would!
OK, so why doesn't this exist?
Why can't I go to the convenience store or the department store and, you know, go up to the cashier and say, "Yeah, I want my personal robot"?
Well, I'm going to talk to you about how to make that happen.
The thing that we need to do is to make robots smarter.
Now, no one will argue that we don't have robots.
We have rovers that are going to Mars and are getting science data and expanding our understanding of the world.
We have manufacturing robots that are helping to build our cars that we drive today.
We even have robots that are helping our military, that are out disposing of bombs so our soldiers can come home safely.
So we have all this, so why don't we have the personal robot?
Why don't I have my robot chef? Because I can't cook.
(Laughter) So, here's one of my robots, this is a simple walking robot, but it is by no means smart.
And so, what we need to do is we need to change the definition of what a robot is.
How do we do that? Well, the first step, before we even start designing and getting our hands dirty, we have to come up with rules, kind of the laws, rules of conduct.
And why is this? Because if these robots are smart, they might be capable of more than we want.
And so we have to come up with rules.
Thou, robot, shall not harm a human.
Thou shall obey me, and only me.
Thou shall always protect me at all possible times.
So we have to lay the boundaries, the rules of engagement, before we actually start designing.
And then we have to come up with tools.
So I believe that the way to make robots smarter is to mimic people.
Now, our brains are complex, there's a lot going on in there, and so, it'd be hard to try to open up the brain and actually figure out how to mimic humans.
The best way is to observe, is to actually watch people do things, and figure out what are they doing, what are their thoughts, what are their actions, what are their emotions?
And so, part of making robots smarter is actually trying to mimic humans, mimic how we do things, so maybe they can do it a little bit better.
And so, some of the tools are varied.
And so, I'm classically trained as an electrical engineer.
I never thought I'd have to understand things like child psychology, infant development.
So, understanding that the way infants develop to children, develop to adults, and how they learn and interact is actually important for robotics.
I didn't understand that I'd actually have to watch tapes of monkeys interacting and communicating, because they have a whole social kind of mechanism where they learn from each other, and so that's really good to make robots smarter.
And, of course, neuroscience, I've always been fascinated with neuroscience, but I never understood that I had to figure out why do the neurons fire, what about the environment helps us to learn, and all of those really contribute to making robots a little bit smarter.
And so, some of the things that I do -- and this is just a little snapshot -- one of the things is mirroring.
So they say our ability to look in a mirror and wave and actually recognize that the person on the other side is us, that self-awareness, is a sign of intelligence, and that allows us to then look at someone pitch a ball and figure out, "OK, I know how to pitch a ball, I'm going to mirror their improvement."
And so I actually have a robot where we are trying to design a robot health coach.
And so, I have an exercise physiologist showing the robot how to do some exercises.
You know, we want to get strong.
And then, the other thing is learning.
So, learning is important. We do this as children, we do this even as adults, we do this as elder.
And yet, one form of learning is muscle memory.
So how many of you play an instrument?
OK, so when you start off, for example, if you think about the violin, you start off and your instructor might actually come and move your hand a little bit or maybe move your bow a little bit up.
So they actually touch you in order to give you muscle memory.
And that helps you understand how to do things a little better.
And so we actually have a learning methodology where of course, we're not going to take the motors and move the legs, and so we have to Nunchuk to give our robot muscle memory in terms of how to do dance moves.
And then, lastly, is creativity.
So, you might ask, "Robots? Creativity? I don't get this.
Why does the robot have to be creative? What about creativity makes them smarter?"
Well, creativity and imagination, those are the things that allow us to create problems when we don't know how to attack it.
They allow us to make something out of nothing.
I mean, if you look at the apps that at out there and the tablets, and the iPads, and the iPhones, and the Androids -- 20 years ago they didn't exist.
So, how is it that we got from something where there was nothing and expanded?
It was our imagination. It was our creativity.
And these are the things that allow us to figure out new things.
And so, I have a robot that is creative, it plays piano, is a composer, and if you listen, it plays "Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star."
(Music) So, all of this together, the last thing is interaction.
So, you have a robot, you want it to be your playmate, your teacher, your instructor, you want it to interact.
And isn't it so cute?
(Laughter) So, interaction is key, it is key to understanding how to work in our world with us, and so the interaction piece is very important.
It deals with communication, it deals with understanding, it deals with gaze, it deals with attention.
All of these things together allow that interaction and our robots to be smart.
And so these are just some of the tools that we use in order to make robots smarter.
So, I want to leave you with one thought.
So, I'm all for robots and smart robots.
I mean, that's what I do, I'd be out of a job if I didn't believe in that.
But yet, where does it end?
How far do we push it?
How far and how smart should we make our smart robots?
Thank you.
Hello, my name is Christian Rudder, and I was one of the founders of OkCupid.
It's now one of the biggest dating sites in the United States.
Like most everyone at the site, I was a math major, As you may expect, we're known for the analytic approach we take to love.
We call it our matching algorithm.
Basically, OkCupid's matching algorithm helps us decide whether two people should go on a date.
We built our entire business around it.
Now, algorithm is a fancy word, and people like to drop it like it's this big thing.
But really, an algorithm is just a systematic, step-by-step way to solve a problem.
It doesn't have to be fancy at all.
Here in this lesson, I'm going to explain how we arrived at our particular algorithm, so you can see how it's done.
Now, why are algorithms even important?
Why does this lesson even exist?
Well, notice one very significant phrase I used above: they are a step-by-step way to solve a problem, and as you probably know, computers excel at step-by-step processes.
A computer without an algorithm is basically an expensive paperweight.
And since computers are such a pervasive part of everyday life, algorithms are everywhere.
The math behind OkCupid's matching algorithm is surprisingly simple.
It's just some addition, multiplication, a little bit of square roots.
The tricky part in designing it was figuring out how to take something mysterious, human attraction, and break it into components that a computer can work with.
The first thing we needed to match people up was data, something for the algorithm to work with.
The best way to get data quickly from people is to just ask for it.
So we decided that OkCupid should ask users questions, stuff like, "Do you want to have kids one day?"
"How often do you brush your teeth?"
"Do you like scary movies?"
And big stuff like, "Do you believe in God?"
Now, a lot of the questions are good for matching like with like, that is, when both people answer the same way.
For example, two people who are both into scary movies are probably a better match than one person who is and one who isn't.
But what about a question like, "Do you like to be the center of attention?"
If both people in a relationship are saying yes to this, they're going to have massive problems.
We realized this early on, and so we decided we needed a bit more data from each question.
We had to ask people to specify not only their own answer, but the answer they wanted from someone else.
That worked really well.
But we needed one more dimension.
Some questions tell you more about a person than others.
For example, a question about politics, something like, "Which is worse: book burning or flag burning?"
might reveal more about someone than their taste in movies.
And it doesn't make sense to weigh all things equally, so we added one final data point.
For everything that OkCupid asks you, you have a chance to tell us the role it plays in your life.
And this ranges from irrelevant to mandatory.
So now, for every question, we have three things for our algorithm: first, your answer; second, how you want someone else -- your potential match -- to answer; and third, how important the question is to you at all.
With all this information, OkCupid can figure out how well two people will get along.
The algorithm crunches the numbers and gives us a result.
As a practical example, let's look at how we'd match you with another person.
Let's call him "B."
Your match percentage with B is based on questions you've both answered.
Let's call that set of common questions "s."
As a very simple example, we use a small set "s" with just two questions in common, and compute a match from that.
Here are our two example questions.
The first one, let's say, is, "How messy are you?"
And the answer possibilities are: very messy, average and very organized.
And let's say you answered "very organized," and you'd like someone else to answer "very organized," and the question is very important to you.
Basically, you're a neat freak.
You're neat, you want someone else to be neat, and that's it.
And let's say B is a little bit different.
He answered "very organized" for himself, but "average" is OK with him as an answer from someone else, and the question is only a little important to him.
Let's look at the second question, from our previous example: "Do you like to be the center of attention?"
The answers are "yes" and "no."
You've answered "no," you want someone else to answer "no," and the question is only a little important to you.
Now B, he's answered "yes."
He wants someone else to answer "no," because he wants the spotlight on him, and the question is somewhat important to him.
So, let's try to compute all of this.
Our first step is, since we use computers to do this, we need to assign numerical values to ideas like "somewhat important" and "very important," because computers need everything in numbers.
We at OkCupid decided on the following scale: "Irrelevant" is worth 0.
"A little important" is worth 1.
"Somewhat important" is worth 10.
"Very important" is 50.
And "absolutely mandatory" is 250.
Next, the algorithm makes two simple calculations.
The first is: How much did B's answers satisfy you?
That is, how many possible points did B score on your scale?
Well, you indicated that B's answer to the first question, about messiness, was very important to you.
It's worth 50 points and B got that right.
The second question is worth only 1, because you said it was only a little important.
B got that wrong, so B's answers were 50 out of 51 possible points.
That's 98% satisfactory. Pretty good.
The second question the algorithm looks at is: How much did you satisfy B?
Well, B placed 1 point on your answer to the messiness question and 10 on your answer to the second.
Of those 11, that's 1 plus 10, you earned 10 -- you guys satisfied each other on the second question.
So your answers were 10 out of 11 equals 91 percent satisfactory to B.
That's not bad.
The final step is to take these two match percentages and get one number for the both of you.
To do this, the algorithm multiplies your scores, then takes the nth root, where "n" is the number of questions.
Because s, which is the number of questions in this sample, is only 2, we have: match percentage equals the square root of 98 percent times 91 percent.
That equals 94 percent.
That 94 percent is your match percentage with B.
It's a mathematical expression of how happy you'd be with each other, based on what we know.
Now, why does the algorithm multiply, as opposed to, say, average the two match scores together, and do the square-root business?
In general, this formula is called the geometric mean.
It's a great way to combine values that have wide ranges and represent very different properties.
In other words, it's perfect for romantic matching.
You've got wide ranges and you've got tons of different data points, like I said, about movies, politics, religion -- everything.
Intuitively, too, this makes sense.
Two people satisfying each other 50 percent should be a better match than two others who satisfy 0 and 100, because affection needs to be mutual.
After adding a little correction for margin of error, in the case where we have a small number of questions, like we do in this example, we're good to go.
Any time OkCupid matches two people, it goes through the steps we just outlined.
First it collects data about your answers, then it compares your choices and preferences to other people's in simple, mathematical ways.
This, the ability to take real-world phenomena and make them something a microchip can understand, is, I think, the most important skill anyone can have these days.
Like you use sentences to tell a story to a person, you use algorithms to tell a story to a computer.
If you learn the language, you can go out and tell your stories.
I hope this will help you do that.
You might think there are many things that I can't do because I cannot see.
That's largely true.
Actually, I just needed to have a bit of help to come up to the stage.
But there is also a lot that I can do.
This is me rock climbing for the first time.
Actually, I love sports and I can play many sports, like swimming, skiing, skating, scuba diving, running and so on.
But there is one limitation: somebody needs to help me.
I want to be independent.
I lost my sight at the age of 14 in a swimming pool accident.
I was an active, independent teenager, and suddenly I became blind.
The hardest thing for me was losing my independence.
Things that until then seemed simple became almost impossible to do alone.
For example, one of my challenges was textbooks.
Back then, there were no personal computers, no Internet, no smartphones.
So I had to ask one of my two brothers to read me textbooks, and I had to create my own books in Braille.
Can you imagine?
Of course, my brothers were not happy about it, and later, I noticed they were not there whenever I needed them.
(Laughter) I think they tried to stay away from me.
I don't blame them.
I really wanted to be freed from relying on someone.
That became my strong desire to ignite innovation.
Jump ahead to the mid-1980s.
I got to know cutting-edge technologies and I thought to myself, how come there is no computer technology to create books in Braille?
These amazing technologies must be able to also help people with limitations like myself.
That's the moment my innovation journey began.
I started developing digital book technologies, such as a digital Braille editor, digital Braille dictionary and a digital Braille library network.
Today, every student who is visually impaired can read textbooks, by using personal computers and mobile devices, in Braille or in voice.
This may not surprise you, since everyone now has digital books in their tablets in 2015.
But Braille went digital many years before digital books, already in the late 1980s, almost 30 years ago.
Strong and specific needs of the blind people made this opportunity to create digital books way back then.
And this is actually not the first time this happened, because history shows us accessibility ignites innovation.
The telephone was invented while developing a communication tool for hearing impaired people.
Some keyboards were also invented to help people with disabilities.
Now I'm going to give you another example from my own life.
In the '90s, people around me started talking about the Internet and web browsing.
I remember the first time I went on the web.
I was astonished.
I could access newspapers at any time and every day.
I could even search for any information by myself.
I desperately wanted to help the blind people have access to the Internet, and I found ways to render the web into synthesized voice, which dramatically simplified the user interface.
This led me to develop the Home Page Reader in 1997, first in Japanese and later, translated into 11 languages.
When I developed the Home Page Reader, I got many comments from users.
One that I strongly remember said, "For me, the Internet is a small window to the world."
It was a revolutionary moment for the blind.
The cyber world became accessible, and this technology that we created for the blind has many uses, way beyond what I imagined.
It can help drivers listen to their emails or it can help you listen to a recipe while cooking.
Today, I am more independent, but it is still not enough.
For example, when I approached the stage just now, I needed assistance.
My goal is to come up here independently.
And not just here.
My goal is to be able to travel and do things that are simple to you.
OK, now let me show you the latest technologies.
This is a smartphone app that we are working on.
(Video) Electronic voice: 51 feet to the door, and keep straight.
EV: Take the two doors to go out. The door is on your right.
EV: Nick is approaching. Looks so happy.
Chieko Asakawa: Hi, Nick!
(Laughter) CA: Where are you going? You look so happy.
Nick: Oh -- well, my paper just got accepted.
CA: That's great! Congratulations.
Nick: Thanks. Wait -- how'd you know it was me, and that I look happy?
(Chieko and Nick laugh) Man: Hi.
(Laughter) CA: Oh ... hi.
EV: He is not talking to you, but on his phone.
EV: Potato chips.
EV: Dark chocolate with almonds.
EV: You gained 5 pounds since yesterday; take apple instead of chocolate.
(Laughter) EV: Approaching.
EV: You arrived.
CA: Now ...
(Applause) Thank you.
So now the app navigates me by analyzing beacon signals and smartphone sensors and permits me to move around indoor and outdoor environments all by myself.
But the computer vision part that showed who is approaching, in which mood -- we are still working on that part.
And recognizing facial expressions is very important for me to be social.
So now the fusions of technologies are ready to help me see the real world.
We call this cognitive assistance.
It understands our surrounding world and whispers to me in voice or sends a vibration to my fingers.
Cognitive assistance will augment missing or weakened abilities -- in other words, our five senses.
This technology is only in an early stage, but eventually, I'll be able to find a classroom on campus, enjoy window shopping or find a nice restaurant while walking along a street.
It will be amazing if I can find you on the street before you notice me.
It will become my best buddy, and yours.
So, this really is a great challenge.
It is a challenge that needs collaboration, which is why we are creating an open community to accelerate research activities.
Just this morning, we announced the open-source fundamental technologies you just saw in the video.
The frontier is the real world.
The blind community is exploring this technical frontier and the pathfinder.
I hope to work with you to explore the new era, and the next time that I'm on this stage, through technology and innovation, I will be able to walk up here all by myself.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
By now, I'm sure you know that in just about anything you do in life, you need numbers.
In particular, though, some fields don't just need a few numbers, they need lots of them.
How do you keep track of all those numbers?
Well, mathematicians dating back as early as ancient China came up with a way to represent arrays of many numbers at once.
Nowadays we call such an array a "matrix," and many of them hanging out together, "matrices".
Matrices are everywhere.
They are all around us, even now in this very room.
Sorry, let's get back on track.
Matrices really are everywhere, though.
They are used in business, economics, cryptography, physics, electronics, and computer graphics.
One reason matrices are so cool is that we can pack so much information into them and then turn a huge series of different problems into one single problem.
So, to use matrices, we need to learn how they work.
It turns out, you can treat matrices just like regular numbers.
You can add them, subtract them, even multiply them.
You can't divide them, but that's a rabbit hole of its own.
Adding matrices is pretty simple.
All you have to do is add the corresponding entries in the order they come.
So the first entries get added together, the second entries, the third, all the way down.
Of course, your matrices have to be the same size, but that's pretty intuitive anyway.
You can also multiply the whole matrix by a number, called a scalar.
Just multiply every entry by that number.
But wait, there's more!
You can actually multiply one matrix by another matrix.
It's not like adding them, though, where you do it entry by entry.
It's more unique and pretty cool once you get the hang of it.
Here's how it works.
Let's say you have two matrices.
Let's make them both two by two, meaning two rows by two columns.
Write the first matrix to the left and the second matrix goes next to it and translated up a bit, kind of like we are making a table.
The product we get when we multiply the matrices together will go right between them.
We'll also draw some gridlines to help us along.
Now, look at the first row of the first matrix and the first column of the second matrix.
See how there's two numbers in each?
Multiply the first number in the row by the first number in the column: 1 times 2 is 2.
Now do the next ones: 3 times 3 is 9.
Now add them up: 2 plus 9 is 11.
Let's put that number in the top-left position so that it matches up with the rows and columns we used to get it.
See how that works?
You can do the same thing to get the other entries.
-4 plus 0 is -4.
4 plus -3 is 1.
-8 plus 0 is -8.
So, here's your answer.
Not all that bad, is it?
There's one catch, though.
Just like with addition, your matrices have to be the right size.
Look at these two matrices.
2 times 8 is 16.
3 times 4 is 12.
3 times wait a minute, there are no more rows in the second matrix.
We ran out of room.
So, these matrices can't be multiplied.
The number of columns in the first matrix has to be the same as the number of rows in the second matrix.
As long as you're careful to match up your dimensions right, though, it's pretty easy.
Understanding matrix multiplication is just the beginning, by the way.
There's so much you can do with them.
For example, let's say you want to encrypt a secret message.
Let's say it's "Math rules".
Though, why anybody would want to keep this a secret is beyond me.
Letting numbers stand for letters, you can put the numbers in a matrix and then an encryption key in another.
Multiply them together and you've got a new encoded matrix.
The only way to decode the new matrix and read the message is to have the key, that second matrix.
There's even a branch of mathematics that uses matrices constantly, called Linear Algebra.
If you ever get a chance to study Linear Algebra, do it, it's pretty awesome.
But just remember, once you know how to use matrices, you can do pretty much anything.
What does a working mother look like?
If you ask the Internet, this is what you'll be told.
Never mind that this is what you'll actually produce if you attempt to work at a computer with a baby on your lap.
(Laughter) But no, this isn't a working mother.
You'll notice a theme in these photos. We'll look at a lot of them.
That theme is amazing natural lighting, which, as we all know, is the hallmark of every American workplace.
There are thousands of images like these.
Just put the term "working mother" into any Google image search engine, stock photo site.
They're all over the Internet, they're topping blog posts and news pieces, and I've become kind of obsessed with them and the lie that they tell us and the comfort that they give us, that when it comes to new working motherhood in America, everything's fine.
But it's not fine.
As a country, we are sending millions of women back to work every year, incredibly and kind of horrifically soon after they give birth.
That's a moral problem but today I'm also going to tell you why it's an economic problem.
I got so annoyed and obsessed with the unreality of these images, which look nothing like my life, that I recently decided to shoot and star in a parody series of stock photos that I hoped the world would start to use just showing the really awkward reality of going back to work when your baby's food source is attached to your body.
I'm just going to show you two of them.
(Laughter) Nothing says "Give that girl a promotion" like leaking breast milk through your dress during a presentation.
You'll notice that there's no baby in this photo, because that's not how this works, not for most working mothers.
Did you know, and this will ruin your day, that every time a toilet is flushed, its contents are aerosolized and they'll stay airborne for hours?
And yet, for many new working mothers, this is the only place during the day that they can find to make food for their newborn babies.
I put these things, a whole dozen of them, into the world.
I wanted to make a point.
I didn't know what I was also doing was opening a door, because now, total strangers from all walks of life write to me all the time just to tell me what it's like for them to go back to work within days or weeks of having a baby.
I'm going to share 10 of their stories with you today.
They are totally real, some of them are very raw, and not one of them looks anything like this.
Here's the first.
"I was an active duty service member at a federal prison.
I returned to work after the maximum allowed eight weeks for my C-section.
A male coworker was annoyed that I had been out on 'vacation,' so he intentionally opened the door on me while I was pumping breast milk and stood in the doorway with inmates in the hallway."
Most of the stories that these women, total strangers, send to me now, are not actually even about breastfeeding.
A woman wrote to me to say, "I gave birth to twins and went back to work after seven unpaid weeks.
Emotionally, I was a wreck.
Physically, I had a severe hemorrhage during labor, and major tearing, so I could barely get up, sit or walk.
My employer told me I wasn't allowed to use my available vacation days because it was budget season."
I've come to believe that we can't look situations like these in the eye because then we'd be horrified, and if we get horrified then we have to do something about it.
So we choose to look at, and believe, this image.
I don't really know what's going on in this picture, because I find it weird and slightly creepy.
(Laughter) Like, what is she doing?
But I know what it tells us.
It tells us that everything's fine.
This working mother, all working mothers and all of their babies, are fine.
There's nothing to see here.
And anyway, women have made a choice, so none of it's even our problem.
I want to break this choice thing down into two parts.
The first choice says that women have chosen to work.
So, that's not true.
Today in America, women make up 47 percent of the workforce, and in 40 percent of American households a woman is the sole or primary breadwinner.
Our paid work is a part, a huge part, of the engine of this economy, and it is essential for the engines of our families.
On a national level, our paid work is not optional.
Choice number two says that women are choosing to have babies, so women alone should bear the consequences of those choices.
You know, that's one of those things that when you hear it in passing, can sound correct.
I didn't make you have a baby.
I certainly wasn't there when that happened.
But that stance ignores a fundamental truth, which is that our procreation on a national scale is not optional.
The babies that women, many of them working women, are having today, will one day fill our workforce, protect our shores, make up our tax base.
Our procreation on a national scale is not optional.
These aren't choices.
We need women to work. We need working women to have babies.
So we should make doing those things at the same time at least palatable, right?
OK, this is pop quiz time: what percentage of working women in America do you think have no access to paid maternity leave?
88 percent.
88 percent of working mothers will not get one minute of paid leave after they have a baby.
So now you're thinking about unpaid leave.
It exists in America. It's called FMLA. It does not work.
Because of the way it's structured, all kinds of exceptions, half of new mothers are ineligible for it.
Here's what that looks like.
"We adopted our son.
When I got the call, the day he was born, I had to take off work.
I had not been there long enough to qualify for FMLA, so I wasn't eligible for unpaid leave.
When I took time off to meet my newborn son, I lost my job."
These corporate stock photos hide another reality, another layer.
Of those who do have access to just that unpaid leave, most women can't afford to take much of it at all.
A nurse told me, "I didn't qualify for short-term disability because my pregnancy was considered a preexisting condition.
We used up all of our tax returns and half of our savings during my six unpaid weeks.
We just couldn't manage any longer.
Physically it was hard, but emotionally it was worse.
I struggled for months being away from my son."
So this decision to go back to work so early, it's a rational economic decision driven by family finances, but it's often physically horrific because putting a human into the world is messy.
A waitress told me, "With my first baby, I was back at work five weeks postpartum.
With my second, I had to have major surgery after giving birth, so I waited until six weeks to go back.
I had third degree tears."
23 percent of new working mothers in America will be back on the job within two weeks of giving birth.
"I worked as a bartender and cook, average of 75 hours a week while pregnant.
I had to return to work before my baby was a month old, working 60 hours a week.
One of my coworkers was only able to afford 10 days off with her baby."
Of course, this isn't just a scenario with economic and physical implications.
Childbirth is, and always will be, an enormous psychological event.
A teacher told me, "I returned to work eight weeks after my son was born.
I already suffer from anxiety, but the panic attacks I had prior to returning to work were unbearable."
Statistically speaking, the shorter a woman's leave after having a baby, the more likely she will be to suffer from postpartum mood disorders like depression and anxiety, and among many potential consequences of those disorders, suicide is the second most common cause of death in a woman's first year postpartum.
Heads up that this next story -- I've never met this woman, but I find it hard to get through.
"I feel tremendous grief and rage that I lost an essential, irreplaceable and formative time with my son.
Labor and delivery left me feeling absolutely broken.
For months, all I remember is the screaming: colic, they said.
On the inside, I was drowning.
Every morning, I asked myself how much longer I could do it.
I was allowed to bring my baby to work.
I closed my office door while I rocked and shushed and begged him to stop screaming so I wouldn't get in trouble.
I hid behind that office door every damn day and cried while he screamed.
I cried in the bathroom while I washed out the pump equipment.
Every day, I cried all the way to work and all the way home again.
I promised my boss that the work I didn't get done during the day, I'd make up at night from home.
I thought, there's just something wrong with me that I can't swing this."
So those are the mothers.
What of the babies?
As a country, do we care about the millions of babies born every year to working mothers?
I say we don't, not until they're of working and tax-paying and military-serving age.
We tell them we'll see them in 18 years, and getting there is kind of on them.
One of the reasons I know this is that babies whose mothers have 12 or more weeks at home with them are more likely to get their vaccinations and their well checks in their first year, so those babies are more protected from deadly and disabling diseases.
But those things are hidden behind images like this.
America has a message for new mothers who work and for their babies.
Whatever time you get together, you should be grateful for it, and you're an inconvenience to the economy and to your employers.
That narrative of gratitude runs through a lot of the stories I hear.
A woman told me, "I went back at eight weeks after my C-section because my husband was out of work.
Without me, my daughter had failure to thrive.
She wouldn't take a bottle.
She started losing weight.
Thankfully, my manager was very understanding.
He let my mom bring my baby, who was on oxygen and a monitor, four times a shift so I could nurse her."
There's a little club of countries in the world that offer no national paid leave to new mothers.
Care to guess who they are?
The first eight make up eight million in total population.
They are Papua New Guinea, Suriname and the tiny island nations of Micronesia, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau and Tonga.
Number nine is the United States of America, with 320 million people.
Oh, that's it.
That's the end of the list.
Every other economy on the planet has found a way to make some level of national paid leave work for the people doing the work of the future of those countries, but we say, "We couldn't possibly do that."
We say that the market will solve this problem, and then we cheer when corporations offer even more paid leave to the women who are already the highest-educated and highest-paid among us.
Remember that 88 percent?
Those middle- and low-income women are not going to participate in that.
We know that there are staggering economic, financial, physical and emotional costs to this approach.
We have decided -- decided, not an accident, to pass these costs directly on to working mothers and their babies.
We know the price tag is higher for low-income women, therefore disproportionately for women of color.
We pass them on anyway.
All of this is to America's shame.
But it's also to America's risk.
Because what would happen if all of these individual so-called choices to have babies started to turn into individual choices not to have babies.
One woman told me, "New motherhood is hard. It shouldn't be traumatic.
When we talk about expanding our family now, we focus on how much time I would have to care for myself and a new baby.
If we were to have to do it again the same way as with our first, we might stick with one kid."
The birthrate needed in America to keep the population stable is 2.1 live births per woman.
In America today, we are at 1.86.
We need women to have babies, and we are actively disincentivizing working women from doing that.
What would happen to work force, to innovation, to GDP, if one by one, the working mothers of this country were to decide that they can't bear to do this thing more than once?
I'm here today with only one idea worth spreading, and you've guessed what it is.
It is long since time for the most powerful country on Earth to offer national paid leave to the people doing the work of the future of this country and to the babies who represent that future.
Childbirth is a public good.
This leave should be state-subsidized.
It should have no exceptions for small businesses, length of employment or entrepreneurs.
It should be able to be shared between partners.
I've talked today a lot about mothers, but co-parents matter on so many levels.
Not one more woman should have to go back to work while she is hobbling and bleeding.
Not one more family should have to drain their savings account to buy a few days of rest and recovery and bonding.
Not one more fragile infant should have to go directly from the incubator to day care because his parents have used up all of their meager time sitting in the NICU.
Not one more working family should be told that the collision of their work, their needed work and their needed parenthood, is their problem alone.
The catch is that when this is happening to a new family, it is consuming, and a family with a new baby is more financially vulnerable than they've ever been before, so that new mother cannot afford to speak up on her own behalf.
But all of us have voices.
I am done, done having babies, and you might be pre-baby, you might be post-baby, you might be no baby.
It should not matter.
We have to stop framing this as a mother's issue, or even a women's issue.
This is an American issue.
We need to stop buying the lie that these images tell us.
We need to stop being comforted by them.
We need to question why we're told that this can't work when we see it work everywhere all over the world.
We need to recognize that this American reality is to our dishonor and to our peril.
Because this is not, this is not, and this is not what a working mother looks like.
(Applause)
When we think about learning, we often picture students in a classroom or lecture hall, books open on their desks, listening intently to a teacher or professor in the front of the room.
But in psychology, learning means something else.
To psychologists, learning is a long-term change in behavior that's based on experience.
Two of the main types of learning are called classical conditioning and operant, or instrumental, conditioning.
Let's talk about classical conditioning first.
In the 1890's, a Russian physiologist named Ivan Pavlov did some really famous experiments on dogs.
He showed dogs some food and rang a bell at the same time.
After a while, the dogs would associate the bell with the food.
They would learn that when they heard the bell, they would get fed.
Eventually, just ringing the bell made the dogs salivate.
They learned to expect food at the sound of a bell.
You see, under normal conditions, the sight and smell of food causes a dog to salivate.
We call the food an unconditioned stimulus, and we call salivation the unconditioned response.
Nobody trains a dog to salivate over some steak.
However, when we pair an unconditioned stimulus like food with something that was previously neutral, like the sound of a bell, that neutral stimulus becomes a conditioned stimulus.
And so classical conditioning was discovered.
We see how this works with animals, but how does it work with humans?
In exactly the same way.
Let's say that one day you go to the doctor to get a shot.
She says, "Don't worry, this won't hurt a bit," and then gives you the most painful shot you've ever had.
A few weeks later you go to the dentist for a check-up.
He starts to put a mirror in your mouth to examine your teeth, and he says, "Don't worry, this won't hurt a bit."
Even though you know the mirror won't hurt, you jump out of the chair and run, screaming from the room.
When you went to get a shot, the words, "This won't hurt a bit," became a conditioned stimulus when they were paired with pain of the shot, the unconditioned stimulus, which was followed by your conditioned response of getting the heck out of there.
Classical conditioning in action.
Operant conditioning explains how consequences lead to changes in voluntary behavior.
So how does operant conditioning work?
There are two main components in operant conditioning: reinforcement and punishment.
Reinforcers make it more likely that you'll do something again, while punishers make it less likely.
Reinforcement and punishment can be positive or negative, but this doesn't mean good and bad.
Positive means the addition of a stimulus, like getting dessert after you finish your veggies, and negative means the removal of a stimulus, like getting a night of no homework because you did well on an exam.
Let's look at an example of operant conditioning.
After eating dinner with your family, you clear the table and wash the dishes.
When you're done, your mom gives you a big hug and says, "Thank you for helping me."
In this situation, your mom's response is positive reinforcement if it makes you more likely to repeat the operant response, which is to clear the table and wash the dishes.
Operant conditioning is everywhere in our daily lives.
There aren't many things we do that haven't been influenced at some point by operant conditioning.
We even see operant conditioning in some extraordinary situations.
One group of scientists showed the power of operant conditioning by teaching pigeons to be art connoisseurs.
Using food as a positive reinforcer, scientists have taught pigeons to select paintings by Monet over those by Picasso.
When showed works of other artists, scientists observed stimulus generalization as the pigeons chose the Impressionists over the Cubists.
Maybe next they'll condition the pigeons to paint their own masterpieces.
These days scientists know how you inherit characteristics from your parents.
They're able to calculate probabilities of having a specific trait or getting a genetic disease according to the information from the parents and the family history.
But how is this possible?
To understand how traits pass from one living being to its descendants, we need to go back in time to the 19th century and a man named Gregor Mendel.
Mendel was an Austrian monk and biologist who loved to work with plants.
By breeding the pea plants he was growing in the monastery's garden, he discovered the principles that rule heredity.
In one of most classic examples, Mendel combined a purebred yellow-seeded plant with a purebred green-seeded plant, and he got only yellow seeds.
He called the yellow-colored trait the dominant one, because it was expressed in all the new seeds.
Then he let the new yellow-seeded hybrid plants self-fertilize.
And in this second generation, he got both yellow and green seeds, which meant the green trait had been hidden by the dominant yellow.
He called this hidden trait the recessive trait.
From those results, Mendel inferred that each trait depends on a pair of factors, one of them coming from the mother and the other from the father.
Now we know that these factors are called alleles and represent the different variations of a gene.
Depending on which type of allele Mendel found in each seed, we can have what we call a homozygous pea, where both alleles are identical, and what we call a heterozygous pea, when the two alleles are different.
This combination of alleles is known as genotype and its result, being yellow or green, is called phenotype.
To clearly visualize how alleles are distributed amongst descendants, we can a diagram called the Punnett square.
You place the different alleles on both axes and then figure out the possible combinations.
Let's look at Mendel's peas, for example.
Let's write the dominant yellow allele as an uppercase "Y" and the recessive green allele as a lowercase "y."
The uppercase Y always overpowers his lowercase friend, so the only time you get green babies is if you have lowercase Y's.
In Mendel's first generation, the yellow homozygous pea mom will give each pea kid a yellow-dominant allele, and the green homozygous pea dad will give a green-recessive allele.
So all the pea kids will be yellow heterozygous.
Then, in the second generation, where the two heterozygous kids marry, their babies could have any of the three possible genotypes, showing the two possible phenotypes in a three-to-one proportion.
But even peas have a lot of characteristics.
For example, besides being yellow or green, peas may be round or wrinkled.
So we could have all these possible combinations: round yellow peas, round green peas, wrinkled yellow peas, wrinkled green peas.
To calculate the proportions for each genotype and phenotype, we can use a Punnett square too.
Of course, this will make it a little more complex.
And lots of things are more complicated than peas, like, say, people.
These days, scientists know a lot more about genetics and heredity.
And there are many other ways in which some characteristics are inherited.
But, it all started with Mendel and his peas.
Great weather we're having!
Awesome job!
You're a tremendous athlete!
Compliments, right?
Well, maybe.
Depending on the attitude and tone of voice behind these lines, they very well may be compliments.
They may also be, though, pointed and attacking lines.
This slight change of attitude behind the lines reveals what we call verbal irony.
So when someone says, "Great weather we're having," it is quite possible that the person really means that if the sun is shining, the birds are singing, and the wind is calm.
But if the weather is horrible, the clouds are looming, and the wind is a raging tempest, and someone says, "Great weather we're having," he probably doesn't actually mean that.
He probably means that the weather is horrible, but he has said the opposite.
This is verbal irony when the speaker says the opposite of what he means.
I know what you're thinking.
Isn't this sarcasm, isn't the speaker being sarcastic?
Yes.
When a speaker says the opposite of what he means, that is verbal irony.
When a speaker then goes the step farther to mean the opposite of what he says and seeks to be a little pointed and mean, like he's making fun of something, then you have sarcasm.
Take the second example: "Awesome job!"
Someone accomplishing his life-long dream: awesome!
Someone winning a sports championship: awesome!
Someone rear-ends another car: not awesome.
So when the passenger says, "Awesome job!"
they probably mean the opposite with a hint of poking fun.
That is verbal irony and that is sarcastic.
"You're a talented athlete," said to an Olympian: authentic, no verbal irony present.
Said to the klutzy kid tripping into English class and spilling his books and pencil case all over the room, now that is just harsh and verbally ironic because what you said is not what you meant.
That is verbal irony.
You have said the opposite of what you mean.
Additionally, since you have the intention of mocking this poor person, you have not only been verbally ironic, but sarcastic as well.
Beware, though.
While all sarcasm fits the definition of verbal irony, not all verbal irony is sarcastic.
Verbal irony is where what is meant is the opposite of what is said, while sarcasm adds that little punch of attitude.
There are times, though, where another layer of meaning can be present without that sarcastic tone.
Alright, now go out there and find those examples of verbal irony and sarcasm.
Good luck!
No, seriously, I mean it, good luck.
No, no, really, I truly want to wish you luck on this difficult task.
Ok, ok, sincerely good luck.
You can do it!
No verbal irony here.
Deep in the jungles of Vietnam, soldiers from both sides battled heat exhaustion and each other for nearly 20 long years.
But the key to Communist victory wasn't weapons or stamina, it was a dirt road.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail, winding through Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia, started as a simple network of dirt roads and blossomed into the centerpiece of the winning North Vietnamese strategy during the Vietnam War, supplying weapons, troops, and psychological support to the South.
The trail was a network of tracks, dirt roads, and river crossings that threaded west out of North Vietnam and south along the Truong Son Mountain Range between Vietnam and Laos.
The journey to the South originally took six months.
But, with engineering and ingenuity, the Vietnamese expanded and improved the trail.
Towards the end of war, as the main roads detoured through Laos, it only took one week.
Here is how it happened.
In 1959, as relations deteriorated between the North and the South, a system of trails was constructed in order to infiltrate soldiers, weapons, and supplies into South Vietnam.
The first troops moved in single-file along routes used by local ethnic groups, and broken tree branches at dusty crossroads were often all that indicated the direction.
Initially, most of the Communist cadres who came down the trail were Southerners by birth who had trained in North Vietnam.
They dressed like civilian peasants in black, silk pajamas with a checkered scarf.
They wore Ho Chi Minh sandals on their feet, cut from truck tires, and carried their ration of cooked rice in elephants' intestines, a linen tube hung around the body.
The conditions were harsh and many deaths were caused by exposure, malaria, and amoebic dysentery.
Getting lost, starving to death, and the possibility of attacks by wild tigers or bears were constant threats.
Meals were invariably just rice and salt, and it was easy to run out.
Fear, boredom, and homesickness were the dominant emotions.
And soldiers occupied their spare time by writing letters, drawing sketches, and drinking and smoking with local villagers.
The first troops down the trail did not engage in much fighting.
And after an exhausting six month trip, arriving in the South was a real highlight, often celebrated by bursting into song.
By 1965, the trip down the trail could be made by truck.
Thousands of trucks supplied by China and Russia took up the task amidst ferocious B-52 bombing and truck drivers became known as pilots of the ground.
As traffic down the trail increased, so did the U.S. bombing.
They drove at night or in the early morning to avoid air strikes, and watchmen were ready to warn drivers of enemy aircraft.
Villages along the trail organized teams to guarantee traffic flow and to help drivers repair damage caused by air attacks.
Their catch cries were, "Everything for our Southern brothers!"
and, "We will not worry about our houses if the vehicles have not yet gotten through."
Some families donated their doors and wooden beds to repair roads.
Vietnamese forces even used deception to get the U.S. aircraft to bomb mountainsides in order to make gravel for use in building and maintaining roads.
The all-pervading red dust seeped into every nook and cranny.
The Ho Chi Minh Trail had a profound impact on the Vietnam War and it was the key to Hanoi's success.
North Vietnamese victory was not determined by the battlefields, but by the trail, which was the political, strategic, and economic lynchpin.
Americans recognized its achievement, calling the trail, "One of the great achievements in military engineering of the 20th century."
The trail is a testimony to the strength of will of the Vietnamese people, and the men and women who used the trail have become folk heros.
Why do we see illusions?
I'm going to tell you about some of my research, where I provided evidence for a different kind of hypothesis than the one that might be in the book on your coffee stand.
Alright, so let's look at one of the illusions here.
And this is a stand-in for many, many kinds of illusions that are explained by this hypothesis.
I'm just going to walk through it for this particular one.
As usual in these things, these two lines are, in fact, parallel, but you perceive them to bow outwards at their centers.
At the center where those radial lines are, it's wider in your visual field than the parts above and below.
And this is remarkable, because it's a remarkably simple stimulus.
It's just a bunch of straight lines.
Why should one of the most complicated objects in the universe be unable to render this incredibly simple image?
When you want to answer questions like this, you need to ask, well, what might this mean to your brain?
And what your brain is going to think this is, is not some lines on a page.
Your brain has evolved to handle the kinds of natural stimuli that it encounters in real life.
So when does the brain encounter stimuli like this?
Well, it seems a bit odd, but in fact, you've been encountering this stimulus all day long.
Whenever you move, whenever you move forward, in particular.
When you move forward, you get optic flow, flowing outwards in your visual field, like when the Enterprise goes into warp.
All of these objects flow outwards and they leave trails, or blur lines, on your retina.
They're activating mini-neurons all in a row.
So, this is a version of what happens in real life and this another version of what happens in real life all the time.
In fact, cartoonists know about this.
They put these blur lines in their cartoons and it means to your brain: motion.
Now, it's not that in real life you see blur lines.
The point is that it's the stimulus at the back of your eye that has these optic blurs in them, and that's what tells your brain that you're moving.
When you move forward, your eyes fixate like cameras, like snapshot cameras, it fixates, it fixates, little (Snapshot sound) camera shots, and each time it fixates when you're moving forward, you get all this flowing outwards.
So when you take a fixation, you end up with this weird optic blur stuff, and it tells you the direction you're moving.
Alright, that's half the story.
That's what this stimulus means.
It means that your brain thinks, when it's looking at the first image, that you're actually on your way, moving towards the center.
It still doesn't explain why you should perceive these straight lines as bowed outwards.
To understand the rest of the story, you have to understand that our brains are slow.
What you would like is that when light hits your eye, then -- ping! -- immediately you have a perception of what the world is like.
But it doesn't work that way.
It takes about a tenth of a second for your perception to be created.
And a tenth of a second doesn't sound very long, but it's a long time in normal behaviors.
If you're moving just at one meter per second, which is fairly slow, then in a tenth of second, you've moved 10 centimeters.
So if you didn't correct for this delay, then anything that you perceived to be within 10 centimeters of you, by the time you perceived it, you would have bumped into it or just passed it.
And of course, this is going to be much worse -- (Laughter) it's going to be much worse in a situation like this.
Your perception is behind.
What you want is that your perception should look like this.
You want your perceptions at any time T to be of the world at time T.
But the only way your brain can do that, is that it has to, instead of generating a perception of the way the world was when light hit your retina, it has to do something fancier.
It can't passively respond and create a best guess, it has to create a best guess about the next moment.
What will the world look like in a tenth of a second?
Build a perception of that, because by the time your perception of the near future occurs in your brain, the near future will have arrived and you'll have a perception of the present, which is what you want.
In my research, I provided a lot of evidence -- and there's other research areas that have provided evidence -- that the brain is filled with mechanisms that try to compensate for its slowness.
And I've shown that huge swaths of illusions are explained by this, this just being one example.
But let me finish by saying, how exactly does this explain this particular example?
So, the question, really, we have to ask is: how do those two vertical lines in that first stimulus, how do they change in the next moment were I moving towards the center, that all those optical lines are suggesting that I'm moving.
What happens to them?
Well, let's imagine.
You've got a doorway.
Imagine it's a cathedral doorway, to make it more concrete -- it'll be helpful in a second.
When you're very far away from it, the sides are perfectly parallel.
But now imagine what happens when you get closer.
It all flows outwards in your visual field, flowing outwards.
But when you're really close -- imagine the sides of the doorway are here and here, but if you look up at this cathedral doorway and do your fingers like this, the sides of the doorway are going up, like railroad tracks in the sky.
What started off as two parallel lines, in fact, bows outwards at eye level, and doesn't go outwards nearly as much above.
So in the next moment, you have a shape that's more like this next picture.
The projective geometry -- that is, the way the things project, in fact, change in this way in the next moment.
So when you have a stimulus like this, well, your brain has no problem, there's just two vertical lines and no cues that there'll be a change in the next moment, so just render it as it is.
But if you add cues -- and this is just one of many kinds of cues that can lead to these kinds of illusions, this very strong optic blur cue -- then you're going to perceive instead exactly how it will appear in the next moment.
All of our perceptions are always trying to be about the present, but you have to perceive the future to, in fact, perceive the present.
And these illusions are failed perceptions of the future, because they're just static images on the page, they're not changing like in real life.
And let me just end by showing one illusion here.
If I can, I'll quickly show two.
This one's fun.
If you just fixate at the middle there, and make stabbing motions with your head, looming towards it like this.
Everybody do that.
Make short, stabbing motions.
Because I've added blur to these optic flow lines, your brain says, "They're probably already moving, that's why they're blurry."
When you do it, they should be bursting out in your visual field faster than they should.
They shouldn't be moving that much.
And a final one I'll just leave in the background is this.
Here are the cues of motion, the kinds of cues that you get on your retina when things are moving.
You don't have to do anything -- just look at it.
Raise your hand if things are moving when they shouldn't be.
It's weird, right?
But what you have now are the cues that, from your brain's point of view, you have the stimulus on your eyes, like, "Oh, these things are moving."
Render a perception of what they'll do in the next moment -- they should be moving and they should have shifted.
What was the most difficult job you ever did?
Was it working in the sun?
Was it working to provide food for a family or a community?
Was it working days and nights trying to protect lives and property?
Was it working alone or working on a project that wasn't guaranteed to succeed, but that might improve human health or save a life?
Was it working to build something, create something, make a work of art?
Was it work for which you were never sure you were fully understood or appreciated?
The people in our communities who do these jobs deserve our attention, our love and our deepest support.
But people aren't the only ones in our communities who do these difficult jobs.
These jobs are also done by the plants, the animals and the ecosystems on our planet, including the ecosystems I study: the tropical coral reefs.
Coral reefs are farmers.
They provide food, income and food security for hundreds of millions of people around the world.
Coral reefs are security guards.
The structures that they build protect our shorelines from storm surge and waves, and the biological systems that they house filter the water and make it safer for us to work and play.
Coral reefs are chemists.
The molecules that we're discovering on coral reefs are increasingly important in the search for new antibiotics and new cancer drugs.
And coral reefs are artists.
The structures that they build are some of the most beautiful things on planet Earth.
And this beauty is the foundation of the tourism industry in many countries with few or little other natural resources.
So for all of these reasons, all of these ecosystem services, economists estimate the value of the world's coral reefs in the hundreds of billions of dollars per year.
And yet despite all that hard work being done for us and all that wealth that we gain, we have done almost everything we possibly could to destroy that.
We have taken the fish out of the oceans and we have added in fertilizer, sewage, diseases, oil, pollution, sediments.
We have trampled the reefs physically with our boats, our fins, our bulldozers, and we have changed the chemistry of the entire sea, warmed the waters and made storms worse.
And these would all be bad on their own, but these threats magnify each other and compound one another and make each other worse.
I'll give you an example.
Where I live and work, in Curaçao, a tropical storm went by a few years ago.
And on the eastern end of the island, where the reefs are intact and thriving, you could barely tell a tropical storm had passed.
But in town, where corals had died from overfishing, from pollution, the tropical storm picked up the dead corals and used them as bludgeons to kill the corals that were left.
This is a coral that I studied during my PhD -- I got to know it quite well.
And after this storm took off half of its tissue, it became infested with algae, the algae overgrew the tissue and that coral died.
This magnification of threats, this compounding of factors is what Jeremy Jackson describes as the "slippery slope to slime."
It's hardly even a metaphor because many of our reefs now are literally bacteria and algae and slime.
Now, this is the part of the talk where you may expect me to launch into my plea for us to all save the coral reefs.
But I have a confession to make: that phrase drives me nuts.
Whether I see it in a tweet, in a news headline or the glossy pages of a conservation brochure, that phrase bothers me, because we as conservationists have been sounding the alarms about the death of coral reefs for decades.
And yet, almost everyone I meet, no matter how educated, is not sure what a coral is or where they come from.
How would we get someone to care about the world's coral reefs when it's an abstract thing they can barely understand?
If they don't understand what a coral is or where it comes from, or how funny or interesting or beautiful it is, why would we expect them to care about saving them?
So let's change that.
What is a coral and where does it come from?
Corals are born in a number of different ways, but most often by mass spawning: all of the individuals of a single species on one night a year, releasing all the eggs they've made that year into the water column, packaged into bundles with sperm cells.
And those bundles go to the surface of the ocean and break apart.
And hopefully -- hopefully -- at the surface of the ocean, they meet the eggs and sperm from other corals.
And that is why you need lots of corals on a coral reef -- so that all of their eggs can meet their match at the surface.
When they're fertilized, they do what any other animal egg does: divides in half again and again and again.
Taking these photos under the microscope every year is one of my favorite and most magical moments of the year.
At the end of all this cell division, they turn into a swimming larva -- a little tiny blob of fat the size of a poppy seed, but with all of the sensory systems that we have.
They can sense color and light, textures, chemicals, pH.
They can even feel pressure waves; they can hear sound.
And they use those talents to search the bottom of the reef for a place to attach and live the rest of their lives.
So imagine finding a place where you would live the rest of your life when you were just two days old.
They attach in the place they find most suitable, they build a skeleton underneath themselves, they build a mouth and tentacles, and then they begin the difficult work of building the world's coral reefs.
One coral polyp will divide itself again and again and again, leaving a limestone skeleton underneath itself and growing up toward the sun.
Given hundreds of years and many species, what you get is a massive limestone structure that can be seen from space in many cases, covered by a thin skin of these hardworking animals.
Now, there are only a few hundred species of corals on the planet, maybe 1,000.
But these systems house millions and millions of other species, and that diversity is what stabilizes the systems, and it's where we're finding our new medicines.
It's how we find new sources of food.
I'm lucky enough to work on the island of Curaçao, where we still have reefs that look like this.
But, indeed, much of the Caribbean and much of our world is much more like this.
Scientists have studied in increasing detail the loss of the world's coral reefs, and they have documented with increasing certainty the causes.
But in my research, I'm not interested in looking backward.
My colleagues and I in Curaçao are interested in looking forward at what might be.
And we have the tiniest reason to be optimistic.
Because even in some of these reefs that we probably could have written off long ago, we sometimes see baby corals arrive and survive anyway.
And we're starting to think that baby corals may have the ability to adjust to some of the conditions that the adults couldn't.
They may be able to adjust ever so slightly more readily to this human planet.
So in the research I do with my colleagues in Curaçao, we try to figure out what a baby coral needs in that critical early stage, what it's looking for and how we can try to help it through that process.
I'm going to show you three examples of the work we've done to try to answer those questions.
A few years ago we took a 3D printer and we made coral choice surveys -- different colors and different textures, and we simply asked the coral where they preferred to settle.
And we found that corals, even without the biology involved, still prefer white and pink, the colors of a healthy reef.
And they prefer crevices and grooves and holes, where they will be safe from being trampled or eaten by a predator.
So we can use this knowledge, we can go back and say we need to restore those factors -- that pink, that white, those crevices, those hard surfaces -- in our conservation projects.
We can also use that knowledge if we're going to put something underwater, like a sea wall or a pier.
We can choose to use the materials and colors and textures that might bias the system back toward those corals.
Now in addition to the surfaces, we also study the chemical and microbial signals that attract corals to reefs.
Starting about six years ago, I began culturing bacteria from surfaces where corals had settled.
And I tried those one by one by one, looking for the bacteria that would convince corals to settle and attach.
And we now have many bacterial strains in our freezer that will reliably cause corals to go through that settlement and attachment process.
So as we speak, my colleagues in Curaçao are testing those bacteria to see if they'll help us raise more coral settlers in the lab, and to see if those coral settlers will survive better when we put them back underwater.
Now in addition to these tools, we also try to uncover the mysteries of species that are under-studied.
This is one of my favorite corals, and always has been: dendrogyra cylindrus, the pillar coral.
I love it because it makes this ridiculous shape, because its tentacles are fat and look fuzzy and because it's rare.
Finding one of these on a reef is a treat.
In fact, it's so rare, that last year it was listed as a threatened species on the endangered species list.
And this was in part because in over 30 years of research surveys, scientists had never found a baby pillar coral.
We weren't even sure if they could still reproduce, or if they were still reproducing.
So four years ago, we started following these at night and watching to see if we could figure out when they spawn in Curaçao.
We got some good tips from our colleagues in Florida, who had seen one in 2007, one in 2008, and eventually we figured out when they spawn in Curaçao and we caught it.
Here's a female on the left with some eggs in her tissue, about to release them into the seawater.
And here's a male on the right, releasing sperm.
We collected this, we got it back to the lab, we got it to fertilize and we got baby pillar corals swimming in our lab.
Thanks to the work of our scientific aunts and uncles, and thanks to the 10 years of practice we've had in Curaçao at raising other coral species, we got some of those larvae to go through the rest of the process and settle and attach, and turn into metamorphosed corals.
So this is the first pillar coral baby that anyone ever saw.
(Applause) And I have to say -- if you think baby pandas are cute, this is cuter.
(Laughter) So we're starting to figure out the secrets to this process, the secrets of coral reproduction and how we might help them.
And this is true all around the world; scientists are figuring out new ways to handle their embryos, to get them to settle, maybe even figuring out the methods to preserve them at low temperatures, so that we can preserve their genetic diversity and work with them more often.
But this is still so low-tech.
We are limited by the space on our bench, the number of hands in the lab and the number of coffees we can drink in any given hour.
Now, compare that to our other crises and our other areas of concern as a society.
We have advanced medical technology, we have defense technology, we have scientific technology, we even have advanced technology for art.
But our technology for conservation is behind.
Think back to the most difficult job you ever did.
Many of you would say it was being a parent.
My mother described being a parent as something that makes your life far more amazing and far more difficult than you could've ever possibly imagined.
I've been trying to help corals become parents for over 10 years now.
And watching the wonder of life has certainly filled me with amazement to the core of my soul.
But I've also seen how difficult it is for them to become parents.
The pillar corals spawned again two weeks ago, and we collected their eggs and brought them back to the lab.
And here you see one embryo dividing, alongside 14 eggs that didn't fertilize and will blow up.
They'll be infected with bacteria, they will explode and those bacteria will threaten the life of this one embryo that has a chance.
We don't know if it was our handling methods that went wrong and we don't know if it was just this coral on this reef, always suffering from low fertility.
Whatever the cause, we have much more work to do before we can use baby corals to grow or fix or, yes, maybe save coral reefs.
So never mind that they're worth hundreds of billions of dollars.
Coral reefs are hardworking animals and plants and microbes and fungi.
They're providing us with art and food and medicine.
And we almost took out an entire generation of corals.
But a few made it anyway, despite our best efforts, and now it's time for us to thank them for the work they did and give them every chance they have to raise the coral reefs of the future, their coral babies.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
As any current or past geometry student knows, the father of geometry was Euclid, a Greek mathematician who lived in Alexandria, Egypt, around 300 B.C.E.
Euclid is known as the author of a singularly influential work known as "Elements."
You think your math book is long?
Euclid's "Elements" is 13 volumes full of just geometry.
In "Elements," Euclid structured and supplemented the work of many mathematicians that came before him, such as Pythagoras, Eudoxus, Hippocrates and others.
Euclid laid it all out as a logical system of proof built up from a set of definitions, common notions, and his five famous postulates.
Four of these postulates are very simple and straightforward, two points determine a line, for example.
The fifth one, however, is the seed that grows our story.
This fifth mysterious postulate is known simply as the parallel postulate.
You see, unlike the first four, the fifth postulate is worded in a very convoluted way.
Euclid's version states that, "If a line falls on two other lines so that the measure of the two interior angles on the same side of the transversal add up to less than two right angles, then the lines eventually intersect on that side, and therefore are not parallel."
Wow, that is a mouthful!
Here's the simpler, more familiar version: "In a plane, through any point not on a given line, only one new line can be drawn that's parallel to the original one."
Many mathematicians over the centuries tried to prove the parallel postulate from the other four, but weren't able to do so.
In the process, they began looking at what would happen logically if the fifth postulate were actually not true.
Some of the greatest minds in the history of mathematics ask this question, people like Ibn al-Haytham, Omar Khayyam, Nasir al-Din al-Tusi, Giovanni Saccheri, János Bolyai, Carl Gauss, and Nikolai Lobachevsky.
They all experimented with negating the parallel postulate, only to discover that this gave rise to entire alternative geometries.
These geometries became collectively known as non-Euclidean geometries.
We'll leave the details of these different geometries for another lesson.
The main difference depends on the curvature of the surface upon which the lines are constructed.
Turns out Euclid did not tell us the entire story in "Elements," and merely described one possible way to look at the universe.
It all depends on the context of what you're looking at.
Flat surfaces behave one way, while positively and negatively curved surfaces display very different characteristics.
At first these alternative geometries seemed strange, but were soon found to be equally adept at describing the world around us.
Navigating our planet requires elliptical geometry while the much of the art of M.C. Escher displays hyperbolic geometry.
Albert Einstein used non-Euclidean geometry as well to describe how space-time becomes warped in the presence of matter, as part of his general theory of relativity.
The big mystery is whether Euclid had any inkling of the existence of these different geometries when he wrote his postulate.
We may never know, but it's hard to believe he had no idea whatsoever of their nature, being the great intellect that he was and understanding the field as thoroughly as he did.
Maybe he did know and he wrote the postulate in such a way as to leave curious minds after him to flush out the details.
If so, he's probably pleased.
These discoveries could never have been made without gifted, progressive thinkers able to suspend their preconceived notions and think outside of what they've been taught.
We, too, must be willing at times to put aside our preconceived notions and physical experiences and look at the larger picture, or we risk not seeing the rest of the story.
The universe, rather beautiful, isn't it?
It's quite literally got everything, from the very big to the very small.
Sure, there are some less than savory elements in there, but on the whole, scholars agree that its existence is probably a good thing.
Such a good thing that an entire field of scientific endeavor is devoted to its study.
This is known as cosmology.
Cosmologists look at what's out there in space and piece together the tale of how our universe evolved: what it's doing now, what it's going to be doing, and how it all began in the first place.
It was Edwin Hubble who first noticed that our universe is expanding, by noting that galaxies seem to be flying further and further apart.
This implied that everything should have started with the monumental explosion of an infinitely hot, infinitely small point.
This idea was jokingly referred to at the time as the "Big Bang," but as the evidence piled up, the notion and the name actually stuck.
We know that after the Big Bang, the universe cooled down to form the stars and galaxies that we see today.
Cosmologists have plenty of ideas about how this happened.
But we can also probe the origins of the universe by recreating the hot, dense conditions that existed at the beginning of time in the laboratory.
This is done by particle physicists.
Over the past century, particle physicists have been studying matter and forces at higher and higher energies.
Firstly with cosmic rays, and then with particle accelerators, machines that smash together subatomic particles at great energies.
The greater the energy of the accelerator, the further back in time they can effectively peek.
Today, things are largely made up of atoms, but hundreds of seconds after the Big Bang, it was too hot for electrons to join atomic nuclei to make atoms.
Instead, the universe consisted of a swirling sea of subatomic matter.
A few seconds after the Big Bang, it was hotter still, hot enough to overpower the forces that usually hold protons and neutrons together in atomic nuclei.
Further back, microseconds after the Big Bang, and the protons and neutrons were only just beginning to form from quarks, one of the fundamental building blocks of the standard model of particle physics.
Further back still, and the energy was too great even for the quarks to stick together.
Physicists hope that by going to even greater energies, they can see back to a time when all the forces were one and the same, which would make understanding the origins of the universe a lot easier.
To do that, they'll not only need to build bigger colliders, but also work hard to combine our knowledge of the very, very big with the very, very small and share these fascinating insights with each other and with, well, you.
And that's how it should be!
Because, after all, when it comes to our universe, we're all in this one together.
The human eye is one of the most powerful machines on the planet.
It's like a 500 megapixel camera that can run in bright light, in near darkness, and even under water, though not real well.
It communicates to our brains so much about the world.
Our eyes are how we find partners, how we understand the people around us, how we read, and how we watch game shows on TV where people get knocked into cold water by padded wrecking balls.
Yup, the human eye is pretty neat, and we're lucky enough to have two of them.
But, there are things that, despite looking really hard, we still can't quite see.
For example, you can watch a horse galloping, but your eyes can't keep up with its fast-moving hooves enough to figure out whether all four feet are ever off the ground simultaneously.
For these types of questions, we need cameras.
About 150 years ago, the photographer Eadweard Muybridge used one to solve the galloping horse mystery.
Using careful photography, Muybridge proved that at certain points as it gallops, a horse really is flying.
"Look, ma! No hooves!"
Since then, photography has found its way into all aspects of math and science.
It enhances our understanding of a world we thought we could already see, but it's one which we really need help to see a little better.
It's not always a matter of the world moving by too quickly for our eyes to process.
Sometimes cameras can help us see matter or movements that are too small for the naked eye.
Botanists use multiple photographs to show the life cycle of plants and how flowers turn over the course of a few hours to follow the sun in what is called phototropism, growing towards the light.
Mathematicians have used photos to look at where in the twists and turns of a whip the crack sound comes when the whip is breaking the sound barrier.
Meteorologists and environmental scientists show the growth of major hurricanes and the recession over the years of many of the world's glaciers.
Slow-motion film or high-speed photography have shown us the beating of a hummingbird's wings and the course of a bullet through its target.
In one project, cadavers, that's dead bodies, were frozen and sliced into thousands of wafer-thin discs.
The discs were photographed to produced animated movies that allow a viewer to travel up and down the skeleton, and into the flesh, and through the bones, and the veins, and, perhaps I should have suggested you don't watch this during dinner, my bad.
In classrooms today, the camera, now present in just about every phone and computer, allows the youngest scientists to observe the world around them, to document it, and to share their findings online.
Whether it's the change of seasons or the growth of the germinating seed, cameras are allowing us to see a beautiful world through new eyes.
Have you ever wondered who has the authority to make laws or punish people who break them?
When we think of power in the United States, we usually think of the President, but he does not act alone.
In fact, he is only one piece of the power puzzle and for very good reason.
When the American Revolution ended in 1783, the United States government was in a state of change.
The founding fathers knew that they did not want to establish another country that was ruled by a king, so the discussions were centered on having a strong and fair national government that protected individual freedoms and did not abuse its power.
When the new constitution was adopted in 1787, the structure of the infant government of the United States called for three separate branches, each with their own powers, and a system of checks and balances.
This would ensure that no one branch would ever become too powerful because the other branches would always be able to check the power of the other two.
These branches work together to run the country and set guidelines for us all to live by.
The legislative branch is described in Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution.
Many people feel that the founding fathers put this branch in the document first because they thought it was the most important.
The legislative branch is comprised of 100 U.S. Senators and 435 members in the U.S. House of Representatives.
This is better known as the U.S. Congress.
Making laws is the primary function of the legislative branch, but it is also responsible for approving federal judges and justices, passing the national budget, and declaring war.
Each state gets two Senators and some number of Representatives, depending on how many people live in that state.
The executive branch is described in Article 2 of the Constitution.
The leaders of this branch of government are the President and Vice President, who are responsible for enforcing the laws that Congress sets forth.
The President works closely with a group of advisors, known as the Cabinet.
These appointed helpers assist the President in making important decisions within their area of expertise, such as defense, the treasury, and homeland security.
The executive branch also appoints government officials, commands the armed forces, and meets with leaders of other nations.
All that combined is a lot of work for a lot of people.
In fact, the executive branch employs over 4 million people to get everything done.
The third brand of the U.S. government is the judicial branch and is detailed in Article 3.
This branch is comprised of all the courts in the land, from the federal district courts to the U.S. Supreme Court.
These courts interpret our nation's laws and punish those who break them.
The highest court, the Supreme Court, settles disputes among states, hears appeals from state and federal courts, and determines if federal laws are constitutional.
There are nine justices on the Supreme Court, and, unlike any other job in our government, Supreme Court justices are appointed for life, or for as long as they want to stay.
Our democracy depends on an informed citizenry, so it is our duty to know how it works and what authority each branch of government has over its citizens.
Besides voting, chances are that some time in your life you'll be called upon to participate in your government, whether it is to serve on a jury, testify in court, or petition your Congress person to pass or defeat an idea for a law.
By knowning the branches, who runs them, and how they work together, you can be involved, informed, and intelligent.
This is Zeno of Elea, an ancient Greek philosopher famous for inventing a number of paradoxes, arguments that seem logical, but whose conclusion is absurd or contradictory.
For more than 2,000 years, Zeno's mind-bending riddles have inspired mathematicians and philosophers to better understand the nature of infinity.
One of the best known of Zeno's problems is called the dichotomy paradox, which means, "the paradox of cutting in two" in ancient Greek.
It goes something like this: After a long day of sitting around, thinking, Zeno decides to walk from his house to the park.
The fresh air clears his mind and help him think better.
In order to get to the park, he first has to get half way to the park.
This portion of his journey takes some finite amount of time.
Once he gets to the halfway point, he needs to walk half the remaining distance.
Again, this takes a finite amount of time.
Once he gets there, he still needs to walk half the distance that's left, which takes another finite amount of time.
This happens again and again and again.
You can see that we can keep going like this forever, dividing whatever distance is left into smaller and smaller pieces, each of which takes some finite time to traverse.
So, how long does it take Zeno to get to the park?
Well, to find out, you need to add the times of each of the pieces of the journey.
The problem is, there are infinitely many of these finite-sized pieces.
So, shouldn't the total time be infinity?
This argument, by the way, is completely general.
It says that traveling from any location to any other location should take an infinite amount of time.
In other words, it says that all motion is impossible.
This conclusion is clearly absurd, but where is the flaw in the logic?
To resolve the paradox, it helps to turn the story into a math problem.
Let's supposed that Zeno's house is one mile from the park and that Zeno walks at one mile per hour.
Common sense tells us that the time for the journey should be one hour.
But, let's look at things from Zeno's point of view and divide up the journey into pieces.
The first half of the journey takes half an hour, the next part takes quarter of an hour, the third part takes an eighth of an hour, and so on.
Summing up all these times, we get a series that looks like this.
"Now", Zeno might say, "since there are infinitely many of terms on the right side of the equation, and each individual term is finite, the sum should equal infinity, right?"
This is the problem with Zeno's argument.
As mathematicians have since realized, it is possible to add up infinitely many finite-sized terms and still get a finite answer.
"How?" you ask.
Well, let's think of it this way.
Let's start with a square that has area of one meter.
Now let's chop the square in half, and then chop the remaining half in half, and so on.
While we're doing this, let's keep track of the areas of the pieces.
The first slice makes two parts, each with an area of one-half The next slice divides one of those halves in half, and so on.
But, no matter how many times we slice up the boxes, the total area is still the sum of the areas of all the pieces.
Now you can see why we choose this particular way of cutting up the square.
We've obtained the same infinite series as we had for the time of Zeno's journey.
As we construct more and more blue pieces, to use the math jargon, as we take the limit as n tends to infinity, the entire square becomes covered with blue.
But the area of the square is just one unit, and so the infinite sum must equal one.
Going back to Zeno's journey, we can now see how how the paradox is resolved.
Not only does the infinite series sum to a finite answer, but that finite answer is the same one that common sense tells us is true.
Zeno's journey takes one hour.
Great things happen at intersections.
In fact, I would argue that some of the most interesting things of the human experience occur at the intersections, in the liminal space, where by liminal I mean the space in-between.
There's freedom in that in-between, freedom to create from the indefiniteness of not-quite-here, not-quite-there, a new self-definition.
Some of the great intersections of the world come to mind, like the Arc de Triomphe in Paris, or Times Square in New York City, both bustling with the excitement of a seemingly endless stream of people.
Other intersections, like the Edmund Pettus Bridge in Selma, Alabama, or Canfield Drive and Copper Creek Court in Ferguson, Missouri, also come to mind because of the tremendous energy at the intersection of human beings, ideologies and the ongoing struggle for justice.
Beyond the physical landscape of our planet, some of the most famous celestial images are of intersections.
Stars are born at the messy intersection of gas and dust, instigated by gravity's irrevocable pull.
Stars die by this same intersection, this time flung outward in a violent collision of smaller atoms, intersecting and efficiently fusing into altogether new and heavier things.
We can all think of intersections that have special meaning to us.
To be intersectional, then, is to occupy a position at an intersection.
I've lived the entirety of my life in the in-between, in the liminal space between dreams and reality, race and gender, poverty and plenty, science and society.
I am both black and a woman.
Like the birth of stars in the heavenlies, this robust combination of knowing results in a shining example of the explosive fusion of identities.
I am also an astrophysicist.
I study blazars, supermassive, hyperactive black holes that sit at the centers of massive galaxies and shoot out jets nearby those black holes at speeds approaching the speed of light in a process we are still trying to completely understand.
I have dreamed of becoming an astrophysicist since I was 12 years old.
I had no idea that at that time, according to Dr. Jamie Alexander's archive of African-American women in physics, only 18 black women in the United States had ever earned a PhD in a physics-related discipline, and that the first black woman to graduate with a PhD in an astronomy-related field did so just one year before my birth.
As I journeyed along my path, I encountered the best and worst of life at an intersection: the tremendous opportunity to self-define, the collision of expectation and experience, the exhilaration of victorious breakthroughs and, sometimes, the explosive pain of regeneration.
I began my college experience just after my family had fallen apart.
Our financial situation disintegrated just after my father's departure from our lives.
This thrust my mother, my sister and I out of the relative comfort of middle-class life and into the almost constant struggle to make ends meet.
Thus, I was one of roughly 60 percent of women of color who find finances to be a major barrier to their educational goals.
Thankfully, Norfolk State University provided me with full funding, and I was able to achieve my bachelor's in physics.
After graduation, and despite knowing that I wanted a PhD in astrophysics, I fell through the cracks.
It was a poster that saved my dream, and some really incredible people and programs.
The American Physical Society had this beautiful poster encouraging students of color to become physicists.
It was striking to me because it featured a young black girl, probably around 12 years old, looking studiously at some physics equations.
I remember thinking I was looking directly back at the little girl who first dared to dream this dream.
I immediately wrote to the Society and requested my personal copy of the poster, which to this day still hangs in my office.
I described to them in the email my educational path, and my desire to find myself again in pursuit of the PhD.
They directed me to the Fisk-Vanderbilt University Bridge Program, itself an intersection of the master's and PhD degrees at two institutions.
After two years out of school, they accepted me into the program, and I found myself again on the path to the PhD.
After receiving my master's at Fisk, I went on to Yale to complete my PhD.
Once I was physically occupying the space that would ultimately give way to my childhood aspirations, I anticipated a smooth glide to the PhD.
(Laughter) It became immediately apparent that not everyone was thrilled to have that degree of liminality in their space.
I was ostracized by many of my classmates, one of whom went so far as to invite me to "do what I really came here to do" as he pushed all the dirty dishes from our meal in front of me to clean up.
I wish that were an isolated occurrence, but for many women of color in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, or STEM, this is something they have long endured.
One hundred percent of the 60 women of color interviewed in a recent study by Joan C. Williams at UC Hastings reported facing racialized gender bias, including being mistaken for the janitorial staff.
This mistaken identity was not reported by any of the white women interviewed for this study, which comprised 557 women in total.
While there is nothing inherently wrong with a janitorial position, and in fact my forefathers and foremothers were able to attend college because many of their parents worked these jobs, it was a clear attempt to put me in my place.
While there was certainly the acute pain of the encounter, the real issue is that my appearance can tell anyone anything about my ability.
Beyond that, though, it underscores that the women of color in STEM do not experience the same set of barriers that just women or just people of color face.
That's why today I want to highlight women of color in STEM, who are inexorably, unapologetically living as the inseparable sum of identities.
STEM itself is an intersectional term, such that its true richness cannot be appreciated without considering the liminal space between disciplines.
Science, the pursuit of understanding the physical world by way of chemistry, physics, biology, cannot be accomplished in the absence of mathematics.
Engineering requires the application of basic science and math to the lived experience.
Technology sits firmly on the foundation of math, engineering and science.
Math itself serves the critical role of Rosetta Stone, decoding and encoding the physical principles of the world.
STEM is utterly incomplete without each individual piece.
This is to say nothing of the enrichment that is realized when STEM is combined with other disciplines.
The purpose for this talk is twofold: first, to say directly to every black, Latina, indigenous, First Nation or any other woman or girl who finds herself resting at the blessed intersection of race and gender, that you can be anything you want to be.
My personal hope is that you'll become an astrophysicist, but beyond that, anything you want.
Do not think for one minute that because you are who you are, you cannot be who you imagine yourself to be.
Hold fast to those dreams and let them carry you into a world you can't even imagine.
Secondly, among the most pressing issues of our time, most now find their intersection with STEM.
We have as a global society solved most of the single-faceted issues of our time.
Those that remain require a thorough investigation of the liminal space between disciplines to create the multifaceted solutions of tomorrow.
Who better to solve these liminal problems than those who have faced their whole lives at the intersections.
We as thought leaders and decision makers must push past the first steps of diversity and into the richer and more robust territory of full inclusion and equal opportunity.
One of my favorite examples of liminal excellence comes from the late Dr. Claudia Alexander, a black woman plasma physicist, who passed away this past July after a 10-year bout with breast cancer.
She was a NASA project scientist who spearheaded the NASA side of the Rosetta mission, which became famous this year for landing a rover on a comet, and the 1.5 billion dollar Galileo mission to Jupiter, two high-profile scientific victories for NASA, the United States and the world.
Dr. Alexander said it this way: "I'm used to walking between two cultures.
For me, it's among the purposes of my life to take us from states of ignorance to states of understanding with bold exploration that you can't do every day."
This shows exactly the power of a liminal person.
She had the technical ability to spearhead some of the most ambitious space missions of our time, and she perfectly understood her place of being exactly who she was in any place she was.
Jessica Matthews, inventor of the SOCCKET line of sports products, like soccer balls, that generate renewable energy as you play with them, said it this way: "A major part of invention isn't just creating things, it's understanding people and understanding the systems that make this world."
The reason I tell my story and the story of Dr. Alexander and Jessica Matthews is because they are fundamentally intersectional stories, the stories of lives lived at the nexus of race, gender and innovation.
Despite implicit and explicit questions of my right to be in an elite space, I'm proud to report that when I graduated, I was the first black woman to earn a PhD in astrophysics in Yale's then 312-year history.
(Applause) I am now part of a small but growing cadre of women of color in STEM who are poised to bring new perspectives and new ideas to life on the most pressing issues of our time: things like educational inequities, police brutality, HIV/AIDS, climate change, genetic editing, artificial intelligence and Mars exploration.
This is to say nothing of the things we haven't even thought of yet.
Women of color in STEM occupy some of the toughest and most exciting sociotechnological issues of our time.
Thus, we are uniquely positioned to contribute to and drive these conversations in ways that are more inclusive of a wider variety of lived experience.
This outlook can be expanded to the many intersectional people whose experiences, positive and negative, enrich the conversations in ways that outmatch even the best-resourced homogenous groups.
This is not a request born out of a desire to fit in.
It's a reminder that we cannot get to the best possible outcomes for the totality of humanity without precisely this collaboration, this bringing together of the liminal, the differently lived, distinctly experienced and disparately impacted.
Simply put, we cannot be the most excellent expression of our collective genius without the full measure of humanity brought to bear.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Feathers are some of the most remarkable things ever made by an animal.
They are gorgeous in their complexity, delicate in their construction, and yet strong enough to hold a bird thousands of feet in the air.
Like all things in nature, feathers evolved over millions of years into their modern form.
It could be hard to imagine how this could have happened.
After all, what did the intermediate forms look like?
What good is half a wing, festooned with half-feathers?
Thanks to science, we now know that birds are living dinosaurs.
You can see the kinship in their skeletons.
Certain dinosaurs share some anatomical details with birds found in no other animals, such as wish bones.
And in the late 1990s, paleontologists started digging up some compelling support for that idea: dinosaurs with bits of feathers still preserved on their bodies.
Since then, scientists have found dozens of species of dinosaurs with remnants of feathers.
Some were as small as pigeons, and some were the size of a school bus.
If you look at how they are related on a family tree, the evolution of feathers doesn't seem quite so impossible.
The most distant feathered relatives of birds had straight feathers that looked like wires.
Then these wires split apart, producing simple branches.
In many dinosaur lineages, these simple feathers evolved into more intricate ones, including some that we see today on birds.
At the same time, the feathers spread across the bodies of dinosaurs, turning from sparse patches of fuzz into dense plumage, which even extended down to their legs.
A few fossils even preserved some of the molecules that give feathers color.
They reveal a beautiful range of colors: glossy, dark plumage, reminiscent of crows, alternating strips of black and white, or splashes of bright red.
Some dinosaurs had high crests on their heads, and others had long, dramatic tail feathers.
Now, none of these dinosaurs could use their feathers to fly - their arms were too short and the rest of their bodies were far too heavy.
But, birds don't just use feathers to fly.
A woodcock uses feathers to blend in perfectly with its forest backdrop.
An ostrich stretches its wings over its nest to shade its young.
A peacock displays its magnificent tail feathers to attract peahens.
Feathers could have served these functions for dinosaurs too.
Exactly how feathered dinosaurs took flight is still a bit of a mystery.
But if a small-feathered dinosaur flapped its arms as it ran up an incline, its feathers would have provided extra lift to help it run faster.
This accident of physics might have led to the evolution of longer dinosaur arms, which would let them run faster and even leap short distances through the air.
Eventually, their arms stretched out into wings.
Only then, perhaps 50 million years after the first wiry feathers evolved, did feathers lift those dinosaurs into the sky.
Big data is an elusive concept.
It represents an amount of digital information, which is uncomfortable to store, transport, or analyze.
Big data is so voluminous that it overwhelms the technologies of the day and challenges us to create the next generation of data storage tools and techniques.
So, big data isn't new.
In fact, physicists at CERN have been rangling with the challenge of their ever-expanding big data for decades.
Fifty years ago, CERN's data could be stored in a single computer.
OK, so it wasn't your usual computer, this was a mainframe computer that filled an entire building.
To analyze the data, physicists from around the world traveled to CERN to connect to the enormous machine.
In the 1970's, our ever-growing big data was distributed across different sets of computers, which mushroomed at CERN.
Each set was joined together in dedicated, homegrown networks.
But physicists collaborated without regard for the boundaries between sets, hence needed to access data on all of these.
So, we bridged the independent networks together in our own CERNET.
In the 1980's, islands of similar networks speaking different dialects sprung up all over Europe and the States, making remote access possible but torturous.
To make it easy for our physicists across the world to access the ever-expanding big data stored at CERN without traveling, the networks needed to be talking with the same language.
We adopted the fledgling internet working standard from the States, followed by the rest of Europe, and we established the principal link at CERN between Europe and the States in 1989, and the truly global internet took off!
Physicists could easily then access the terabytes of big data remotely from around the world, generate results, and write papers in their home institutes.
Then, they wanted to share their findings with all their colleagues.
To make this information sharing easy, we created the web in the early 1990's.
Physicists no longer needed to know where the information was stored in order to find it and access it on the web, an idea which caught on across the world and has transformed the way we communicate in our daily lives.
During the early 2000's, the continued growth of our big data outstripped our capability to analyze it at CERN, despite having buildings full of computers.
We had to start distributing the petabytes of data to our collaborating partners in order to employ local computing and storage at hundreds of different institutes.
In order to orchestrate these interconnected resources with their diverse technologies, we developed a computing grid, enabling the seamless sharing of computing resources around the globe.
This relies on trust relationships and mutual exchange.
But this grid model could not be transferred out of our community so easily, where not everyone has resources to share nor could companies be expected to have the same level of trust.
Instead, an alternative, more business-like approach for accessing on-demand resources has been flourishing recently, called cloud computing, which other communities are now exploiting to analyzing their big data.
It might seem paradoxical for a place like CERN, a lab focused on the study of the unimaginably small building blocks of matter, to be the source of something as big as big data.
But the way we study the fundamental particles, as well as the forces by which they interact, involves creating them fleetingly, colliding protons in our accelerators and capturing a trace of them as they zoom off near light speed.
To see those traces, our detector, with 150 million sensors, acts like a really massive 3-D camera, taking a picture of each collision event - that's up to 14 millions times per second.
That makes a lot of data.
But if big data has been around for so long, why do we suddenly keep hearing about it now?
Well, as the old metaphor explains, the whole is greater than the sum of its parts, and this is no longer just science that is exploiting this.
The fact that we can derive more knowledge by joining related information together and spotting correlations can inform and enrich numerous aspects of everyday life, either in real time, such as traffic or financial conditions, in short-term evolutions, such as medical or meteorological, or in predictive situations, such as business, crime, or disease trends.
Virtually every field is turning to gathering big data, with mobile sensor networks spanning the globe, cameras on the ground and in the air, archives storing information published on the web, and loggers capturing the activities of Internet citizens the world over.
The challenge is on to invent new tools and techniques to mine these vast stores, to inform decision making, to improve medical diagnosis, and otherwise to answer needs and desires of tomorrow's society in ways that are unimagined today.
Is it possible to create something out of nothing?
Or, more precisely, can energy be made into matter?
Yes, but only when it comes together with its twin, antimatter.
And there's something pretty mysterious about antimatter: there's way less of it out there than there should be.
Let's start with the most famous physics formula ever: E equals m c squared.
It basically says that mass is concentrated energy, and mass and energy are exchangeable, like two currencies with a huge exchange rate.
90 trillion Joules of energy are equivalent to 1 gram of mass.
But how do I actually transform energy into matter?
The magic word is &lt;i&gt;energy density&lt;/i&gt;.
If you concentrate a huge amount of energy in a tiny space, new particles will come into existence.
If we look closer, we see that these particles always come in pairs, like twins.
That's because particles always have a counterpart, an antiparticle, and these are always produced in exactly equal amounts: 50/50.
This might sound like science fiction, but it's the daily life of particle accelerators.
In the collisions between two protons at CERN's Large Hadron Collider, billions of particles and antiparticles are produced every second.
Consider, for example, the electron.
It has a very small mass and negative electric charge.
It's antiparticle, the positron, has exactly the same mass, but a positive electric charge.
But, apart from the opposite charges, both particles are identical and perfectly stable.
And the same is true for their heavy cousins, the proton and the antiproton.
Therefore, scientists are convinced that a world made of antimatter would look, feel, and smell just like our world.
In this antiworld, we may find antiwater, antigold, and, for example, an antimarble.
Now imagine that a marble and an antimarble are brought together.
These two apparently solid objects would completely disappear into a big flash of energy, equivalent to an atomic bomb.
Because combining matter and antimatter would create so much energy, science fiction is full of ideas about harnessing the energy stored in antimatter, for example, to fuel spaceships like Star Trek.
After all, the energy content of antimatter is a billion times higher than conventional fuel.
The energy of one gram of antimatter would be enough for driving a car 1,000 times around the Earth, or to bring the space shuttle into orbit.
So why don't we use antimatter for energy production?
Well, antimatter isn't just sitting around, ready for us to harvest.
We have to make antimatter before we can combust antimatter, and it takes a billion times more energy to make antimatter than you get back.
But, what if there was some antimatter in outer space and we could dig it out one day from an antiplanet somewhere.
A few decades ago, many scientists believed that this could actually be possible.
Today, observations have shown that there is no significant amount of antimatter anywhere in the visible universe, which is weird because, like we said before, there should be just as much antimatter as there is matter in the universe.
Since antiparticles and particles should exist in equal numbers, this missing antimatter?
Now that is a real mystery.
To understand what might be happening, we must go back to the Big Bang.
In the instant the universe was created, a huge amount of energy was transformed into mass, and our initial universe contained equal amounts of matter and antimatter.
But just a second later, most matter and all of the antimatter had destroyed one another, producing an enormous amount of radiation that can still be observed today.
Just about 100 millionths of the original amount of matter stuck around and no antimatter whatsoever.
"Now, wait!" you might say, "Why did all the antimatter disappear and only matter was left?"
It seems that we were somehow lucky that a tiny asymmetry exists between matter and antimatter.
Otherwise, there would be no particles at all anywhere in the universe and also no human beings.
But what causes this asymmetry?
Experiments at CERN are trying to find out the reason why something exists and why we don't live in a universe filled with radiation only?
But, so far, we just don't know the answer.
In the past few months, I've been traveling for weeks at a time with only one suitcase of clothes.
One day, I was invited to an important event, and I wanted to wear something special and new for it.
So I looked through my suitcase and I couldn't find anything to wear.
I was lucky to be at the technology conference on that day, and I had access to 3D printers.
So I quickly designed a skirt on my computer, and I loaded the file on the printer.
It just printed the pieces overnight.
The next morning, I just took all the pieces, assembled them together in my hotel room, and this is actually the skirt that I'm wearing right now.
(Applause) So it wasn't the first time that I printed clothes.
For my senior collection at fashion design school, I decided to try and 3D print an entire fashion collection from my home.
The problem was that I barely knew anything about 3D printing, and I had only nine months to figure out how to print five fashionable looks.
I always felt most creative when I worked from home.
I loved experimenting with new materials, and I always tried to develop new techniques to make the most unique textiles for my fashion projects.
I loved going to old factories and weird stores in search of leftovers of strange powders and weird materials, and then bring them home to experiment on.
As you can probably imagine, my roommates didn't like that at all.
(Laughter) So I decided to move on to working with big machines, ones that didn't fit in my living room.
I love the exact and the custom work I can do with all kinds of fashion technologies, like knitting machines and laser cutting and silk printing.
One summer break, I came here to New York for an internship at a fashion house in Chinatown.
We worked on two incredible dresses that were 3D printed.
They were amazing -- like you can see here.
But I had a few issues with them.
They were made from hard plastics and that's why they were very breakable.
The models couldn't sit in them, and they even got scratched from the plastics under their arms.
With 3D printing, the designers had so much freedom to make the dresses look exactly like they wanted, but still, they were very dependent on big and expensive industrial printers that were located in a lab far from their studio.
Later that year, a friend gave me a 3D printed necklace, printed using a home printer.
I knew that these printers were much cheaper and much more accessible than the ones we used at my internship.
So I looked at the necklace, and then I thought, "If I can print a necklace from home, why not print my clothes from home, too?"
I really liked the idea that I wouldn't have to go to the market and pick fabrics that someone else chose to sell -- I could just design them and print them directly from home.
I found a small makerspace, where I learned everything I know about 3D printing.
Right away, they literally gave me the key to the lab, so I could experiment into the night, every night.
The main challenge was to find the right filament for printing clothes with.
So what is a filament?
Filament is the material you feed the printer with.
And I spent a month or so experimenting with PLA, which is a hard and scratchy, breakable material.
The breakthrough came when I was introduced to Filaflex, which is a new kind of filament.
It's strong, yet very flexible.
And with it, I was able to print the first garment, the red jacket that had the word "Liberté" -- "freedom" in French -- embedded into it.
I chose this word because I felt so empowered and free when I could just design a garment from my home and then print it by myself.
And actually, you can easily download this jacket, and easily change the word to something else.
For example, your name or your sweetheart's name.
(Laughter) So the printer plates are small, so I had to piece the garment together, just like a puzzle.
And I wanted to solve another challenge.
I wanted to print textiles that I would use just like regular fabrics.
That's when I found an open-source file from an architect who designed a pattern that I love.
And with it, I was able to print a beautiful textile that I would use just like a regular fabric.
And it actually even looks a little bit like lace.
So I took his file and I modified it, and changed it, played with it -- many kinds of versions out of it.
And I needed to print another 1,500 more hours to complete printing my collection.
So I brought six printers to my home and just printed 24-7.
And this is actually a really slow process, but let's remember the Internet was significantly slower 20 years ago, so 3D printing will also accelerate and in no time you'll be able to print a T-Shirt in your home in just a couple of hours, or even minutes.
So you guys, you want to see what it looks like?
Audience: Yeah!
(Applause) Danit Peleg: Rebecca is wearing one of my five outfits.
Almost everything here she's wearing, I printed from my home.
Even her shoes are printed.
Audience: Wow!
Audience: Cool!
(Applause) Danit Peleg: Thank you, Rebecca.
(To audience) Thank you, guys.
So I think in the future, materials will evolve, and they will look and feel like fabrics we know today, like cotton or silk.
Imagine personalized clothes that fit exactly to your measurements.
Music was once a very physical thing.
You would have to go to the record shop and buy CDs, but now you can just download the music -- digital music -- directly to your phone.
Fashion is also a very physical thing.
And I wonder what our world will look like when our clothes will be digital, just like this skirt is.
Thank you so much.
(Applause) [Thank You] (Applause)
The ancient Greeks had a great idea: The universe is simple.
In their minds, all you needed to make it were four elements: earth, air, fire, and water.
As theories go, it's a beautiful one.
It has simplicity and elegance.
It says that by combining the four basic elements in different ways, you could produce all the wonderful diversity of the universe.
Earth and fire, for example, give you things that are dry.
Air and water, things that are wet.
But as theories go, it had a problem.
It didn't predict anything that could be measured, and measurement is the basis of experimental science.
Worse still, the theory was wrong.
But the Greeks were great scientists of the mind and in the 5th century B.C., Leucippus of Miletus came up with one of the most enduring scientific ideas ever.
Everything we see is made up of tiny, indivisible bits of stuff called atoms.
This theory is simple and elegant, and it has the advantage over the earth, air, fire, and water theory of being right.
Centuries of scientific thought and experimentation have established that the real elements, things like hydrogen, carbon, and iron, can be broken down into atoms.
In Leucippus's theory, the atom is the smallest, indivisible bit of stuff that's still recognizable as hydrogen, carbon, or iron.
The only thing wrong with Leucippus's idea is that atoms are, in fact, divisible.
Furthermore, his atoms idea turns out to explain just a small part of what the universe is made of.
What appears to be the ordinary stuff of the universe is, in fact, quite rare.
Leucippus's atoms, and the things they're made of, actually make up only about 5% of what we know to be there.
Physicists know the rest of the universe, 95% of it, as the dark universe, made of dark matter and dark energy.
How do we know this?
Well, we know because we look at things and we see them.
That might seem rather simplistic, but it's actually quite profound.
All the stuff that's made of atoms is visible.
Light bounces off it, and we can see it.
When we look out into space, we see stars and galaxies.
Some of them, like the one we live in, are beautiful, spiral shapes, spinning gracefully through space.
When scientists first measured the motion of groups of galaxies in the 1930's and weighed the amount of matter they contained, they were in for a surprise.
They found that there's not enough visible stuff in those groups to hold them together.
Later measurements of individual galaxies confirmed this puzzling result.
There's simply not enough visible stuff in galaxies to provide enough gravity to hold them together.
From what we can see, they ought to fly apart, but they don't.
So there must be stuff there that we can't see.
We call that stuff dark matter.
The best evidence for dark matter today comes from measurements of something called the cosmic microwave background, the afterglow of the Big Bang, but that's another story.
All of the evidence we have says that dark matter is there and it accounts for much of the stuff in those beautiful spiral galaxies that fill the heavens.
So where does that leave us?
We've long known that the heavens do not revolve around us and that we're residents of a fairly ordinary planet, orbiting a fairly ordinary star, in the spiral arm of a fairly ordinary galaxy.
The discovery of dark matter took us one step further away from the center of things.
It told us that the stuff we're made of is only a small fraction of what makes up the universe.
But there was more to come.
Early this century, scientists studying the outer reaches of the universe confirmed that not only is everything moving apart from everything else, as you would expect in a universe that began in hot, dense big bang, but that the universe's expansion also seems to be accelerating.
What's that about?
Either there is some kind of energy pushing this acceleration, just like you provide energy to accelerate a car, or gravity does not behave exactly as we think.
Most scientists think it's the former, that there's some kind of energy driving the acceleration, and they called it &lt;i&gt;dark energy&lt;/i&gt;.
Today's best measurements allow us to work out just how much of the universe is dark.
It looks as if dark energy makes up about 68% of the universe and dark matter about 27%, leaving just 5% for us and everything else we can actually see.
So what's the dark stuff made of?
We don't know, but there's one theory, called &lt;i&gt;supersymmetry&lt;/i&gt;, that could explain some of it.
Supersymmetry, or SUSY for short, predicts a whole range of new particles, some of which could make up the dark matter.
If we found evidence for SUSY, we could go from understanding 5% of our universe, the things we can actually see, to around a third.
Not bad for a day's work.
Dark energy would probably be harder to understand, but there are some speculative theories out there that might point the way.
Among them are theories that go back to that first great idea of the ancient Greeks, the idea that we began with several minutes ago, the idea that the universe must be simple.
These theories predict that there is just a single element from which all the universe's wonderful diversity stems, a vibrating string.
The idea is that all the particles we know today are just different harmonics on the string.
Unfortunately, string theories today are, as yet, untestable.
But, with so much of the universe waiting to be explored, the stakes are high.
Does all of this make you feel small?
It shouldn't.
Instead, you should marvel in the fact that, as far as we know, you are a member of the only species in the universe able even to begin to grasp its wonders, and you're living at the right time to see our understanding explode.
Today, we're going to look at the world of Rome through the eyes of a young girl.
Here she is, drawing a picture of herself in the atrium of her father's enormous house.
Her name is Domitia, and she is just 5 years old.
She has an older brother who is fourteen, Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, named after her dad.
Girls don't get these long names that boys have.
What is worse is that Dad insists on calling all his daughters Domitia.
"Domitia!"
His call to Domitia drawing on the column, Domitia III.
She has an older sister, Domitia II, who is 7 years old.
And then there's Domitia I, who is ten.
There would have been a Domitia IV, but mom died trying to give birth to her three years ago.
Confused?
The Romans were too.
They could work out ancestry through the male line with the nice, tripartite names such as Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus.
But they got in a real mess over which Domitia was married to whom and was either the great aunt or the great stepmother and so on to whom when they came to write it down.
Domitia III is not just drawing on the pillar, she's also watching the action.
You see, it's early, in the time of day when all her dad's clients and friends come to see him at home to pay their respects.
Lucius Popidius Secundus, a 17 year old, he wants to marry Domitia II within the next five to seven years, has come as well.
He seems to be wooing not his future wife, but her dad.
Poor Lucius, he does not know that Domitia's dad thinks he and his family are wealthy but still scumbags from the Subura.
Afterall, it is the part of Rome full of barbers and prostitutes.
Suddenly, all the men are leaving with Dad.
It's the second hour and time for him to be in court with a sturdy audience of clients to applaud his rhetoric and hiss at his opponent.
The house is now quieter.
The men won't return for seven hours, not until dinner time.
But what happens in the house for those seven hours?
What do Domitia, Domitia, and Domitia do all day?
Not an easy question!
Everything written down by the Romans that we have today was written by men.
This makes constructing the lives of women difficult.
However, we can't have a history of just Roman men, so here it goes.
We can begin in the atrium.
There is a massive loom, on which Dad's latest wife is working on a new toga.
Domitia, Domitia, and Domitia are tasked with spinning the wool that will be used to weave this mighty garment, 30 or more feet long and elliptical in shape.
Romans loved the idea that their wives work wool.
We know that because it's written on the gravestones of so many Roman women.
Unlike women in Greece, Roman women go out the house and move about the city.
They go to the baths in the morning to avoid the men or to separate baths that are for women only.
Some do go in for the latest fad of the AD 70s: nude bathing with men present.
Where they have no place is where the men are: in the Forum, in the Law Court, or in the Senate House.
Their place in public is in the porticos with gardens, with sculpture, and with pathways for walking in.
When Domitia, Domitia, and Domitia want to leave the house to go somewhere, like the Portico of Livia, they must get ready.
Domitia II and Domitia III are ready, but Domitia I, who is betrothed to be married in two years to darling Philatus, isn't ready.
She's not slow, she just has more to do.
Being betrothed means she wears the insignia of betrothal: engagement rings and all the gifts Pilatus has given her - jewels, earrings, necklaces, and the pendants.
She may even wear her myrtle crown.
All this bling shouts, "I'm getting married to that 19 year old who gave me all this stuff I'm wearing!"
While as they wait, Domitia II and Domitia III play with their dolls that mirror the image of their sister decked out to be married.
One day, these dolls will be dedicated to the household gods on the day of their wedding.
Okay, we're ready.
The girls step into litters carried by some burly slaves.
They also have a chaperone with them and will be meeting an aunt at the Porticus of Livia.
Carried high on the shoulders of these slaves, the girls look out through the curtains to see the crowded streets below them.
They traverse the city, pass the Coliseum, but then turn off to climb up the hill to the Porticus of Livia.
It was built by Livia, the wife of the first emperor Augustus, on the site of the house of Vedius Pollio.
He wasn't such a great guy.
He once tried to feed a slave to the eels in his fish pond for simply dropping a dish.
Luckily, the emperor was at the dinner and tamed his temper.
The litters are placed on the ground and the girls get out and arm in arm, two by two, they ascend the steps into the enclosed garden with many columns.
Domitia III shot off and is drawing on a column.
Domitia II joins her but seeks to read the graffiti higher up on the column.
She spots a drawing of gladiators and tries to imagine seeing them fighting, something she will never be permitted to do, except from the very rear of the Coliseum.
From there, she will have a good view of the 50,000 spectators but will see little by way of blood and gore.
If she really wanted a decent view, she could become a vestal virgin and would sit right down the front.
But a career tending the sacred flame of Vesta is not to everybody's taste.
Domitia I has met another ten year old also decked out in the insignia of betrothal.
Home time.
When they get there after the eighth hour, something is up.
A smashed dish lies on the floor.
All the slaves are being gathered together in the atrium and await the arrival of their master.
Dad is going to go mad.
He will not hit his children, but like many other Romans, he believes that slaves have to be punished.
The whip lies ready for his arrival.
No one knows who smashed the dish, but Dad will call the undertaker to torture it out of them, if he must.
The doorkeeper opens the front door to the house.
A hush comes over the anxious slaves.
In walks not their master but, instead, a pregnant teenager.
It is the master's eldest daughter, age 15, who is already a veteran of marriage and child birth.
Guess what her name is.
There is a five to ten percent chance she won't survive giving birth to her child, but, for now, she has come to dinner with her family.
As a teenage mother, she has proved that she is a successful wife by bringing children and descendants for her husband, who will carry on his name in the future.
The family head off to the dining room and are served dinner.
It would seem Dad has had an invite to dinner elsewhere.
With dinner concluded, the girls crossed the atrium to bid farewell to their older sister who is carried home in a litter, escorted by some of Dad's bodyguards.
Returning to the house, the girls cross the atrium.
The slaves, young and old, male and female, await the return of their owner.
When he returns, he may exact vengeance, ensuring his power over the slaves is maintained through violence and terror, to which any slave could be subjected.
But, for the girls, they head upstairs for the night, ready for bed.
Imagine a place so dark you can't see the nose on your face.
Eyes opened or closed, it's all the same because the sun never shines there.
Up ahead, you see a light.
When you creep in to investigate, a blue light flits around you.
"I could watch this forever," you think.
But you can't because the mouth of an anglerfish has just sprung open and eaten you alive.
You are just one of many creatures at the bottom of the ocean who learn too late to appreciate the power of bioluminescence.
Bioluminescence refers to the ability of certain living things to create light.
The human body can make stuff like ear wax and toe nails, but these organisms can turn parts of their body into glow sticks.
It's like nature made them ready to rave.
Why?
In one way or another, bioluminescence improves a living thing's chances of survival.
Take the firefly.
It's ability to glow green helps it attract a mate on a warm, summer night, but it's just one of many living things that can glow.
The railroad worm, Phrixothrix hirtus, can light up its body in two colors: red and green.
Would you eat something that looks like an airport runway?
Neither would any sensible predator.
The flashing lights keep the worm safe.
Then there's the deep sea shrimp, Acantherphyra purpurea.
When it feels threatened, it spews a cloud of glowing goo from its mouth.
Who doesn't run the other way when they've just been puked on?
Plus, that puke attracts bigger predators who want to eat the shrimp's enemy.
So what if you can't bioluminesce?
No problem!
There are other ways for living things to make bioluminescence work for them, even if they weren't born with the equipment to glow.
Let's revisit the anglerfish moments before it tried to eat you.
That glowing bait on top of its head?
It comes from a pocket of skin called the esca.
The esca holds bioluminescent bacteria.
The anglerfish can't glow there by itself, so it holds a sack of glowing bacteria instead.
Remember the firefly?
It can actually make itself glow.
Inside its lantern are two chemicals, a luciferin and a luciferase.
When firefly luciferase and luciferin mix together in the presence of oxygen and fuel for the cell, called ATP, the chemical reaction gives off energy in the form of light.
Once scientists figured out how the firefly creates its luciferase and luciferin, they used genetic engineering to make this light-producing reaction occur inside other living things that can't glow.
For example, they inserted the genes, or instructions, for a cell to create firefly luciferase and luciferin into a tobacco plant.
Once there, the tobacco plant followed the instructions slipped into its DNA and lit up like a Christmas tree.
The beauty of bioluminescence, unlike the light from the sun or an incandescent bulb, is that it's not hot.
It takes place in a range of temperatures that don't burn a living thing.
And unlike a glow stick, which fades out as the chemicals inside get used up, bioluminescent reactions use replenishable resources.
That's one reason engineers are trying to develop bioluminescent trees.
Just think, if planted on the side of highways, they could light the way, using only oxygen and other freely available, clean resources to run.
Talk about survival advantage!
That could help our planet live longer.
Do you find yourself thinking of other ways to put bioluminescence to good use?
That glow stick you swing at a rave may help you find a mate, but how else can bioluminescence improve your survival?
If you start thinking in this way, you have seen the light.
What's an algorithm?
In computer science, an algorithm is a set of instructions for solving some problem, step-by-step.
Typically, algorithms are executed by computers, but we humans have algorithms as well.
For instance, how would you go about counting the number of people in a room?
Well, if you're like me, you probably point at each person, one at a time, and count up from 0: 1, 2, 3, 4 and so forth.
Well, that's an algorithm.
In fact, let's try to express it a bit more formally in pseudocode, English-like syntax that resembles a programming language.
Let n equal 0.
For each person in room, set n = n + 1.
How to interpret this pseudocode?
Well, line 1 declares, so to speak, a variable called n and initializes its value to zero.
This just means that at the beginning of our algorithm, the thing with which we're counting has a value of zero.
After all, before we start counting, we haven't counted anything yet.
Calling this variable n is just a convention.
I could have called it almost anything.
Now, line 2 demarks the start of loop, a sequence of steps that will repeat some number of times.
So, in our example, the step we're taking is counting people in the room.
Beneath line 2 is line 3, which describes exactly how we'll go about counting.
The indentation implies that it's line 3 that will repeat.
So, what the pseudocode is saying is that after starting at zero, for each person in the room, we'll increase n by 1.
Now, is this algorithm correct?
Well, let's bang on it a bit.
Does it work if there are 2 people in the room?
Let's see.
In line 1, we initialize n to zero.
For each of these two people, we then increment n by 1.
So, in the first trip through the loop, we update n from zero to 1, on the second trip through that same loop, we update n from 1 to 2.
And so, by this algorithm's end, n is 2, which indeed matches the number of people in the room.
So far, so good.
How about a corner case, though?
Suppose that there are zero people in the room, besides me, who's doing the counting.
In line 1, we again initialize n to zero.
This time, though, line 3 doesn't execute at all since there isn't a person in the room, and so, n remains zero, which indeed matches the number of people in the room.
Pretty simple, right?
But counting people one a time is pretty inefficient, too, no?
Surely, we can do better!
Why not count two people at a time?
Instead of counting 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and so forth, why not count 2, 4, 6, 8, and so on?
It even sounds faster, and it surely is.
Let's express this optimization in pseudocode.
Let n equal zero.
For each pair of people in room, set n = n + 2.
Pretty simple change, right?
Rather than count people one at a time, we instead count them two at a time.
This algorithm's thus twice as fast as the last.
But is it correct?
Let's see.
Does it work if there are 2 people in the room?
In line 1, we initialize n to zero.
For that one pair of people, we then increment n by 2.
And so, by this algorithm's end, n is 2, which indeed matches the number of people in the room.
Suppose next that there are zero people in the room.
In line 1, we initialize n to zero.
As before, line 3 doesn't execute at all since there aren't any pairs of people in the room, and so, n remains zero, which indeed matches the number of people in the room.
But what if there are 3 people in the room?
How does this algorithm fair?
Let's see.
In line 1, we initialize n to zero.
For a pair of those people, we then increment n by 2, but then what?
There isn't another full pair of people in the room, so line 2 no longer applies.
And so, by this algorithm's end, n is still 2, which isn't correct.
Indeed this algorithm is said to be buggy because it has a mistake.
Let's redress with some new pseudocode.
Let n equal zero.
For each pair of people in room, set n = n + 2.
If 1 person remains unpaired, set n = n + 1.
To solve this particular problem, we've introduced in line 4 a condition, otherwise known as a branch, that only executes if there is one person we could not pair with another.
So now, whether there's 1 or 3 or any odd number of people in the room, this algorithm will now count them.
Can we do even better?
Well, we could count in 3's or 4's or even 5's and 10's, but beyond that it's going to get a little bit difficult to point.
At the end of the day, whether executed by computers or humans, algorithms are just a set of instructions with which to solve problems.
These were just three.
What problem would you solve with an algorithm?
So when I was a kid ...
this was my team.
(Laughter) I stunk at sports.
I didn't like to play them, I didn't like to watch them.
So this is what I did. I went fishing.
And for all of my growing up I fished on the shores of Connecticut, and these are the creatures that I saw on a regular basis.
But after I grew up and went to college, and I came home in the early 90's, this is what I found.
My team had shrunk.
It was like literally having your roster devastated.
And as I sort of looked into that, from a very personal point of view as a fisherman, I started to kind of figure out, well, what was the rest of the world thinking about it?
First place I started to look was fish markets.
And when I went to fish markets, in spite of where I was -- whether I was in North Carolina, or Paris, or London, or wherever -- I kept seeing this weirdly repeating trope of four creatures, again and again -- on the menus, on ice -- shrimp, tuna, salmon and cod.
And I thought this was pretty strange, and as I looked at it, I was wondering, did anyone else notice this sort of shrinking of the market?
Well, when I looked into it, I realized that people didn't look at it as their team.
Ordinary people, the way they looked at seafood was like this.
It's not an unusual human characteristic to reduce the natural world down to very few elements.
We did it before, 10,000 years ago, when we came out of our caves.
If you look at fire pits from 10,000 years ago, you'll see raccoons, you'll see, you know, wolves, you'll see all kinds of different creatures.
But if you telescope to the age of -- you know, 2,000 years ago, you'll see these four mammals: pigs, cows, sheep and goats.
It's true of birds, too.
You look at the menus in New York City restaurants 150 years ago, 200 years ago, you'll see snipe, woodcock, grouse, dozens of ducks, dozens of geese.
But telescope ahead to the age of modern animal husbandry, and you'll see four: turkeys, ducks, chicken and geese.
So it makes sense that we've headed in this direction.
But how have we headed in this direction?
Well ...
first it's a very, very new problem.
This is the way we've been fishing the oceans over the last 50 years.
World War II was a tremendous incentive to arm ourselves in a war against fish.
All of the technology that we perfected during World War II -- sonar, lightweight polymers -- all these things were redirected towards fish.
And so you see this tremendous buildup in fishing capacity, quadrupling in the course of time, from the end of World War II to the present time.
And right now that means we're taking between 80 and 90 million metric tons out of the sea every year.
That's the equivalent of the human weight of China taken out of the sea every year.
And it's no coincidence that I use China as the example because China is now the largest fishing nation in the world.
Well, that's only half the story.
The other half of the story is this incredible boom in fish farming and aquaculture, which is now, only in the last year or two, starting to exceed the amount of wild fish that we produce.
So that if you add wild fish and farmed fish together, you get the equivalent of two Chinas created from the ocean each and every year.
And again, it's not a coincidence that I use China as the example, because China, in addition to being the biggest catcher of fish, is also the biggest farmer of fish.
So let's look though at the four choices we are making right now.
The first one -- by far the most consumed seafood in America and in much of the West, is shrimp.
Shrimp in the wild -- as a wild product -- is a terrible product.
5, 10, 15 pounds of wild fish are regularly killed to bring one pound of shrimp to the market.
They're also incredibly fuel inefficient to bring to the market.
In a recent study that was produced out of Dalhousie University, it was found that dragging for shrimp is one of the most carbon-intensive ways of fishing that you can find.
So you can farm them, and people do farm them, and they farm them a lot in this very area.
Problem is ...
the place where you farm shrimp is in these wild habitats -- in mangrove forests.
Now look at those lovely roots coming down.
Those are the things that hold soil together, protect coasts, create habitats for all sorts of young fish, young shrimp, all sorts of things that are important to this environment.
Well, this is what happens to a lot of coastal mangrove forests.
We've lost millions of acres of coastal mangroves over the last 30 or 40 years.
That rate of destruction has slowed, but we're still in a major mangrove deficit.
The other thing that's going on here is a phenomenon that the filmmaker Mark Benjamin called "Grinding Nemo."
This phenomenon is very, very relevant to anything that you've ever seen on a tropical reef.
Because what's going on right now, we have shrimp draggers dragging for shrimp, catching a huge amount of bycatch, that bycatch in turn gets ground up and turned into shrimp food.
And sometimes, many of these vessels -- manned by slaves -- are catching these so-called "trash fish," fish that we would love to see on a reef, grinding them up and turning them into shrimp feed -- an ecosystem literally eating itself and spitting out shrimp.
The next most consumed seafood in America, and also throughout the West, is tuna.
So tuna is this ultimate global fish.
These huge management areas have to be observed in order for tuna to be well managed.
Our own management area, called a Regional Fisheries Management Organization, is called ICCAT, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas.
The great naturalist Carl Safina once called it, "The International Conspiracy to Catch all the Tunas."
Of course we've seen incredible improvement in ICCAT in the last few years, there is total room for improvement, but it remains to be said that tuna is a global fish, and to manage it, we have to manage the globe.
Well, we could also try to grow tuna but tuna is a spectacularly bad animal for aquaculture.
Many people don't know this but tuna are warm-blooded.
They can heat their bodies 20 degrees above ambient temperature, they can swim at over 40 miles an hour.
So that pretty much eliminates all the advantages of farming a fish, right?
A farmed fish is -- or a fish is cold-blooded, it doesn't move too much.
That's a great thing for growing protein.
But if you've got this crazy, wild creature that swims at 40 miles an hour and heats its blood -- not a great candidate for aquaculture.
The next creature -- most consumed seafood in America and throughout the West -- is salmon.
Now salmon got its plundering, too, but it didn't really necessarily happen through fishing.
This is my home state of Connecticut.
Connecticut used to be home to a lot of wild salmon.
But if you look at this map of Connecticut, every dot on that map is a dam.
There are over 3,000 dams in the state of Connecticut.
I often say this is why people in Connecticut are so uptight -- (Laughter) If somebody could just unblock Connecticut's chi, I feel that we could have an infinitely better world.
But I made this particular comment at a convention once of national parks officers, and this guy from North Carolina sidled up to me, he says, "You know, you oughtn't be so hard on your Connecticut, cause we here in North Carolina, we got 35,000 dams."
So it's a national epidemic, it's an international epidemic.
And there are dams everywhere, and these are precisely the things that stop wild salmon from reaching their spawning grounds.
So as a result, we've turned to aquaculture, and salmon is one the most successful, at least from a numbers point of view.
When they first started farming salmon, it could take as many as six pounds of wild fish to make a single pound of salmon.
The industry has, to its credit, greatly improved.
They've gotten it below two to one, although it's a little bit of a cheat because if you look at the way aquaculture feed is produced, they're measuring pellets -- pounds of pellets per pound of salmon.
Those pellets are in turn reduced fish.
So the actual -- what's called the FIFO, the fish in and the fish out -- kind of hard to say.
But in any case, credit to the industry, it has lowered the amount of fish per pound of salmon.
Problem is we've also gone crazy with the amount of salmon that we're producing.
Aquaculture is the fastest growing food system on the planet.
It's growing at something like seven percent per year.
And so even though we're doing less per fish to bring it to the market, we're still killing a lot of these little fish.
And it's not just fish that we're feeding fish to, we're also feeding fish to chickens and pigs.
So we've got chickens and they're eating fish, but weirdly, we also have fish that are eating chickens.
Because the byproducts of chickens -- feathers, blood, bone -- get ground up and fed to fish.
So I often wonder, is there a fish that ate a chicken that ate a fish?
It's sort of a reworking of the chicken and egg thing. Anyway -- (Laughter) All together, though, it results in a terrible mess.
What you're talking about is something between 20 and 30 million metric tons of wild creatures that are taken from the ocean and used and ground up.
That's the equivalent of a third of a China, or of an entire United States of humans that's taken out of the sea each and every year.
The last of the four is a kind of amorphous thing.
It's what the industry calls "whitefish."
There are many fish that get cycled into this whitefish thing but the way to kind of tell the story, I think, is through that classic piece of American culinary innovation, the Filet-O-Fish sandwich.
So the Filet-O-Fish sandwich actually started as halibut.
And it started because a local franchise owner found that when he served his McDonald's on Friday, nobody came.
Because it was a Catholic community, they needed fish.
So he went to Ray Kroc and he said, "I'm going to bring you a fish sandwich, going to be made out of halibut."
Ray Kroc said, "I don't think it's going to work.
I want to do a Hula Burger, and there's going to be a slice of pineapple on a bun.
But let's do this, let's have a bet.
Whosever sandwich sells more, that will be the winning sandwich."
Well, it's kind of sad for the ocean that the Hula Burger didn't win.
So he made his halibut sandwich.
Unfortunately though, the sandwich came in at 30 cents.
Ray wanted the sandwich to come in at 25 cents, so he turned to Atlantic cod.
We all know what happened to Atlantic cod in New England.
So now the Filet-O-Fish sandwich is made out of Alaska pollock, it's the largest fin fish fishery in the United States, 2 to 3 billion pounds of fish taken out of the sea every single year.
If we go through the pollock, the next choice is probably going to be tilapia.
Tilapia is one of those fish nobody ever heard of 20 years ago.
It's actually a very efficient converter of plant protein into animal protein, and it's been a godsend to the third world.
It's actually a tremendously sustainable solution, it goes from an egg to an adult in nine months.
The problem is that when you look about the West, it doesn't do what the West wants it to do.
It really doesn't have what's called an oily fish profile.
It doesn't have the EPA and DHA omega-3s that we all think are going to make us live forever.
So what do we do?
I mean, first of all, what about this poor fish, the clupeids?
The fish that represent a huge part of that 20 to 30 million metric tons.
Well, one possibility that a lot of conservationists have raised is could we eat them?
Could we eat them directly instead of feeding them to salmon?
There are arguments for it.
They are tremendously fuel efficient to bring to market, a fraction of the fuel cost of say, shrimp, and at the very top of the carbon efficiency scale.
They also are omega-3 rich, a great source for EPA and DHA.
So that is a potential.
And if we were to go down that route what I would say is, instead of paying a few bucks a pound -- or a few bucks a ton, really -- and making it into aquafeed, could we halve the catch and double the price for the fishermen and make that our way of treating these particular fish?
Other possibility though, which is much more interesting, is looking at bivalves, particularly mussels.
Now, mussels are very high in EPA and DHA, they're similar to canned tuna.
They're also extremely fuel efficient.
To bring a pound of mussels to market is about a thirtieth of the carbon as required to bring beef to market.
They require no forage fish, they actually get their omega-3s by filtering the water of microalgae.
In fact, that's where omega-3s come from, they don't come from fish.
Microalgae make the omega-3s, they're only bioconcentrated in fish.
Mussels and other bivalves do tremendous amounts of water filtration.
A single mussel can filter dozens of gallons every single day.
And this is incredibly important when we look at the world.
Right now, nitrification, overuse of phosphates in our waterways are causing tremendous algal blooms.
Over 400 new dead zones have been created in the last 20 years, tremendous sources of marine life death.
We also could look at not a fish at all.
We could look at a vegetable.
We could look at seaweed, the kelps, all these different varieties of things that can be high in omega-3s, can be high in proteins, tremendously good things.
They filter the water just like mussels do.
And weirdly enough, it turns out that you can actually feed this to cows.
Now, I'm not a big fan of cattle.
But if you wanted to keep growing cattle in a time and place where water resources are limited, you're growing seaweed in the water, you don't have to water it -- major consideration.
And the last fish is a question mark.
We have the ability to create aquacultured fish that creates a net gain of marine protein for us.
This creature would have to be vegetarian, it would have to be fast growing, it would have to be adaptable to a changing climate and it would have to have that oily fish profile, that EPA, DHA, omega-3 fatty acid profile that we're looking for.
This exists kind of on paper.
I have been reporting on these subjects for 15 years.
Every time I do a new story, somebody tells me, "We can do all that. We can do it. We've figured it all out.
We can produce a fish that's a net gain of marine protein and has omega-3s."
Great.
It doesn't seem to be getting scaled up.
It is time to scale this up.
If we do, 30 million metric tons of seafood, a third of the world catch, stays in the water.
So I guess what I'm saying is this is what we've been going with.
We tend to go with our appetites rather than our minds.
But if we went with this, or some configuration of it, we might have a little more of this.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Olive oil is 100% fat; there's nothing else in it.
Pancake mix, on the other hand, is only about 11% fat.
And, yet, olive oil is good for you, and pancake mix is not.
Why is that?
As it turns out, the amount of fat we eat doesn't impact our weight or our cholesterol or our risk of heart disease nearly as much as what kind of fat we eat.
But let's back up: What is fat?
If we were to zoom in on a salmon, which is a fatty fish, past the organs, past the tissues, into the cells, we would see that the stuff we call fat is actually made up of molecules called triglycerides, and they are not all alike.
Here's one example.
Those three carbons on the left, that's glycerol.
Now, you can think of that as the backbone that holds the rest of the molecule together.
The three long chains on the right are called fatty acids, and it's subtle differences in the structures of these chains that determine whether a fat is, let's say, solid or liquid; whether or not it goes rancid quickly; and, most importantly, how good or how bad it is for you.
Let's take a look at some of these differences.
One is length.
Fatty acids can be short or long.
Another, more important difference is the type of bond between the carbon atoms.
Some fatty acids have only single bonds.
Others have both single and double bonds.
Fatty acids with only single bonds are called saturated, and those with one or more double bonds are called unsaturated.
Now, most unsaturated fats are good for you, while saturated fats are bad for you in excess.
For saturated fats, the story pretty much ends there but not for unsaturated fats.
The double bonds in these molecules have a kind of weird property; they're rigid.
So, that means there are two ways to arrange every double bond.
The first is like this, where both hydrogens are on same side and both carbons are on the same side.
The second way is like this.
Now the hydrogens and carbons are on opposite sides of the double bond.
Now, even though both of these molecules are made up of exactly the same building blocks, they are two completely different substances, and they behave completely differently inside of us.
The configuration on the left is called CIS, which you've probably never heard of.
The one of the right is called TRANS, and you probably have heard of trans fats before.
They don't go rancid, they're more stable during deep frying, and they can change the texture of foods in ways that other fats just can't.
They're also terrible for your health, by far worse than saturated fat, even though technically they're a type of unsaturated fat.
Now, I know that seems crazy, but your body doesn't care what a molecule looks like on paper.
All that matters is the 3-D shape where the molecule fits, where it doesn't, and what pathways it interferes with.
So, how do you know if a food has trans fat in it?
Well, the only sure way to know is if you see the words, "partially hydrogenated" in the ingredients list.
Don't let nutrition labels or advertising fool you.
The FDA allows manufacturers to claim that their products contain "0" grams of trans fat even if they actually have up to half a gram per serving.
But there are no hard and fast rules about how small a serving can be, and, that means, you'll have to rely on seeing those key words, partially hydrogenated, because that's how trans fats are made, by partially hydrogenating unsaturated fats.
So, let's go back to our olive oil and pancake mix from before.
Olive oil is 100% fat.
Pancake mix is only 11% fat.
But olive oil is mostly unsaturated fat, and it has no trans fat at all.
On the other hand, more than half the fat in pancake mix is either saturated or trans fat.
And, so, even though olive oil has 10 times as much fat as pancake mix, it's healthy for you, whereas pancake mix is not.
Now, I'm not trying to pick on pancake mix.
There are lots of foods with this type of fat profile.
The point is this: It's not how much fat you eat, it's what kind of fat.
And what makes a particular fat healthy or unhealthy is its shape.
There are still lots of things about space that we may never be able to answer, like is time travel possible?
Or are aliens living somewhere else in the Milky Way?
But there is one thing I believe about space: Space is trying to kill me.
Space isn't out to get me personally.
It's also trying to kill you and everybody else.
Think about it.
Space doesn't naturally have what we need to survive when we travel there: no air, it's too hot or too cold, no ozone to protect us from those nasty UV rays, either.
This all sounds bad, but what can space really do to me if I stay on Earth?
What we need to understand is that objects in space can cause people to think their days are numbered, even when there are events on Earth that can hurt or kill us before something from space does.
So, what are the odds that one of these objects will really affect Earth and you and me in our lifetime?
Well, we can take what we know about the universe to try and figure that out.
You might have heard stories about asteroids hitting the Earth.
That would be pretty bad.
Scientists think asteroids might have killed off most of the dinosaurs.
Sounds like something we should worry about, right?
Well, astronomers can now watch asteroids in space and see them coming using complex computer models to predict the deadly rock's path.
For a while, the reported odds that asteroid Apophis would strike Earth in 2036 were once 1 in 625.
But, after updating their data, astronomers now say the chances are extremely low.
Okay, what about the sun?
Hollywood movies like to pick on our sun by showing Earth destroyed by solar flares or the sun dying out, which would cause Earth to freeze.
Astronomers predict our sun contains enough gas to make energy for another 3 to 5 billion years.
So, in 3 to 5 billion years, if people still exist on Earth, they'll have to deal with that.
But today, well, we're safe.
Sometimes the sun does shoot flares at Earth, but the magnetic fields surrounding our planet blocks most of that radiation.
The radiation that does get through creates things like the Aurora Borealis.
Gigantic solar flares can mess with our satellites and electrical equipment, but the chances of it killing you are pretty slim.
Okay, what about that supermassive black hole in the middle of our galaxy?
What happens to Earth, and us, when it pulls us in?
After all, it is supermassive.
Nope, not going to happen.
That's one big object that can't bother us.
How can we be so sure?
Our solar system is on the edge of the Milky Way while the nearest supermassive black hole is about 26,000 light years from Earth.
That means we aren't on that black hole's menu.
So, you still think space objects are trying to kill you even after what I've told you so far?
I think I've even convinced myself that odds are really good that space and the objects up there won't kill me after all.
But I'll probably keep looking up just to make sure nothing is headed my way.
The next time you see a news report of a hurricane or a tropical storm showing high winds battering trees and houses, ask yourself, "How did the wind get going so fast?"
Amazingly enough, this is a motion that started more than five billion years ago.
But, to understand why, we need to understand spin.
In physics, we talk about two types of motion.
The first is straight-line motion.
You push on something, and it moves forward.
The second type, spin, involves an object rotating, or turning on its axis in place.
An object in straight-line motion will move forever unless something, like the friction of the ground beneath it, causes it to slow down and stop.
The same thing happens when you get something spinning.
It will keep on spinning until something stops it.
But the spin can speed up.
If an ice skater is gliding across the ice in straight-line motion and she pulls her arms in, she keeps on gliding at the same speed.
But if she is spinning on the ice and she pulls her arms in, you know what happens next.
She spins faster.
This is called the conservation of angular momentum.
Mathematically, angular momentum is a product of two numbers, one that gives the spin rate and one that gives the distance of the mass from the axis.
If something is freely spinning, as one number gets bigger, the other gets smaller.
Arms closer, spin faster.
Arms farther, spin slower.
Spin causes other effects, too.
If you are riding on a spinning merry-go-round and you toss a ball to a friend, it will appear to follow a curving path.
It doesn't actually curve, though.
It really goes in a straight line.
You were the one who was following a curving path, but, from your point of view, the ball appears to curve.
We call this the coriolis effect.
Oh, and you are riding on a speeding merry-go-round right now at this very moment.
We call it the Earth.
The Earth spins on its axis once each day.
But why does the Earth spin?
Now, that's a story that starts billions of years ago.
A cloud of dust and gas that form the Sun and the Earth and the planets and you and me started to collapse as gravity pulled it all together.
Before it started to collapse, this cloud had a very gentle spin.
And, as it collapsed, like that ice skater pulling her arms in, the spin got faster and faster.
And everything that formed out of the cloud, the Sun and the planets around the Sun and the moons around the planets, all inherited this spin.
And this inherited spin is what gives us night and day.
And this day-night cycle is what drives our weather.
The Earth is warm on the daytime side, cool on the nighttime side, and it's warmer at the equator than at the poles.
The differences in temperature make differences in air pressure, and the differences in air pressure make air move.
They make the wind blow.
But, because the Earth spins, the moving air curves to the right in the Northern Hemisphere because of the coriolis effect.
If there's a region of low pressure in the atmosphere, air is pushed toward it, like water going down a drain.
But the air curves to the right as it goes, and this gives it a spin.
With the dramatic low pressure in a storm, the air gets pulled in tighter and tighter, so it gets going faster and faster, and this is how we get the high winds of a hurricane.
So, when you see a spinning storm on a weather report, think about this: The spin ultimately came from the spin of the Earth, and the Earth's spin is a remnant, a fossil relic, of the gentle spin of the cloud of dust and gas that collapsed to make the Earth some five billion years ago.
You are watching something, the spin, that is older than dirt, that's older than rocks, that's older than the Earth itself.
How big was that fish you caught?
This big?
This big?
This big?
Without photographic evidence, there's nothing that proves you caught a whopper, and that's been true since the dawn of fishing.
In fact, hundreds of years ago, long before photography could capture the moment, Japanese fishermen invented their own way to record trophy catches.
They called it Gyotaku.
Gyotaku is the ancient art of printing fish that originated in Japan as a way to record trophy catches prior to the modern day camera.
Gyo means fish and taku means impression.
There are several different stories about how Gyotaku came about, but it basically started with fishermen needing a way to record the species and size of the fish they caught over 100 years ago.
Fishermen took paper, ink, and brushes out to sea with them.
They told stories of great adventures at sea.
Since the Japanese revered certain fish, the fishermen would take a rubbing from these fish and release them.
To make the rubbing, they would paint the fish with non-toxic sumi-e ink and print them on rice paper.
This way they could be released or cleaned and sold at market.
The first prints like this were for records only with no extra details.
It wasn't until the mid 1800's that they began painting eye details and other embellishments onto the prints.
One famous nobleman, Lord Sakai, was an avid fisherman, and, when he made a large catch, he wanted to preserve the memory of the large, red sea bream.
To do so, he commissioned a fisherman to print his catch.
After this, many fisherman would bring their Gyotaku prints to Lord Sakai, and if he liked their work, he would hire them to print for him.
Many prints hung in the palace during the Edo period.
After this period, Gyotaku was not as popular and began to fade away.
Today, Gyotaku has become a popular art form, enjoyed by many.
And the prints are said to bring good luck to the fishermen.
But the art form is quite different than it used to be.
Most artists today learn on their own by trial and error.
Before the artist begins to print, the fish needs to be prepared for printing.
First, the artist places the fish on a hollowed out surface.
Then the artist spreads the fins out and pins them down on the board to dry.
They then clean the fish with water.
When it comes time to print, there are two different methods.
The indirect method begins with pasting moist fabric or paper onto the fish using rice paste.
Then, the artist uses a tompo, or a cotton ball covered in silk, to put ink on the fabric or paper to produce the print.
This method requires more skill and great care needs to be taken when pulling the paper off the fish so the paper doesn't tear.
In the direct method, the artist paints directly on the fish, and then gently presses the moist fabric or paper into the fish.
With both of these methods, no two prints are exactly alike, but both reveal dramatic images of the fish.
For the final touch, the artist uses a chop, or a stamp, and signs their work, and can hold it up to say, "The fish was exactly this big!"
Fifty years ago in the old Soviet Union, a team of engineers was secretly moving a large object through a desolate countryside.
With it, they were hoping to capture the minds of people everywhere by being the first to conquer outer space.
The rocket was huge.
And packed in its nose was a silver ball with two radios inside.
On October 4, 1957, they launched their rocket.
One of the Russian scientists wrote at the time: "We are about to create a new planet that we will call Sputnik.
In the olden days, explorers like Vasco da Gama and Columbus had the good fortune to open up the terrestrial globe.
Now we have the good fortune to open up space.
And it is for those in the future to envy us our joy."
You're watching snippets from "Sputnik," my fifth documentary feature, which is just about completed.
It tells the story of Sputnik, and the story of what happened to America as a result.
For days after the launch, Sputnik was a wonderful curiosity.
A man-made moon visible by ordinary citizens, it inspired awe and pride that humans had finally launched an object into space.
But just three days later, on a day they called Red Monday, the media and the politicians told us, and we believed, that Sputnik was proof that our enemy had beaten us in science and technology, and that they could now attack us with hydrogen bombs, using their Sputnik rocket as an IBM missile.
All hell broke loose.
Sputnik quickly became one of the three great shocks to hit America -- historians say the equal of Pearl Harbor or 9/11.
It provoked the missile gap.
It exploded an arms race.
It began the space race.
Within a year, Congress funded huge weapons increases, and we went from 1,200 nuclear weapons to 20,000.
And the reactions to Sputnik went far beyond weapons increases.
For example, some here will remember this day, June 1958, the National Civil Defense Drill, where tens of millions of people in 78 cities went underground.
Or the Gallup Poll that showed that seven in 10 Americans believed that a nuclear war would happen, and that at least 50 percent of our population was going to be killed.
But Sputnik provoked wonderful changes as well.
For example, some in this room went to school on scholarship because of Sputnik.
Support for engineering, math and science -- education in general -- boomed.
And Vint Cerf points out that Sputnik led directly to ARPA, and the Internet, and, of course, NASA.
My feature documentary shows how a free society can be stampeded by those who know how to use media.
But it also shows how we can turn what appears at first to be a bad situation, into something that was overall very good for America.
"Sputnik" will soon be released.
In closing, I would like to take a moment to thank one of my investors: longtime TEDster, Jay Walker.
And I'd like to thank you all.
(Applause).
Thank you, Chris.
Well, I'm an ocean chemist.
I look at the chemistry of the ocean today.
I look at the chemistry of the ocean in the past.
The way I look back in the past is by using the fossilized remains of deepwater corals.
You can see an image of one of these corals behind me.
It was collected from close to Antarctica, thousands of meters below the sea, so, very different than the kinds of corals you may have been lucky enough to see if you've had a tropical holiday.
So I'm hoping that this talk will give you a four-dimensional view of the ocean.
Two dimensions, such as this beautiful two-dimensional image of the sea surface temperature.
This was taken using satellite, so it's got tremendous spatial resolution.
The overall features are extremely easy to understand.
The equatorial regions are warm because there's more sunlight.
The polar regions are cold because there's less sunlight.
And that allows big icecaps to build up on Antarctica and up in the Northern Hemisphere.
If you plunge deep into the sea, or even put your toes in the sea, you know it gets colder as you go down, and that's mostly because the deep waters that fill the abyss of the ocean come from the cold polar regions where the waters are dense.
If we travel back in time 20,000 years ago, the earth looked very much different.
And I've just given you a cartoon version of one of the major differences you would have seen if you went back that long.
The icecaps were much bigger.
They covered lots of the continent, and they extended out over the ocean.
Sea level was 120 meters lower.
Carbon dioxide [levels] were very much lower than they are today.
So the earth was probably about three to five degrees colder overall, and much, much colder in the polar regions.
What I'm trying to understand, and what other colleagues of mine are trying to understand, is how we moved from that cold climate condition to the warm climate condition that we enjoy today.
We know from ice core research that the transition from these cold conditions to warm conditions wasn't smooth, as you might predict from the slow increase in solar radiation.
And we know this from ice cores, because if you drill down into ice, you find annual bands of ice, and you can see this in the iceberg.
You can see those blue-white layers.
Gases are trapped in the ice cores, so we can measure CO2 -- that's why we know CO2 was lower in the past -- and the chemistry of the ice also tells us about temperature in the polar regions.
And if you move in time from 20,000 years ago to the modern day, you see that temperature increased.
It didn't increase smoothly.
Sometimes it increased very rapidly, then there was a plateau, then it increased rapidly.
It was different in the two polar regions, and CO2 also increased in jumps.
So we're pretty sure the ocean has a lot to do with this.
The ocean stores huge amounts of carbon, about 60 times more than is in the atmosphere.
It also acts to transport heat across the equator, and the ocean is full of nutrients and it controls primary productivity.
So if we want to find out what's going on down in the deep sea, we really need to get down there, see what's there and start to explore.
This is some spectacular footage coming from a seamount about a kilometer deep in international waters in the equatorial Atlantic, far from land.
You're amongst the first people to see this bit of the seafloor, along with my research team.
You're probably seeing new species.
You'd have to collect the samples and do some very intense taxonomy.
You can see beautiful bubblegum corals.
There are brittle stars growing on these corals.
Those are things that look like tentacles coming out of corals.
There are corals made of different forms of calcium carbonate growing off the basalt of this massive undersea mountain, and the dark sort of stuff, those are fossilized corals, and we're going to talk a little more about those as we travel back in time.
To do that, we need to charter a research boat.
This is the James Cook, an ocean-class research vessel moored up in Tenerife.
Looks beautiful, right?
Great, if you're not a great mariner.
Sometimes it looks a little more like this.
This is us trying to make sure that we don't lose precious samples.
Everyone's scurrying around, and I get terribly seasick, so it's not always a lot of fun, but overall it is.
So we've got to become a really good mapper to do this.
You don't see that kind of spectacular coral abundance everywhere.
It is global and it is deep, but we need to really find the right places.
We just saw a global map, and overlaid was our cruise passage from last year.
This was a seven-week cruise, and this is us, having made our own maps of about 75,000 square kilometers of the seafloor in seven weeks, but that's only a tiny fraction of the seafloor.
We're traveling from west to east, over part of the ocean that would look featureless on a big-scale map, but actually some of these mountains are as big as Everest.
So with the maps that we make on board, we get about 100-meter resolution, enough to pick out areas to deploy our equipment, but not enough to see very much.
To do that, we need to fly remotely-operated vehicles about five meters off the seafloor.
And if we do that, we can get maps that are one-meter resolution down thousands of meters.
Here is a remotely-operated vehicle, a research-grade vehicle.
You can see an array of big lights on the top.
There are high-definition cameras, manipulator arms, and lots of little boxes and things to put your samples.
Here we are on our first dive of this particular cruise, plunging down into the ocean.
We go pretty fast to make sure the remotely operated vehicles are not affected by any other ships.
And we go down, and these are the kinds of things you see.
These are deep sea sponges, meter scale.
This is a swimming holothurian -- it's a small sea slug, basically.
This is slowed down.
Most of the footage I'm showing you is speeded up, because all of this takes a lot of time.
This is a beautiful holothurian as well.
And this animal you're going to see coming up was a big surprise.
I've never seen anything like this and it took us all a bit surprised.
This was after about 15 hours of work and we were all a bit trigger-happy, and suddenly this giant sea monster started rolling past.
This wasn't what we were looking for.
We were looking for corals, deep sea corals.
You're going to see a picture of one in a moment.
It's small, about five centimeters high.
It's made of calcium carbonate, so you can see its tentacles there, moving in the ocean currents.
An organism like this probably lives for about a hundred years.
And as it grows, it takes in chemicals from the ocean.
And the chemicals, or the amount of chemicals, depends on the temperature; it depends on the pH, it depends on the nutrients.
And if we can understand how these chemicals get into the skeleton, we can then go back, collect fossil specimens, and reconstruct what the ocean used to look like in the past.
And here you can see us collecting that coral with a vacuum system, and we put it into a sampling container.
We can do this very carefully, I should add.
Some of these organisms live even longer.
This is a black coral called Leiopathes, an image taken by my colleague, Brendan Roark, about 500 meters below Hawaii.
Four thousand years is a long time.
If you take a branch from one of these corals and polish it up, this is about 100 microns across.
And Brendan took some analyses across this coral -- you can see the marks -- and he's been able to show that these are actual annual bands, so even at 500 meters deep in the ocean, corals can record seasonal changes, which is pretty spectacular.
But 4,000 years is not enough to get us back to our last glacial maximum.
So what do we do?
We go in for these fossil specimens.
This is what makes me really unpopular with my research team.
So going along, there's giant sharks everywhere, there are pyrosomes, there are swimming holothurians, there's giant sponges, but I make everyone go down to these dead fossil areas and spend ages kind of shoveling around on the seafloor.
And we pick up all these corals, bring them back, we sort them out.
But each one of these is a different age, and if we can find out how old they are and then we can measure those chemical signals, this helps us to find out what's been going on in the ocean in the past.
So on the left-hand image here, I've taken a slice through a coral, polished it very carefully and taken an optical image.
On the right-hand side, we've taken that same piece of coral, put it in a nuclear reactor, induced fission, and every time there's some decay, you can see that marked out in the coral, so we can see the uranium distribution.
Why are we doing this?
Uranium is a very poorly regarded element, but I love it.
The decay helps us find out about the rates and dates of what's going on in the ocean.
And if you remember from the beginning, that's what we want to get at when we're thinking about climate.
So we use a laser to analyze uranium and one of its daughter products, thorium, in these corals, and that tells us exactly how old the fossils are.
This beautiful animation of the Southern Ocean I'm just going to use illustrate how we're using these corals to get at some of the ancient ocean feedbacks.
You can see the density of the surface water in this animation by Ryan Abernathey.
It's just one year of data, but you can see how dynamic the Southern Ocean is.
The intense mixing, particularly the Drake Passage, which is shown by the box, is really one of the strongest currents in the world coming through here, flowing from west to east.
It's very turbulently mixed, because it's moving over those great big undersea mountains, and this allows CO2 and heat to exchange with the atmosphere in and out.
And essentially, the oceans are breathing through the Southern Ocean.
We've collected corals from back and forth across this Antarctic passage, and we've found quite a surprising thing from my uranium dating: the corals migrated from south to north during this transition from the glacial to the interglacial.
We don't really know why, but we think it's something to do with the food source and maybe the oxygen in the water.
So here we are.
I'm going to illustrate what I think we've found about climate from those corals in the Southern Ocean.
This is my illustration of that.
We think back in the glacial, from the analysis we've made in the corals, that the deep part of the Southern Ocean was very rich in carbon, and there was a low-density layer sitting on top.
That stops carbon dioxide coming out of the ocean.
We then found corals that are of an intermediate age, and they show us that the ocean mixed partway through that climate transition.
That allows carbon to come out of the deep ocean.
And then if we analyze corals closer to the modern day, or indeed if we go down there today anyway and measure the chemistry of the corals, we see that we move to a position where carbon can exchange in and out.
So this is the way we can use fossil corals to help us learn about the environment.
So I want to leave you with this last slide.
It's just a still taken out of that first piece of footage that I showed you.
This is a spectacular coral garden.
We didn't even expect to find things this beautiful.
It's thousands of meters deep.
There are new species.
It's just a beautiful place.
There are fossils in amongst, and now I've trained you to appreciate the fossil corals that are down there.
So next time you're lucky enough to fly over the ocean or sail over the ocean, just think -- there are massive sea mountains down there that nobody's ever seen before, and there are beautiful corals.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine a world in which you see numbers and letters as colored even though they're printed in black, in which music or voices trigger a swirl of moving, colored shapes, in which words and names fill your mouth with unusual flavors.
Jail tastes like cold, hard bacon while Derek tastes like earwax.
Welcome to synesthesia, the neurological phenomenon that couples two or more senses in 4% of the population.
A synesthete might not only hear my voice, but also see it, taste it, or feel it as a physical touch.
Sharing the same root with anesthesia, meaning no sensation, synesthesia means joined sensation.
Having one type, such as colored hearing, gives you a 50% chance of having a second, third, or fourth type.
One in 90 among us experience graphemes, the written elements of language, like letters, numerals, and punctuation marks, as saturated with color.
Some even have gender or personality.
For Gail, 3 is athletic and sporty, 9 is a vain, elitist girl.
By contrast, the sound units of language, or phonemes, trigger synestetic tastes.
For James, college tastes like sausage, as does message and similar words with the -age ending.
Synesthesia is a trait, like having blue eyes, rather than a disorder because there's nothing wrong.
In fact, all the extra hooks endow synesthetes with superior memories.
For example, a girl runs into someone she met long ago.
"Let's see, she had a green name.
D's are green: Debra, Darby, Dorothy, Denise.
Yes! Her name is Denise!"
Once established in childhood, pairings remain fixed for life.
Synesthetes inherit a biological propensity for hyperconnecting brain neurons, but then must be exposed to cultural artifacts, such as calendars, food names, and alphabets.
The amazing thing is that a single nucleotide change in the sequence of one's DNA alters perception.
In this way, synesthesia provides a path to understanding subjective differences, how two people can see the same thing differently.
Take Sean, who prefers blue tasting food, such as milk, oranges, and spinach.
The gene heightens normally occurring connections between the taste area in his frontal lobe and the color area further back.
But suppose in someone else that the gene acted in non-sensory areas.
You would then have the ability to link seemingly unrelated things, which is the definition of metaphor, seeing the similar in the dissimilar.
Not surprisingly, synesthesia is more common in artists who excel at making metaphors, like novelist Vladimir Nabokov, painter David Hockney, and composers Billy Joel and Lady Gaga.
But why do the rest of us non-synesthetes understand metaphors like "sharp cheese" or "sweet person"?
It so happens that sight, sound, and movement already map to one another so closely, that even bad ventriloquists convince us that the dummy is talking.
Movies, likewise, can convince us that the sound is coming from the actors' mouths rather than surrounding speakers.
So, inwardly, we're all synesthetes, outwardly unaware of the perceptual couplings happening all the time.
Cross-talk in the brain is the rule, not the exception.
And that sounds like a sweet deal to me!
Can I get a show of hands -- how many of you in this room have been on a plane in this past year?
That's pretty good.
Well, it turns out that you share that experience with more than three billion people every year.
And when we put so many people in all these metal tubes that fly all over the world, sometimes, things like this can happen and you get a disease epidemic.
I first actually got into this topic when I heard about the Ebola outbreak last year.
And it turns out that, although Ebola spreads through these more range-limited, large-droplet routes, there's all these other sorts of diseases that can be spread in the airplane cabin.
The worst part is, when we take a look at some of the numbers, it's pretty scary.
So with H1N1, there was this guy that decided to go on the plane and in the matter of a single flight actually spread the disease to 17 other people.
And then there was this other guy with SARS, who managed to go on a three-hour flight and spread the disease to 22 other people.
That's not exactly my idea of a great superpower.
When we take a look at this, what we also find is that it's very difficult to pre-screen for these diseases.
So when someone actually goes on a plane, they could be sick and they could actually be in this latency period in which they could actually have the disease but not exhibit any symptoms, and they could, in turn, spread the disease to many other people in the cabin.
How that actually works is that right now we've got air coming in from the top of the cabin and from the side of the cabin, as you see in blue.
And then also, that air goes out through these very efficient filters that eliminate 99.97 percent of pathogens near the outlets.
What happens right now, though, is that we have this mixing airflow pattern.
So if someone were to actually sneeze, that air would get swirled around multiple times before it even has a chance to go out through the filter.
So I thought: clearly, this is a pretty serious problem.
I didn't have the money to go out and buy a plane, so I decided to build a computer instead.
It actually turns out that with computational fluid dynamics, what we're able to do is create these simulations that give us higher resolutions than actually physically going in and taking readings in the plane.
And so how, essentially, this works is you would start out with these 2D drawings -- these are floating around in technical papers around the Internet.
I take that and then I put it into this 3D-modeling software, really building that 3D model.
And then I divide that model that I just built into these tiny pieces, essentially meshing it so that the computer can better understand it.
And then I tell the computer where the air goes in and out of the cabin, throw in a bunch of physics and basically sit there and wait until the computer calculates the simulation.
So what we get, actually, with the conventional cabin is this: you'll notice the middle person sneezing, and we go "Splat!" -- it goes right into people's faces.
It's pretty disgusting.
From the front, you'll notice those two passengers sitting next to the central passenger not exactly having a great time.
And when we take a look at that from the side, you'll also notice those pathogens spreading across the length of the cabin.
The first thing I thought was, "This is no good."
So I actually conducted more than 32 different simulations and ultimately, I came up with this solution right here.
This is what I call a -- patent pending -- Global Inlet Director.
With this, we're able to reduce pathogen transmission by about 55 times, and increase fresh-air inhalation by about 190 percent.
So how this actually works is we would install this piece of composite material into these existing spots that are already in the plane.
So it's very cost-effective to install and we can do this directly overnight.
All we have to do is put a couple of screws in there and you're good to go.
And the results that we get are absolutely amazing.
Instead of having those problematic swirling airflow patterns, we can create these walls of air that come down in-between the passengers to create personalized breathing zones.
So you'll notice the middle passenger here is sneezing again, but this time, we're able to effectively push that down to the filters for elimination.
And same thing from the side, you'll notice we're able to directly push those pathogens down.
So if you take a look again now at the same scenario but with this innovation installed, you'll notice the middle passenger sneezes, and this time, we're pushing that straight down into the outlet before it gets a chance to infect any other people.
So you'll notice the two passengers sitting next to the middle guy are breathing virtually no pathogens at all.
Take a look at that from the side as well, you see a very efficient system.
And in short, with this system, we win.
When we take a look at what this means, what we see is that this not only works if the middle passenger sneezes, but also if the window-seat passenger sneezes or if the aisle-seat passenger sneezes.
And so with this solution, what does this mean for the world?
Well, when we take a look at this from the computer simulation into real life, we can see with this 3D model that I built over here, essentially using 3D printing, we can see those same airflow patterns coming down, right to the passengers.
In the past, the SARS epidemic actually cost the world about 40 billion dollars.
And in the future, a big disease outbreak could actually cost the world in excess of three trillion dollars.
So before, it used to be that you had to take an airplane out of service for one to two months, spend tens of thousands of man hours and several million dollars to try to change something.
But now, we're able to install something essentially overnight and see results right away.
So it's really now a matter of taking this through to certification, flight testing, and going through all of these regulatory approvals processes.
But it just really goes to show that sometimes the best solutions are the simplest solutions.
And two years ago, even, this project would not have happened, just because the technology then wouldn't have supported it.
But now with advanced computing and how developed our Internet is, it's really the golden era for innovation.
And so the question I ask all of you today is: why wait?
Together, we can build the future today.
Thanks.
(Applause)
Imagine yourself standing on a beach, looking out over the ocean, waves crashing against the shore, blue as far as your eyes can see.
Let it really sink in, the sheer scope and size of it all.
Now, ask yourself, "How big is it?
How big is the ocean?"
First thing, we need to understand that there really is only one ocean, consisting of five component basins that we call the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian, the Arctic, and the Southern.
Each of these five, while generally referred to as oceans in and of themselves, are really and truly a part of a single, massive body of water, one ocean, which defines the very face of planet Earth.
The ocean covers roughly 71% of our planet's surface, some 360 million square kilometers, an area in excess of the size of 36 U.S.A.'s.
It's such a vast spread, when viewed from space, the ocean is, by far, the dominant feature of our planet.
Speaking of space, the ocean currently holds over 1.3 billion, that's billion with a "b", cubic kilometers of water.
Put another way, that's enough water to immerse the entire United States under a body of salt water over 132 kilometers tall, a height well beyond the reach of the highest clouds and extending deep into the upper atmosphere.
With all that volume, the ocean represents 97% of Earth's total water content.
On top of all that, the ocean contains upwards of 99% of the world's biosphere, that is, the spaces and places where life exists.
Now let that sink in for a second.
The immediate world as we know it, indeed the totality of all the living space encompassed by the continents themselves, all of that represents only 1% of the biosphere.
1%!
The ocean is everything else.
So, the ocean is physically massive.
It's importance to life is practically unparalleled.
It also happens to hold the greatest geological features of our planet.
Quickly, here are four of the most notable.
The ocean contains the world's largest mountain range, the mid-ocean ridge.
At roughly 65,000 kilometers long, this underwater range is some 10 times longer than the longest mountain chain found purely on dry land, the Andes.
Beneath the Denmark Strait exists the world's largest waterfall.
This massive cataract carries roughly 116 times more water per second over its edge than the Congo River's Inga Falls, the largest waterfall by volume on land.
The world's tallest mountain is actually found in the ocean, hiding in plain sight.
While 4200 meters of Hawaii's Mauna Kea sit above sea level, its sides plummet beneath the waves for another 5800 meters.
From its snow-covered top to it's silt-covered bottom, then, this Hawaiian mountain is roughly 10,000 meters in height, dwarfing tiny Everest's paltry peak by well over a kilometer.
Then, since we're picking on poor Everest, let's consider the world's deepest canyon, the Challenger Deep, existing 11 kilometers below the ocean's surface, some six times deeper than the Grand Canyon.
That's deep enough to sink Mount Everest into and still have over 2.1 kilometers of water sitting atop its newly submerged peak.
Put another way, the depth of the Challenger Deep is roughly the same height that commercial airliners travel.
So, pretty much however you choose to slice it, the ocean is capital B capital I, capital G, BIG!
It defines our planet, home to the greatest geological features, comprises the largest living space, and accordingly, is home to the greatest numbers and forms of life on Earth.
It is practically incomprehensible in scope.
But it is not so big, so vast, so extraordinary as to be untouchable.
In fact, with roughly 50% of the world's population living within 100 kilometers of the coastline and with most of the remainder living close enough to lakes, rivers, or swamps, all of which ultimately lead to the ocean, virtually every single person on the planet has the opportunity to influence the general health and nature of the world ocean.
Evidence of human influence is seen in every part of the ocean, no matter how deep, no matter how distant.
The ocean defines our planet, but, in a very real sense, we define the ocean.
What is at the center of the universe?
It's an essential question that humans have been wondering about for centuries.
But the journey toward an answer has been a strange one.
If you wanted to know the answer to this question in third century B.C.E. Greece, you might look up at the night sky and trust what you see.
That's what Aristotle, THE guy to ask back then, did.
He thought that since we're on Earth, looking up, it must be the center, right?
For him, the sphere of the world was made up of four elements: Earth, water, air, and fire.
These elements shifted around a nested set of solid crystalline spheres.
Each of the wandering stars, the planets, had their own crystal sphere.
The rest of the universe and all of its stars were on the last crystal sphere.
If you watch the sky change over time, you could see that this idea worked fine at explaining the motion you saw.
For centuries, this was central to how Europe and the Islamic world saw the universe.
But in 1543, a guy named Copernicus proposed a different model.
He believed that the sun was at the center of the universe.
This radically new idea was hard for a lot of people to accept.
After all, Aristotle's ideas made sense with what they could see, and they were pretty flattering to humans.
But a series of subsequent discoveries made the sun-centric model hard to ignore.
First, Johannes Kepler pointed out that orbits aren't perfect circles or spheres.
Then, Galileo's telescope caught Jupiter's moons orbiting around Jupiter, totally ignoring Earth.
And then, Newton proposed the theory of universal gravitation, demonstrating that all objects are pulling on each other.
Eventually, we had to let go of the idea that we were at the center of the universe.
Shortly after Copernicus, in the 1580s, an Italian friar, Giordano Bruno, suggested the stars were suns that likely had their own planets and that the universe was infinite.
This idea didn't go over well.
Bruno was burned at the stake for his radical suggestion.
Centuries later, the philosopher Rene Descartes proposed that the universe was a series of whirlpools, which he called vortices, and that each star was at the center of a whirlpool.
In time, we realized there were far more stars than Aristotle ever dreamed.
As astronomers like William Herschel got more and more advanced telescopes, it became clear that our sun is actually one of many stars inside the Milky Way.
And those smudges we see in the night sky?
They're other galaxies, just as vast as our Milky Way home.
Maybe we're farther from the center than we ever realized.
In the 1920s, astronomers studying the nebuli wanted to figure out how they were moving.
Based on the Doppler Effect, they expected to see blue shift for objects moving toward us, and red shift for ones moving away.
But all they saw was a red shift.
Everything was moving away from us, fast.
This observation is one of the pieces of evidence for what we now call the Big Bang Theory.
According to this theory, all matter in the universe was once a singular, infinitely dense particle.
In a sense, our piece of the universe was once at the center.
But this theory eliminates the whole idea of a center since there can't be a center to an infinite universe.
The Big Bang wasn't just an explosion in space; it was an explosion of space.
What each new discovery proves is that while our observations are limited, our ability to speculate and dream of what's out there isn't.
What we think we know today can change tomorrow.
As with many of the thinkers we just met, sometimes our wildest guesses lead to wonderful and humbling answers and propel us toward even more perplexing questions.
Have you ever helped set a table and found yourself wondering where to place the forks?
Or sat down to eat a restaurant and wondered which utensils to use?
Well, here's some simple, traditional etiquette tips on how to set a table.
What would happen if you set a table like this?
It doesn't look good, and you have to clean up the mess before you can even start.
Let's try another way.
To start, use a placemat or tablecloth, but not both, so the dishes aren't directly on the table.
This is more about looks than etiquette, but it's rare to see nothing under a plate unless you're eating at a picnic table.
Set out any flowers, candlesticks, or other decorations you like.
Candles are usually only lit at night.
Start with utensils for the main course, putting your dinner fork on the left and your dinner knife on the right-hand side since these are the hands we use them with.
Here's a helpful tip: You always eat outside-in, so to set for salad, we'll put the salad fork to the outside of the dinner fork and the salad knife to the outside of the dinner knife.
We'll have salad first, then our main course.
Notice, too, that the knife blades are both pointed toward the plate.
This is an old tradition from a time when dinner knives were quite sharp, and it was a sign of politeness and nonaggression to keep them pointed away from other diners.
We might have some soup, and since soup usually comes first, the soup spoon goes outside the knives since we use our right hand to hold it.
Here's another tip: Only set the table with what you'll need.
If you're not eating soup, don't set a soup spoon.
Now, for dessert, we'll have ice cream so we'll place the dessert up top since we don't need it for a little while.
Notice that the bowl of the spool is pointing to the left.
This way, when it's time to eat, you just slide it down and it's in the right spot.
If you were having cake, you'd set a fork and flip it 180 degrees so it would be right side-up on the left instead.
Next we'll anchor our setting with the plate.
You can also serve from the kitchen then bring them to the table.
The bread plate goes up and to the left of the setting, and the butter knife goes on the plate at an angle, again, with the blade pointing in.
There's only one spot left, and that's for the drinks.
Set the wine glass to the upper right, and then place the water glass to the left of it at an angle.
If you're like me and can never remember which goes where, think water, wine, w-a, w-i; a, i; they go left to right in alphabetical order.
Another tip: To remember left and right with the bread and the drinks, think B-M-W like the car.
B, your bread plate, is on the left; M, your meal, is in the middle, and W, your water, is on the right.
Lastly, the napkin traditionally goes to the left of the forks, though it's okay to put it underneath them, too.
For a fancier meal like this one that takes up a lot of space, we'll put it in the middle.
Now we're ready to eat.
Hopefully these tips will be helpful the next time you're asked to help set the table or sit down at a fancy meal.
Enjoy!
Some superheroes can grow to the size of a building at will.
That's very intimidating!
But a scientist must ask where the extra material is coming from.
The Law of Conservation of Mass implies that mass can neither be created nor destroyed, which means that our hero's mass will not change just because his size changes.
For instance, when we bake a fluffy sponge cake, even though the resulting delicious treat is much bigger in size than the cake batter that went into the oven, the weight of the cake batter should still equal the weight of the cake plus the moisture that has evaporated.
In a chemical equation, molecules rearrange to make new compounds, but all the components should still be accounted for.
When our hero expands from 6 feet tall to 18 feet tall, his height triples.
Galileo's Square Cube Law says his weight will be 27 - 3 times 3 times 3 equals 27 - times his regular weight since he has to expand in all three dimensions.
So, when our superhero transforms into a giant, we are dealing with two possibilities.
Our hero towering at 18 feet still only weighs 200 pounds, the original weight in this human form.
Now, option two, our hero weighs 5,400 pounds - 200 pounds times 27 equals 5,400 pounds - when he is 18 feet tall, which means he also weighs 5,400 pounds when he is 6 feet tall.
Nobody can get in the same elevator with him without the alarm going off.
Now, option two seems a little more scientifically plausible, but it begs the question, how does he ever walk through the park without sinking into the ground since the pressure he is exerting on the soil is calculated by his mass divided by the area of the bottom of his feet?
And what kind of super socks and super shoes is he putting on his feet to withstand all the friction that results from dragging his 5,400 pound body against the road when he runs?
And can he even run?
And I won't even ask how he finds pants flexible enough to withstand the expansion.
Now, let's explore the density of the two options mentioned above.
Density is defined as mass divided by volume.
The human body is made out of bones and flesh, which has a relatively set density.
In option one, if the hero weighs 200 pounds all the time, then he would be bones and flesh at normal size.
When he expands to a bigger size while still weighing 200 pounds, he essentially turns himself into a giant, fluffy teddy bear.
In option two, if the hero weighs 5,400 pounds all the time, then he would be bones and flesh at 18 feet with 5,400 pounds of weight supported by two legs.
The weight would be exerted on the leg bones at different angles as he moves.
Bones, while hard, are not malleable, meaning they do not bend, so they break easily.
The tendons would also be at risk of tearing.
Tall buildings stay standing because they have steel frames and do not run and jump around in the jungle.
Our hero, on the other hand, one landing at a bad angle and he's down.
Assuming his bodily function is the same as any mammal's, his heart would need to pump a large amount of blood throughout his body to provide enough oxygen for him to move 5,400 pounds of body weight around.
This would take tremendous energy, which he would need to provide by consuming 27 times 3,000 calories of food every day.
Now, that is roughly 150 Big Macs.
27 times 3,000 calculated equals 81,000 calculated slash 550 calories equals 147.
He wouldn't have time to fight crime because he would be eating all the time and working a 9-to-5 job in order to afford all the food he eats.
And what about superheroes who can turn their bodies into rocks or sand?
Well, everything on Earth is made out of elements.
And what defines each element is the number of protons in the nucleus.
That is how our periodic table is organized.
Hydrogen has one proton, helium, two protons, lithium, three protons, and so on.
The primary component of the most common form of sand is silicon dioxide.
Meanwhile, the human body consists of 65% oxygen, 18% carbon, 10% hydrogen, and 7% of various other elements including 0.002% of silicon.
In a chemical reaction, the elements recombine to make new compounds.
So, where is he getting all this silicon necessary to make the sand?
Sure, we can alter elements by nuclear fusion or nuclear fission.
However, nuclear fusion requires so much heat, the only natural occurrence of this process is in stars.
In order to utilize fusion in a short amount of time, the temperature of the area needs to be hotter than the Sun.
Every innocent bystander will be burned to a crisp.
Rapid nuclear fission is not any better since it often results in many radioactive particles.
Our hero would become a walking, talking nuclear power plant, ultimately harming every person he tries to save.
And do you really want the heat of the Sun or a radioactive nuclear plant inside of your body?
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and invisibility.
Some superheros can move faster than the wind.
The men in Apollo 10 reached a record-breaking speed of around 25,000 miles per hour when the shuttle re-entered the Earth's atmosphere in 1969.
Wouldn't we save a lot of time to be able to move that fast?
But what's the catch?
Air is not empty.
Elements like oxygen and nitrogen, even countless dust particles, make up the air around us.
When we move past these things in the air, we're rubbing against them and creating a lot of friction, which results in heat.
Just like rubbing your hands together warms them up or rubbing two sticks together makes fire, the faster objects rub together, the more heat is generated.
So, if we're running at 25,000 miles per hour, the heat from friction would burn our faces off.
Even if we somehow withstood the heat, the sand and dirt in the air would still scrape us up with millions of tiny cuts all happening at the same time.
Ever seen the front bumper or grill of a truck?
What do you think all the birds and bugs would do to your open eyes or exposed skin?
Okay, so you'll wear a mask to avoid destroying your face.
But what about people in buildings between you and your destination?
It takes us approximately one-fifth of a second to react to what we see.
By the time we see what is ahead of us and react to it - time times velocity equals distance equals one-fifth of a second times 25,000 miles per hour equals 1.4 miles - we would have gone past it or through it by over a mile.
We're either going to kill ourselves by crashing into the nearest wall at super speed or, worse, if we're indestructible, we've essentially turned our bodies into missiles that destroy everything in our path.
So, long distance travel at 25,000 miles per hour would leave us burning up, covered in bugs, and leaves no time to react.
What about short bursts to a location we can see with no obstacles in between?
Okay, let's say a bullet is about to hit a beautiful damsel in distress.
So, our hero swoops in at super speed, grabs her, and carries her to safety.
That sounds very romantic, but, in reality, that girl will probably suffer more damage from the hero than the bullet if he moved her at super speed.
Newton's First Law of Motion deals with inertia, which is the resistance to a change in its state of motion.
So, an object will continue moving or staying at the same place unless something changes it.
Acceleration is the rate the velocity changes over time.
When the girl at rest, velocity equals zero miles per hour, begins accelerating to reach the speed within seconds, velocity increases rapidly to 25,000 miles per hour, her brain would crash into the side of her skull.
And, when she stops suddenly, velocity decreases rapidly back to zero miles per hour, her brain would crash into the other side of her skull, turning her brain into mush.
The brain is too fragile to handle the sudden movement.
So is every part of her body, for that matter.
Remember, it's not the speed that causes the damage because the astronauts survived Apollo 10, it's the acceleration or sudden stop that causes our internal organs to crash into the front of our bodies the way we move forward in a bus when the driver slams on the brakes.
What the hero did to the girl is mathematically the same as running her over with a space shuttle at maximum speed.
She probably died instantly at the point of impact.
He's going to owe this poor girl's family an apology and a big fat compensation check.
Oh, and possibly face jail time.
Doctors have to carry liability insurance just in case they make a mistake and hurt their patients.
I wonder how much superhero insurance policy would cost.
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and invisibility.
If you wake up one morning with 1,000 times the strength you had the night before, how will you handle delicate day-to-day tasks?
Everything must seem so fragile to you since the scale of your strength has expanded one thousand times.
You'd have to be very careful when you're shaking someone's hand so you don't end up breaking their bones or crushing everyone you hug.
And using a fork to pick up a piece of broccoli from a Styrofoam plate without driving the fork through the plate is going to be as difficult as brain surgery.
Say the day comes and you get the chance to save a damsel in distress falling from a helicopter.
So, you hold out your arms, hoping to catch her.
Seconds later, you will find yourself holding her lifeless body.
What happened?
Well, pressure is force divided by area.
The smaller the area, the bigger the pressure.
This is why we can lift heavy objects without breaking our skin, but a tiny needle can make us bleed with just a little poke.
The pressure that will be exerted on her body can be calculated by force divided by the area on the top of your arms that comes in contact with her.
It doesn't matter if your arms are strong enough to catch her body without breaking your bones.
Her spine is not strong enough to be caught by you without being damaged.
Even if you rip off the nearest door to provide a bigger area to catch her with, you still wouldn't be able to save her anyway.
Remember, it's not the fall that kills her, but the sudden stop at the bottom.
Let's say she's falling from a 32 story building, about 300 feet, and you are 6 feet tall, maybe 10 feet on your tippy-toes, with your arms above your head holding a door, in hopes of distributing the pressure across a larger surface area, but all you're doing is essentially moving the ground up by 10 feet.
So, she's now falling from 290 feet, instead of 300 feet, reaching the speed of 173 feet per second just before impact, not counting air resistance.
It's the equivalent of crashing at 94 miles per hour into a wall with a door in front of it.
The only thing that could save her is flying.
But that power comes with its own host of scientific issues.
If you could fly, what you must do is fly up to her, start flying down at the speed she is falling, hold on to her, then gradually slow down until you come to a complete stop.
This process requires a lot of cushion space between the point she starts falling and the ground.
Every second you waste on changing into your superhero costume and flying up to her height, her head is getting that much closer to the pavement!
If she's falling from a high place, and you can't get to her until she's only a few feet above the ground, there's really nothing you can do other than magically turn the pavement into marshmellow to allow her enough time to slowly come to a stop.
Then, break out the chocolate and graham crackers and you've got s'mores.
Mmmm, delicious!
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and invisibility.
Immortality.
In movies, kings are always searching for the secret to immortality.
But is immortality really a good thing?
To a ten-year-old boy, one year is the same as 10% of his life.
To his forty-year-old mother, one year is merely 2.5% of her life.
The same year, 365 days, can feel differently to different people.
If we live until we're 82, that's about 30,000 days.
If this boy lives for 30,000 years, a year to him could feel like a day.
And if this boy's emotions sustain through the potential boredom of living for millions of years, he might become extremely lonely and sad, knowing he has and always will outlive everyone he has ever loved.
But what if everyone were immortal?
Well, first off, Earth is only so big.
So, where would we all live?
(Grunts) "Excuse me!" "That's my face!"
"Stop it!" "Pardon me."
"Tight in here!"
Do you remember what you did last year or when you were five?
How much of your past have you forgotten?
If you have trouble remembering what you did when you were five, how will you remember what happened if you were alive a thousand years ago?
A million years ago?
We don't remember every single detail of our past because our brains have a limited capacity and we replace useless memories, like middle school locker combinations, with relevant information.
If this immortal boy finds a companion to fall in love with once every hundred years, he would have ten thousand girlfriends in a million years.
And how many of those ten thousand girls' names will he be able to remember?
This changes what a meaningful relationship means, doesn't it?
Another tricky thing about immortality: Human beings have not always looked the same.
This can be explained by Darwin's theory of evolution.
For instance, if women find taller men more attractive, then more tall men would mate and have children, putting more tall genes in the gene pool.
That means, in the next generation, more children will have the genes to be taller.
Repeat that process for a million years and the average height will be a lot taller than the average height today, assuming there's no natural disaster that wipes out all the tall people.
Our ancestors were short, hairy apes.
We still have body hair, but we don't look like apes any more.
If you're the only person who is immortal, while everyone else keeps evolving, generation after generation, you will eventually look quite different than the people who surround you.
"Hi, how you doing?"
If one of our ancestors, apes, is still alive today, how many people will make friends with it instead of calling the Museum of Natural History?
And one more physical consideration for immortality: Scars.
After all, immortality doesn't automatically translate to invincibility, it just means you cannot die.
But it doesn't guarantee what condition you'll be alive in.
Look at your body and count how many scars you have.
If you have made this many permanent scars within your life, imagine how much damage you would have if you were one thousand years old!
Now, there are approximately 185,000 amputation-related hospital discharges every year in the U.S.
These injuries are due to accidents or illnesses.
Certainly the percentage is low comparing to the total population if you only live for a hundred years.
However, if you've been alive for over one million years, the odds of still having all your limbs are pretty slim.
What about little accessories, like your eyes, your nose, your ears, fingers or toes?
What about your teeth?
What are the odds of you keeping your dental health for a hundred years?
A thousand years?
One million years?
You might end up looking like a horribly scuffed-up Mr. Potato Head with missing pieces and dentures.
So, are you sure you want to live forever?
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and -- invisibility.
Nicole Paris: TEDYouth, make some noise!
(Beatboxing) TEDYouth, make some -- (Beatboxing) (Beatboxing ends) Are you ready?
(Cheers and applause) Are you ready?
Ed Cage: Yeah, yeah, yeah!
(Beatboxing) (Laughter) EC: Y'all like that? Let me show you how we used to do it -- NP: Get it pops, go ahead.
EC: ... when I was growing up in the '90s.
(Beatboxing) (Beatboxing ends) (Laughter) (Beatboxing) NP: Pops, pops, pops, pops, pops, pops, hold up, hold up, hold up, hold up!
Oh my God.
OK, he's trying to battle me.
Hold on, right now, hold on.
Do you remember when you used to beatbox me to sleep?
EC: Yeah, yeah, I remember.
That's when she was a little baby.
We would do something like this.
(Beatboxing) NP: I remember that.
(Beatboxing) NP: All right, pops, pops, pops, chill out, chill out.
Hold up, hold up, hold up.
EC: Y'all remember the video.
This is like a little payback or something for 50 million people calling me the loser.
NP: Hold up, hold up.
But a lot of people out there don't really know what beatboxing is, where it started from.
EC: Right, right.
NP: Where it came from.
So why don't you give them a little history -- just a tickle -- a bit of history of where it comes from.
EC: Beatbox started here in New York.
(Cheers) That's right, that's right. New York, New York!
Everybody like, "Yeah!"
Well, we from St. Louis.
(Laughter) NP: Now you can put y'all hands down.
(Laughter) EC: But beatbox started here in New York.
What you would have is that, when we would go to parties, you would have the DJ and you would have the rapper.
But because I don't have electricity coming out of me, we had to emulate what the beats was doing.
So when you would see the beatboxer, you would see us over to the side.
Then you would see a rapper, and when the rapper began to rap, we would do a simple beat, because back then the beats were simple -- (Beatboxing) or -- (Beatboxing) Those were simple beats.
But now, you got folks that want to do all type of stuff with their beats now, and they want to humiliate their father, which is not right when you want to humiliate the person that take care of you, pay all your tuition, (Nicole laughs) especially when you have 50 million people that just go around and call you "the loser."
Well, I'm taking that to heart.
But now we do something different in our house, so we have these jam sessions, and our jam sessions consist of us jamming in church.
You know, in church, we'll look at each other like, (Beatboxing) (Laughter) and we'll text the beat to each other.
Or we'll be in the kitchen cooking, road trips, airports.
NP: Standing right there in the corner, "Aw, Dad -- listen to that."
(Beatboxing) Naw, I'm kidding. But you know what?
We're talking all about this jam session and everything.
EC: Yeah.
NP: Why don't we give them a little peek, just a tiny bit of our jam session?
NP: Y'all want to hear some jam session? EC: Y'all ready for a jam session?
(Cheers) NP: Sorry? I can't hear you.
(Cheers) Yeah! Kick it, pops!
(Beatboxing) (Applause) (Beatboxing) (Beatboxing ends) (Applause) NP: I'm getting ready to go!
EC: Y'all ready? Everybody stand up! Come on, everybody stand up!
Get on up! Come on, stretch!
(Beatboxing) (Beatboxing ends) NP: That's it.
(Cheers and applause) Thank you! Make some noise!
EG: Thank you, everybody!
NP: Make some noise! Make some noise!
Thank you!
If humans could fly, without tools and machines, how fast do you think we would go?
As of 2012, the world record for fastest short-distance sprint speed is roughly 27 miles per hour.
Running speed depends on how much force is exerted by the runner's legs, and according to Newton's Second Law of Motion, force is the product of mass times acceleration.
And Newton's Third Law states that for every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
So, that means running requires having a ground to push off from, and the ground pushes back against the runner's foot.
So, flying would actually be more similar to swimming.
Michael Phelps is currently the fastest human in water and the most decorated Olympian of all time.
Guess how fast he swims?
The answer may surprise you.
His fastest recorded speed is less than 5 miles per hour.
A child on the ground can easily outrun Michael Phelps in water, but why is that?
Well, let's go back to Newton's Third Law of Motion.
When we run, we move forward by pushing against the ground with our feet and the ground pushes back, propelling us forward.
The ground is solid.
By definition, it means the particles are essentially locked into place and must push back instead of getting out of the way, but water is liquid and flows easily.
When we move our limbs to push back against the water, a part of the water molecules can just slide past one another instead of pushing back.
Now, let's think about flying.
Air has a lot more free space for particles to move past one another, so even more of our energy would be wasted.
We would need to push a lot of air backwards in order to move forward.
Astronauts move around in shuttles in zero gravity when they're in outer space by pulling on handles installed on the ceiling walls and floors of the shuttle.
Now, imagine you were given the ability to float.
How would you move around in the middle of the street?
Well, you wouldn't get very far by swimming in air, would you?
Nah, I don't think so!
Now, assuming you were granted the ability to float and the speed to move around efficiently, let's discuss the height of your flight.
According to the Ideal Gas Law, P-V N-R-T, pressure and temperature has a positive correlation, meaning they increase and decrease together.
This is because the air expands in volume with less pressure, so the molecules have more room to wander around without colliding into each other and creating heat.
Since the atmospheric pressure is a lot lower in high altitudes, it would be freezing cold if you were flying above the clouds.
You'd need to wrap yourself up to keep your core body temperature above 95 degrees Fahrenheit, otherwise you'd start shivering violently, gradually becoming mentally confused and eventually drop out of the sky due to loss of muscle control from hypothermia!
Now, the Ideal Gas Law implies that as the pressure decreases, gas volume increases.
So, if you were to fly straight up too quickly, the inert gas in your body would rapidly expand the way soda fizzes up when shaken.
The phenomenon is called "the bends," decompression sickness, or "divers disease" since deep sea scuba divers experience this when they come up too quickly.
This results in pain, paralysis, or death, depending on how foamy your blood becomes.
Okay, well, let's say you want to fly just a few meters above the ground where you can still see the road signs and breath oxygen with ease.
You'll still need goggles and a helmet to protect you from birds, insects, street signs, electrical wires, and other flying humans, including flying cops ready to hand you a ticket if you don't follow the flying rules, buddy.
Now remember, if you have a collision mid-air that knocks you unconscious, you would experience free fall until you hit the ground.
Without society or the laws of physics, flying would be a totally awesome ability to have.
But, even if we could all just float around a few feet above the ground and only moving at a snail's pace, I'm telling you, it's still a cool ability that I'd want, wouldn't you?
Yeah, I thought so.
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and invisibility.
Wouldn't it be great if we could be invisible?
Ha, right?
I mean, we could spy on people without being noticed and do whatever we want without being held responsible.
Now, magicians have figured out how to utilize full-sized mirrors to bend light in order to create disappearing illusions.
Scientists have created metamaterials to guide rays of light around tiny, two-dimensional objects.
Cameras can also film what is behind you and project the image so you appear invisible from the front.
However, none of these options can make an object as large as a person appear invisible for all angles and distances while its moving.
But if you are truly invisible, as in from within, here are a few problems you may not have thought about before.
To move around undetected by other people, you would have to be totally naked.
Even if it's freezing outside!
You can't carry anything, including your wallet and keys, otherwise people would just see your wallet and keys floating around.
Drivers and people on the street can't see you either, therefore they can and will run into you at some point.
Oh, and you better not wear any perfume or make any noise breathing, otherwise they'll know you're there.
And, just because you start off invisible, doesn't mean you'll stay that way.
What if someone accidentally spills scolding hot coffee on you?
And what if it rains?
But if you think only liquid can make you visible, you're wrong.
Dust consists of dead skin cells from humans, soil particles, and fibers from clothes made from cotton and other materials.
Dust sticks to the moisture on our skin when we sweat and the tiny hairs on our skin when we are dry.
So, even if you are invisible, dust would still land on every part of you.
We usually don't notice the dust on our skin because we can't see a thin layer of dust on top of our skin color.
But, if you're invisible, people would see a human-shaped blob of dust walking around with extremely dirty soles.
Gross!
What do you think the world looks like if you are invisible?
Well, the answer is nothing.
The reason you can't see in the dark is because there is no light.
To see an apple, light has to hit the apple and return it to your eyes.
Then, the retinas in your eyes catch the light reflection for your brain to interpret into the image of an apple.
If you're invisible, then, by definition, light would travel through you or around you instead of bouncing off you for people to see.
But that means that retinas in your eyes are not catching the light, either.
Therefore, your brain has nothing to interpret into an image.
Can you see your reflection without a mirror to stop the light?
No.
So, when you can't be seen by others, you also cannot see.
Ouch!
Now, have you given any thought as of whether the invisibility is permanent?
If it is, how can you receive medical treatment from a doctor if you're injured?
The doctor wouldn't know where to apply ointments or bandages because they cannot access your injury.
For that matter, you can't see it either.
I mean, what if you have an illness or an infection?
How can the doctor diagnose you without being able to see the color change or inflammation?
And what if everyone is permanently invisible?
Well, think about how boring the world would be without seeing people on the streets, on TV, or at home on your computer like right now.
It's lonely being invisible.
Now, which superpower physics lesson will you explore next?
Shifting body size and content, super speed, flight, super strength, immortality, and invisibility.
Do you remember when you first realized that your computer was more than just a monitor and keyboard?
That between the mouse click and the video playing, there was something that captured your intention, understood it, and made it real?
What is that something?
Is it gremlins?
Let's imagine that we can shrink down to the size of an electron and inject ourselves into a click of a mouse.
If you took your mouse apart, you'd see that it's really a very simple machine.
It has a couple buttons and a system for detecting motion and distance.
You might have an optical mouse that makes these measurements with lights and sensors, but older ones did this with a hard rubber ball and some plastic wheels.
Same concept.
When you click the button on your mouse, it sends a message to the computer with information about its position.
When your mouse click is received, it's handled by the basic input/output subsystem.
This subsystem acts like the eyes and ears and mouth and hands of the computer.
Basically, it provides a way for the computer to interact with its environment.
But it also acts like a buffer to keep the CPU from being overwhelmed by distractions.
In this case, the I/O subsystem decides that your mouse click is pretty important so it generates an interrupt to the CPU.
"Hey, CPU! Got a click here."
The CPU, or central processing unit, is the brains of the whole computer.
Just like your brain doesn't take up your whole body, the CPU doesn't take up the whole computer, but it runs the show all the same.
And the CPU's job, its whole job, is fetching instructions from memory and executing them.
So, while you're typing, typing, typing, maybe really fast, like 60 words a minute, the CPU is fetching and executing billions of instructions a second.
Yes, billions every second: instructions to move your mouse around on the screen, to run that clock widget on your desktop, play your internet radio, manage the files you're editing on the hard drive, and much, much more.
Your computer's CPU is one heck of a multitasker!
"But oh my gosh there's a very important mouse click coming through now!
Let's drop everything now and deal with that!"
There are programs for everything that the CPU does.
A special program for the mouse, for the clock widget, for the internet radio, and for dealing with letters sent by the keyboard.
Each program was initially written by a human in a human-readable programming language, like Java, C++, or Python.
But human programs take up a lot of space and contain a lot of unnecessary information to a computer, so they are compiled and made smaller and stored in bits of ones and zeros in memory.
The CPU realizes that it needs instructions for how to deal with this mouse click, so it looks up the address for the mouse program and sends a request to the memory subsystem for instructions stored there.
Each instruction in the mouse device driver is duly fetched and executed.
And that's not nearly the end of the story!
Because the CPU learns that the mouse was clicked when the cursor was over a picture of a button on the monitor screen, and so, the CPU asks memory for the monitor program to find out what that button is.
And then the CPU has to ask memory for the program for the button, which means that the CPU needs the monitor program again to show the video associated with the button, and so it goes.
And let's just say there are a lot of programs involved before you even see the button on the screen light up when you clicked it.
So, just the simple task of clicking your mouse means visiting all of the critical components of your computer's architecture: peripherals, the basic input-output system, the CPU, programs, and memory, and not one gremlin.
Have you ever been floating in a swimming pool, all comfy and warm, thinking, "Man, it'd be cool to be an astronaut!
You could float out in outer space, look down at the Earth and everything.
It'd be so neat!"
Only that's not how it is at all.
If you are in outer space, you are orbiting the Earth: it's called free fall.
You're actually falling towards the Earth.
Think about this for a moment: that's the feeling you get if you're going over the top of a roller coaster, going, like, "Whoa!"
Only you're doing this the whole time you're orbiting the Earth, for two, three, four hours, days.
Whatever it takes, right?
So, how does orbiting work?
Let's take a page from Isaac Newton.
He had this idea, a little mental experiment: You take a cannon, you put it on top of a hill.
If you shoot the cannonball, it goes a little bit away.
But if you shoot it harder, it goes far enough so that it lands a little bit past the curvature of Earth.
Well, you can imagine if you shot it really, really, hard, it would go all the way around the Earth and come back -- boom! -- and hit you in the backside or something.
Let's zoom way back and put you in a little satellite over the North Pole of the Earth and consider north to be up.
You're going to fall down and hit the Earth.
But you are actually moving sideways really fast.
So when you fall down, you're going to miss.
You're going to end up on the side of the Earth, falling down, and now the Earth is pulling you back in sideways.
So it's pulling you back in and you fall down, and so you miss the Earth again, and now you're under the Earth.
The Earth is going to pull you up, but you're moving sideways still.
So you're going to miss the Earth again.
Now you're on the other side of the Earth, moving upward, and the Earth's pulling you sideways.
So you're going to fall sideways, but you're going to be moving up and so you'll miss.
Now you're back on top of the Earth again, over the North Pole, going sideways and falling down, and yep -- you guessed it.
You'll keep missing because you're moving so fast.
In this way, astronauts orbit the Earth.
They're always falling towards the Earth, but they're always missing, and therefore, they're falling all the time.
They feel like they're falling, so you just have to get over it.
So technically, if you ran fast enough and tripped, you could miss the Earth.
But there's a big problem.
First, you have to be going eight kilometers a second.
That's 18,000 miles an hour, just over Mach 23!
The second problem: If you're going that fast, yes, you would orbit the Earth and come back where you came from, but there's a lot of air in the way, much less people and things.
So you would burn up due to atmospheric friction.
So, I do not recommend this.
Myths and misconceptions about evolution.
Let's talk about evolution.
You've probably heard that some people consider it controversial, even though most scientists don't.
But even if you aren't one of those people and you think you have a pretty good understanding of evolution, chances are you still believe some things about it that aren't entirely right, things like, "Evolution is organisms adapting to their environment."
This was an earlier, now discredited, theory of evolution.
Almost 60 years before Darwin published his book, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck proposed that creatures evolve by developing certain traits over their lifetimes and then passing those on to their offspring.
For example, he thought that because giraffes spent their lives stretching to reach leaves on higher branches, their children would be born with longer necks.
But we know now that's not how genetic inheritance works.
In fact, individual organisms don't evolve at all.
Instead, random genetic mutations cause some giraffes to be born with longer necks, and that gives them a better chance to survive than the ones who weren't so lucky, which brings us to "survival of the fittest".
This makes it sound like evolution always favors the biggest, strongest, or fastest creatures, which is not really the case.
For one thing, evolutionary fitness is just a matter of how well-suited they are to their current environment.
If all the tall trees suddenly died out and only short grass was left, all those long-necked giraffes would be at a disadvantage.
Secondly, survival is not how evolution occurs, reproduction is.
And the world if full of creatures like the male anglerfish, which is so small and ill-suited for survival at birth that it has to quickly find a mate before it dies.
But at least we can say that if an organism dies without reproducing, it's evolutionarily useless, right?
Wrong!
Remember, natural selection happens not at the organism level, but at the genetic level, and the same gene that exists in one organism will also exist in its relatives.
So, a gene that makes an animal altruistically sacrifice itself to help the survival and future reproduction of its siblings or cousins, can become more widespread than one that is solely concerned with self-preservation.
Anything that lets more copies of the gene pass on to the next generation will serve its purpose, except evolutionary purpose.
One of the most difficult things to keep in mind about evolution is that when we say things like, "Genes want to make more copies of themselves," or even, "natural selection," we're actually using metaphors.
A gene doesn't want anything, and there's no outside mechanism that selects which genes are best to preserve.
All that happens is that random genetic mutations cause the organisms carrying them to behave or develop in different ways.
Some of those ways result in more copies of the mutated gene being passed on, and so forth.
Nor is there any predetermined plan progressing towards an ideal form.
It's not ideal for the human eye to have a blind spot where the optic nerve exits the retina, but that's how it developed, starting from a simple photoreceptor cell.
In retrospect, it would have been much more advantageous for humans to crave nutrients and vitamins rather than just calories.
But over the millenia, during which our ancestors evolved, calories were scarce, and there was nothing to anticipate that this would later change so quickly.
So, evolution proceeds blindly, step by step by step, creating all of the diversity we see in the natural world.
Commas are tricky things, especially when subordinates and conjunctions are involved.
If you can remember a few basic rules, a simple law of physics, and some common scenarios, you will be able to use commas correctly.
I like to think of the different parts of our sentence as characters.
Let's meet a few of them: the tiny conjunctions, the mighty subordinates, and the clever comma.
Conjunctions are small and nimble.
They are words that connect clauses, words, and phrases.
You can easily remember the conjunctions by remembering the acronym FANBOYS.
The conjunctions are for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so.
Because they're so small, more often than not, they require the help of a comma but not always.
Subordinates, on the other hand, are the WWE heavyweight champions of sentences.
They are words that connect two unequal things, dependent and independent clauses.
Subordinates make it very clear what is being prioritized in a sentence.
Commonly used subordinates are although, because, before, however, unless, and even though.
Because subordinates are all about power, they can do a lot of heavy lifting by themselves.
But, of course, sometimes even the strongest among us needs some help from our clever friends.
Because our clever comma is so nice, she often roams her neighborhood looking for some community service to do.
Today, as soon as she leaves her house, she sees a subordinate lifting the weight of two complete sentences, one on each arm.
Bartheleme loves engaging in political debate even though he usually loses.
The comma asks the subordinate if he needs help.
Well, we know that subordinates are the WWE heavyweight champions of sentences.
They can easily hold the weight of these two complete sentences because they are distributed evenly on both arms.
So, when the comma asks if it can help, the subordinate is appalled at the idea of needing assistance.
No thanks, maybe next time!
So, the comma continues on.
Soon, she seems a couple of subordinates attempting to lift the weight of sentences directly in front of themselves.
Even though Bartheleme loves to sing, he never sings in front of others.
The comma asks the subordinates if they need help.
They might not want to admit it, but this time the subordinates do need help.
Complete sentences weigh quite a bit.
Simple physics tells us that it's easier to balance heavy objects if the weight is evenly distributed.
So, while the subordinates are quite capable of balancing two complete sentences when carrying the weight on both sides, they're having trouble picking just one up.
The comma rushes over to help the struggling subordinates, but how will she help?
When subordinates begin sentences, the comma will place herself directly after the first thought or complete sentence.
After helping the subordinates, our comma heroine continues on and spots a conjunction holding the weight of two complete sentences.
Bartheleme was accepted into the University of Chicago, and he is on the waitlist for Stanford University.
The comma asks the conjunction if he needs help.
Of course he does! Hurry!
The comma rushes and places itself before the conjunction.
Fanboys aren't as militant as subordinates.
For this reason, the commas don't have to fall in line behind the fanboys.
Fanboys are courteous creatures.
They allow the comma to go ahead of them.
Helping others is hard work!
On her way home, our comma sees a conjunction holding up the weight of a complete sentence and a fragment sentence.
Bartheleme is going to major in molecular biology or interpretive dance.
The now-exhausted comma asks the conjunction if he needs help lifting the items.
This is one of the rare occassions where a conjunction doesn't need the help of a comma.
The conjunction assures the comma that help isn't needed, which is good for the comma because by now, all it wants to do is go home and rest up for another day of vigilant sentence constructing.
So, I have an overlooked but potentially lucrative investment opportunity for you.
Over the past 10 years in the UK, the return on burial plots has outperformed the UK property market by a ratio of around three to one.
There are private cemeteries being set up with plots for sale to investors, and they start at around 3,900 pounds.
And they're projected to achieve about 40 percent growth.
The biggest advantage is that this is a market with continuous demand.
Now, this is a real proposition, and there are companies out there that really are offering this investment, but my interest in it is quite different.
I'm an architect and urban designer, and for the past year and a half, I've been looking at approaches to death and dying and at how they've shaped our cities and the buildings within them.
So in the summer, I did my first exhibition on death and architecture in Venice, and it was called "Death in Venice."
And because death is a subject that many of us find quite uncomfortable to talk about, the exhibition was designed to be quite playful, so that people would literally engage with it.
So one of our exhibits was an interactive map of London which showed just how much of the real estate in the city is given over to death.
As you wave your hand across the map, the name of the piece of real estate -- the building or the cemetery -- is revealed.
And those white shapes that you can see, they're all of the hospitals and hospices and mortuaries and cemeteries in the city.
In fact, the majority are cemeteries.
We wanted to show that, even though death and burial are things that we might not think about, they're all around us, and they're important parts of our cities.
So about half a million people die in the UK each year, and of those, around a quarter will want to be buried.
But the UK, like many Western European countries, is running out of burial space, especially in the major cities.
And the Greater London Authority has been aware of this for a while, and the main causes are population growth, the fact that existing cemeteries are almost full.
There's a custom in the UK that graves are considered to be occupied forever, and there's also development pressure -- people want to use that same land to build houses or offices or shops.
So they came up with a few solutions.
They were like, well, maybe we can reuse those graves after 50 years.
Or maybe we can bury people, like, four deep, so that four people can be buried in the same plot, and we can make more efficient use of the land that way, and in that way, hopefully London will still have space to bury people in the near future.
But, traditionally, cemeteries haven't been taken care of by the local authority.
In fact, the surprising thing is that there's no legal obligation on anyone in the UK to provide burial space.
Traditionally, it's been done by private and religious organizations, like churches and mosques and synagogues.
But there's also occasionally been a for-profit group who has wanted to get in on the act.
And, you know, they look at the small size of a burial plot and that high cost, and it looks like there's serious money to be made.
So, actually, if you want to go out and start your own cemetery, you kind of can.
There was this couple in South Wales, and they had a farmhouse and a load of fields next to it, and they wanted to develop the land.
They had a load of ideas.
They first thought about making a caravan park, but the council said no.
And then they wanted to make a fish farm and again the council said no.
Then they hit on the idea of making a cemetery and they calculated that by doing this, they could increase the value of their land from about 95,000 pounds to over one million pounds.
But just to come back to this idea of making profit from cemeteries, like, it's kind of ludicrous, right?
The thing is that the high cost of those burial plots is actually very misleading.
They look like they're expensive, but that cost reflects the fact that you need to maintain the burial plot -- like, someone has to cut the grass for the next 50 years.
That means it's very difficult to make money from cemeteries.
And it's the reason that normally they're run by the council or by a not-for-profit group.
But anyway, the council granted these people permission, and they're now trying to build their cemetery.
So just to explain to you kind of how this works: If I want to build something in the UK, like a cemetery for example, then I have to apply for planning permission first.
So if I want to build a new office building for a client or if I want to extend my home or, you know, if I have a shop and I want to convert it into an office, I have to do a load of drawings, and I submit them to the council for permission.
And they'll look at things like how it fits in the surroundings.
So they'll look at what it looks like.
But they'll also think about things like what impact is it going to have on the local environment?
And they'll be thinking about things like, is this thing going to cause pollution or is there going to be a lot of traffic that wants to go to this thing that I've built?
But also good things.
Is it going to add local services like shops to the neighborhood that local people would like to use?
And they'll weigh up the advantages and the disadvantages and they'll make a decision.
So that's how it works if I want to build a large cemetery.
But what if I've got a piece of land and I just want to bury a few people, like five or six?
Well, then -- actually, I don't need permission from anyone!
There's actually almost no regulation in the UK around burial, and the little bit that there is, is about not polluting water courses, like not polluting rivers or groundwater.
So actually, if you want to go and make your own mini-cemetery, then you can.
But I mean, like -- really, who does this? Right?
Well, if you're an aristocratic family and you have a large estate, then there's a chance that you'll have a mausoleum on it, and you'll bury your family there.
But the really weird thing is that you don't need to have a piece of land of a certain size before you're allowed to start burying people on it.
And so that means that, technically, this applies to, like, the back garden of your house in the suburbs.
(Laughter) So what if you wanted to try this yourself at home?
Well, there's a few councils that have guidance on their website which can help you.
So, the first thing that they tell you is that you need to have a certificate of burial before you can go ahead -- you're not allowed to just murder people and put them under the patio.
(Laughter) They also tell you that you need to keep a record of where the grave is.
But that's pretty much it for formal requirements.
Now, they do warn you that your neighbors might not like this, but, legally speaking, there's almost nothing that they can do about it.
And just in case any of you still had that profit idea in your mind about how much those burial plots cost and how much money you might be able to make, they also warn that it might cause the value of your house to drop by 20 percent.
Although, actually, it's more likely that no one will want to buy your house at all after that.
So what I find fascinating about this is the fact that it kind of sums up many of our attitudes towards death.
In the UK, and I think that the figures across Europe are probably similar, only about 30 percent of people have ever talked to anyone about their wishes around death, and even for people over 75, only 45 percent of people have ever talked about this.
And the reasons that people give ... you know, they think that their death is far off or they think that they're going to make people uncomfortable by talking about it.
And you know, to a certain extent, there are other people out there who are taking care of things for us.
The government has all this regulation and bureaucracy around things like burying a death, for example, and there's people like funeral directors who devote their entire working lives to this issue.
But when it comes to our cities and thinking about how death fits in our cities, there's much less regulation and design and thought than we might imagine.
So we're not thinking about this, but all of the people we imagine are thinking about it -- they're not taking care of it either.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Try to measure a circle.
The diameter and radius are easy, they're just straight lines you can measure with a ruler.
But to get the circumference, you'd need measuring tape or a piece of string, unless there was a better way.
Now, it's obvious that a circle's circumference would get smaller or larger along with its diameter, but the relationship goes further than that.
In fact, the ratio between the two, the circumference divided by the diameter, will always be the same number, no matter how big or small the circle gets.
Historians aren't sure when or how this number was first discovered, but it's been known in some form for almost 4,000 years.
Estimates of it appear in the works of ancient Greek, Babylonian, Chinese, and Indian mathematicians.
And it's even believed to have been used in building the Egyptian pyramids.
Mathematicians estimated it by inscribing polygons in circles.
And by the year 1400, it had been calculated to as far as ten decimal places.
So, when did they finally figure out the exact value instead of just estimating?
Actually, never!
You see, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter is what's known as an irrational number, one that can never be expressed as a ratio of two whole numbers.
You can come close, but no matter how precise the fraction is, it will always be just a tiny bit off.
So, to write it out in its decimal form, you'd have an on-going series of digits starting with 3.14159 and continuing forever!
That's why, instead of trying to write out an infinite number of digits every time, we just refer to it using the Greek letter pi.
Nowadays, we test the speed of computers by having them calculate pi, and quantum computers have been able to calculate it up to two quadrillion digits.
People even compete to see how many digits they can memorize and have set records for remembering over 67,000 of them.
But for most scientific uses, you only need the first forty or so.
And what are these scientific uses?
Well, just about any calculations involving circles, from the volume of a can of soda to the orbits of satellites.
And it's not just circles, either.
Because it's also useful in studying curves, pi helps us understand periodic or oscillating systems like clocks, electromagnetic waves, and even music.
In statistics, pi is used in the equation to calculate the area under a normal distribution curve, which comes in handy for figuring out distributions of standardized test scores, financial models, or margins of error in scientific results.
As if that weren't enough, pi is used in particle physics experiments, such as those using the Large Hadron Collider, not only due to its round shape, but more subtly, because of the orbits in which tiny particles move.
Scientists have even used pi to prove the illusive notion that light functions as both a particle and an electromagnetic wave, and, perhaps most impressively, to calculate the density of our entire universe, which, by the way, still has infinitely less stuff in it than the total number of digits in pi.
This image of the Vitruvian Man, taken from Leonardo's sketches, has become one of the most recognizable symbols of the Renaissance.
But why?
It's a simple pen and ink drawing, right?
Wrong!
Let's start to answer this question with a math problem.
I know how to calculate the area of a circle.
I take the value for pi and multiply it by the radius squared.
I also know how to take the area of a square.
I multiply the base by itself.
But how can I take the area of a circle and create a square with an equal area?
This is a problem often called "squaring a circle" that was first proposed in the ancient world.
And like many ideas of the ancient world, it was given new life during the Renaissance.
As it turns out, this problem is impossible to solve because of the nature of pi, but that's another story.
Leonardo's sketch, which is influenced by the writings of the Roman architect, Vitruvius, places a man firmly at the center of a circle and a square.
Vitruvius claimed the navel is the center of the human body and that if one takes a compass and places the fixed point on the navel, a circle can be drawn perfectly around the body.
Additionally, Vitruvius recognized that arm span and height have a nearly perfect correspondence in the human body, thus placing the body perfectly inside a square as well.
Leonardo used the ideas of Vitruvius to solve the problem of squaring a circle metaphorically using mankind as the area for both shapes.
Leonardo wasn't just thinking about Vitruvius, though.
There was an intellectual movement in Italy at the time called Neoplatonism.
This movement took an old concept from the 4th century developed by Plato and Aristotle, called "The Great Chain of Being."
This belief holds that the universe has a hierarchy resembling a chain, and that chain starts at the top with God, then travels down through the angels, planets, stars, and all lifeforms before ending with demons and devils.
Early in this philosophic movement, it was thought that mankind's place in this chain was exactly in the center.
Because humans have a mortal body accompanied by an immortal soul, we divide the universe nicely in half.
Around the time Leonardo sketched the Vitruvian Man, however, a Neoplatonist named Pico Della Mirandola had a different idea.
He pried mankind off the chain and claimed that humans have a unique ability to take any position they want.
Pico claimed that God desired a being capable of comprehending the beautiful and complicated universe he had created.
This led to the creation of mankind, which he placed at the center of the universe with the ability to take whatever form he pleases.
Mankind, according to Pico, could crawl down the chain and behave like an animal or crawl up the chain and behave like a god, it's our choice.
Looking back at the sketch, we can see that by changing the position of the man, he can fill the irreconcilable areas of a circle and a square.
If geometry is the language the universe is written in, then this sketch seems to say we can exist within all its elements.
Mankind can fill whatever shape he pleases geometrically and philosophically as well.
In this one sketch, Leonardo was able to combine the mathematics, religion, philosophy, architecture, and artistic skill of his age.
No wonder it has become such an icon for the entire time period.
Take a moment to read the following.
How was that?
Frustrating?
Slow?
What were those sentences about?
They're actually a simulation of the experience of dyslexia, designed to make you decode each word.
Those with dyslexia experience that laborious pace every time they read.
When most people think of dyslexia, they think of seeing letters and words backwards, like seeing "b" as "d" and vice versa, or they might think people with dyslexia see "saw" as "was".
The truth is people with dyslexia see things the same way as everyone else.
Dyslexia is caused by a phonological processing problem, meaning people affected by it have trouble not with seeing language but with manipulating it.
For example, if you heard the word cat and then someone asked you, "Remove the 'c'," what word would you have left?
At.
This can be difficult for those with dyslexia.
Given a word in isolation, like fantastic, students with dyslexia need to break the word into parts to read it: fan, tas, tic.
Time spent decoding makes it hard to keep up with peers and gain sufficient comprehension.
Spelling words phonetically, like s-t-i-k for stick and f-r-e-n-s for friends is also common.
These difficulties are more widespread and varied than commonly imagined.
Dyslexia affects up to one in five people.
It occurs on a continuum.
One person might have mild dyslexia while the next person has a profound case of it.
Dyslexia also runs in families.
It's common to see one family member who has trouble spelling while another family member has severe difficulty decoding even one syllable words, like catch.
The continuum and distribution of dyslexia suggests a broader principle to bear in mind as we look at how the brains of those with dyslexia process language.
Neurodiversity is the idea that because all our brains show differences in structure and function, we shouldn't be so quick to label every deviation from "the norm" as a pathological disorder or dismiss people living with these variations as "defective."
People with neurobiological variations like dyslexia, including such creative and inventive individuals as Picasso, Muhammad Ali, Whoopi Goldberg, Steven Spielberg, and Cher, clearly have every capacity to be brilliant and successful in life.
So, here's the special way the brains of those with dyslexia work.
The brain is divided into two hemispheres.
The left hemisphere is generally in charge of language and, ultimately, reading, while the right typically handles spatial activities.
fMRI studies have found that the brains of those with dyslexia rely more on the right hemisphere and frontal lobe than the brains of those without it.
This means, when they read a word, it takes a longer trip through their brain and can get delayed in the frontal lobe.
Because of this neurobiological glitch, they read with more difficulty.
But those with dyslexia can physically change their brain and improve their reading with an intensive, multi-sensory intervention that breaks the language down and teaches the reader to decode based on syllable types and spelling rules.
The brains of those with dyslexia begin using the left hemisphere more efficiently while reading, and their reading improves.
The intervention works because it locates dyslexia appropriately as a functional variation in the brain, which, naturally, shows all sorts of variations from one person to another.
Neurodiversity emphasizes this spectrum of brain function in all humans and suggests that to better understand the perspectives of those around us, we should try not only to see the world through their eyes but understand it through their brains.
When we watch a film or a play, we know that the actors probably learned their lines from a script, which essentially tells them what to say and when to say it.
A piece of written music operates on exactly the same principle.
In a very basic sense, it tells a performer what to play and when to play it.
Aesthetically speaking, there's a world of difference between, say, Beethoven and Justin Bieber, but both artists have used the same building blocks to create their music: notes.
And although the end result can sound quite complicated, the logic behind musical notes is actually pretty straightforward.
Let's take a look at the foundational elements to music notation and how they interact to create a work of art.
Music is written on five parallel lines that go across the page.
These five lines are called a staff, and a staff operates on two axes: up and down and left to right.
The up-and-down axis tells the performer the pitch of the note or what note to play, and the left-to-right axis tells the performer the rhythm of the note or when to play it.
Let's start with pitch.
To help us out, we're going to use a piano, but this system works for pretty much any instrument you can think of.
In the Western music tradition, pitches are named after the first seven letters of the alphabet, A, B, C, D, E, F, and G.
After that, the cycle repeats itself: A, B, C, D, E, F, G, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and so on.
But how do these pitches get their names?
Well, for example, if you played an F and then played another F higher or lower on the piano, you'd notice that they sound pretty similar compared to, say, a B.
Going back to the staff, every line and every space between two lines represents a separate pitch.
If we put a note on one of these lines or one of these spaces, we're telling a performer to play that pitch.
The higher up on the staff a note is placed, the higher the pitch.
But there are obviously many, many more pitches than the nine that these lines and spaces gives us.
A grand piano, for example, can play 88 separate notes.
So how do we condense 88 notes onto a single staff?
We use something called a clef, a weird-looking figure placed at the beginning of the staff, which acts like a reference point, telling you that a particular line or space corresponds to a specific note on your instrument.
If we want to play notes that aren't on the staff, we kind of cheat and draw extra little lines called ledger lines and place the notes on them.
If we have to draw so many ledger lines that it gets confusing, then we need to change to a different clef.
As for telling a performer when to play the notes, two main elements control this: the beat and the rhythm.
The beat of a piece of music is, by itself, kind of boring.
It sounds like this.
(Ticking) Notice that it doesn't change, it just plugs along quite happily.
It can go slow or fast or whatever you like, really.
The point is that just like the second hand on a clock divides one minute into sixty seconds, with each second just as long as every other second, the beat divides a piece of music into little fragments of time that are all the same length: beats.
With a steady beat as a foundation, we can add rhythm to our pitches, and that's when music really starts to happen.
This is a quarter note.
It's the most basic unit of rhythm, and it's worth one beat.
This is a half note, and it's worth two beats.
This whole note here is worth four beats, and these little guys are eighth notes, worth half a beat each.
"Great," you say, "what does that mean?"
You might have noticed that across the length of a staff, there are little lines dividing it into small sections.
These are bar lines and we refer to each section as a bar.
At the beginning of a piece of music, just after the clef, is something called the time signature, which tells a performer how many beats are in each bar.
This says there are two beats in each bar, this says there are three, this one four, and so on.
The bottom number tells us what kind of note is to be used as the basic unit for the beat.
One corresponds to a whole note, two to a half note, four to a quarter note, and eight to an eighth note, and so on.
So this time signature here tells us that there are four quarter notes in each bar, one, two, three, four; one, two, three, four, and so on.
But like I said before, if we just stick to the beat, it gets kind of boring, so we'll replace some quarter notes with different rhythms.
Notice that even though the number of notes in each bar has changed, the total number of beats in each bar hasn't.
So, what does our musical creation sound like?
(Music) Eh, sounds okay, but maybe a bit thin, right?
Let's add another instrument with its own pitch and rhythm.
Now it's sounding like music.
Sure, it takes some practice to get used to reading it quickly and playing what we see on our instrument, but, with a bit of time and patience, you could be the next Beethoven or Justin Bieber.
There are a lot of ways this marvelous language of ours, English, doesn't make sense.
For example, most of the time when we talk about more than one of something, we put an S on the end.
One cat, two cats.
But then, there's that handful of words where things work differently.
Alone you have a man; if he has company, then you've got men, or probably better for him, women too.
Although if there were only one of them, it would be a woman.
Or if there's more than one goose, they're geese, but why not lots of mooses, meese?
Or if you have two feet, then why don't you read two beek instead of books.
The fact is that if you were speaking English before about a thousand years ago, beek is exactly what you would have said for more than one book.
If Modern English is strange, Old English needed therapy.
Believe it or not, English used to be an even harder language to learn than it is today.
Twenty-five hundred years ago, English and German were the same language.
They drifted apart slowly, little by little becoming more and more different.
That meant that in early English, just like in German, inanimate objects had gender.
A fork, gafol, was a woman; a spoon, laefel, was a man; and the table they were on, bord, was neither, also called neuter.
Go figure!
Being able to use words meant not just knowing their meaning but what gender they were, too.
And while today there are only about a dozen plurals that don't make sense, like men and geese, in Old English, it was perfectly normal for countless plurals to be like that.
You think it's odd that more than one goose is geese?
Well, imagine if more than one goat was a bunch of gat, or if more than one oak tree was a field of ack.
To be able to talk about any of these, you just had to know the exact word for their plural rather than just adding the handy S on the end.
And it wasn't always an S at the end either.
In merry Old English, they could add other sounds to the end.
Just like more than one child is children, more than one lamb was lambru, you fried up your eggru, and people talked not about breads, but breadru.
Sometimes it was like sheep is today - where, to make a plural, you don't do anything.
One sheep, two sheep.
In Old English, one house, two house.
And just like today, we have oxen instead of oxes.
Old English people had toungen instead of tongues, namen instead of names, and if things stayed the way they were, today we would have eyen instead of eyes.
So, why didn't things stay the way they were?
In a word, Vikings.
In the 8th century, Scandinavian marauders started taking over much of England.
They didn't speak English, they spoke Norse.
Plus, they were grown-ups, and grown-ups aren't as good at learning languages as children.
After the age of roughly 15, it's almost impossible to learn a new language without an accent and without slipping up here and there as we all know from what language classes are like.
The Vikings were no different, so they had a way of smoothing away the harder parts of how English worked.
Part of that was those crazy plurals.
Imagine running up against a language with eggru and gat on the one hand, and then with other words, all you have to do is add 's' and get days and stones.
Wouldn't it make things easier to just use the 's' for everything?
That's how the Vikings felt too.
And there were so many of them, and they married so many of the English women, that pretty soon, if you grew up in England, you heard streamlined English as much as the real kind.
After a while nobody remembered the real kind any more.
Nobody remembered that once you said doora instead of doors and handa instead of hands.
Plurals made a lot more sense now, except for a few hold-outs like children and teeth that get used so much that it was hard to break the habit.
The lesson is that English makes a lot more sense than you think.
Thank the ancestors of people in Copenhagen and Oslo for the fact that today we don't ask for a handful of pea-night instead of peanuts.
Although, wouldn't it be fun, if for just a week or two, we could?
Pat Mitchell: So I was thinking about female friendship a lot, and by the way, these two women, I'm very honored to say, have been my friends for a very long time, too.
Jane Fonda: Yes we have.
PM: And one of the things that I read about female friendship is something that Cervantes said.
He said, "You can tell a lot about someone," in this case a woman, "by the company that she keeps."
So let's start with -- (Laughter) JF: We're in big trouble.
Lily Tomlin: Hand me one of those waters, I'm extremely dry.
(Laughter) JF: You're taking up our time.
We have a very limited -- LT: Just being with her sucks the life out of me.
(Laughter) JF: You ain't seen nothing yet.
Anyway -- sorry.
PM: So tell me, what do you look for in a friend?
LT: I look for someone who has a sense of fun, who's audacious, who's forthcoming, who has politics, who has even a small scrap of passion for the planet, someone who's decent, has a sense of justice and who thinks I'm worthwhile.
(Laughter) (Applause) JF: You know, I was thinking this morning, I don't even know what I would do without my women friends.
I mean it's, "I have my friends, therefore I am."
LT: (Laughter) JF: No, it's true.
I exist because I have my women friends. They -- You're one of them.
I don't know about you. But anyway -- (Laughter) You know, they make me stronger, they make me smarter, they make me braver.
They tap me on the shoulder when I might be in need of course-correcting.
And most of them are a good deal younger than me, too.
You know? I mean, it's nice -- LT: Thank you.
(Laughter) JF: No, I do, I include you in that, because listen, you know -- it's nice to have somebody still around to play with and learn from when you're getting toward the end.
I'm approaching -- I'll be there sooner than you.
LT: No, I'm glad to have you parallel aging alongside me.
(Laughter) JF: I'm showing you the way.
(Laughter) LT: Well, you are and you have.
PM: Well, as we grow older, and as we go through different kinds of life's journeys, what do you do to keep your friendships vital and alive?
LT: Well you have to use a lot of -- JF: She doesn't invite me over much, I'll tell you that.
LT: I have to use a lot of social media -- You be quiet now. And so -- (Laughter) LT: And I look through my emails, I look through my texts to find my friends, so I can answer them as quickly as possible, because I know they need my counsel.
(Laughter) They need my support, because most of my friends are writers, or activists, or actors, and you're all three ...
and a long string of other descriptive phrases, and I want to get to you as soon as possible, I want you to know that I'm there for you.
JF: Do you do emojis?
LT: Oh ... JF: No?
LT: That's embarrassing. JF: I'm really into emojis.
LT: No, I spell out my -- I spell out my words of happiness and congratulations, and sadness.
JF: You spell it right out -- LT: I spell it, every letter.
(Laughter) JF: Such a purist.
You know, as I've gotten older, I've understood more the importance of friendships, and so, I really make an effort to reach out and make play dates -- not let too much time go by.
I read a lot so, as Lily knows all too well, my books that I like, I send to my friends.
LT: When we knew we would be here today you sent me a lot of books about women, female friendships, and I was so surprised to see how many books, how much research has been done recently -- JF: And were you grateful? LT: I was grateful.
(Laughter) PM: And -- LT: Wait, no, it's really important because this is another example of how women are overlooked, put aside, marginalized.
There's been very little research done on us, even though we volunteered lots of times.
JF: That's for sure.
(Laughter) LT: This is really exciting, and you all will be interested in this.
The Harvard Medical School study has shown that women who have close female friendships are less likely to develop impairments -- physical impairments as they age, and they are likely to be seen to be living much more vital, exciting -- JF: And longer -- LT: Joyful lives.
JF: We live five years longer than men.
LT: I think I'd trade the years for joy.
(Laughter) LT: But the most important part is they found -- the results were so exciting and so conclusive -- the researchers found that not having close female friends is detrimental to your health, as much as smoking or being overweight.
JF: And there's something else, too -- LT: I've said my part, so ...
(Laughter) JF: OK, well, listen to my part, because there's an additional thing.
Because they only -- for years, decades -- they only researched men when they were trying to understand stress, only very recently have they researched what happens to women when we're stressed, and it turns out that when we're stressed -- women, our bodies get flooded by oxytocin.
Which is a feel-good, calming, stress-reducing hormone.
Which is also increased when we're with our women friends.
And I do think that's one reason why we live longer.
And I feel so bad for men because they don't have that.
Testosterone in men diminishes the effects of oxytocin.
LT: Well, when you and I and Dolly made "9 to 5" ...
JF: Oh -- LT: We laughed, we did, we laughed so much, we found we had so much in common and we're so different.
Here she is, like Hollywood royalty, I'm like a tough kid from Detroit, [Dolly's] a Southern kid from a poor town in Tennessee, and we found we were so in sync as women, and we must have -- we laughed -- we must have added at least a decade onto our lifespans.
JF: I think -- we sure crossed our legs a lot.
(Laughter) If you know what I mean.
LT: I think we all know what you mean.
(Laughter) PM: You're adding decades to our lives right now.
So among the books that Jane sent us both to read on female friendship was one by a woman we admire greatly, Sister Joan Chittister, who said about female friendship that women friends are not just a social act, they're a spiritual act.
Do you think of your friends as spiritual?
Do they add something spiritual to your lives?
LT: Spiritual -- I absolutely think that.
Because -- especially people you've known a long time, people you've spent time with -- I can see the spiritual essence inside them, the tenderness, the vulnerability.
There's actually kind of a love, an element of love in the relationship.
I just see deeply into your soul.
PM: Do you think that, Jane -- LT: But I have special powers.
JF: Well, there's all kinds of friends.
There's business friends, and party friends, I've got a lot of those.
(Laughter) But the oxytocin-producing friendships have ...
They feel spiritual because it's a heart opening, right?
You know, we go deep. And -- I find that I shed tears a lot with my intimate friends.
Not because I'm sad but because I'm so touched and inspired by them.
LT: And you know one of you is going to go soon.
(Laughter) PM: Well, two of us are sitting here, Lily, which one are you talking about?
(Laughter) And I always think, when women talk about their friendships, that men always look a little mystified.
What are the differences, in your opinion, between men friendships and women friendships?
JF: There's a lot of difference, and I think we have to have a lot of empathy for men -- (Laughter) that they don't have what we have.
Which I think may be why they die sooner.
(Laughter) I have a lot of compassion for men, because women, no kidding, we -- women's relationships, our friendships are full disclosure, we go deep.
They're revelatory.
We risk vulnerability -- this is something men don't do.
I mean how many times have I asked you, "Am I doing OK?"
"Did I really screw up there?"
PM: You're doing great.
(Laughter) JF: But I mean, we ask questions like that of our women friends, and men don't.
You know, people describe women's relationships as face-to-face, whereas men's friendships are more side-by-side.
LT: I mean most of the time men don't want to reveal their emotions, they want to bury deeper feelings.
I mean, that's the general, conventional thought.
They would rather go off in their man cave and watch a game or hit golf balls, or talk about sports, or hunting, or cars or have sex.
I mean, it's just the kind of -- it's a more manly behavior.
JF: You meant -- LT: They talk about sex.
I meant they might have sex if they could get somebody in their man cave to -- (Laughter) JF: You know something, though, that I find very interesting -- and again, psychologists didn't know this until relatively recently -- is that men are born every bit as relational as women are.
If you look at films of newborn baby boys and girls, you'll see the baby boys just like the girls, gazing into their mother's eyes, you know, needing that relational exchange of energy.
When the mother looks away, they could see the dismay on the child, even the boy would cry.
They need relationship.
So the question is why, as they grow older, does that change?
And the answer is patriarchal culture, which says to boys and young men that to be needing of relationship, to be emotional with someone is girly.
That a real man doesn't ask directions or express a need, they don't go to doctors if they feel bad.
They don't ask for help.
There's a quote that I really like, "Men fear that becoming 'we' will erase his 'I'."
You know, his sense of self.
Whereas women's sense of self has always been kind of porous.
But our "we" is our saving grace, it's what makes us strong.
It's not that we're better than men, we just don't have our masculinity to prove.
LT: And, well -- JF: That's a Gloria Steinem quote.
So we can express our humanity -- LT: I know who Gloria Steinem is.
JF: I know you know who she is, but I think it's a -- (Laughter) No, but it's a great quote, I think.
We're not better than men, we just don't have our masculinity to prove.
And that's really important.
LT: But men are so inculcated in the culture to be comfortable in the patriarchy.
And we've got to make something different happen.
JF: Women's friendships are like a renewable source of power.
LT: Well, that's what's exciting about this subject.
It's because our friendships -- female friendships are just a hop to our sisterhood, and sisterhood can be a very powerful force, to give the world -- to make it what it should be -- the things that humans desperately need.
PM: It is why we're talking about it, because women's friendships are, as you said, Jane, a renewable source of power.
So how do we use that power?
JF: Well, women are the fastest growing demographic in the world, especially older women.
And if we harness our power, we can change the world.
And guess what? We need to.
(Applause) And we need to do it soon.
And one of the things that we need to do -- and we can do it as women -- for one thing, we kind of set the consumer standards.
We need to consume less.
We in the Western world need to consume less and when we buy things, we need to buy things that are made locally, when we buy food, we need to buy food that's grown locally.
We are the ones that need to get off the grid.
We need to make ourselves independent from fossil fuels.
And the fossil fuel companies -- the Exxons and the Shell Oils and those bad guys -- cause they are -- are going to tell us that we can't do it without going back to the Stone Age.
You know, that the alternatives just aren't quite there yet, and that's not true.
There are countries in the world right now that are living mostly on renewable energy and doing just fine.
And they tell us that if we do wean ourselves from fossil fuel that we're going to be back in the Stone Age, and in fact, if we begin to use renewable energy, and not drill in the Arctic, and not drill -- LT: Oh, boy.
JF: And not drill in the Alberta tar sands -- Right.
That we will be -- there will be more democracy and more jobs and more well-being, and it's women that are going to lead the way.
LT: Maybe we have the momentum to start a third-wave feminist movement with our sisterhood around the world, with women we don't see, women we may never meet, but we join together that way, because -- Aristotle said -- most people -- people would die without male friendships.
And the operative word here was "male."
Because they thought that friendships should be between equals and women were not considered equal -- JF: They didn't think we had souls even, the Greeks.
LT: No, exactly. That shows you just how limited Aristotle was.
(Laughter) And wait, no, here's the best part.
It's like, you know, men do need women now.
The planet needs women.
The US Constitution needs women.
We are not even in the Constitution.
JF: You're talking about the Equal Rights Amendment.
LT: Right.
Justice Ginsberg said something like -- every constitution that's been written since the end of World War II included a provision that made women citizens of equal stature, but ours does not.
So that would be a good place to start.
Very, very mild -- JF: Right.
(Applause) And gender equality, it's like a tide, it would lift all boats, not just women.
PM: Needing new role models on how to do that.
How to be friends, how to think about our power in different ways, as consumers, as citizens of the world, and this is what makes Jane and Lily a role model of how women can be friends -- for a very long time, and even if they occasionally disagree.
Thank you.
Thank you both.
(Applause) JF: Thanks.
LT: Thank you.
JF: Thank you.
(Applause)
Imagine this: You're fast asleep when all of a sudden you're awoken!
And not by your alarm clock.
Your eyes open, and there's a demon sitting on your chest, pinning you down.
You try to open your mouth and scream, but no sound comes out.
You try to get up and run away, but you realize that you are completely immobilized.
The demon is trying to suffocate you, but you can't fight back.
You've awoken into your dream, and it's a nightmare.
It sounds like a Stephen King movie, but it's actually a medical condition called sleep paralysis, and about half of the population has experienced this strange phenomenon at least once in their life.
This panic-inducing episode of coming face-to-face with the creatures from your nightmares can last anywhere from seconds to minutes and may involve visual or auditory hallucinations of an evil spirit or an out-of-body feeling like you're floating.
Some have even mistaken sleep paralysis for an encounter with a ghost or an alien abduction.
In 1867, Dr. Silas Weir Mitchell was the first medical professional to study sleep paralysis.
"The subject awakes to consciousness of his environment but is incapable of moving a muscle.
Lying to all appearance, still asleep.
He's really engaged for a struggle for movement, fraught with acute mental distress.
Could he but manage to stir, the spell would vanish instantly."
Even though Dr. Mitchell was the first to observe patients in a state of sleep paralysis, it's so common that nearly every culture throughout time has had some kind of paranormal explanation for it.
In medieval Europe, you might think that an incubus, a sex-hungry demon in male form, visited you in the night.
In Scandinavia, the mare, a damned woman, is responsible for visiting sleepers and sitting on their rib cages.
In Turkey, a jinn holds you down and tries to strangle you.
In Thailand, Phi Am bruises you while you sleep.
In the southern United States, the hag comes for you.
In Mexico, you could blame subirse el muerto, the dead person, on you.
In Greece, Mora sits upon your chest and tries to asphyxiate you.
In Nepal, Khyaak the ghost resides under the staircase.
It may be easier to blame sleep paralysis on evil spirits because what's actually happening in your brain is much harder to explain.
Modern scientists believe that sleep paralysis is caused by an abnormal overlap of the REM, rapid eye movement, and waking stages of sleep.
During a normal REM cycle, you're experiencing a number of sensory stimuli in the form of a dream, and your brain is unconscious and fully asleep.
During your dream, special neurotransmitters are released, which paralyze almost all of your muscles.
That's called REM atonia.
It's what keeps you from running in your bed when you're being chased in your dreams.
During an episode of sleep paralysis, you're experiencing normal components of REM.
You're dreaming and your muscles are paralyzed, only your brain is conscious and wide awake.
This is what causes you to imagine that you're having an encounter with a menacing presence.
So this explains the hallucinations, but what about the feelings of panic, strangling, choking, chest pressure that so many people describe?
Well during REM, the function that keeps you from acting out your dreams, REM atonia, also removes voluntary control of your breathing.
Your breath becomes more shallow and rapid.
You take in more carbon dioxide and experience a small blockage of your airway.
During a sleep paralysis episode, a combination of your body's fear response to a perceived attack by an evil creature and your brain being wide awake while your body is in an REM sleep state triggers a response for you to take in more oxygen.
That makes you gasp for air, but you can't because REM atonia has removed control of your breath.
This struggle for air while your body sleeps creates a perceived sensation of pressure on the chest or suffocation.
While a few people experience sleep paralysis regularly and it may be linked to sleep disorders such as narcolepsy, many who experience an episode of sleep paralysis do so infrequently, perhaps only once in a lifetime.
So you can rest easy, knowing that an evil entity is not trying to haunt, possess, strangle, or suffocate you.
Save that for the horror films!
Ten years ago, I had my first exhibition here.
I had no idea if it would work or was at all possible, but with a few small steps and a very steep learning curve, I made my first sculpture, called "The Lost Correspondent."
Teaming up with a marine biologist and a local dive center, I submerged the work off the coast of Grenada, in an area decimated by Hurricane Ivan.
And then this incredible thing happened.
It transformed.
One sculpture became two.
Two quickly became 26.
And before I knew it, we had the world's first underwater sculpture park.
In 2009, I moved to Mexico and started by casting local fisherman.
This grew to a small community, to almost an entire movement of people in defense of the sea.
And then finally, to an underwater museum, with over 500 living sculptures.
Gardening, it seems, is not just for greenhouses.
We've since scaled up the designs: "Ocean Atlas," in the Bahamas, rising 16 feet up to the surface and weighing over 40 tons, to now currently in Lanzarote, where I'm making an underwater botanical garden, the first of its kind in the Atlantic Ocean.
Each project, we use materials and designs that help encourage life; a long-lasting pH-neutral cement provides a stable and permanent platform.
It is textured to allow coral polyps to attach.
We position them down current from natural reefs so that after spawning, there's areas for them to settle.
The formations are all configured so that they aggregate fish on a really large scale.
Even this VW Beetle has an internal living habitat to encourage crustaceans such as lobsters and sea urchins.
So why exhibit my work in the ocean?
Because honestly, it's really not easy.
When you're in the middle of the sea under a hundred-foot crane, trying to lower eight tons down to the sea floor, you start to wonder whether I shouldn't have taken up watercolor painting instead.
(Laughter) But in the end, the results always blow my mind.
(Music) The ocean is the most incredible exhibition space an artist could ever wish for.
You have amazing lighting effects changing by the hour, explosions of sand covering the sculptures in a cloud of mystery, a unique timeless quality and the procession of inquisitive visitors, each lending their own special touch to the site.
(Music) But over the years, I've realized that the greatest thing about what we do, the really humbling thing about the work, is that as soon as we submerge the sculptures, they're not ours anymore, because as soon as we sink them, the sculptures, they belong to the sea.
As new reefs form, a new world literally starts to evolve, a world that continuously amazes me.
It's a bit of a cliché, but nothing man-made can ever match the imagination of nature.
Sponges look like veins across the faces.
Staghorn coral morphs the form.
Fireworms scrawl white lines as they feed.
Tunicates explode from the faces.
Sea urchins crawl across the bodies feeding at night.
Coralline algae applies a kind of purple paint.
The deepest red I've ever seen in my life lives underwater.
Gorgonian fans oscillate with the waves.
Purple sponges breathe water like air.
And grey angelfish glide silently overhead.
And the amazing response we've had to these works tells me that we've managed to plug into something really primal, because it seems that these images translate across the world, and that's made me focus on my responsibility as an artist and about what I'm trying to achieve.
I'm standing here today on this boat in the middle of the ocean, and this couldn't be a better place to talk about the really, really important effect of my work.
Because as we all know, our reefs are dying, and our oceans are in trouble.
So here's the thing: the most used, searched and shared image of all my work thus far is this.
And I think this is for a reason, or at least I hope it is.
What I really hope is that people are beginning to understand that when we think of the environment and the destruction of nature, that we need to start thinking about our oceans, too.
Since building these sites, we've seen some phenomenal and unexpected results.
Besides creating over 800 square meters of new habitats and living reef, visitors to the marine park in Cancun now divide half their time between the museum and the natural reefs, providing significant rest for natural, overstressed areas.
Visitors to "Ocean Atlas" in the Bahamas highlighted a leak from a nearby oil refinery.
The subsequent international media forced the local government to pledge 10 million dollars in coastal cleanups.
The sculpture park in Grenada was instrumental in the government designating a spot -- a marine-protected area.
Entrance fees to the park now help fund park rangers to manage tourism and fishing quotas.
The site was actually listed as a "Wonder of the World" by National Geographic.
So why are we all here today in this room?
What do we all have in common?
I think we all share a fear that we don't protect our oceans enough.
And one way of thinking about this is that we don't regard our oceans as sacred, and we should.
When we see incredible places -- like the Himalayas or the La Sagrada Família, or the Mona Lisa, even -- when we see these incredible places and things, we understand their importance.
We call them sacred, and we do our best to cherish them, to protect them and to keep them safe.
But in order to do that, we are the ones that have to assign that value; otherwise, it will be desecrated by someone who doesn't understand that value.
So I want to finish up tonight by talking about sacred things.
When we were naming the site in Cancun, we named it a museum for a very important and simple reason: museums are places of preservation, of conservation and of education.
They're places where we keep objects of great value to us, where we simply treasure them for them being themselves.
If someone was to throw an egg at the Sistine Chapel, we'd all go crazy.
If someone wanted to build a seven-star hotel at the bottom of the Grand Canyon, then we would laugh them out of Arizona.
Yet every day we dredge, pollute and overfish our oceans.
And I think it's easier for us to do that, because when we see the ocean, we don't see the havoc we're wreaking.
Because for most people, the ocean is like this.
And it's really hard to think of something that's just so plain and so enormous, as fragile.
It's simply too massive, too vast, too endless.
And what do you see here?
I think most people actually look past to the horizon.
So I think there's a real danger that we never really see the sea, and if we don't really see it, if it doesn't have its own iconography, if we miss its majesty, then there's a big danger that we take it for granted.
Cancun is famous for spring break, tequila and foam parties.
And its waters are where frat boys can ride around on Jet Skis and banana boats.
But because of our work there, there's now a little corner of Cancun that is simply precious for being itself.
And we don't want to stop in Grenada, in Cancun or the Bahamas.
Just last month, I installed these Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse in the Thames River, in central London, right in front of the Houses of Parliament, putting a stark message about climate change in front of the people that have the power to help change things.
Because for me, this is just the beginning of the mission.
We want to team up with other inventors, creators, philanthropists, educators, biologists, to see better futures for our oceans.
And we want to see beyond sculpture, beyond art, even.
Say you're a 14-year-old kid from the city, and you've never seen the ocean.
And instead of getting taken to the natural history museum or an aquarium, you get taken out to the ocean, to an underwater Noah's Ark, which you can access through a dry-glass viewing tunnel, where you can see all the wildlife of the land be colonized by the wildlife of the ocean.
Clearly, it would blow your mind.
So let's think big and let's think deep.
Who knows where our imagination and willpower can lead us?
I hope that by bringing our art into the ocean, that not only do we take advantage of amazing creativity and visual impact of the setting, but that we are also giving something back, and by encouraging new environments to thrive, and in some way opening up a new -- or maybe it's a really old way of seeing the seas: as delicate, precious places, worthy of our protection.
Our oceans are sacred.
Thank you.
(Applause)
On October 4, 1957, the world watched in awe and fear as the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the world's first man-made satellite, into space.
This little metal ball, smaller than two feet in diameter, launched a space race between the U.S. and U.S.S.R.
that would last for eighteen years and change the world as we know it.
Sputnik was actually not the first piece of human technology to enter space.
That superlative goes to the V-2 rocket used by Germany in missile attacks against Allied cities as a last-ditch effort in the final years of World War II.
It wasn't very effective, but, at the end of the war, both the U.S. and U.S.S.R. had captured the technology and the scientists that had developed it and began using them for their own projects.
And by August 1957, the Soviet's successfully tested the first intercontinental ballistic missile, the R-7, the same rocket that would be used to launch Sputnik two months later.
So, the scary thing about Sputnik was not the orbiting ball itself, but the fact that the same technology could be used to launch a nuclear warhead at any city.
Not wanting to fall too far behind, President Eisenhower ordered the Navy to speed up its own project and launch a satellite as soon as possible.
So, on December 6, 1957, excited people across the nation tuned in to watch the live broadcast as the Vanguard TV3 satellite took off and crashed to the ground two seconds later.
The Vanguard failure was a huge embarassment for the United States.
Newspapers printed headlines like, "Flopnik" and "Kaputnik."
And a Soviet delegate at the U.N. mockingly suggested that the U.S. should receive foreign aid for developing nations.
Fortunately, the Army had been working on their own parallel project, The Explorer, which was successfully launched in January 1958, but the U.S. had barely managed to catch up before they were surpassed again as Yuri Gargarin became the first man in space in April 1961.
Almost a year passed and several more Soviet astronauts completed their missions before Project Mercury succeeded in making John Glenn the first American in orbit in February 1962.
By this time, President Kennedy had realized that simply catching up to each Soviet advance a few months later wasn't going to cut it.
The U.S. had to do something first, and in May 1961, a month after Gargarin's flight, he announced the goal of putting a man on the moon by the end of the 1960s.
They succeeded in this through the Apollo program with Neil Armstrong taking his famous step on July 20, 1969.
With both countries' next turning their attention to orbital space stations, there's no telling how much longer the space race could have gone on.
But because of improving relations negotiated by Soviet Premier Leonid Breshnev and U.S. President Nixon, the U.S.S.R. and U.S. moved toward cooperation rather than competition.
The successful joint mission, known as Apollo-Soyuz, in which an American Apollo spacecraft docked with a Soviet Soyuz craft and the two crews met, shook hands, and exchanged gifts, marked the end of the space race in 1975.
So, in the end, what was the point of this whole space race?
Was it just a massive waste of time?
Two major superpowers trying to outdo each other by pursuing symbolic projects that were both dangerous and expensive, using resources that could have been better spent elsewhere?
Well, sure, sort of, but the biggest benefits of the space program had nothing to do with one country beating another.
During the space race, funding for research and education, in general, increased dramatically, leading to many advances that may not have otherwise been made.
Many NASA technologies developed for space are now widely used in civilian life, from memory foam in mattresses to freeze-dried food, to LEDs in cancer treatment.
And, of course, the satellites that we rely on for our GPS and mobile phone signals would not have been there without the space program.
All of which goes to show that the rewards of scientific research and advancement are often far more vast than even the people pursuing them can imagine.
Imagine you're at a football game when this obnoxious guy sits next to you.
He's loud, he spills his drink on you, and he makes fun of your team.
Days later, you're walking in the park when suddenly it starts to pour rain.
Who should show up at your side to offer you an umbrella?
The same guy from the football game.
Do you change your mind about him based on this second encounter, or do you go with your first impression and write him off?
Research in social psychology suggests that we're quick to form lasting impressions of others based on their behaviors.
We manage to do this with little effort, inferring stable character traits from a single behavior, like a harsh word or a clumsy step.
Using our impressions as guides, we can accurately predict how people are going to behave in the future.
Armed with the knowledge the guy from the football game was a jerk the first time you met him, you might expect more of the same down the road.
If so, you might choose to avoid him the next time you see him.
That said, we can change our impressions in light of new information.
Behavioral researchers have identified consistent patterns that seem to guide this process of impression updating.
On one hand, learning very negative, highly immoral information about someone typically has a stronger impact than learning very positive, highly moral information.
So, unfortunately for our new friend from the football game, his bad behavior at the game might outweigh his good behavior at the park.
Research suggests that this bias occurs because immoral behaviors are more diagnostic, or revealing, of a person's true character.
Okay, so by this logic, bad is always stronger than good when it comes to updating.
Well, not necessarily.
Certain types of learning don't seem to lead to this sort of negativity bias.
When learning about another person's abilities and competencies, for instance, this bias flips.
It's actually the positive information that gets weighted more heavily.
Let's go back to that football game.
If a player scores a goal, it ultimately has a stronger impact on your impression of their skills than if they miss the net.
The two sides of the updating story are ultimately quite consistent.
Overall, behaviors that are perceived as being less frequent are also the ones that people tend to weigh more heavily when forming and updating impressions, highly immoral actions and highly competent actions.
So, what's happening at the level of the brain when we're updating our impressions?
Using fMRI, or functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging, researchers have identified an extended network of brain regions that respond to new information that's inconsistent with initial impressions.
These include areas typically associated with social cognition, attention, and cognitive control.
Moreover, when updating impressions based on people's behaviors, activity in the ventrolateral prefrontal cortex and the superior temporal sulcus correlates with perceptions of how frequently those behaviors occur in daily life.
In other words, the brain seems to be tracking low-level, statistical properties of behavior in order to make complex decisions regarding other people's character.
It needs to decide is this person's behavior typical or is it out of the ordinary?
In the situation with the obnoxious-football-fan-turned-good-samaritan, your brain says, "Well, in my experience, pretty much anyone would lend someone their umbrella, but the way this guy acted at the football game, that was unusual."
And so, you decide to go with your first impression.
There's a good moral in this data: your brain, and by extension you, might care more about the very negative, immoral things another person has done compared to the very positive, moral things, but it's a direct result of the comparative rarity of those bad behaviors.
We're more used to people being basically good, like taking time to help a stranger in need.
In this context, bad might be stronger than good, but only because good is more plentiful.
Think about the last time you judged someone based on their behavior, especially a time when you really feel like you changed your mind about someone.
Was the behavior that caused you to update your impression something you'd expect anyone to do, or was it something totally out of the ordinary?
On our planet, we have two polar regions: the Arctic, whose name comes from the Greek Arktikos, of the North, and the Antarctic from Antarktikos, opposite of the North.
But there's an easier way to remember them if you just remember what surrounds them.
The Arctic, situated in the Northern hemisphere of our planet, is an ocean entirely surrounded by land.
On the other side of the world, the Antarctic is a continent entirely surrounded by ocean.
So, the Arctic has polar bears but no penguins, and the Antarctic has penguins but no polar bears.
Let's talk about the Arctic first.
The Arctic region consists of a vast, ice-covered ocean surrounded by treeless permafrost.
The area can be defined as the region between the Arctic Circle and the North Pole.
If you were to stand at the North Pole, everywhere you looked, in all directions, would be south.
But standing at the North Pole is difficult to do for very long because it's in the middle of an ocean, covered by constantly shifting, frozen sea ice.
If you were to fall into the water at the North Pole, you'd fall into water that's 13,980 feet deep.
Above the water, average winter temperatures can be as low as -40 degrees Celsius, and the coldest recorded temperature is approximately -68 degrees Celsius.
Despite these incredibly harsh conditions, humans have populated areas in the Arctic for thousands of years.
Life in the Arctic includes organisms living in the ice, zooplankton and phytoplankton, fish and marine mammals, birds, land animals, plants, and human societies.
Okay, what about Antarctica?
Antarctica is Earth's southernmost continent, and it contains the geographic South Pole.
It's the fifth largest continent on the planet at nearly twice the size of Australia.
Almost 98% of Anarctica is covered by ice at least one mile in thickness.
Conditions in Antarctica are some of the most extreme in the entire world.
On average, it's the coldest, windiest, driest continent and has the highest average elevation of all the continents.
You might think that it snows all the time at the Poles, but Antarctica is so dry, it's considered a desert with annual precipitation of only 200 millimeters along the coast and far less inland.
The temperature in Antarctica has reached -89 degrees Celsius.
Because it's so harsh and hard to get to, there are no permanent human residents on Antarctica, but anywhere from 1,000 to 5,000 people reside throughout the year at the research stations scattered across the continent.
Even the most extreme animals fight for survival, and only cold-adapted organisms survive there, including many types of algae, animals, bacteria, fungi, plants, and protista.
But why is Antarctica colder than its northern cousin?
Well, first, much of the continent is more than three kilometers above sea level, and temperature decreases with elevation.
That's why mountaintops have snow on them.
Second, remember that the Arctic is really a frozen ocean.
The water in the ocean beneath it is warmer than the frozen ground in the Antarctic, and that warmth is transferred through the ice pack.
This prevents temperatures in the Arctic regions from reaching the extremes typical of the land surface of Antarctica.
Third, the seasons are conspiring against the Antarctic.
During the aphelion in July, when the Earth is the farthest away from the Sun, it also happens to be winter in the Antarctic, which creates a double-whammy of cold for the southern pole.
But despite being inhospitable, the North and South Pole are a big reason why our planet is the way it is.
Both of our polar regions are very important climate controllers.
They help moderate the temperature in our temperate zones and give us stable weather.
As sea ice in the Arctic declines due to climate change and global warming, weather around the globe becomes increasing more unstable.
Wars are a tragic part of our history and will almost certainly be a tragic part of our future.
Since the establishment of the United Nations, wars of aggression have been outlawed and multilateral conventions refer to armed conflict instead of war.
But the wars of the future won't be like the wars of our past.
Alongside traditional warfare, our future will include cyberwarfare, remotely fighting our enemies through the use of a new class of weapons, including computer viruses and programs to alter the enemy's ability to operate.
And not only is cyberwarfare not covered by existing legal frameworks, but the question of what exactly constitutes cyberwarfare is still highly debated.
So, how can we deal with cyberwarfare if we can't even agree on what it means?
One way forward is to envision situations where new international laws may be needed.
Imagine a new kind of assassin, one that could perpetrate a crime without firing a single shot or even being in the same country.
For example, an individual working for the government uses a wireless device to send a signal to another foreign leader's pacemaker.
This device directs the pacemaker to malfunction, ultimately resulting in the foreign leader's death.
Would this cyber assassination constitute an act of war?
As a second example, imagine an allied group of nations cooperatively infiltrating the computer systems of an enemy nation's nuclear warship.
This attack results in a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier almost melting down, which was stopped just short of killing thousands of soldiers and civilians.
As a defensive measure, the enemy country responds by unleashing a defensive cyberattack that results in the allied nations' power grids going down.
Hospitals can no longer treat patients, entire regions without heat or clean water, all ultimately causing tens of thousands civilian deaths.
The origin of the power failure was the counterattack, but the fragile infrastructure, feeble cybersecurity, and the antiquated state of the power grid all contributed to the deaths of the civilians.
Could the country fight back?
Who would they fight?
And would their retaliation be considered an act of war?
Do they constitute war crimes against humanity?
Who is to be held responsible?
The computer programmers who wrote the code?
The military project manager who oversaw the creation of the code?
The commander who hit the button, setting off the event?
The hardware engineer who created the computers, knowing that they were intended to enable an attack?
Because war has been with us for so long, we have laws to deal with figuring out who should be held accountable for their actions in combat.
These legal frameworks aim to contain and prevent atrocities from being more atrocious.
Commandeering civilian planes and using them as weapons, dropping atomic bombs, the use of gas chambers or poisonous gas in conflict, all of these actions, if committed, constitute acts of war and war crimes under customary international law and the Hague conventions.
Again, the current legal framework stays silent on hypothetical questions and countless others because there are no easy answers, and there are only two ways to make progress on these questions: peace or new laws.
So, what hypothetical but plausible scenarios can you imagine falling under the burgeoning definition of cyberwarfare, and how might you design an international legal framework to deter these activities?
A hundred years ago this month, a 36-year-old Albert Einstein stood up in front of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin to present a radical new theory of space, time and gravity: the general theory of relativity.
General relativity is unquestionably Einstein's masterpiece, a theory which reveals the workings of the universe at the grandest scales, capturing in one beautiful line of algebra everything from why apples fall from trees to the beginning of time and space.
1915 must have been an exciting year to be a physicist.
Two new ideas were turning the subject on its head.
One was Einstein's theory of relativity, the other was arguably even more revolutionary: quantum mechanics, a mind-meltingly strange yet stunningly successful new way of understanding the microworld, the world of atoms and particles.
Over the last century, these two ideas have utterly transformed our understanding of the universe.
It's thanks to relativity and quantum mechanics that we've learned what the universe is made from, how it began and how it continues to evolve.
A hundred years on, we now find ourselves at another turning point in physics, but what's at stake now is rather different.
The next few years may tell us whether we'll be able to continue to increase our understanding of nature, or whether maybe for the first time in the history of science, we could be facing questions that we cannot answer, not because we don't have the brains or technology, but because the laws of physics themselves forbid it.
This is the essential problem: the universe is far, far too interesting.
Relativity and quantum mechanics appear to suggest that the universe should be a boring place.
It should be dark, lethal and lifeless.
But when we look around us, we see we live in a universe full of interesting stuff, full of stars, planets, trees, squirrels.
The question is, ultimately, why does all this interesting stuff exist?
Why is there something rather than nothing?
This contradiction is the most pressing problem in fundamental physics, and in the next few years, we may find out whether we'll ever be able to solve it.
At the heart of this problem are two numbers, two extremely dangerous numbers.
These are properties of the universe that we can measure, and they're extremely dangerous because if they were different, even by a tiny bit, then the universe as we know it would not exist.
The first of these numbers is associated with the discovery that was made a few kilometers from this hall, at CERN, home of this machine, the largest scientific device ever built by the human race, the Large Hadron Collider.
The LHC whizzes subatomic particles around a 27-kilometer ring, getting them closer and closer to the speed of light before smashing them into each other inside gigantic particle detectors.
On July 4, 2012, physicists at CERN announced to the world that they'd spotted a new fundamental particle being created at the violent collisions at the LHC: the Higgs boson.
Now, if you followed the news at the time, you'll have seen a lot of physicists getting very excited indeed, and you'd be forgiven for thinking we get that way every time we discover a new particle.
Well, that is kind of true, but the Higgs boson is particularly special.
We all got so excited because finding the Higgs proves the existence of a cosmic energy field.
Now, you may have trouble imagining an energy field, but we've all experienced one.
If you've ever held a magnet close to a piece of metal and felt a force pulling across that gap, then you've felt the effect of a field.
And the Higgs field is a little bit like a magnetic field, except it has a constant value everywhere.
It's all around us right now.
We can't see it or touch it, but if it wasn't there, we would not exist.
The Higgs field gives mass to the fundamental particles that we're made from.
If it wasn't there, those particles would have no mass, and no atoms could form and there would be no us.
But there is something deeply mysterious about the Higgs field.
Relativity and quantum mechanics tell us that it has two natural settings, a bit like a light switch.
It should either be off, so that it has a zero value everywhere in space, or it should be on so it has an absolutely enormous value.
In both of these scenarios, atoms could not exist, and therefore all the other interesting stuff that we see around us in the universe would not exist.
In reality, the Higgs field is just slightly on, not zero but 10,000 trillion times weaker than its fully on value, a bit like a light switch that's got stuck just before the off position.
And this value is crucial.
If it were a tiny bit different, then there would be no physical structure in the universe.
So this is the first of our dangerous numbers, the strength of the Higgs field.
Theorists have spent decades trying to understand why it has this very peculiarly fine-tuned number, and they've come up with a number of possible explanations.
They have sexy-sounding names like "supersymmetry" or "large extra dimensions."
I'm not going to go into the details of these ideas now, but the key point is this: if any of them explained this weirdly fine-tuned value of the Higgs field, then we should see new particles being created at the LHC along with the Higgs boson.
So far, though, we've not seen any sign of them.
But there's actually an even worse example of this kind of fine-tuning of a dangerous number, and this time it comes from the other end of the scale, from studying the universe at vast distances.
One of the most important consequences of Einstein's general theory of relativity was the discovery that the universe began as a rapid expansion of space and time 13.8 billion years ago, the Big Bang.
Now, according to early versions of the Big Bang theory, the universe has been expanding ever since with gravity gradually putting the brakes on that expansion.
But in 1998, astronomers made the stunning discovery that the expansion of the universe is actually speeding up.
The universe is getting bigger and bigger faster and faster driven by a mysterious repulsive force called dark energy.
Now, whenever you hear the word "dark" in physics, you should get very suspicious because it probably means we don't know what we're talking about.
(Laughter) We don't know what dark energy is, but the best idea is that it's the energy of empty space itself, the energy of the vacuum.
Now, if you use good old quantum mechanics to work out how strong dark energy should be, you get an absolutely astonishing result.
You find that dark energy should be 10 to the power of 120 times stronger than the value we observe from astronomy.
That's one with 120 zeroes after it.
This is a number so mind-bogglingly huge that it's impossible to get your head around.
We often use the word "astronomical" when we're talking about big numbers.
Well, even that one won't do here.
This number is bigger than any number in astronomy.
It's a thousand trillion trillion trillion times bigger than the number of atoms in the entire universe.
So that's a pretty bad prediction.
In fact, it's been called the worst prediction in physics, and this is more than just a theoretical curiosity.
If dark energy were anywhere near this strong, then the universe would have been torn apart, stars and galaxies could not form, and we would not be here.
So this is the second of those dangerous numbers, the strength of dark energy, and explaining it requires an even more fantastic level of fine-tuning than we saw for the Higgs field.
But unlike the Higgs field, this number has no known explanation.
The hope was that a complete combination of Einstein's general theory of relativity, which is the theory of the universe at grand scales, with quantum mechanics, the theory of the universe at small scales, might provide a solution.
Einstein himself spent most of his later years on a futile search for a unified theory of physics, and physicists have kept at it ever since.
One of the most promising candidates for a unified theory is string theory, and the essential idea is, if you could zoom in on the fundamental particles that make up our world, you'd see actually that they're not particles at all, but tiny vibrating strings of energy, with each frequency of vibration corresponding to a different particle, a bit like musical notes on a guitar string.
So it's a rather elegant, almost poetic way of looking at the world, but it has one catastrophic problem.
It turns out that string theory isn't one theory at all, but a whole collection of theories.
It's been estimated, in fact, that there are 10 to the 500 different versions of string theory.
Each one would describe a different universe with different laws of physics.
Now, critics say this makes string theory unscientific.
You can't disprove the theory.
But others actually turned this on its head and said, well, maybe this apparent failure is string theory's greatest triumph.
What if all of these 10 to the 500 different possible universes actually exist out there somewhere in some grand multiverse?
Suddenly we can understand the weirdly fine-tuned values of these two dangerous numbers.
In most of the multiverse, dark energy is so strong that the universe gets torn apart, or the Higgs field is so weak that no atoms can form.
We live in one of the places in the multiverse where the two numbers are just right.
We live in a Goldilocks universe.
Now, this idea is extremely controversial, and it's easy to see why.
If we follow this line of thinking, then we will never be able to answer the question, "Why is there something rather than nothing?"
In most of the multiverse, there is nothing, and we live in one of the few places where the laws of physics allow there to be something.
Even worse, we can't test the idea of the multiverse.
We can't access these other universes, so there's no way of knowing whether they're there or not.
So we're in an extremely frustrating position.
That doesn't mean the multiverse doesn't exist.
There are other planets, other stars, other galaxies, so why not other universes?
The problem is, it's unlikely we'll ever know for sure.
Now, the idea of the multiverse has been around for a while, but in the last few years, we've started to get the first solid hints that this line of reasoning may get born out.
Despite high hopes for the first run of the LHC, what we were looking for there -- we were looking for new theories of physics: supersymmetry or large extra dimensions that could explain this weirdly fine-tuned value of the Higgs field.
But despite high hopes, the LHC revealed a barren subatomic wilderness populated only by a lonely Higgs boson.
My experiment published paper after paper where we glumly had to conclude that we saw no signs of new physics.
The stakes now could not be higher.
This summer, the LHC began its second phase of operation with an energy almost double what we achieved in the first run.
What particle physicists are all desperately hoping for are signs of new particles, micro black holes, or maybe something totally unexpected emerging from the violent collisions at the Large Hadron Collider.
If so, then we can continue this long journey that began 100 years ago with Albert Einstein towards an ever deeper understanding of the laws of nature.
But if, in two or three years' time, when the LHC switches off again for a second long shutdown, we've found nothing but the Higgs boson, then we may be entering a new era in physics: an era where there are weird features of the universe that we cannot explain; an era where we have hints that we live in a multiverse that lies frustratingly forever beyond our reach; an era where we will never be able to answer the question, "Why is there something rather than nothing?"
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Harry, even if you just said the science may not have some answers, I would like to ask you a couple of questions, and the first is: building something like the LHC is a generational project.
I just mentioned, introducing you, that we live in a short-term world.
How do you think so long term, projecting yourself out a generation when building something like this?
Harry Cliff: I was very lucky that I joined the experiment I work on at the LHC in 2008, just as we were switching on, and there are people in my research group who have been working on it for three decades, their entire careers on one machine.
So I think the first conversations about the LHC were in 1976, and you start planning the machine without the technology that you know you're going to need to be able to build it.
So the computing power did not exist in the early '90s when design work began in earnest.
One of the big detectors which record these collisions, they didn't think there was technology that could withstand the radiation that would be created in the LHC, so there was basically a lump of lead in the middle of this object with some detectors around the outside, but subsequently we have developed technology.
So you have to rely on people's ingenuity, that they will solve the problems, but it may be a decade or more down the line.
BG: China just announced two or three weeks ago that they intend to build a supercollider twice the size of the LHC.
I was wondering how you and your colleagues welcome the news.
HC: Size isn't everything, Bruno. BG: I'm sure. I'm sure.
(Laughter) It sounds funny for a particle physicist to say that.
But I mean, seriously, it's great news.
So building a machine like the LHC requires countries from all over the world to pool their resources.
No one nation can afford to build a machine this large, apart from maybe China, because they can mobilize huge amounts of resources, manpower and money to build machines like this.
So it's only a good thing.
What they're really planning to do is to build a machine that will study the Higgs boson in detail and could give us some clues as to whether these new ideas, like supersymmetry, are really out there, so it's great news for physics, I think.
BG: Harry, thank you. HC: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Have you experienced déjà vu?
It's that shadowy feeling you get when a situation seems familiar.
A scene in a restaurant plays out exactly as you remember.
The world moves like a ballet you've choreographed, but the sequence can't be based on a past experience because you've never eaten here before.
This is the first time you've had clams, so what's going on?
Unfortunately, there isn't one single explanation for déjà vu.
The experience is brief and occurs without notice, making it nearly impossible for scientists to record and study it.
Scientists can't simply sit around and wait for it to happen to them -- this could take years.
It has no physical manifestations and in studies, it's described by the subject as a sensation or feeling.
Because of this lack of hard evidence, there's been a surplus of speculation over the years.
Since Emile Boirac introduced déjà vu as a French term meaning "already seen," more than 40 theories attempt to explain this phenomenon.
Still, recent advancements in neuroimaging and cognitive psychology narrow down the field of prospects.
Let's walk through three of today's more prevalent theories, using the same restaurant setting for each.
First up is dual processing.
We'll need an action.
Let's go with a waiter dropping a tray of dishes.
As the scene unfolds, your brain's hemispheres process a flurry of information: the waiter's flailing arms, his cry for help, the smell of pasta.
Within milliseconds, this information zips through pathways and is processed into a single moment.
Most of the time, everything is recorded in-sync.
However, this theory asserts that déjà vu occurs when there's a slight delay in information from one of these pathways.
The difference in arrival times causes the brain to interpret the late information as a separate event.
When it plays over the already-recorded moment, it feels as if it's happened before because, in a sense, it has.
Our next theory deals with a confusion of the past rather than a mistake in the present.
This is the hologram theory, and we'll use that tablecloth to examine it.
As you scan its squares, a distant memory swims up from deep within your brain.
According to the theory, this is because memories are stored in the form of holograms, and in holograms, you only need one fragment to see the whole picture.
Your brain has identified the tablecloth with one from the past, maybe from your grandmother's house.
However, instead of remembering that you've seen it at your grandmother's, your brain has summoned up the old memory without identifying it.
This leaves you stuck with familiarity, but no recollection.
Although you've never been in this restaurant, you've seen that tablecloth but are just failing to identify it.
Now, look at this fork.
Are you paying attention?
Our last theory is divided attention, and it states that déjà vu occurs when our brain subliminally takes in an environment while we're distracted by one particular object.
When our attention returns, we feel as if we've been here before.
For example, just now you focused on the fork and didn't observe the tablecloth or the falling waiter.
Although your brain has been recording everything in your peripheral vision, it's been doing so below conscious awareness.
When you finally pull yourself away from the fork, you think you've been here before because you have, you just weren't paying attention.
While all three of these theories share the common features of déjà vu, none of them propose to be the conclusive source of the phenomenon.
Still, while we wait for researchers and inventers to come up with new ways to capture this fleeting moment, we can study the moment ourselves.
After all, most studies of déjà vu are based on first-hand accounts, so why can't one be yours?
The next time you get déjà vu, take a moment to think about it.
Have you been distracted?
Is there a familiar object somewhere?
Is your brain just acting slow?
Or is it something else?
Have you ever noticed how the full moon looks bigger when it's near the horizon than when it's high over head?
If so, you're not alone.
People have wondered about this strange effect since ancient times, and surprisingly, we still don't have a great explanation, but that's not for lack of trying.
Some of the greatest minds in history - Aristotle, Ptolemy, Da Vinci, Decartes - have all wrestled with this problem and failed to generate an adequate explanation.
One of the first ideas suggested was that the image of the moon in the sky really is bigger near the horizon.
Perhaps the Earth's atmosphere acts like a giant lens, magnifying the moon as it rises and sets.
But this explanation doesn't cut it.
If anything, the refraction of the atmosphere would make the moon look slightly smaller.
Plus, if you actually measure the size of the visible moon at different positions, it doesn't change at all.
But then, why does it still seem bigger when it's rising?
This must be some kind of optical illusion.
The question is, which one?
One explanation is the Ebbinghaus Illusion, where two identical objects look different because of the relative size of the objects they're surrounded by.
Here the two center circles are actually the same size.
Maybe the moon looks bigger near the horizon because it's next to tiny trees, houses, and towers in the distance.
But when the moon is higher up, it's surrounded by the vast darkness of the night sky and looks tiny by comparison.
Another possibility is the famous Ponzo Illusion.
If you've ever tried to draw in perspective, you know that the closer something is to the horizon, the smaller you should draw it.
Our brain compensates automatically for this by perceiving objects near the horizon as larger than they actually appear.
The two yellow lines in this drawing are the same size, but the upper one seems bigger because we interpret it as receding farther into the horizon.
So, between Ponzo and Ebbinghaus, it seems like we've solved the mystery of the moon illusion, but, unfortunately, there are a few details that complicate things.
For one thing, if this was just the Ebbinghaus effect, then we would expect the moon illusion to disappear for pilots flying high above the clouds since there wouldn't be any other smaller objects near the horizon.
But in fact, pilots and sailors out on the ocean still claim to see the moon illusion.
On the other hand, if it's just our brain's autocorrecting the size of objects near the horizon, then we'd expect the moon illusion to be visible inside a planetarium, where the whole sky, including the horizon, is displayed on a spherical dome overhead.
Studies have shown, though, that this is not the case.
To make matters worse, it seems the moon illusion disappears entirely if you just bend over and look at the moon between your legs.
Now, this is just getting ridiculous!
One of the most promising explanations today is known as Convergence Micropsia.
Our brains judge the distance to objects and their apparent size by the focus of our eyes.
When looking at the horizon, your eyes focus far off into the distance so your brain knows you're looking far away.
The moon appears a certain size.
Your brain thinks it's far away, which it is, so you naturally conclude the moon must be big.
But when looking up at the night sky, there's nothing for your eyes to focus on, so they default to their rest focus, which is a point just a few meters away.
Now your brain thinks the moon is much closer than it really is, so you naturally conclude the moon's not as big as you thought it was.
Rather than explain why the moon looks so big near the horizon, Convergence Microspia explains why the moon looks so small when overhead.
Still not satisfied?
Well, frankly, neither are many scientists, so the debate over the moon illusion still rages on and may continue as long as we still see it in the night sky.
Bruno Giussani: Commissioner, thank you for coming to TED.
António Guterres: Pleasure.
BG: Let's start with a figure.
During 2015, almost one million refugees and migrants arrived in Europe from many different countries, of course, from Syria and Iraq, but also from Afghanistan and Bangladesh and Eritrea and elsewhere.
And there have been reactions of two different kinds: welcoming parties and border fences.
But I want to look at it a little bit from the short-term and the long-term perspective.
And the first question is very simple: Why has the movement of refugees spiked so fast in the last six months?
AG: Well, I think, basically, what triggered this huge increase was the Syrian refugee group.
There has been an increased movement into Europe from Africa, from Asia, but slowly growing, and all of a sudden we had this massive increase in the first months of this year.
Why? I think there are three reasons, two long-term ones and the trigger.
The long-term ones, in relation to Syrians, is that hope is less and less clear for people.
I mean, they look at their own country and they don't see much hope to go back home, because there is no political solution, so there is no light at the end of the tunnel.
Second, the living conditions of the Syrians in the neighboring countries have been deteriorating.
We just had research with the World Bank, and 87 percent of the Syrians in Jordan and 93 percent of the Syrians in Lebanon live below the national poverty lines.
Only half of the children go to school, which means that people are living very badly.
Not only are they refugees, out of home, not only have they suffered what they have suffered, but they are living in very, very dramatic conditions.
And then the trigger was when all of a sudden, international aid decreased.
The World Food Programme was forced, for lack of resources, to cut by 30 percent food support to the Syrian refugees.
They're not allowed to work, so they are totally dependent on international support, and they felt, "The world is abandoning us."
And that, in my opinion, was the trigger.
All of a sudden, there was a rush, and people started to move in large numbers and, to be absolutely honest, if I had been in the same situation and I would have been brave enough to do it, I think I would have done the same.
BG: But I think what surprised many people is it's not only sudden, but it wasn't supposed to be sudden.
The war in Syria has been happening for five years.
Millions of refugees are in camps and villages and towns around Syria.
You have yourself warned about the situation and about the consequences of a breakdown of Libya, for example, and yet Europe looked totally unprepared.
AG: Well, unprepared because divided, and when you are divided, you don't want to recognize the reality.
You prefer to postpone decisions, because you do not have the capacity to make them.
And the proof is that even when the spike occurred, Europe remained divided and was unable to put in place a mechanism to manage the situation.
You talk about one million people.
It looks enormous, but the population of the European Union is 550 million people, which means we are talking about one per every [550] Europeans.
Now, in Lebanon, we have one refugee per three Lebanese.
And Lebanon? Struggling, of course, but it's managing.
So, the question is: is this something that could have been managed if -- not mentioning the most important thing, which would have been addressing the root causes, but forgetting about root causes for now, looking at the phenomenon as it is -- if Europe were able to come together in solidarity to create an adequate reception capacity of entry points?
But for that, the countries at entry points need to be massively supported, and then screening the people with security checks and all the other mechanisms, distributing those that are coming into all European countries, according to the possibilities of each country.
I mean, if you look at the relocation program that was approved by the Commission, always too little too late, or by the Council, too little too late -- BG: It's already breaking down.
AG: My country is supposed to receive four thousand.
Four thousand in Portugal means nothing.
So this is perfectly manageable if it is managed, but in the present circumstances, the pressure is at the point of entry, and then, as people move in this chaotic way through the Balkans, then they come to Germany, Sweden, basically, and Austria.
They are the three countries that are, in the end, receiving the refugees.
The rest of Europe is looking without doing much.
BG: Let me try to bring up three questions, playing a bit devil's advocate.
I'll try to ask them, make them blunt.
But I think the questions are very present in the minds of many people in Europe right now, The first, of course, is about numbers.
You say 550 million versus one million is not much, but realistically, how many people can Europe take?
AG: Well, that is a question that has no answer, because refugees have the right to be protected.
And there is such a thing as international law, so there is no way you can say, "I take 10,000 and that's finished."
I remind you of one thing: in Turkey, at the beginning of the crisis, I remember one minister saying, "Turkey will be able to receive up to 100,000 people."
Turkey has now two million three-hundred thousand or something of the sort, if you count all refugees.
So I don't think it's fair to say how many we can take.
What it is fair to say is: how we can we organize ourselves to assume our international responsibilities?
And Europe has not been able to do so, because basically, Europe is divided because there is no solidarity in the European project.
And it's not only about refugees; there are many other areas.
And let's be honest, this is the moment in which we need more Europe instead of less Europe.
But as the public less and less believes in European institutions, it is also each time more difficult to convince the public that we need more Europe to solve these problems.
BG: We seem to be at the point where the numbers turn into political shifts, particularly domestically.
We saw it again this weekend in France, but we have seen it over and over in many countries: in Poland and in Denmark and in Switzerland and elsewhere, where the mood changes radically because of the numbers, although they are not very significant in absolute numbers.
The Prime Minister of -- AG: But, if I may, on these: I mean, what does a European see at home in a village where there are no migrants?
What a European sees is, on television, every single day, a few months ago, opening the news every single day, a crowd coming, uncontrolled, moving from border to border, and the images on television were of hundreds or thousands of people moving.
And the idea is that nobody is taking care of it -- this is happening without any kind of management.
And so their idea was, "They are coming to my village."
So there was this completely false idea that Europe was being invaded and our way of life is going to change, and everything will -- And the problem is that if this had been properly managed, if people had been properly received, welcomed, sheltered at point of entry, screened at point of entry, and the moved by plane to different European countries, this would not have scared people.
But, unfortunately, we have a lot of people scared, just because Europe was not able to do the job properly.
BG: But there are villages in Germany with 300 inhabitants and 1,000 refugees.
So, what's your position?
How do you imagine these people reacting?
AG: If there would be a proper management of the situation and the proper distribution of people all over Europe, you would always have the percentage that I mentioned: one per each 2,000.
It is because things are not properly managed that in the end we have situations that are totally impossible to live with, and of course if you have a village -- in Lebanon, there are many villages that have more Syrians than Lebanese; Lebanon has been living with that.
I'm not asking for the same to happen in Europe, for all European villages to have more refugees than inhabitants.
What I am asking is for Europe to do the job properly, and to be able to organize itself to receive people as other countries in the world were forced to do in the past.
BG: So, if you look at the global situation not only at Europe -- (Applause) BG: Yes!
(Applause) BG: If you look at the global situation, so, not only at Europe, I know you can make a long list of countries that are not really stepping up, but I'm more interested in the other part -- is there somebody who's doing the right thing?
AG: Well, 86 percent of the refugees in the world are in the developing world.
And if you look at countries like Ethiopia -- Ethiopia has received more than 600,000 refugees.
All the borders in Ethiopia are open.
And they have, as a policy, they call the "people to people" policy that every refugee should be received.
And they have South Sudanese, they have Sudanese, they have Somalis.
They have all the neighbors.
They have Eritreans.
And, in general, African countries are extremely welcoming of refugees coming, and I would say that in the Middle East and in Asia, we have seen a tendency for borders to be open.
Now we see some problems with the Syrian situation, as the Syrian situation evolved into also a major security crisis, but the truth is that for a large period, all borders in the Middle East were open.
The truth is that for Afghans, the borders of Pakistan and Iran were open for, at the time, six million Afghans that came.
So I would say that even today, the trend in the developing world has been for borders to be open.
The trend in the developed world is for these questions to become more and more complex, especially when there is, in the public opinion, a mixture of discussions between refugee protections on one side and security questions -- in my opinion, misinterpreted -- on the other side.
BG: We'll come back to that too, but you mentioned the cutting of funding and the vouchers from the World Food Programme.
That reflects the general underfunding of the organizations working on these issues.
Now that the world seems to have woken up, are you getting more funding and more support, or it's still the same?
AG: We are getting more support.
I would say that we are coming close to the levels of last year.
We were much worse during the summer.
But that is clearly insufficient to address the needs of the people and address the needs of the countries that are supporting the people.
And here we have a basic review of the criteria, the objectives, the priorities of development cooperation that is required.
For instance, Lebanon and Jordan are middle-income countries.
Because they are middle-income countries, they cannot receive soft loans or grants from the World Bank.
Now, today this doesn't make any sense, because they are providing a global public good.
They have millions of refugees there, and to be honest, they are pillars of stability in the region, with all the difficulties they face, and the first line of defense of our collective security.
So it doesn't make sense that these countries are not a first priority in development cooperation policies.
And they are not.
And not only do the refugees live in very dramatic circumstances inside those countries, but the local communities themselves are suffering, because salaries went down, because there are more unemployed, because prices and rents went up.
And, of course, if you look at today's situation of the indicators in these countries, it is clear that, especially their poor groups of the population, are living worse and worse because of the crisis they are facing.
BG: Who should be providing this support?
Country by country, international organizations, the European Union?
Who should be coming up with this support?
AG: We need to join all efforts.
It's clear that bilateral cooperation is essential.
It's clear that multilateral cooperation is essential.
It's clear that international financial institutions should have flexibility in order to be able to invest more massively in support to these countries.
We need to combine all the instruments and to understand that today, in protracted situations, at a certain moment, that it doesn't make sense anymore to make a distinction between humanitarian aid and development aid or development processes.
Because you are talking about children in school, you are talking about health, you are talking about infrastructure that is overcrowded.
You are talking about things that require a long-term perspective, a development perspective and not only an emergency humanitarian aid perspective.
BG: I would like your comment on something that was in newspapers this morning.
It is a statement made by the current front-runner for the Republican nomination for US President, Donald Trump.
Yesterday, he said this.
(Laughter) No, listen to this. It's interesting.
I quote: "I am calling for a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the US, until our country's representatives can figure out what's going on."
How do you react to that?
AG: Well, it's not only Donald Trump.
We have seen several people around the world with political responsibility saying, for instance, that Muslims refugees should not be received.
And the reason why they say this is because they think that by doing or saying this, they are protecting the security of their countries.
Now, I've been in government.
I am very keen on the need for governments to protect the security of their countries and their people.
But if you say, like that, in the US or in any European country, "We are going to close our doors to Muslim refugees," what you are saying is the best possible help for the propaganda of terrorist organizations.
Because what you are saying -- (Applause) What you are saying will be heard by all the Muslims in your own country, and it will pave the way for the recruitment and the mechanisms that, through technology, Daesh and al-Nusra, al-Qaeda, and all those other groups are today penetrating in our societies.
And it's just telling them, "You are right, we are against you."
So obviously, this is creating in societies that are all multiethnic, multi-religious, multicultural, this is creating a situation in which, really, it is much easier for the propaganda of these terrorist organizations to be effective in recruiting people for terror acts within the countries where these kinds of sentences are expressed.
BG: Have the recent attacks in Paris and the reactions to them made your job more difficult?
AG: Undoubtedly.
BG: In what sense?
AG: In the sense that, I mean, for many people the first reaction in relation to these kinds of terrorist attacks is: close all borders -- not understanding that the terrorist problem in Europe is largely homegrown.
We have thousands and thousands of European fighters in Syria and in Iraq, so this is not something that you solve by just not allowing Syrians to come in.
And I must say, I am convinced that the passport that appeared, I believe, was put by the person who has blown -- BG: -- himself up, yeah.
AG: [I believe] it was on purpose, because part of the strategies of Daesh is against refugees, because they see refugees as people that should be with the caliphate and are fleeing to the crusaders.
And I think that is part of Daesh's strategy to make Europe react, closing its doors to Muslim refugees and having an hostility towards Muslims inside Europe, exactly to facilitate Daesh's work.
And my deep belief is that it was not the refugee movement that triggered terrorism.
I think, as I said, essentially terrorism in Europe is today a homegrown movement in relation to the global situation that we are facing, and what we need is exactly to prove these groups wrong, by welcoming and integrating effectively those that are coming from that part of the world.
And another thing that I believe is that to a large extent, what we are today paying for in Europe is the failures of integration models that didn't work in the '60s, in the '70s, in the '80s, in relation to big migration flows that took place at that time and generated what is today in many of the people, for instance, of the second generation of communities, a situation of feeling marginalized, having no jobs, having improper education, living in some of the neighborhoods that are not adequately provided by public infrastructure.
And this kind of uneasiness, sometimes even anger, that exists in this second generation is largely due to the failure of integration policies, to the failure of what should have been a much stronger investment in creating the conditions for people to live together and respect each other.
For me it is clear.
(Applause) For me it is clear that all societies will be multiethnic, multicultural, multi-religious in the future.
To try to avoid it is, in my opinion, impossible.
And for me it's a good thing that they will be like that, but I also recognize that, for that to work properly, you need a huge investment in the social cohesion of your own societies.
And Europe, to a large extent, failed in that investment in the past few decades.
BG: Question: You are stepping down from your job at the end of the year, after 10 years.
If you look back at 2005, when you entered that office for the first time, what do you see?
AG: Well, look: In 2005, we were helping one million people go back home in safety and dignity, because conflicts had ended.
Last year, we helped 124,000.
In 2005, we had about 38 million people displaced by conflict in the world.
Today, we have more than 60 million.
At that time, we had had, recently, some conflicts that were solved.
Now, we see a multiplication of new conflicts and the old conflicts never died: Afghanistan, Somalia, Democratic Republic of Congo.
It is clear that the world today is much more dangerous than it was.
It is clear that the capacity of the international community to prevent conflicts and to timely solve them, is, unfortunately, much worse than what it was 10 years ago.
There are no clear power relations in the world, no global governance mechanisms that work, which means that we live in a situation where impunity and unpredictability tend to prevail, and that means that more and more people suffer, namely those that are displaced by conflicts.
BG: It's a tradition in American politics that when a President leaves the Oval Office for the last time, he leaves a handwritten note on the desk for his successor that walks in a couple of hours later.
If you had to write such a note to your successor, Filippo Grandi, what would you write?
AG: Well, I don't think I would write any message.
You know, one of the terrible things when one leaves an office is to try to become the backseat driver, always telling the new one what to do.
So that, I will not do.
If I had to say something to him, it would be, "Be yourself, and do your best."
BG: Commissioner, thank you for the job you do.
Thank you for coming to TED.
(Applause)
What is love?
Seriously, though, what is it?
What is love?
A verb?
A noun?
A universal truth?
An ideal?
A common thread of all religions?
A cult?
A neurological phenomenon?
There's no shortage of answers.
Some are all-encompassing.
It conquers all.
It's all you need.
It's all there is.
These are all comparisons, though, ways of defining it by contrast, by saying it's more important than all other things, but is it?
Sure, love matters more than your standard turkey sandwich, but does it matter more than shelter?
Or sanity?
Or an exceptional turkey sandwich?
No matter your answer, you're just ranking it, not defining it.
Another challenge to defining love is we often try to do so while falling into it or out of it.
Would you trust someone who just won the lottery to accurately define the concept of currency?
Or, I don't know, ask a guy to define bears while he's fending them off?
Or is romance not like winning the lottery?
Are break ups not like bear attacks?
Bad comparisons?
That's my point.
I'm not thinking right because I'm in love, so ha!
Taking a step back, or taking a cold shower, whatever, love is potentially the most intensely thought about thing in all of human history.
And despite centuries upon centuries of obsession, it still overwhelms us.
Some say it's a feeling, a magical emotion, a feeling for someone like you've never felt before.
But feelings are fluid, not very concrete foundation for a definition.
Sometimes you hate the person you love.
Plus, come on, you've felt feelings like it before, sort of in miniature.
Your relationships with your family shape your relationships with partners.
And your love for your partner may be in its own dynamic relationship, healthy or totally weird, with the love of your parents and siblings.
Love is also a set of behaviors we associate with the feeling: Holding hands, kissing, hugging, public displays of affection, dating, marriage, having kids, or just sex.
But these loving actions can be subjective or culturally relative.
You may love or be someone who can't have kids or doesn't want to, who believes in marriage but also in divorce, who's from a culture where people don't really date the way we think of dating, or who just doesn't want to make out on the bus.
But if love is a thing that we can define, then how can it mean opposite things for so many people?
So, maybe love's just all in your head, a personal mystery winding through your neural pathways and lighting up pleasing, natural rewards in your nervous system.
Perhaps these rewards are addictive.
Perhaps love is a temporary or permanent addiction to a person, just like a person can be addicted to a drug.
I don't mean to be edgy like some pop song.
Evidence shows that chemicals in your brain stimulated by another person can make you develop a habit for that person.
The person comes to satisfy a physiological craving, and you want more.
But then sometimes, slowly or suddenly, you don't.
You've fallen out of love, become unaddicted, for a spell.
What happened?
Does one develop a tolerance or hit a limit?
Why do some lovers stay addicted to each other their entire lives?
Perhaps to create new lives, to proliferate their species?
Maybe love is just human DNA's optimal method for bringing about its own replication.
There are evolutionary arguments regarding every human mating behavior, from how we display ourselves to potential mates, to how we treat each other in relationships, to how we raise kids.
Thus, some argue that the feeling you think you feel in your soul is just biology's way to make you continue our species.
Nature has selected you to have crushes on hotties, just like it makes monkeys have crushes on hot monkeys, and biology marches on.
But is that all love is?
Or, perhaps worse, is it just a construct, some fake concept we all convince each other to try to live up to for a fake sense of purpose?
Maybe it is a construct, but let's be more precise about what a construct is because love is constructed from reality: Our experiences, feelings, brain chemistry, cultural expectations, our lives.
And this edifice can be viewed through countless dimensions: scientific, emotional, historical, spiritual, legal, or just personal.
If no two people are the same, no two people's love is the same either.
So, in every loving relationship, there's a lot to talk about and partners should be open to that, or the relationship probably won't last.
Love is always up for discussion and, sure, under construction.
So, if we can't define it, that's a good sign.
It means we're all still making it.
Wait, I didn't mean, you know what I meant.
Imagine two people are listening to music.
What are the odds that they are listening to the exact same playlist?
Probably pretty low.
After all, everyone has very different tastes in music.
Now, what are the odds that your body will need the exact same medical care and treatment as another person's body?
Even lower.
As we go through our lives, each of us will have very different needs for our own healthcare.
Scientists and doctors are constantly researching ways to make medicine more personalized.
One way they are doing this is by researching stem cells.
Stem cells are cells that are undifferentiated, meaning they do not have a specific job or function.
While skin cells protect your body, muscle cells contract, and nerve cells send signals, stem cells do not have any specific structures or functions.
Stem cells do have the potential to become all other kinds of cells in your body.
Your body uses stem cells to replace worn-out cells when they die.
For example, you completely replace the lining of your intestines every four days.
Stem cells beneath the lining of your intestines replace these cells as they wear out.
Scientists hope that stem cells could be used to create a very special kind of personalized medicine in which we could replace your own body parts with, well, your own body parts.
Stem cell researchers are working hard to find ways in which to use stem cells to create new tissue to replace the parts of organs that are damaged by injury or disease.
Using stem cells to replace damaged bodily tissue is called regenerative medicine.
For example, scientists currently use stem cells to treat patients with blood diseases such as leukemia.
Leukemia is a form of cancer that affects your bone marrow.
Bone marrow is the spongy tissue inside your bones where your blood cells are created.
In leukemia, some of the cells inside your bone marrow grow uncontrollably, crowding out the healthy stem cells that form your blood cells.
Some leukemia patients can receive a stem cell transplant.
These new stem cells will create the blood cells needed by the patient's body.
There are actually multiple kinds of stem cells that scientists can use for medical treatments and research.
Adult stem cells or tissue-specific stem cells are found in small numbers in most of your body's tissues.
Tissue-specific stem cells replace the existing cells in your organs as they wear out and die.
Embryonic stem cells are created from leftover embryos that are willingly donated by patients from fertility clinics.
Unlike tissue-specific stem cells, embryonic stem cells are pluripotent.
This means that they can be grown into any kind of tissue in the body.
A third kind of stem cells is called induced pluripotent stem cells.
These are regular skin, fat, liver, or other cells that scientists have changed to behave like embryonic stem cells.
Like embryonic stem cells, they, too, can become any kind of cell in the body.
While scientists and doctors hope to use all of these kinds of stem cells to create new tissue to heal your body, they can also use stem cells to help understand how the body works.
Scientists can watch stem cells develop into tissue to understand the mechnanisms that the body uses to create new tissue in a controlled and regulated way.
Scientists hope that with more research, they can not only develop specialized medicine that is specific to your body but also better understand how your body functions, both when it's healthy and when it's not.
Today ,more than half of all people in the world live in an urban area.
By mid-century, this will increase to 70%.
But as recently as 100 years ago, only two out of ten people lived in a city, and before that, it was even less.
How have we reached such a high degree of urbanization, and what does it mean for our future?
In the earliest days of human history, humans were hunter-gatherers, often moving from place to place in search of food.
But about 10,000 years ago, our ancestors began to learn the secrets of selective breeding and early agricultural techniques.
For the first time, people could raise food rather than search for it, and this led to the development of semi-permanent villages for the first time in history.
"Why only semi-permanent?" you might ask.
Well, at first, the villages still had to relocate every few years as the soil became depleted.
It was only with the advent of techniques like irrigation and soil tilling about 5,000 years ago that people could rely on a steady and long-term supply of food, making permanent settlements possible.
And with the food surpluses that these techniques produced, it was no longer necessary for everyone to farm.
This allowed the development of other specialized trades, and, by extension, cities.
With cities now producing surplus food, as well as tools, crafts, and other goods, there was now the possibility of commerce and interaction over longer distances.
And as trade flourished, so did technologies that facilitated it, like carts, ships, roads, and ports.
Of course, these things required even more labor to build and maintain, so more people were drawn from the countryside to the cities as more jobs and opportunities became available.
If you think modern cities are overcrowded, you may be surprised to learn that some cities in 2000 B.C. had population densities nearly twice as high as that of Shanghai or Calcutta.
One reason for this was that transportation was not widely available, so everything had to be within walking distance, including the few sources of clean water that existed then.
And the land area of the city was further restricted by the need for walls to defend against attacks.
The Roman Empire was able to develop infrastructure to overcome these limitations, but other than that, modern cities as we know them, didn't really get their start until the Industrial Revolution, when new technology deployed on a mass scale allowed cities to expand and integrate further, establishing police, fire, and sanitation departments, as well as road networks, and later electricity distribution.
So, what is the future of cities?
Global population is currently more than 7 billion and is predicted to top out around 10 billion.
Most of this growth will occur in the urban areas of the world's poorest countries.
So, how will cities need to change to accommodate this growth?
First, the world will need to seek ways to provide adequate food, sanitation, and education for all people.
Second, growth will need to happen in a way that does not damage the land that provides us with the goods and services that support the human population.
Food production might move to vertical farms and skyscrapers, rooftop gardens, or vacant lots in city centers, while power will increasingly come from multiple sources of renewable energy.
Instead of single-family homes, more residences will be built vertically.
We may see buildings that contain everything that people need for their daily life, as well as a smaller, self-sufficient cities focused on local and sustainable production.
The future of cities is diverse, malleable, and creative, no longer built around a single industry, but reflecting an increasingly connected and global world.
What if you could only see one color?
Imagine, for instance, that you could only see things that were red and that everything else was completely invisible to you.
As it turns out, that's how you live your life all the time because your eyes can only see a minuscule part of the full spectrum of light.
Different kinds of light are all around you everyday but are invisible to the human eye, from the radio waves that carry your favorite songs, to the x-rays doctors use to see inside of you, to the microwaves that heat up your food.
In order to understand how these can all be light, we'll need to know a thing or two about what light is.
Light is electromagnetic radiation that acts like both a wave and a particle.
Light waves are kind of like waves on the ocean.
There are big waves and small waves, waves that crash on the shore one right after the other, and waves that only roll in every so often.
The size of a wave is called its wavelength, and how often it comes by is called its frequency.
Imagine being a boat in that ocean, bobbing up and down as the waves go by.
If the waves that day have long wavelengths, they'll make you bob only so often, or at a low frequency.
If the waves, instead, have short wavelengths, they'll be close together, and you'll bob up and down much more often, at a high frequency.
Different kinds of light are all waves, they just have different wavelengths and frequencies.
If you know the wavelength or frequency of a wave of light, you can also figure out its energy.
Long wavelengths have low energies, while short wavelengths have high energies.
It's easy to remember if you think about being in that boat.
If you were out sailing on a day with short, choppy waves, you'd probably be pretty high energy yourself, running around to keep things from falling over.
But on a long wavelength sea, you'd be rolling along, relaxed, low energy.
The energy of light tells us how it will interact with matter, for example, the cells of our eyes.
When we see, it's because the energy of light stimulates a receptor in our eye called the retina.
Our retina are only sensitive to light with a very small range in energy, and so we call that range of light visible light.
Inside our retina are special receptors called rods and cones.
The rods measure brightness, so we know how much light there is.
The cones are in charge of what color of light we see because different cones are sensitive to different energies of light.
Some cones are more excited by light that is long wavelength and low energy, and other cones are more excited by short wavelength, high-energy light.
When light hits our eye, the relative amount of energy each cone measures signals our brain to perceive colors.
The rainbow we perceive is actually visible light in order of its energy.
At one side of the rainbow is low-energy light we see as red, and at the other side is high-energy light we see as blue.
If light shines on us that has an energy our retina can't measure, we won't be able to see it.
Light that is too short wavelength or high energy gets absorbed by the eye's surface before it can even get to the retina, and light that is too long wavelength doesn't have enough energy to stimulate our retina at all.
The only thing that makes one kind of light different from another is its wavelength.
Radio waves have long wavelengths, while x-rays have short wavelengths.
And visible light, the kind you can actually see, is somewhere in between.
Even though our eyes can't detect light outside of the visible range, we can build special detectors that are stimulated by these other wavelengths of light, kind of like digital eyes.
With these devices, we can measure the light that is there, even though we can't see it ourselves.
So, take a step back and think about all of this for a moment.
Even though they seem different, the warmth you feel from a crackling fire is the same as the sun shining on you on a beautiful day, the same as ultraviolet light you put on sunscreen to protect yourself from, the same thing as your TV, your radio, and your microwave.
Now, those examples are all things here on Earth, things you experience in your everyday life, but here's something even more amazing.
Our universe gives off the full spectrum of light, too.
When you think of the night sky, you probably think of being able to see the stars shining with your own eyes, but that's just visible light, which you now know is only a tiny part of the full spectrum.
If we had to draw the universe and could only use visible light, it would be like having only one crayon -- pretty sad.
To see the universe in its full spectrum, we need to have the right eyes, and that means using special telescopes that can help us see beyond visible light.
You've probably heard of the Hubble Space Telescope and seen its beautiful pictures taken in visible and ultraviolet light.
But you might not know that there are 20 space telescopes in orbit, missions that can each see part of the full spectrum of light.
With telescopes acting as our virtual eyes, both in space and here on Earth, we can see some amazing things.
And the coolest thing of all, no matter the wavelength or energy, the light that we see out in the distant universe is the same thing as the light that we can experience and study here on Earth.
So, since we know the physics of how x-ray, ultraviolet light, or microwaves work here, we can study the light of a distant star or galaxy and know what kinds of things are happening there too.
So, as you go about your daily life, think beyond what your eyes can and can't see.
Knowing just a little bit about the natural world can help you perceive the full spectrum around you all the time.
In 1977, the physicist Edward Purcell calculated that if you push a bacteria and then let go, it will stop in about a millionth of a second.
In that time, it will have traveled less than the width of a single atom.
The same holds true for a sperm and many other microbes.
It all has to do with being really small.
Microscopic creatures inhabit a world alien to us, where making it through an inch of water is an incredible endeavor.
But why does size matter so much for a swimmer?
What makes the world of a sperm so fundamentally different from that of a sperm whale?
To find out, we need to dive into the physics of fluids.
Here's a way to think about it.
Imagine you are swimming in a pool.
It's you and a whole bunch of water molecules.
Water molecules outnumber you a thousand trillion trillion to one.
So, pushing past them with your gigantic body is easy, but if you were really small, say you were about the size of a water molecule, all of a sudden, it's like you're swimming in a pool of people.
Rather than simply swishing by all the teeny, tiny molecules, now every single water molecule is like another person you have to push past to get anywhere.
In 1883, the physicist Osborne Reynolds figured out that there is one simple number that can predict how a fluid will behave.
It's called the Reynolds number, and it depends on simple properties like the size of the swimmer, its speed, the density of the fluid, and the stickiness, or the viscosity, of the fluid.
What this means is that creatures of very different sizes inhabit vastly different worlds.
For example, because of its huge size, a sperm whale inhabits the large Reynolds number world.
If it flaps its tail once, it can coast ahead for an incredible distance.
Meanwhile, sperm live in a low Reynolds number world.
If a sperm were to stop flapping its tail, it wouldn't even coast past a single atom.
To imagine what it would feel like to be a sperm, you need to bring yourself down to its Reynolds number.
Picture yourself in a tub of molasses with your arms moving about as slow as the minute hand of a clock, and you'd have a pretty good idea of what a sperm is up against.
So, how do microbes manage to get anywhere?
Well, many don't bother swimming at all.
They just let the food drift to them.
This is somewhat like a lazy cow that waits for the grass under its mouth to grow back.
But many microbes do swim, and this is where those incredible adaptations come in.
One trick they can use is to deform the shape of their paddle.
By cleverly flexing their paddle to create more drag on the power stroke than on the recovery stroke, single-celled organisms like paramecia manage to inch their way through the crowd of water molecules.
But there's an even more ingenious solution arrived at by bacteria and sperm.
Instead of wagging their paddles back and forth, they wind them like a cork screw.
Just as a cork screw on a wine bottle converts winding motion into forward motion, these tiny creatures spin their helical tails to push themselves forward in a world where water feels as thick as cork.
Other strategies are even stranger.
Some bacteria take Batman's approach.
They use grappling hooks to pull themselves along.
They can even use this grappling hook like a sling shot and fling themselves forward.
Others use chemical engineering.
H. pylori lives only in the slimy, acidic mucus inside our stomachs.
It releases a chemical that thins out the surrounding mucus, allowing it to glide through slime.
Maybe it's no surprise that these guys are also responsible for stomach ulcers.
So, when you look really closely at our bodies and the world around us, you can see all sorts of tiny creatures finding clever ways to get around in a sticky situation.
Without these adaptations, bacteria would never find their hosts, and sperms would never make it to their eggs, which means you would never get stomach ulcers, but you would also never be born in the first place.
(Pop)
To many, one of the coolest things about "Game of Thrones" is that the inhabitants of the Dothraki Sea have their own real language.
And Dothraki came hot on the heels of the real language that the Na'vi speak in "Avatar," which, surely, the Na'vi needed when the Klingons in "Star Trek" have had their own whole language since 1979.
And let's not forget the Elvish languages in J.R.R. Tolkien's "Lord of the Rings" trilogy, especially since that was the official grandfather of the fantasy conlangs.
"Conlang" is short for "constructed language."
They're more than codes like Pig Latin, and they're not just collections of fabricated slang like the Nadsat lingo that the teen hoodlums in "A Clockwork Orange" speak, where "droog" from Russian happens to mean "friend."
What makes conlangs real languages isn't the number of words they have.
It helps, of course, to have a lot of words.
Dothraki has thousands of words.
Na'vi started with 1,500 words.
Fans on websites have steadily created more.
But we can see the difference between vocabulary alone and what makes a real language from a look at how Tolkien put together grand old Elvish, a conlang with several thousands words.
After all, you could memorize 5,000 words of Russian and still be barely able to construct a sentence.
A four-year-old would talk rings around you.
That's because you have to know how to put the words together.
That is, a real language has grammar.
Elvish does.
In English, to make a verb past, you add an "-ed."
Wash, washed.
In Elvish, "wash" is "allu" and "washed" is "allune."
Real languages also change over time.
There's no such thing as a language that's the same today as it was a thousand years ago.
As people speak, they drift into new habits, shed old ones, make mistakes, and get creative.
Today, one says, "Give us today our daily bread."
In Old English, they said, "Urne gedaeghwamlican hlaf syle us todaeg."
Things change in conlangs, too.
Tolkien charted out ancient and newer versions of Elvish.
When the first Elves awoke at Cuiviénen, in their new language, the word for "people" was "kwendi," but in the language of one of the groups that moved away, Teleri, over time, "kwendi" became "pendi," with the "k" turning into a "p."
And just like real languages, conlangs like Elvish split off into many.
When the Romans transplanted Latin across Europe, French, Spanish, and Italian were born.
When groups move to different places, over time, their ways of speaking grow apart, just like everything else about them.
Thus, Latin's word for hand was "manus," but in French, it became "main," while in Spain it became "mano."
Tolkien made sure Elvish did the same kind of thing.
While that original word "kwendi" became "pendi" among the Teleri, among the Avari, who spread throughout Middle Earth, it became "kindi" when the "w" dropped out.
The Elvish varieties Tolkien fleshed out the most are Quenya and Sindarin, and their words are different in the same way French and Spanish are.
Quenya has "suc" for "drink," Sindarin has "sog."
And as you know, real languages are messy.
That's because they change, and change has a way of working against order, just like in a living room or on a bookshelf.
Real languages are never perfectly logical.
That's why Tolkien made sure that Elvish had plenty of exceptions.
Lots of verbs are conjugated in ways you just have to know.
Take even the word "know."
In the past, it's "knew," which isn't explained by any of the rules in English.
Oh well.
In Elvish, "know" is "ista," but "knew" is "sinte."
Oh well.
The truth is, though, that Elvish is more a sketch for a real language than a whole one.
For Tolkien, Elvish was a hobby rather than an attempt to create something people could actually speak.
Much of the Elvish the characters in the "Lord of the Rings" movies speak has been made up since Tolkien by dedicated fans of Elvish based on guesses as to what Tolkien would have constructed.
That's the best we can do for Elvish because there are no actual Elves around to speak it for us.
But the modern conlangs go further.
Dothraki, Na'vi, and Klingon are developed enough that you can actually speak them.
Here's a translation of "Hamlet" into Klingon, although performing it would mean getting used to pronouncing "k" with your uvula, that weird, cartoony thing hanging in the back of your throat.
Believe it or not, you actually do that in plenty of languages around the world, like Eskimo ones.
Pronouncing Elvish is much easier, though.
So, let's take our leave for now from this introduction to conlangs in Elvish and the other three conlangs discussed with a heartfelt quad-conlangual valedictory: "A Na Marie!"
"Hajas!"
Na'vi's "Kiyevame!"
"Qapla!"
and "Goodbye!"
In 2008, Burhan Hassan, age 17, boarded a flight from Minneapolis to the Horn of Africa.
And while Burhan was the youngest recruit, he was not alone.
Al-Shabaab managed to recruit over two dozen young men in their late teens and early 20s with a heavy presence on social media platforms like Facebook.
With the Internet and other technologies, they've changed our everyday lives, but they've also changed recruitment, radicalization and the front lines of conflict today.
What about the links connecting Twitter, Google and protesters fighting for democracy?
These numbers represent Google's public DNS servers, effectively the only digital border crossing protesters had and could use to communicate with each other, to reach the outside world and to spread viral awareness of what was happening in their own country.
Today, conflict is essentially borderless.
If there are bounds to conflict today, they're bound by digital, not physical geography.
And under all this is a vacuum of power where non-state actors, individuals and private organizations have the advantage over slow, outdated military and intelligence agencies.
And this is because, in the digital age of conflict, there exists a feedback loop where new technologies, platforms like the ones I mentioned, and more disruptive ones, can be adapted, learned, and deployed by individuals and organizations faster than governments can react.
To understand the pace of our own government thinking on this, I like to turn to something aptly named the Worldwide Threat Assessment, where every year the Director of National Intelligence in the US looks at the global threat landscape, and he says, "These are the threats, these are the details, and this is how we rank them."
In 2007, there was absolutely no mention of cyber security.
It took until 2011, when it came at the end, where other things, like West African drug trafficking, took precedence.
In 2012, it crept up, still behind things like terrorism and proliferation.
In 2013, it became the top threat, in 2014 and for the foreseeable future.
What things like that show us is that there is a fundamental inability today on the part of governments to adapt and learn in digital conflict, where conflict can be immaterial, borderless, often wholly untraceable.
And conflict isn't just online to offline, as we see with terrorist radicalization, but it goes the other way as well.
We all know the horrible events that unfolded in Paris this year with the Charlie Hebdo terrorist attacks.
What an individual hacker or a small group of anonymous individuals did was enter those social media conversations that so many of us took part in.
#JeSuisCharlie.
On Facebook, on Twitter, on Google, all sorts of places where millions of people, myself included, were talking about the events and saw images like this, the emotional, poignant image of a baby with "Je suis Charlie" on its wrist.
And this turned into a weapon.
What the hackers did was weaponize this image, where unsuspecting victims, like all of us in those conversations, saw this image, downloaded it but it was embedded with malware.
And so when you downloaded this image, it hacked your system.
It took six days to deploy a global malware campaign.
The divide between physical and digital domains today ceases to exist, where we have offline attacks like those in Paris appropriated for online hacks.
And it goes the other way as well, with recruitment.
We see online radicalization of teens, who can then be deployed globally for offline terrorist attacks.
With all of this, we see that there's a new 21st century battle brewing, and governments don't necessarily take a part.
So in another case, Anonymous vs. Los Zetas.
In early September 2011 in Mexico, Los Zetas, one of the most powerful drug cartels, hung two bloggers with a sign that said, "This is what will happen to all Internet busybodies."
A week later, they beheaded a young girl.
They severed her head, put it on top of her computer with a similar note.
And taking the digital counteroffensive because governments couldn't even understand what was going on or act, Anonymous, a group we might not associate as the most positive force in the world, took action, not in cyber attacks, but threatening information to be free.
On social media, they said, "We will release information that ties prosecutors and governors to corrupt drug deals with the cartel."
And escalating that conflict, Los Zetas said, "We will kill 10 people for every bit of information you release."
And so it ended there because it would become too gruesome to continue.
But what was powerful about this was that anonymous individuals, not federal policia, not military, not politicians, could strike fear deep into the heart of one of the most powerful, violent organizations in the world.
And so we live in an era that lacks the clarity of the past in conflict, in who we're fighting, in the motivations behind attacks, in the tools and techniques used, and how quickly they evolve.
And the question still remains: what can individuals, organizations and governments do?
For answers to these questions, it starts with individuals, and I think peer-to-peer security is the answer.
Those people in relationships that bought over teens online, we can do that with peer-to-peer security.
Individuals have more power than ever before to affect national and international security.
And we can create those positive peer-to-peer relationships on and offline, we can support and educate the next generation of hackers, like myself, instead of saying, "You can either be a criminal or join the NSA."
That matters today.
And it's not just individuals -- it's organizations, corporations even.
They have an advantage to act across more borders, more effectively and more rapidly than governments can, and there's a set of real incentives there.
It's profitable and valuable to be seen as trustworthy in the digital age, and will only be more so in future generations to come.
But we still can't ignore government, because that's who we turn to for collective action to keep us safe and secure.
But we see where that's gotten us so far, where there's an inability to adapt and learn in digital conflict, where at the highest levels of leadership, the Director of the CIA, Secretary of Defense, they say, "Cyber Pearl Harbor will happen." "Cyber 9/11 is imminent."
But this only makes us more fearful, not more secure.
By banning encryption in favor of mass surveillance and mass hacking, sure, GCHQ and the NSA can spy on you.
But that doesn't mean that they're the only ones that can.
Capabilities are cheap, even free.
Technical ability is rising around the world, and individuals and small groups have the advantage.
So today it might just be the NSA and GCHQ, but who's to say that the Chinese can't find that backdoor?
Or in another generation, some kid in his basement in Estonia?
And so I would say that it's not what governments can do, it's that they can't.
Governments today need to give up power and control in order to help make us more secure.
Giving up mass surveillance and hacking and instead fixing those backdoors means that, yeah, they can't spy on us, but neither can the Chinese or that hacker in Estonia a generation from now.
And government support for technologies like Tor and Bitcoin mean giving up control, but it means that developers, translators, anybody with an Internet connection, in countries like Cuba, Iran and China, can sell their skills, their products, in the global marketplace, but more importantly sell their ideas, show us what's happening in their own countries.
And so it should be not fearful, it should be inspiring to the same governments that fought for civil rights, free speech and democracy in the great wars of the last century, that today, for the first time in human history, we have a technical opportunity to make billions of people safer around the world that we've never had before in human history.
It should be inspiring.
(Applause)
Many elements of traditional Japanese culture, such as cuisine and martial arts, are well-known throughout the world.
Kabuki, a form of classical theater performance, may not be as well understood in the West but has evolved over 400 years to still maintain influence and popularity to this day.
The word Kabuki is derived from the Japanese verb kabuku, meaning out of the ordinary or bizarre.
Its history began in early 17th century Kyoto, where a shrine maiden named Izumo no Okuni would use the city's dry Kamo Riverbed as a stage to perform unusual dances for passerby, who found her daring parodies of Buddhist prayers both entertaining and mesmerizing.
Soon other troops began performing in the same style, and Kabuki made history as Japan's first dramatic performance form catering to the common people.
By relying on makeup, or keshou, and facial expressions instead of masks and focusing on historical events and everyday life rather than folk tales, Kabuki set itself apart from the upper-class dance theater form known as Noh and provided a unique commentary on society during the Edo period.
At first, the dance was practiced only by females and commonly referred to as Onna-Kabuki.
It soon evolved to an ensemble performance and became a regular attraction at tea houses, drawing audiences from all social classes.
At this point, Onna-Kabuki was often risque as geishas performed not only to show off their singing and dancing abilities but also to advertise their bodies to potential clients.
A ban by the conservative Tokugawa shogunate in 1629 led to the emergence of Wakashu-Kabuki with young boys as actors.
But when this was also banned for similar reasons, there was a transition to Yaro-Kabuki, performed by men, necessitating elaborate costumes and makeup for those playing female roles, or onnagata.
Attempts by the government to control Kabuki didn't end with bans on the gender or age of performers.
The Tokugawa military group, or Bakufu, was fueled by Confucian ideals and often enacted sanctions on costume fabrics, stage weaponry, and the subject matter of the plot.
At the same time, Kabuki became closely associated with and influenced by Bunraku, an elaborate form of puppet theater.
Due to these influences, the once spontaneous, one-act dance evolved into a structured, five-act play often based on the tenets of Confucian philosophy.
Before 1868, when the Tokugawa shogunate fell and Emperor Meiji was restored to power, Japan had practiced isolation from other countries, or Sakoku.
And thus, the development of Kabuki had mostly been shaped by domestic influences.
But even before this period, European artists, such as Claude Monet, had become interested in and inspired by Japanese art, such as woodblock prints, as well as live performance.
After 1868, others such as Vincent van Gogh and composer Claude Debussy began to incorporate Kabuki influences in their work, while Kabuki itself underwent much change and experimentation to adapt to the new modern era.
Like other traditional art forms, Kabuki suffered in popularity in the wake of World War II.
But innovation by artists such as director Tetsuji Takechi led to a resurgence shortly after.
Indeed, Kabuki was even considered a popular form of entertainment amongst American troops stationed in Japan despite initial U.S. censorship of Japanese traditions.
Today, Kabuki still lives on as an integral part of Japan's rich cultural heritage, extending its influence beyond the stage to television, film, and anime.
The art form pioneered by Okuni continues to delight audiences with the actors' elaborate makeup, extravagant and delicately embroidered costumes, and the unmistakable melodrama of the stories told on stage.
Nicolas Steno is rarely heard of outside Intro to Geology, but anyone hoping to understand life on Earth should see how Steno expanded and connected those very concepts: Earth, life, and understanding.
Born Niels Stensen in 1638 Denmark, son of a goldsmith, he was a sickly kid whose school chums died of plague.
He survived to cut up corpses as an anatomist, studying organs shared across species.
He found a duct in animal skulls that sends saliva to the mouth.
He refuted Descartes' idea that only humans had a pineal gland, proving it wasn't the seat of the soul, arguably, the debut of neuroscience.
Most remarkable for the time was his method.
Steno never let ancient texts, Aristotelian metaphysics, or Cartesian deductions overrule empirical, experimental evidence.
His vision, uncluttered by speculation or rationalization, went deep.
Steno had seen how gallstones form in wet organs by accretion.
They obeyed molding principles he knew from the goldsmith trade, rules useful across disciplines for understanding solids by their structural relationships.
Later, the Grand Duke of Tuscany had him dissect a shark.
Its teeth resembled tongue stones, odd rocks seen inside other rocks in Malta and the mountains near Florence.
Pliny the Elder, old Roman naturalist, said these fell from the sky.
In the Dark Ages, folks said they were snake tongues, petrified by Saint Paul.
Steno saw that tongue stones were shark teeth and vice versa, with the same signs of structural growth.
Figuring similar things are made in similar ways, he argued the ancient teeth came from ancient sharks in waters that formed rock around the teeth and became mountains.
Rock layers were once layers of watery sediment, which would lay out horizontally, one atop another, oldest up to newest.
If layers were deformed, tilted, cut by a fault or a canyon, that change came after the layer formed.
Sounds simple today; back then, revolutionary.
He'd invented stratigraphy and laid geology's ground work.
By finding one origin for shark teeth from two eras by stating natural laws ruling the present also ruled the past, Steno planted seeds for uniformitarianism, the idea that the past was shaped by processes observable today.
In the 18th and 19th centuries, English uniformitarian geologists, James Hutton and Charles Lyell, studied current, very slow rates of erosion and sedimentation and realized the Earth had to be way older than the biblical guestimate, 6000 years.
Out of their work came the rock cycle, which combined with plate tectonics in the mid-twentieth century to give us the great molten-crusting, quaking, all-encircling theory of the Earth, from a gallstone to a 4.5 billion-year-old planet.
Now think bigger, take it to biology.
Say you see shark teeth in one layer and a fossil of an organism you've never seen under that.
The deeper fossil's older, yes?
You now have evidence of the origin and extinction of species over time.
Get uniformitarian.
Maybe a process still active today caused changes not just in rocks but in life.
It might also explain similarities and differences between species found by anatomists like Steno.
It's a lot to ponder, but Charles Darwin had the time on a long trip to the Galapagos, reading a copy of his friend Charles Lyell's "Principles of Geology," which Steno sort of founded.
Sometimes giants stand on the shoulders of curious little people.
Nicolas Steno helped evolve evolution, broke ground for geology, and showed how unbiased, empirical observation can cut across intellectual borders to deepen our perspective.
His finest accomplishment, though, may be his maxim, casting the search for truth beyond our senses and our current understanding as the pursuit of the beauty of the as yet unknown.
Beautiful is what we see, more beautiful is what we know, most beautiful, by far, is what we don't.
You probably know that all stuff is made up of atoms and that an atom is a really, really, really, really tiny particle.
Every atom has a core, which is made up of at least one positively charged particle called a proton, and in most cases, some number of neutral particles called neutrons.
That core is surrounded by negatively charged particles called electrons.
The identity of an atom is determined only by the number of protons in its nucleus.
Hydrogen is hydrogen because it has just one proton, carbon is carbon because it has six, gold is gold because it has 79, and so on.
Indulge me in a momentary tangent.
How do we know about atomic structure?
We can't see protons, neutrons, or electrons.
So, we do a bunch of experiments and develop a model for what we think is there.
Then we do some more experiments and see if they agree with the model.
If they do, great.
If they don't, it might be time for a new model.
We've had lots of very different models for atoms since Democritus in 400 BC, and there will almost certainly be many more to come.
Okay, tangent over.
The cores of atoms tend to stick together, but electrons are free to move, and this is why chemists love electrons.
If we could marry them, we probably would.
But electrons are weird.
They appear to behave either as particles, like little baseballs, or as waves, like water waves, depending on the experiment that we perform.
One of the weirdest things about electrons is that we can't exactly say where they are.
It's not that we don't have the equipment, it's that this uncertainty is part of our model of the electron.
So, we can't pinpoint them, fine.
But we can say there's a certain probability of finding an electron in a given space around the nucleus.
And that means that we can ask the following question: If we drew a shape around the nucleus such that we would be 95% sure of finding a given electron within that shape, what would it look like?
Here are a few of these shapes.
Chemists call them orbitals, and what each one looks like depends on, among other things, how much energy it has.
The more energy an orbital has, the farther most of its density is from the nucleus.
By they way, why did we pick 95% and not 100%?
Well, that's another quirk of our model of the electron.
Past a certain distance from the nucleus, the probability of finding an electron starts to decrease more or less exponentially, which means that while it will approach zero, it'll never actually hit zero.
So, in every atom, there is some small, but non-zero, probability that for a very, very short period of time, one of its electrons is at the other end of the known universe.
But mostly electrons stay close to their nucleus as clouds of negative charged density that shift and move with time.
How electrons from one atom interact with electrons from another determines almost everything.
Atoms can give up their electrons, surrendering them to other atoms, or they can share electrons.
And the dynamics of this social network are what make chemistry interesting.
From plain old rocks to the beautiful complexity of life, the nature of everything we see, hear, smell, taste, touch, and even feel is determined at the atomic level.
What keeps us healthy and happy as we go through life?
If you were going to invest now in your future best self, where would you put your time and your energy?
There was a recent survey of millennials asking them what their most important life goals were, and over 80 percent said that a major life goal for them was to get rich.
And another 50 percent of those same young adults said that another major life goal was to become famous.
(Laughter) And we're constantly told to lean in to work, to push harder and achieve more.
We're given the impression that these are the things that we need to go after in order to have a good life.
Pictures of entire lives, of the choices that people make and how those choices work out for them, those pictures are almost impossible to get.
Most of what we know about human life we know from asking people to remember the past, and as we know, hindsight is anything but 20/20.
We forget vast amounts of what happens to us in life, and sometimes memory is downright creative.
But what if we could watch entire lives as they unfold through time?
What if we could study people from the time that they were teenagers all the way into old age to see what really keeps people happy and healthy?
We did that.
The Harvard Study of Adult Development may be the longest study of adult life that's ever been done.
For 75 years, we've tracked the lives of 724 men, year after year, asking about their work, their home lives, their health, and of course asking all along the way without knowing how their life stories were going to turn out.
Studies like this are exceedingly rare.
Almost all projects of this kind fall apart within a decade because too many people drop out of the study, or funding for the research dries up, or the researchers get distracted, or they die, and nobody moves the ball further down the field.
But through a combination of luck and the persistence of several generations of researchers, this study has survived.
About 60 of our original 724 men are still alive, still participating in the study, most of them in their 90s.
And we are now beginning to study the more than 2,000 children of these men.
And I'm the fourth director of the study.
Since 1938, we've tracked the lives of two groups of men.
The first group started in the study when they were sophomores at Harvard College.
They all finished college during World War II, and then most went off to serve in the war.
And the second group that we've followed was a group of boys from Boston's poorest neighborhoods, boys who were chosen for the study specifically because they were from some of the most troubled and disadvantaged families in the Boston of the 1930s.
Most lived in tenements, many without hot and cold running water.
When they entered the study, all of these teenagers were interviewed.
They were given medical exams.
We went to their homes and we interviewed their parents.
And then these teenagers grew up into adults who entered all walks of life.
They became factory workers and lawyers and bricklayers and doctors, one President of the United States.
Some developed alcoholism. A few developed schizophrenia.
Some climbed the social ladder from the bottom all the way to the very top, and some made that journey in the opposite direction.
The founders of this study would never in their wildest dreams have imagined that I would be standing here today, 75 years later, telling you that the study still continues.
Every two years, our patient and dedicated research staff calls up our men and asks them if we can send them yet one more set of questions about their lives.
Many of the inner city Boston men ask us, "Why do you keep wanting to study me? My life just isn't that interesting."
The Harvard men never ask that question.
(Laughter) To get the clearest picture of these lives, we don't just send them questionnaires.
We interview them in their living rooms.
We get their medical records from their doctors.
We draw their blood, we scan their brains, we talk to their children.
We videotape them talking with their wives about their deepest concerns.
And when, about a decade ago, we finally asked the wives if they would join us as members of the study, many of the women said, "You know, it's about time."
(Laughter) So what have we learned?
What are the lessons that come from the tens of thousands of pages of information that we've generated on these lives?
Well, the lessons aren't about wealth or fame or working harder and harder.
The clearest message that we get from this 75-year study is this: Good relationships keep us happier and healthier. Period.
We've learned three big lessons about relationships.
The first is that social connections are really good for us, and that loneliness kills.
It turns out that people who are more socially connected to family, to friends, to community, are happier, they're physically healthier, and they live longer than people who are less well connected.
And the experience of loneliness turns out to be toxic.
People who are more isolated than they want to be from others find that they are less happy, their health declines earlier in midlife, their brain functioning declines sooner and they live shorter lives than people who are not lonely.
And the sad fact is that at any given time, more than one in five Americans will report that they're lonely.
And we know that you can be lonely in a crowd and you can be lonely in a marriage, so the second big lesson that we learned is that it's not just the number of friends you have, and it's not whether or not you're in a committed relationship, but it's the quality of your close relationships that matters.
It turns out that living in the midst of conflict is really bad for our health.
High-conflict marriages, for example, without much affection, turn out to be very bad for our health, perhaps worse than getting divorced.
And living in the midst of good, warm relationships is protective.
Once we had followed our men all the way into their 80s, we wanted to look back at them at midlife and to see if we could predict who was going to grow into a happy, healthy octogenarian and who wasn't.
And when we gathered together everything we knew about them at age 50, it wasn't their middle age cholesterol levels that predicted how they were going to grow old.
It was how satisfied they were in their relationships.
The people who were the most satisfied in their relationships at age 50 were the healthiest at age 80.
And good, close relationships seem to buffer us from some of the slings and arrows of getting old.
Our most happily partnered men and women reported, in their 80s, that on the days when they had more physical pain, their mood stayed just as happy.
But the people who were in unhappy relationships, on the days when they reported more physical pain, it was magnified by more emotional pain.
And the third big lesson that we learned about relationships and our health is that good relationships don't just protect our bodies, they protect our brains.
It turns out that being in a securely attached relationship to another person in your 80s is protective, that the people who are in relationships where they really feel they can count on the other person in times of need, those people's memories stay sharper longer.
And the people in relationships where they feel they really can't count on the other one, those are the people who experience earlier memory decline.
And those good relationships, they don't have to be smooth all the time.
Some of our octogenarian couples could bicker with each other day in and day out, but as long as they felt that they could really count on the other when the going got tough, those arguments didn't take a toll on their memories.
So this message, that good, close relationships are good for our health and well-being, this is wisdom that's as old as the hills.
Why is this so hard to get and so easy to ignore?
Well, we're human.
What we'd really like is a quick fix, something we can get that'll make our lives good and keep them that way.
Relationships are messy and they're complicated and the hard work of tending to family and friends, it's not sexy or glamorous.
It's also lifelong. It never ends.
The people in our 75-year study who were the happiest in retirement were the people who had actively worked to replace workmates with new playmates.
Just like the millennials in that recent survey, many of our men when they were starting out as young adults really believed that fame and wealth and high achievement were what they needed to go after to have a good life.
But over and over, over these 75 years, our study has shown that the people who fared the best were the people who leaned in to relationships, with family, with friends, with community.
So what about you?
Let's say you're 25, or you're 40, or you're 60.
What might leaning in to relationships even look like?
Well, the possibilities are practically endless.
It might be something as simple as replacing screen time with people time or livening up a stale relationship by doing something new together, long walks or date nights, or reaching out to that family member who you haven't spoken to in years, because those all-too-common family feuds take a terrible toll on the people who hold the grudges.
I'd like to close with a quote from Mark Twain.
More than a century ago, he was looking back on his life, and he wrote this: "There isn't time, so brief is life, for bickerings, apologies, heartburnings, callings to account.
There is only time for loving, and but an instant, so to speak, for that."
The good life is built with good relationships.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Mysteries of vernacular: Robot, a machine capable of carrying out a programmable series of actions.
The origin of the word robot dates back more than a thousand years to the era of serfdom in central Europe when servitude was the currency for rent.
In those days, the Old Church Slavonic word rabota described the forced labor of the people.
A slight adjustment of spelling, and rabota became the Czech robota, which, in addition to defining the toil of the serfs, was also used figuratively to describe any kind of hard work or drudgery.
In 1920, Czech writer Karel Capek published a science fiction play called "R.U.R.", short for "Rossum's Universal Robots."
The story featured automated machines with distinctly human features that, until they revolt, catered to the whims of the people of Earth.
Capek originally considered calling these hard-working machines labori from the Latin word for labor, but he worried it sounded a bit too scholarly.
He opted, instead, to emphasize their enslaved state by naming them roboti, or robot in English.
"R.U.R." was wildly successful, and when it was translated into English in 1923, the word robot was enthusiastically embraced.
Though most of today's robots look quite different than Capek imagined, they've become just as popular as he predicted.
Unlike in "R.U.R.", though, our robots haven't risen up against us, and here's hoping it stays that way!
Oh, excuse me!
Have you ever yawned because somebody else yawned?
You aren't especially tired, yet suddenly your mouth opens wide and a big yawn comes out.
This phenomenon is known as contagious yawning.
And while scientists still don't fully understand why it happens, there are many hypotheses currently being researched.
Let's take a look at a few of the most prevalent ones, beginning with two physiological hypotheses before moving to a psychological one.
Our first physiological hypothesis states that contagious yawning is triggered by a specific stimulus, an initial yawn.
This is called fixed action pattern.
Think of fixed action pattern like a reflex.
Your yawn makes me yawn.
Similar to a domino effect, one person's yawn triggers a yawn in a person nearby that has observed the act.
Once this reflex is triggered, it must run its course.
Have you ever tried to stop a yawn once it has begun?
Basically impossible!
Another physiological hypothesis is known as non-conscious mimicry, or the chameleon effect.
This occurs when you imitate someone's behavior without knowing it, a subtle and unintentional copycat maneuver.
People tend to mimic each other's postures.
If you are seated across from someone that has their legs crossed, you might cross your own legs.
This hypothesis suggests that we yawn when we see someone else yawn because we are unconsciously copying his or her behavior.
Scientists believe that this chameleon effect is possible because of a special set of neurons known as mirror neurons.
Mirror neurons are a type of brain cell that responds equally when we perform an action as when we see someone else perform the same action.
These neurons are important for learning and self-awareness.
For example, watching someone do something physical, like knitting or putting on lipstick, can help you do those same actions more accurately.
Neuroimaging studies using fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging, show us that when we seem someone yawn or even hear their yawn, a specific area of the brain housing these mirror neurons tends to light up, which, in turn, causes us to respond with the same action: a yawn!
Our psychological hypothesis also involves the work of these mirror neurons.
We will call it the empathy yawn.
Empathy is the ability to understand what someone else is feeling and partake in their emotion, a crucial ability for social animals like us.
Recently, neuroscientists have found that a subset of mirror neurons allows us to empathize with others' feelings at a deeper level.
(Yawn) Scientists discovered this empathetic response to yawning while testing the first hypothesis we mentioned, fixed action pattern.
This study was set up to show that dogs would enact a yawn reflex at the mere sound of a human yawn.
While their study showed this to be true, they found something else interesting.
Dogs yawned more frequently at familiar yawns, such as from their owners, than at unfamiliar yawns from strangers.
Following this research, other studies on humans and primates have also shown that contagious yawning occurs more frequently among friends than strangers.
In fact, contagious yawning starts occurring when we are about four or five years old, at the point when children develop the ability to identify others' emotions properly.
Still, while newer scientific studies aim to prove that contagious yawning is based on this capacity for empathy, more research is needed to shed light on what exactly is going on.
It's possible that the answer lies in another hypothesis altogether.
The next time you get caught in a yawn, take a second to think about what just happened.
Were you thinking about a yawn?
Did someone near you yawn?
Was that person a stranger or someone close?
And are you yawning right now?
I once said, "If you want to liberate a society, all you need is the Internet."
I was wrong.
I said those words back in 2011, when a Facebook page I anonymously created helped spark the Egyptian revolution.
The Arab Spring revealed social media's greatest potential, but it also exposed its greatest shortcomings.
The same tool that united us to topple dictators eventually tore us apart.
I would like to share my own experience in using social media for activism, and talk about some of the challenges I have personally faced and what we could do about them.
In the early 2000s, Arabs were flooding the web.
Thirsty for knowledge, for opportunities, for connecting with the rest of the people around the globe, we escaped our frustrating political realities and lived a virtual, alternative life.
Just like many of them, I was completely apolitical until 2009.
At the time, when I logged into social media, I started seeing more and more Egyptians aspiring for political change in the country.
It felt like I was not alone.
In June 2010, Internet changed my life forever.
While browsing Facebook, I saw a photo, a terrifying photo, of a tortured, dead body of a young Egyptian guy.
His name was Khaled Said.
Khaled was a 29-year-old Alexandrian who was killed by police.
I saw myself in his picture.
I thought, "I could be Khaled."
I could not sleep that night, and I decided to do something.
I anonymously created a Facebook page and called it "We are all Khaled Said."
In just three days, the page had over 100,000 people, fellow Egyptians who shared the same concern.
Whatever was happening had to stop.
I recruited my co-admin, AbdelRahman Mansour.
We worked together for hours and hours.
We were crowdsourcing ideas from the people.
We were engaging them.
We were calling collectively for actions, and sharing news that the regime did not want Egyptians to know.
The page became the most followed page in the Arab world.
It had more fans than established media organizations and even top celebrities.
On January 14, 2011, Ben Ali fled out of Tunisia after mounting protests against his regime.
I saw a spark of hope.
Egyptians on social media were wondering, "If Tunisia did it, why can't we?"
I posted an event on Facebook and called it "A Revolution against Corruption, Injustice and Dictatorship."
I posed a question to the 300,000 users of the page at the time: "Today is the 14th of January.
The 25th of January is Police Day.
It's a national holiday.
If 100,000 of us take to the streets of Cairo, no one is going to stop us.
I wonder if we could do it."
In just a few days, the invitation reached over a million people, and over 100,000 people confirmed attendance.
Social media was crucial for this campaign.
It helped a decentralized movement arise.
It made people realize that they were not alone.
And it made it impossible for the regime to stop it.
At the time, they didn't even understand it.
And on January 25th, Egyptians flooded the streets of Cairo and other cities, calling for change, breaking the barrier of fear and announcing a new era.
Then came the consequences.
A few hours before the regime cut off the Internet and telecommunications, I was walking in a dark street in Cairo, around midnight.
I had just tweeted, "Pray for Egypt.
The government must be planning a massacre tomorrow."
I was hit hard on my head.
I lost my balance and fell down, to find four armed men surrounding me.
One covered my mouth and the others paralyzed me.
I knew I was being kidnapped by state security.
I found myself in a cell, handcuffed, blindfolded.
I was terrified.
So was my family, who started looking for me in hospitals, police stations and even morgues.
After my disappearance, a few of my fellow colleagues who knew I was the admin of the page told the media about my connection with that page, and that I was likely arrested by state security.
My colleagues at Google started a search campaign trying to find me, and the fellow protesters in the square demanded my release.
After 11 days of complete darkness, I was set free.
And three days later, Mubarak was forced to step down.
It was the most inspiring and empowering moment of my life.
It was a time of great hope.
Egyptians lived a utopia for 18 days during the revolution.
They all shared the belief that we could actually live together despite our differences, that Egypt after Mubarak would be for all.
But unfortunately, the post-revolution events were like a punch in the gut.
The euphoria faded, we failed to build consensus, and the political struggle led to intense polarization.
Social media only amplified that state, by facilitating the spread of misinformation, rumors, echo chambers and hate speech.
The environment was purely toxic.
My online world became a battleground filled with trolls, lies, hate speech.
I started to worry about the safety of my family.
But of course, this wasn't just about me.
The polarization reached its peak between the two main powers -- the army supporters and the Islamists.
People in the center, like me, started feeling helpless.
Both groups wanted you to side with them; you were either with them or against them.
And on the 3rd of July 2013, the army ousted Egypt's first democratically elected president, after three days of popular protest that demanded his resignation.
That day I made a very hard decision.
I decided to go silent, completely silent.
It was a moment of defeat.
I stayed silent for more than two years, and I used the time to reflect on everything that happened, trying to understand why did it happen.
It became clear to me that while it's true that polarization is primarily driven by our human behavior, social media shapes this behavior and magnifies its impact.
Say you want to say something that is not based on a fact, pick a fight or ignore someone that you don't like.
These are all natural human impulses, but because of technology, acting on these impulses is only one click away.
In my view, there are five critical challenges facing today's social media.
First, we don't know how to deal with rumors.
Rumors that confirm people's biases are now believed and spread among millions of people.
Second, we create our own echo chambers.
We tend to only communicate with people that we agree with, and thanks to social media, we can mute, un-follow and block everybody else.
Third, online discussions quickly descend into angry mobs.
All of us probably know that.
It's as if we forget that the people behind screens are actually real people and not just avatars.
And fourth, it became really hard to change our opinions.
Because of the speed and brevity of social media, we are forced to jump to conclusions and write sharp opinions in 140 characters about complex world affairs.
And once we do that, it lives forever on the Internet, and we are less motivated to change these views, even when new evidence arises.
Fifth -- and in my point of view, this is the most critical -- today, our social media experiences are designed in a way that favors broadcasting over engagements, posts over discussions, shallow comments over deep conversations.
It's as if we agreed that we are here to talk at each other instead of talking with each other.
I witnessed how these critical challenges contributed to an already polarized Egyptian society, but this is not just about Egypt.
Polarization is on the rise in the whole world.
We need to work hard on figuring out how technology could be part of the solution, rather than part of the problem.
There's a lot of debate today on how to combat online harassment and fight trolls.
This is so important.
No one could argue against that.
But we need to also think about how to design social media experiences that promote civility and reward thoughtfulness.
I know for a fact if I write a post that is more sensational, more one-sided, sometimes angry and aggressive, I get to have more people see that post.
I will get more attention.
But what if we put more focus on quality?
What is more important: the total number of readers of a post you write, or who are the people who have impact that read what you write?
Couldn't we just give people more incentives to engage in conversations, rather than just broadcasting opinions all the time?
Or reward people for reading and responding to views that they disagree with?
And also, make it socially acceptable that we change our minds, or probably even reward that?
What if we have a matrix that says how many people changed their minds, and that becomes part of our social media experience?
If I could track how many people are changing their minds, I'd probably write more thoughtfully, trying to do that, rather than appealing to the people who already agree with me and "liking" because I just confirmed their biases.
We also need to think about effective crowdsourcing mechanisms, to fact-check widely spread online information, and reward people who take part in that.
In essence, we need to rethink today's social media ecosystem and redesign its experiences to reward thoughtfulness, civility and mutual understanding.
As a believer in the Internet, I teamed up with a few friends, started a new project, trying to find answers and explore possibilities.
Our first product is a new media platform for conversations.
We're hosting conversations that promote mutual understanding and hopefully change minds.
We don't claim to have the answers, but we started experimenting with different discussions about very divisive issues, such as race, gun control, the refugee debate, relationship between Islam and terrorism.
These are conversations that matter.
Today, at least one out of three people on the planet have access to the Internet.
But part of this Internet is being held captive by the less noble aspects of our human behavior.
Five years ago, I said, "If you want to liberate society, all you need is the Internet."
Today, I believe if we want to liberate society, we first need to liberate the Internet.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
In a time-lapse video, it looks like a monster coming alive.
For a moment, it sits there innocuously.
Then, ripples move across its surface.
It bulges outwards, bursting with weird boils.
It triples in volume.
Its color darkens ominously, and its surface hardens into an alien topography of peaks and craters.
Then, the kitchen timer dings.
Your cookie is ready.
What happened inside that oven?
Don't let the apron deceive you!
Bakers are mad scientists.
When you slide the pan into the oven, you're setting off a series of chemical reactions that transform one substance, dough, into another, cookies.
When the dough reaches 92 degrees Fahrenheit, the butter inside melts, causing the dough to start spreading out.
Butter is an emulsion, or mixture of two substances that don't want to stay together, in this case, water and fat, along with some dairy solids that help hold them together.
As the butter melts, its trapped water is released.
And as the cookie gets hotter, the water expands into steam.
It pushes against the dough from the inside, trying to escape through the cookie walls like Ridley Scott's chest-bursting alien.
Your eggs may have been home to squirming salmonella bacteria.
An estimated 142,000 Americans are infected this way each year.
Though salmonella can live for weeks outside a living body and even survive freezing, 136 degrees is too hot for them.
When your dough reaches that temperature, they die off.
You'll live to test your fate with a bite of raw dough you sneak from your next batch.
At 144 degrees, changes begin in the proteins, which come mostly from the eggs in your dough.
Eggs are composed of dozens of different kinds of proteins, each sensitive to a different temperature.
In an egg fresh from the hen, these proteins look like coiled up balls of string.
When they're exposed to heat energy, the protein strings unfold and get tangled up with their neighbors.
This linked structure makes the runny egg nearly solid, giving substance to squishy dough.
Water boils away at 212 degrees, so like mud baking in the sun, your cookie gets dried out and it stiffens.
Cracks spread across its surface.
The steam that was bubbling inside evaporates, leaving behind airy pockets that make the cookie light and flaky.
Helping this along is your leavening agent, sodium bicarbonate, or baking soda.
The sodium bicarbonate reacts with acids in the dough to create carbon dioxide gas, which makes airy pockets in your cookie.
Now, it's nearly ready for a refreshing dunk in a cool glass of milk.
One of science's tastiest reactions occurs at 310 degrees.
This is the temperature for Maillard reactions.
Maillard reactions result when proteins and sugars break down and rearrange themselves, forming ring-like structures, which reflect light in a way that gives foods like Thanksgiving turkey and hamburgers their distinctive, rich brown color.
As this reaction occurs, it produces a range of flavor and aroma compounds, which also react with each other, forming even more complex tastes and smells.
Caramelization is the last reaction to take place inside your cookie.
Caramelization is what happens when sugar molecules break down under high heat, forming the sweet, nutty, and slightly bitter flavor compounds that define, well, caramel.
And, in fact, if your recipe calls for a 350 degree oven, it'll never happen, since caramelization starts at 356 degrees.
If your ideal cookie is barely browned, like a Northeasterner on a beach vacation, you could have set your oven to 310 degrees.
If you like your cookies to have a nice tan, crank up the heat.
Caramelization continues up to 390 degrees.
And here's another trick: you don't need that kitchen timer; your nose is a sensitive scientific instrument.
When you smell the nutty, toasty aromas of the Maillard reaction and caramelization, your cookies are ready.
Grab your glass of milk, put your feet up, and reflect that science can be pretty sweet.
What's the worst bug on the planet?
You might vote for the horsefly or perhaps the wasp, but for many people, the worst offender is by far the mosquito.
The buzzing, the biting, the itching, the mosquito is one of the most commonly detested pests in the world.
In Alaska, swarms of mosquitos can get so thick that they actually asphyxiate caribou.
And mosquito-borne diseases kill millions of people every year.
The scourge that is the mosquito isn't new.
Mosquitoes have been around for over a hundred million years and over that time have coevolved with all sorts of species, including our own.
There are actually thousands of species of mosquitos in the world, but they all share one insidious quality: they suck blood, and they're really, really good at sucking blood.
Here's how they do it.
After landing, a mosquito will slather some saliva onto the victim's skin, which works like an antiseptic, numbing the spot so we don't notice their attack.
This is what causes the itchy, red bumps, by the way.
Then the bug will use its serrated mandibles to carve a little hole in your skin, allowing it to probe around with its proboscis, searching for a blood vessel.
When it hits one, the lucky parasite can suck two to three times its weight in blood.
Turns out we don't really like that too much.
In fact, humans hate mosquitos so much that we spend billions of dollars worldwide to keep them away from us -- from citronella candles to bug sprays to heavy-duty agricultural pesticides.
But it's not just that mosquitos are annoying, they're also deadly.
Mosquitos can transmit everything from malaria to yellow fever to West Nile virus to dengue.
Over a million people worldwide die every year from mosquito-borne diseases, and that's just people.
Horses, dogs, cats, they can all get diseases from mosquitoes too.
So, if these bugs are so dastardly, why don't we just get rid of them?
We are humans after all, and we're pretty good at getting rid of species.
Well, it's not quite so simple.
Getting rid of the mosquito removes a food source for lots of organisms, like frogs and fish and birds.
Without them, plants would lose a pollinator.
But some scientists say that mosquitos aren't actually all that important.
If we got rid of them, they argue, another species would simply take their place and we'd probably have far fewer deaths from malaria.
The problem is that nobody knows what would happen if we killed off all the mosquitos.
Something better might take their spot or perhaps something even worse.
The question is, are we willing to take that risk?
Late in January 1975, a 17-year-old German girl called Vera Brandes walked out onto the stage of the Cologne Opera House.
The auditorium was empty.
It was lit only by the dim, green glow of the emergency exit sign.
This was the most exciting day of Vera's life.
She was the youngest concert promoter in Germany, and she had persuaded the Cologne Opera House to host a late-night concert of jazz from the American musician, Keith Jarrett.
1,400 people were coming.
And in just a few hours, Jarrett would walk out on the same stage, he'd sit down at the piano and without rehearsal or sheet music, he would begin to play.
But right now, Vera was introducing Keith to the piano in question, and it wasn't going well.
Jarrett looked to the instrument a little warily, played a few notes, walked around it, played a few more notes, muttered something to his producer.
Then the producer came over to Vera and said ...
"If you don't get a new piano, Keith can't play."
There'd been a mistake.
The opera house had provided the wrong instrument.
This one had this harsh, tinny upper register, because all the felt had worn away.
The black notes were sticking, the white notes were out of tune, the pedals didn't work and the piano itself was just too small.
It wouldn't create the volume that would fill a large space such as the Cologne Opera House.
So Keith Jarrett left.
He went and sat outside in his car, leaving Vera Brandes to get on the phone to try to find a replacement piano.
Now she got a piano tuner, but she couldn't get a new piano.
And so she went outside and she stood there in the rain, talking to Keith Jarrett, begging him not to cancel the concert.
And he looked out of his car at this bedraggled, rain-drenched German teenager, took pity on her, and said, "Never forget ... only for you."
And so a few hours later, Jarrett did indeed step out onto the stage of the opera house, he sat down at the unplayable piano and began.
(Music) Within moments it became clear that something magical was happening.
Jarrett was avoiding those upper registers, he was sticking to the middle tones of the keyboard, which gave the piece a soothing, ambient quality.
But also, because the piano was so quiet, he had to set up these rumbling, repetitive riffs in the bass.
And he stood up twisting, pounding down on the keys, desperately trying to create enough volume to reach the people in the back row.
It's an electrifying performance.
It somehow has this peaceful quality, and at the same time it's full of energy, it's dynamic.
And the audience loved it.
Audiences continue to love it because the recording of the Köln Concert is the best-selling piano album in history and the best-selling solo jazz album in history.
Keith Jarrett had been handed a mess.
He had embraced that mess, and it soared.
But let's think for a moment about Jarrett's initial instinct.
He didn't want to play.
Of course, I think any of us, in any remotely similar situation, would feel the same way, we'd have the same instinct.
We don't want to be asked to do good work with bad tools.
We don't want to have to overcome unnecessary hurdles.
But Jarrett's instinct was wrong, and thank goodness he changed his mind.
And I think our instinct is also wrong.
I think we need to gain a bit more appreciation for the unexpected advantages of having to cope with a little mess.
So let me give you some examples from cognitive psychology, from complexity science, from social psychology, and of course, rock 'n' roll.
So cognitive psychology first.
We've actually known for a while that certain kinds of difficulty, certain kinds of obstacle, can actually improve our performance.
For example, the psychologist Daniel Oppenheimer, a few years ago, teamed up with high school teachers.
And he asked them to reformat the handouts that they were giving to some of their classes.
So the regular handout would be formatted in something straightforward, such as Helvetica or Times New Roman.
But half these classes were getting handouts that were formatted in something sort of intense, like Haettenschweiler, or something with a zesty bounce, like Comic Sans italicized.
Now, these are really ugly fonts, and they're difficult fonts to read.
But at the end of the semester, students were given exams, and the students who'd been asked to read the more difficult fonts, had actually done better on their exams, in a variety of subjects.
And the reason is, the difficult font had slowed them down, forced them to work a bit harder, to think a bit more about what they were reading, to interpret it ...
and so they learned more.
Another example.
The psychologist Shelley Carson has been testing Harvard undergraduates for the quality of their attentional filters.
What do I mean by that?
What I mean is, imagine you're in a restaurant, you're having a conversation, there are all kinds of other conversations going on in the restaurant, you want to filter them out, you want to focus on what's important to you.
Can you do that?
If you can, you have good, strong attentional filters.
But some people really struggle with that.
Some of Carson's undergraduate subjects struggled with that.
They had weak filters, they had porous filters -- let a lot of external information in.
And so what that meant is they were constantly being interrupted by the sights and the sounds of the world around them.
If there was a television on while they were doing their essays, they couldn't screen it out.
Now, you would think that that was a disadvantage ...
but no.
When Carson looked at what these students had achieved, the ones with the weak filters were vastly more likely to have some real creative milestone in their lives, to have published their first novel, to have released their first album.
These distractions were actually grists to their creative mill.
They were able to think outside the box because their box was full of holes.
Let's talk about complexity science.
So how do you solve a really complex -- the world's full of complicated problems -- how do you solve a really complicated problem?
For example, you try to make a jet engine.
There are lots and lots of different variables, the operating temperature, the materials, all the different dimensions, the shape.
You can't solve that kind of problem all in one go, it's too hard.
So what do you do?
Well, one thing you can do is try to solve it step-by-step.
So you have some kind of prototype and you tweak it, you test it, you improve it.
You tweak it, you test it, you improve it.
Now, this idea of marginal gains will eventually get you a good jet engine.
And it's been quite widely implemented in the world.
So you'll hear about it, for example, in high performance cycling, web designers will talk about trying to optimize their web pages, they're looking for these step-by-step gains.
That's a good way to solve a complicated problem.
But you know what would make it a better way?
A dash of mess.
You add randomness, early on in the process, you make crazy moves, you try stupid things that shouldn't work, and that will tend to make the problem-solving work better.
And the reason for that is the trouble with the step-by-step process, the marginal gains, is they can walk you gradually down a dead end.
And if you start with the randomness, that becomes less likely, and your problem-solving becomes more robust.
Let's talk about social psychology.
So the psychologist Katherine Phillips, with some colleagues, recently gave murder mystery problems to some students, and these students were collected in groups of four and they were given dossiers with information about a crime -- alibis and evidence, witness statements and three suspects.
And the groups of four students were asked to figure out who did it, who committed the crime.
And there were two treatments in this experiment.
In some cases these were four friends, they all knew each other well.
In other cases, three friends and a stranger.
And you can see where I'm going with this.
Obviously I'm going to say that the groups with the stranger solved the problem more effectively, which is true, they did.
Actually, they solved the problem quite a lot more effectively.
So the groups of four friends, they only had a 50-50 chance of getting the answer right.
Which is actually not that great -- in multiple choice, for three answers? 50-50's not good.
(Laughter) The three friends and the stranger, even though the stranger didn't have any extra information, even though it was just a case of how that changed the conversation to accommodate that awkwardness, the three friends and the stranger, they had a 75 percent chance of finding the right answer.
That's quite a big leap in performance.
But I think what's really interesting is not just that the three friends and the stranger did a better job, but how they felt about it.
So when Katherine Phillips interviewed the groups of four friends, they had a nice time, they also thought they'd done a good job.
They were complacent.
When she spoke to the three friends and the stranger, they had not had a nice time -- it's actually rather difficult, it's rather awkward ...
and they were full of doubt.
They didn't think they'd done a good job even though they had.
And I think that really exemplifies the challenge that we're dealing with here.
Because, yeah -- the ugly font, the awkward stranger, the random move ...
these disruptions help us solve problems, they help us become more creative.
But we don't feel that they're helping us.
We feel that they're getting in the way ...
and so we resist.
And that's why the last example is really important.
So I want to talk about somebody from the background of the world of rock 'n' roll.
And you may know him, he's actually a TED-ster.
His name is Brian Eno.
He is an ambient composer -- rather brilliant.
He's also a kind of catalyst behind some of the great rock 'n' roll albums of the last 40 years.
He's worked with David Bowie on "Heroes," he worked with U2 on "Achtung Baby" and "The Joshua Tree," he's worked with DEVO, he's worked with Coldplay, he's worked with everybody.
And what does he do to make these great rock bands better?
Well, he makes a mess.
He disrupts their creative processes.
It's his role to be the awkward stranger.
It's his role to tell them that they have to play the unplayable piano.
And one of the ways in which he creates this disruption is through this remarkable deck of cards -- I have my signed copy here -- thank you, Brian.
They're called The Oblique Strategies, he developed them with a friend of his.
And when they're stuck in the studio, Brian Eno will reach for one of the cards.
He'll draw one at random, and he'll make the band follow the instructions on the card.
So this one ...
"Change instrument roles."
Yeah, everyone swap instruments -- Drummer on the piano -- Brilliant, brilliant idea.
"Look closely at the most embarrassing details. Amplify them."
"Make a sudden, destructive, unpredictable action. Incorporate."
These cards are disruptive.
Now, they've proved their worth in album after album.
The musicians hate them.
(Laughter) So Phil Collins was playing drums on an early Brian Eno album.
He got so frustrated he started throwing beer cans across the studio.
Carlos Alomar, great rock guitarist, working with Eno on David Bowie's "Lodger" album, and at one point he turns to Brian and says, "Brian, this experiment is stupid."
But the thing is it was a pretty good album, but also, Carlos Alomar, 35 years later, now uses The Oblique Strategies.
And he tells his students to use The Oblique Strategies because he's realized something.
Just because you don't like it doesn't mean it isn't helping you.
The strategies actually weren't a deck of cards originally, they were just a list -- list on the recording studio wall.
A checklist of things you might try if you got stuck.
The list didn't work.
Know why?
Not messy enough.
Your eye would go down the list and it would settle on whatever was the least disruptive, the least troublesome, which of course misses the point entirely.
And what Brian Eno came to realize was, yes, we need to run the stupid experiments, we need to deal with the awkward strangers, we need to try to read the ugly fonts.
These things help us.
They help us solve problems, they help us be more creative.
But also ...
we really need some persuasion if we're going to accept this.
So however we do it ...
whether it's sheer willpower, whether it's the flip of a card or whether it's a guilt trip from a German teenager, all of us, from time to time, need to sit down and try and play the unplayable piano.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Looking up at the night sky, we are amazed by how it seems to go on forever.
But what will the sky look like billions of years from now?
A particular type of scientist, called a cosmologist, spends her time thinking about that very question.
The end of the universe is intimately linked to what the universe contains.
Over 100 years ago, Einstein developed the Theory of General Relativity, formed of equations that help us understand the relationship between what a universe is made of and its shape.
It turns out that the universe could be curved like a ball or sphere.
We call this positively curved or closed.
Or it could be shaped like a saddle.
We call this negatively curved or open.
Or it could be flat.
And that shape determines how the universe will live and die.
We now know that the universe is very close to flat.
However, the components of the universe can still affect its eventual fate.
We can predict how the universe will change with time if we measure the amounts or energy densities of the various components in the universe today.
So, what is the universe made of?
The universe contains all the things that we can see, like stars, gas, and planets.
We call these things ordinary or baryonic matter.
Even though we see them all around us, the total energy density of these components is actually very small, around 5% of the total energy of the universe.
So, now let's talk about what the other 95% is.
Just under 27% of the rest of the energy density of the universe is made up of what we call dark matter.
Dark matter is only very weakly interacting with light, which means it doesn't shine or reflect light in the way that stars and planets do, but, in every other way, it behaves like ordinary matter -- it attracts things gravitationally.
In fact, the only way we can detect this dark matter is through this gravitational interaction, how things orbit around it and how it bends light as it curves the space around it.
We have yet to discover a dark matter particle, but scientists all over the world are searching for this elusive particle or particles and the effects of dark matter on the universe.
But this still doesn't add up to 100%.
The remaining 68% of the energy density of the universe is made up of dark energy, which is even more mysterious than dark matter.
This dark energy doesn't behave like any other substance we know at all and acts more like anti-gravity force.
We say that it has a gravitational pressure, which ordinary matter and dark matter do not.
Instead of pulling the universe together, as we would expect gravity to do, the universe appears to be expanding apart at an ever-increasing rate.
The leading idea for dark energy is that it is a cosmological constant.
That means it has the strange property that it expands as the volume of space increases to keep its energy density constant.
So, as the universe expands as it is doing right now, there will be more and more dark energy.
Dark matter and baryonic matter, on the other hand, don't expand with the universe and become more diluted.
Because of this property of the cosmological constant, the future universe will be more and more dominated by dark energy, becoming colder and colder and expanding faster and faster.
Eventually, the universe will run out of gas to form stars, and the stars themselves will run out of fuel and burn out, leaving the universe with only black holes in it.
Given enough time, even these black holes will evaporate, leaving a universe that is completely cold and empty.
That is what we call the heat death of the universe.
While it might sound depressing living in a universe that will end its lifetime cold and devoid of life, the end fate of our universe actually has a beautiful symmetry to its hot, fiery beginning.
We call the accelerating end state of the universe a de Sitter phase, named after the Dutch mathematician Willem de Sitter.
However, we also believe that the universe had another phase of de Sitter expansion in the earliest times of its life.
We call this early period inflation, where, shortly after the Big Bang, the universe expanded extremely fast for a brief period.
So, the universe will end in much the same state as it began, accelerating.
We live at an extraordinary time in the life of the universe where we can start to understand the universe's journey and view a history that plays itself out on the sky for all of us to see.
It's the first sense you use when you're born.
One out of every fifty of your genes is dedicated to it.
It must be important, right?
Okay, take a deep breath through your nose.
It's your sense of smell, and it's breathtakingly powerful.
As an adult, you can distinguish about 10,000 different smells.
Here's how your nose does it.
Smell starts when you sniff molecules from the air into your nostrils.
95% of your nasal cavity is used just to filter that air before it hits your lungs.
But at the very back of your nose is a region called the olfactory epithelium, a little patch of skin that's key to everything you smell.
The olfactory epithelium has a layer of olfactory receptor cells, special neurons that sense smells, like the taste buds of your nose.
When odor molecules hit the back of your nose, they get stuck in a layer of mucus covering the olfactory epithelium.
As they dissolve, they bind to the olfactory receptor cells, which fire and send signals through the olfactory tract up to your brain.
As a side note, you can tell a lot about how good an animal's sense of smell is by the size of its olfactory epithelium.
A dog's olfactory epithelium is 20 times bigger than your puny human one.
But there's still a lot we don't know about this little patch of cells, too.
For example, our olfactory epithelium is pigmented, and scientists don't really know why.
But how do you actually tell the difference between smells?
It turns out that your brain has 40 million different olfactory receptor neurons, so odor A might trigger neurons 3, 427, and 988, and odor B might trigger neurons 8, 76, and 2,496,678.
All of these different combinations let you detect a staggeringly broad array of smells.
Olfactory neurons are always fresh and ready for action.
They're the only neuron in the body that gets replaced regularly, every four to eight weeks.
Once they are triggered, the signal travels through a bundle called the olfactory tract to destinations all over your brain, making stops in the amygdala, the thalamus, and the neocortex.
This is different from how sight and sound are processed.
Each of those signals goes first to a relay center in the middle of the cerebral hemisphere and then out to other regions of the brain.
But smell, because it evolved before most of your other senses, takes a direct route to these different regions of the brain, where it can trigger your fight-or-flight response, help you recall memories, or make your mouth water.
But even though we've all got the same physiological set-up, two nostrils and millions of olfactory neurons, not everybody smells the same things.
One of the most famous examples of this is the ability to smell so-called "asparagus pee."
For about a quarter of the population, urinating after eating asparagus means smelling a distinct odor.
The other 75% of us don't notice.
And this isn't the only case of smells differing from nose to nose.
For some people, the chemical androstenone smells like vanilla; to others, it smells like sweaty urine, which is unfortunate because androstenone is commonly found in tasty things like pork.
So with the sweaty urine smellers in mind, pork producers will castrate male pigs to stop them from making androstenone.
The inability to smell a scent is called anosmia, and there are about 100 known examples.
People with allicin anosmia can't smell garlic.
Those with eugenol anosmia can't smell cloves.
And some people can't smell anything at all.
This kind of full anosmia could have several causes.
Some people are born without a sense of smell.
Others lose it after an accident or during an illness.
If the olfactory epithelium gets swollen or infected, it can hamper your sense of smell, something you might have experienced when you were sick.
Not being able to smell anything can mess with your other senses, too.
Many people who can't smell at all also can't really taste the same way the rest of us do.
It turns out that how something tastes is closely related to how it smells.
As you chew your food, air is pushed up your nasal passage, carrying with it the smell of your food.
Those scents hit your olfactory epithelium and tell your brain a lot about what you're eating.
Without the ability to smell, you lose the ability to taste anything more complicated than the five tastes your taste buds can detect: sweet, salty, bitter, sour, and savory.
So, the next time you smell exhaust fumes, salty sea air, or roast chicken, you'll know exactly how you've done it and, perhaps, be a little more thankful that you can.
[Why don't we eat bugs?] For centuries, people have consumed bugs, everything from beetles to caterpillars, locusts, grasshoppers, termites, and dragonflies.
The practice even has a name: entomophagy.
Early hunter-gatherers probably learned from animals that foraged for protein-rich insects and followed suit.
As we evolved and bugs became part of our dietary tradition, they fulfilled the role of both staple food and delicacy.
In ancient Greece, cicadas were considered luxury snacks.
And even the Romans found beetle larvae to be scrumptious.
Why have we lost our taste for bugs?
The reason for our rejection is historical, and the story probably begins around 10,000 BC in the Fertile Crescent, a place in the Middle East that was a major birthplace of agriculture.
Back then, our once-nomadic ancestors began to settle in the Crescent.
And as they learned to farm crops and domesticate animals there, attitudes changed, rippling outwards towards Europe and the rest of the Western world.
As farming took off, people might have spurned bugs as mere pests that destroyed their crops.
Populations grew, and the West became urbanized, weakening connections with our foraging past.
People simply forgot their bug-rich history.
Today, for people not accustomed to entomophagy, bugs are just an irritant.
They sting and bite and infest our food.
We feel an "ick factor" associated with them and are disgusted by the prospect of cooking insects.
Almost 2,000 insect species are turned into food, forming a big part of everyday diets for two billion people around the world.
Countries in the tropics are the keenest consumers, because culturally, it's acceptable.
Species in those regions are also large, diverse, and tend to congregate in groups or swarms that make them easy to harvest.
Take Cambodia in Southeast Asia where huge tarantulas are gathered, fried, and sold in the marketplace.
In southern Africa, the juicy mopane worm is a dietary staple, simmered in a spicy sauce or eaten dried and salted.
And in Mexico, chopped jumiles are toasted with garlic, lemon, and salt.
Bugs can be eaten whole to make up a meal or ground into flour, powder, and paste to add to food.
But it's not all about taste.
They're also healthy.
In fact, scientists say entomophagy could be a cost-effective solution for developing countries that are food insecure.
Insects can contain up to 80% protein, the body's vital building blocks, and are also high in energy-rich fat, fiber, and micronutrients like vitamins and minerals.
Did you know that most edible insects contain the same amount or even more mineral iron than beef, making them a huge, untapped resource when you consider that iron deficiency is currently the most common nutritional problem in the world?
The mealworm is another nutritious example.
The yellow beetle larvae are native to America and easy to farm.
They have a high vitamin content, loads of healthy minerals, and can contain up to 50% protein, almost as much as in an equivalent amount of beef.
To cook, simply sauté in butter and salt or roast and drizzle with chocolate for a crunchy snack.
What you have to overcome in "ick factor," you gain in nutrition and taste.
Indeed, bugs can be delicious.
Mealworms taste like roasted nuts.
Locusts are similar to shrimp.
Crickets, some people say, have an aroma of popcorn.
Farming insects for food also has less environmental impact than livestock farms do because insects emit far less greenhouse gas and use up less space, water, and food.
Socioeconomically, bug production could uplift people in developing countries since insect farms can be small scale, highly productive, and yet relatively inexpensive to keep.
Insects can also be turned into more sustainable food for livestock and can be reared on organic waste, like vegetable peelings, that might otherwise just end up rotting in landfills.
Feeling hungry yet?
Faced with a plate of fried crickets, most people today would still recoil, imagining all those legs and feelers getting stuck between their teeth.
But think of a lobster.
It's pretty much just a giant insect with legs and feelers galore that was once regarded as an inferior, repulsive food.
Now, lobster is a delicacy.
Can the same paradigm shift happen for bugs?
So, give it a try!
Pop that insect into your mouth, and savor the crunch.
In J.R.R.'s world, Gandalf is one of five wizards sent by the Valar to guide the inhabitants of Middle Earth in their struggles against the dark force of Sauron.
Gandalf's body was mortal, subject to the physical rules of Middle Earth, but his spirit was immortal, as seen when he died as Gandalf the Grey and resurrected as Gandalf the White.
According to the Wachowski's script, an awakened human only has to link up and hack the neon binary code of the Matrix to learn how to fly a helicopter in a matter of seconds.
Or if you are the One, or one of the Ones, you don't even need a helicopter, you just need a cool pair of shades.
Cheshire cats can juggle their own heads.
iPads are rudimentary.
No Quidditch match ends until the Golden Snitch is caught.
And the answer to the ultimate question of life, the universe, and everything is most certainly 42.
Just like real life, fictional worlds operate consistently within a spectrum of physical and societal rules.
That's what makes these intricate worlds believable, comprehensible, and worth exploring.
In real life, the Law of Gravity holds seven book sets of "Harry Potter" to millions of bookshelves around the world.
We know this to be true, but we also know that ever since J.K. typed the words wizard, wand, and "Wingardium Leviosa," that Law of Gravity has ceased to exist on the trillions of pages resting between those bookends.
Authors of science fiction and fantasy literally build worlds.
They make rules, maps, lineages, languages, cultures, universes, alternate universes within universes, and from those worlds sprout story, after story, after story.
When it's done well, readers can understand fictional worlds and their rules just as well as the characters that live in them do and sometimes, just as well or even better than the reader understands the world outside of the book.
But how?
How can human-made squiggles on a page reflect lights into our eyes that send signals to our brains that we logically and emotionally decode as complex narratives that move us to fight, cry, sing, and think, that are strong enough not only to hold up a world that is completely invented by the author, but also to change the reader's perspective on the real world that resumes only when the final squiggle is reached?
I'm not sure anyone knows the answer to that question, yet fantastical, fictional worlds are created everyday in our minds, on computers, even on napkins at the restaurant down the street.
The truth is your imagination and a willingness to, figuratively, live in your own world are all you need to get started writing a novel.
I didn't dream up Hogwarts or the Star Wars' Cantina, but I have written some science thrillers for kids and young adults.
Here are some questions and methods I've used to help build the worlds in which those books take place.
I start with a basic place and time.
Whether that's a fantasy world or a futuristic setting in the real world, it's important to know where you are and whether you're working in the past, present, or future.
I like to create a timeline showing how the world came to be.
What past events have shaped the way it is now?
Then I brainstorm answers to questions that draw out the details of my fictional world.
What rules are in place here?
This covers everything from laws of gravity, or not, to the rules of society and the punishments for individuals who break them.
What kind of government does this world have?
Who has power, and who doesn't?
What do people believe in here?
And what does this society value most?
Then it's time to think about day-to-day life.
What's the weather like in this world?
Where do the inhabitants live and work and go to school?
What do they eat and how do they play?
How do they treat their young and their old?
What relationships do they have with the animals and plants of the world?
And what do those animals and plants look like?
What kind of technology exists?
Transportation?
Communication?
Access to information?
There's so much to think about!
So, spend some time living in those tasks and the answers to those questions, and you're well on your way to building your own fictional world.
Once you know your world as well as you hope your reader will, set your characters free in it and see what happens.
And ask yourself, "How does this world you created shape the individuals who live in it?
And what kind of conflict is likely to emerge?"
Answer those questions, and you have your story.
Good luck, future world-builder!
I am in search of another planet in the universe where life exists.
I can't see this planet with my naked eyes or even with the most powerful telescopes we currently possess.
But I know that it's there.
And understanding contradictions that occur in nature will help us find it.
On our planet, where there's water, there's life.
So we look for planets that orbit at just the right distance from their stars.
At this distance, shown in blue on this diagram for stars of different temperatures, planets could be warm enough for water to flow on their surfaces as lakes and oceans where life might reside.
Some astronomers focus their time and energy on finding planets at these distances from their stars.
What I do picks up where their job ends.
I model the possible climates of exoplanets.
And here's why that's important: there are many factors besides distance from its star that control whether a planet can support life.
Take the planet Venus.
It's named after the Roman goddess of love and beauty, because of its benign, ethereal appearance in the sky.
But spacecraft measurements revealed a different story.
The surface temperature is close to 900 degrees Fahrenheit, 500 Celsius.
That's hot enough to melt lead.
Its thick atmosphere, not its distance from the sun, is the reason.
It causes a greenhouse effect on steroids, trapping heat from the sun and scorching the planet's surface.
The reality totally contradicted initial perceptions of this planet.
From these lessons from our own solar system, we've learned that a planet's atmosphere is crucial to its climate and potential to host life.
We don't know what the atmospheres of these planets are like because the planets are so small and dim compared to their stars and so far away from us.
For example, one of the closest planets that could support surface water -- it's called Gliese 667 Cc -- such a glamorous name, right, nice phone number for a name -- it's 23 light years away.
So that's more than 100 trillion miles.
Trying to measure the atmospheric composition of an exoplanet passing in front of its host star is hard.
It's like trying to see a fruit fly passing in front of a car's headlight.
OK, now imagine that car is 100 trillion miles away, and you want to know the precise color of that fly.
So I use computer models to calculate the kind of atmosphere a planet would need to have a suitable climate for water and life.
Here's an artist's concept of the planet Kepler-62f, with the Earth for reference.
It's 1,200 light years away, and just 40 percent larger than Earth.
Our NSF-funded work found that it could be warm enough for open water from many types of atmospheres and orientations of its orbit.
So I'd like future telescopes to follow up on this planet to look for signs of life.
Ice on a planet's surface is also important for climate.
Ice absorbs longer, redder wavelengths of light, and reflects shorter, bluer light.
That's why the iceberg in this photo looks so blue.
The redder light from the sun is absorbed on its way through the ice.
Only the blue light makes it all the way to the bottom.
Then it gets reflected back to up to our eyes and we see blue ice.
My models show that planets orbiting cooler stars could actually be warmer than planets orbiting hotter stars.
There's another contradiction -- that ice absorbs the longer wavelength light from cooler stars, and that light, that energy, heats the ice.
Using climate models to explore how these contradictions can affect planetary climate is vital to the search for life elsewhere.
And it's no surprise that this is my specialty.
I'm an African-American female astronomer and a classically trained actor who loves to wear makeup and read fashion magazines, so I am uniquely positioned to appreciate contradictions in nature -- (Laughter) (Applause) ... and how they can inform our search for the next planet where life exists.
My organization, Rising Stargirls, teaches astronomy to middle-school girls of color, using theater, writing and visual art.
That's another contradiction -- science and art don't often go together, but interweaving them can help these girls bring their whole selves to what they learn, and maybe one day join the ranks of astronomers who are full of contradictions, and use their backgrounds to discover, once and for all, that we are truly not alone in the universe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Can you read in the car?
If so, consider yourself pretty lucky.
For one-third of the population, looking at a book while moving along in a car or a boat or train or plane quickly makes them sick to their stomach.
But why do we get motion sickness in the first place?
Well, believe it or not, scientists aren't exactly sure.
The most common theory has to do with mismatched sensory signals.
When you travel in a car, your body gets two different messages.
Your eyes are seeing the inside of a vehicle, which doesn't seem to be moving.
Meanwhile, your ear is telling your brain you're accelerating.
Wait, your ear?
Your ear has another important function besides hearing.
In its innermost part lies a group of structures known as the vestibular system, which gives us our sense of balance and movement.
Inside there are three semicircular tubules that can sense rotation, one for each dimension of space.
And there are also two hair-lined sacks filled with fluid.
When you move, the fluid shifts and tickles the hairs, telling your brain if you're moving horizontally or vertically.
All this tells your body which direction you're moving in, how much you've accelerated, even at what angle.
In a car, your vestibular system correctly senses your movement, but your eyes don't see it, especially when glued to a book.
The opposite can happen.
You're at the movies, and the camera makes a sweeping move.
This time, your eyes think you're moving while your ear knows you're sitting still.
But why does this conflicting information make us feel so terrible?
Scientists aren't sure, but they think there's an evolutionary explanation.
Fast moving vehicles and video recordings have only existed in the last couple of centuries, a blink in evolutionary time.
For most of our history, there wasn't that much that could cause this sensory mix-up, except for poisons.
And because poisons are not the best thing for survival, our bodies evolved a direct but unpleasant way to get rid of what we ate that was causing the confusion.
It's a pretty reasonable theory, but it leaves things unexplained, like why women are more affected by motion sickness than men, or why passengers get more nauseous than drivers.
Another theory suggests that the cause is more about the way some unfamiliar situations make it harder to maintain our natural body posture.
Studies show that being immersed in water or just changing your stance can greatly reduce the effects of motion sickness.
But we don't really know what's going on.
We know the more common remedies for car queasiness -- looking at the horizon, over-the-counter pills, chewing gum, but none are totally reliable nor can they handle intense motion sickness and sometimes the stakes are far higher than just not being bored during a long car ride.
At NASA, where astronauts are hurled into space at 17,000 miles per hour, motion sickness is a serious problem.
In addition to researching the latest space-age technologies, NASA also spends a lot of time figuring out how to keep astronauts from vomiting up their space rations.
Like understanding the mysteries of sleep or curing the common cold, motion sickness is one of those seemingly simple problems that, despite amazing scientific progress, we still know very little about.
Perhaps one day the exact cause of motion sickness will be found, and with it, a completely effective way to prevent it, but that day is still on the horizon.
In the 1920's, the German mathematician David Hilbert devised a famous thought experiment to show us just how hard it is to wrap our minds around the concept of infinity.
Imagine a hotel with an infinite number of rooms and a very hardworking night manager.
One night, the Infinite Hotel is completely full, totally booked up with an infinite number of guests.
A man walks into the hotel and asks for a room.
Rather than turn him down, the night manager decides to make room for him.
How?
Easy, he asks the guest in room number 1 to move to room 2, the guest in room 2 to move to room 3, and so on.
Every guest moves from room number "n" to room number "n+1".
Since there are an infinite number of rooms, there is a new room for each existing guest.
This leaves room 1 open for the new customer.
The process can be repeated for any finite number of new guests.
If, say, a tour bus unloads 40 new people looking for rooms, then every existing guest just moves from room number "n" to room number "n+40", thus, opening up the first 40 rooms.
But now an infinitely large bus with a countably infinite number of passengers pulls up to rent rooms.
countably infinite is the key.
Now, the infinite bus of infinite passengers perplexes the night manager at first, but he realizes there's a way to place each new person.
He asks the guest in room 1 to move to room 2.
He then asks the guest in room 2 to move to room 4, the guest in room 3 to move to room 6, and so on.
Each current guest moves from room number "n" to room number "2n" -- filling up only the infinite even-numbered rooms.
By doing this, he has now emptied all of the infinitely many odd-numbered rooms, which are then taken by the people filing off the infinite bus.
Everyone's happy and the hotel's business is booming more than ever.
Well, actually, it is booming exactly the same amount as ever, banking an infinite number of dollars a night.
Word spreads about this incredible hotel.
People pour in from far and wide.
One night, the unthinkable happens.
The night manager looks outside and sees an infinite line of infinitely large buses, each with a countably infinite number of passengers.
What can he do?
If he cannot find rooms for them, the hotel will lose out on an infinite amount of money, and he will surely lose his job.
Luckily, he remembers that around the year 300 B.C.E., Euclid proved that there is an infinite quantity of prime numbers.
So, to accomplish this seemingly impossible task of finding infinite beds for infinite buses of infinite weary travelers, the night manager assigns every current guest to the first prime number, 2, raised to the power of their current room number.
So, the current occupant of room number 7 goes to room number 2^7, which is room 128.
The night manager then takes the people on the first of the infinite buses and assigns them to the room number of the next prime, 3, raised to the power of their seat number on the bus.
So, the person in seat number 7 on the first bus goes to room number 3^7 or room number 2,187.
This continues for all of the first bus.
The passengers on the second bus are assigned powers of the next prime, 5.
The following bus, powers of 7.
Each bus follows: powers of 11, powers of 13, powers of 17, etc.
Since each of these numbers only has 1 and the natural number powers of their prime number base as factors, there are no overlapping room numbers.
All the buses' passengers fan out into rooms using unique room-assignment schemes based on unique prime numbers.
In this way, the night manager can accommodate every passenger on every bus.
Although, there will be many rooms that go unfilled, like room 6, since 6 is not a power of any prime number.
Luckily, his bosses weren't very good in math, so his job is safe.
The night manager's strategies are only possible because while the Infinite Hotel is certainly a logistical nightmare, it only deals with the lowest level of infinity, mainly, the countable infinity of the natural numbers, 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on.
Georg Cantor called this level of infinity aleph-zero.
We use natural numbers for the room numbers as well as the seat numbers on the buses.
If we were dealing with higher orders of infinity, such as that of the real numbers, these structured strategies would no longer be possible as we have no way to systematically include every number.
The Real Number Infinite Hotel has negative number rooms in the basement, fractional rooms, so the guy in room 1/2 always suspects he has less room than the guy in room 1.
Square root rooms, like room radical 2, and room pi, where the guests expect free dessert.
What self-respecting night manager would ever want to work there even for an infinite salary?
But over at Hilbert's Infinite Hotel, where there's never any vacancy and always room for more, the scenarios faced by the ever-diligent and maybe too hospitable night manager serve to remind us of just how hard it is for our relatively finite minds to grasp a concept as large as infinity.
Maybe you can help tackle these problems after a good night's sleep.
But honestly, we might need you to change rooms at 2 a.m.
How fast are you moving right now?
That seems like an easy question.
The first tempting answer is, "I'm not moving."
Upon further reflection, you realize that maybe the Earth's motion counts.
So, a second tempting answer is, "19 miles/second around the Sun."
But then you recall learning that the Sun moves around the center of the Milky Way galaxy, and the Milky Way moves within the Local Group of galaxies, and the Local Group moves within the Virgo Cluster, and the Virgo Cluster moves within...
"How fast are you moving?"
is not an easy question.
When Mission Control tells astronauts how fast they're going, there's always an assumed standard of rest.
At the start of the voyage, speeds are given relative to the launchpad.
But later, when the launchpad is just one more arbritrary place down there on Earth's spinning surface, speeds are given relative to the idealized, non-spinning pinpoint center of Earth.
On their way to the Moon, Apollo astronauts had a hard time answering the question, "How fast are you moving?"
Speed away from Earth was one thing, and speed toward the Moon was quite another.
That's because the Earth and the Moon move relative to one another.
Ah, of course!
Speed is a relative quantity.
When Captain Kirk ask Lieutenant Sulu if the Starship Enterprise has reached a speed of warp 7, Sulu should reply, "Relative to what, Captain?"
Such a sassy reply may get subordinate Starfleet officers in trouble, but it is the only good answer to the question, "How fast are you moving?"
This is basic relatively talking.
Not fancy Einsteinian relativity, but good old fashioned (and still correct) Galilean relativity.
Galileo seems to have been the first person to realize that there is no such thing as an absolute speed.
Speeds are relative.
This means that speeds only have meaning when they are referred to a reference frame.
Presumably that reference frame is itself at rest.
But then we have to ask again, "At rest relative to what?"
Because even the concept of rest has lost any hint of absolute meaning.
Speed is relative, and rest is relative.
Earth's speed is 19 miles/second relative to the Sun.
The Enterprise's speed is warp 7 relative to the center of the Milky Way galaxy.
Your speed is zero relative to your easy chair.
But depending on where you sit, it is hundreds of miles/hour relative to Earth's center.
When we furrow a brow and ask, "But how fast is Earth really moving?"
we imagine Spaceship Earth plowing through the ocean of space as it orbits the Sun.
But space is not an ocean.
It has no substance as water does.
Space is not a thing; space is nothing.
Space is no thing.
You can move between two points in space, say between Earth and Mars, but you can't move through space.
There's nothing to move through.
It's like trying to say how much a hole weighs.
A hole weighs exactly nothing because a hole is nothing.
It's a void, and so is space.
To move relative to nothing is meaningless.
The concepts of speed and of rest have only relative meaning.
They are absolutely meaningless.
They mean something only with respect to arbitrarily chosen, artificial frames of reference.
If, someday, you are buckled into your spaceship, and you see from the side window, say, a space station whizz by at constant speed, there is no way to know which of you is really moving.
Neither of you is really moving because there is no deep reality about constant speed.
Constant speed in a straight line has only relative meaning, a kind of relative reality.
Does this mean that all motion is relative?
No! Some motions have only relative meaning, but some motions have absolute meaning, are absolutely real.
For example, constant speed is relative, but change in speed is absolute.
Calling something absolute in science means that arbitrary standards are not used in its measurement.
It is unambiguously measurable.
When your spaceship fires its engines, your change in speed is beyond doubt.
You feel it in your stomach, and your ship's sensors can measure it.
Outside your window, the passing space station may seem to be changing speed, but the beings inside the station will not feel it.
And no sensors can measure it.
You are really changing speed, and they are really are not.
There's something absolutely real about changes in speed.
The same goes for rotation.
If your spaceship is spinning, you can feel it, and your ship's sensors can measure it.
The space station outside may seem to be going around you, but it is you who feels queasy, not the folks in the space station.
You are really spinning, and they really are not.
There's something absolutely real about rotation.
So, some motions are relative, and some are not.
There is no deep reality about constant speed, but changes in speed are deeply real, and so are rotations.
We have to be thoughtful in our analysis of everyday experience in order to identify what is deeply real.
Since we can be fooled by perceptions as basic as speed, maybe every perception deserves careful scrutiny.
This is what inspired Einstein to his incredible insights about the speed of light and forward time travel.
Knowing how to identify what is deeply real is tough and important work.
If a police officer ever pulls you over for speeding and asks, &amp;quot;Do you know how fast you were going?&amp;quot; an insightful, though perhaps unwise, reply would be, "Relative to what?"
And then, as you sit in the backseat of the police car and feel it accelerate toward jail, you can add, &amp;quot;But some things are absolute!&amp;quot;
An enduring myth says we use only 10% of our brain, the other 90% standing idly by for spare capacity.
Hucksters promised to unlock that hidden potential with methods "based on neuroscience," but all they really unlock is your wallet.
Two-thirds of the public and nearly half of science teachers mistakenly believe the 10% myth.
In the 1890s, William James, the father of American psychology, said, "Most of us do not meet our mental potential."
James meant this as a challenge, not an indictment of scant brain usage.
But the misunderstanding stuck.
Also, scientists couldn't figure out for a long time the purpose of our massive frontal lobes or broad areas of the parietal lobe.
Damage didn't cause motor or sensory deficits, so authorities concluded they didn't do anything.
For decades, these parts were called silent areas, their function elusive.
We've since learned that they underscore executive and integrative ability, without which, we would hardly be human.
They are crucial to abstract reasoning, planning, weighing decisions and flexibly adapting to circumstances.
The idea that 9/10 of your brain sits idly by in your skull looks silly when we calculate how the brain uses energy.
Rodent and canine brains consume 5% of total body energy.
Monkey brains use 10%.
An adult human brain, which accounts for only 2% of the body's mass, consumes 20% of daily glucose burned.
In children, that figure is 50%, and in infants, 60%.
This is far more than expected for their relative brain sizes, which scale in proportion to body size.
Human ones weigh 1.5 kilograms, elephant brains 5 kg, and whale brains 9 kg, yet on a per weight basis, humans pack in more neurons than any other species.
This dense packing is what makes us so smart.
There is a trade-off between body size and the number of neurons a primate, including us, can sustain.
A 25 kg ape has to eat 8 hours a day to uphold a brain with 53 billion neurons.
The invention of cooking, one and half million years ago, gave us a huge advantage.
Cooked food is rendered soft and predigested outside of the body.
Our guts more easily absorb its energy.
Cooking frees up time and provides more energy than if we ate food stuffs raw and so we can sustain brains with 86 billion densely packed neurons.
40% more than the ape.
Here's how it works.
Half the calories a brain burns go towards simply keeping the structure intact by pumping sodium and potassium ions across membranes to maintain an electrical charge.
To do this, the brain has to be an energy hog.
It consumes an astounding 3.4 x 10^21 ATP molecules per minute, ATP being the coal of the body's furnace.
The high cost of maintaining resting potentials in all 86 billion neurons means that little energy is left to propel signals down axons and across synapses, the nerve discharges that actually get things done.
Even if only a tiny percentage of neurons fired in a given region at any one time, the energy burden of generating spikes over the entire brain would be unsustainable.
Here's where energy efficiency comes in.
Letting just a small proportion of cells signal at any one time, known as sparse coding, uses the least energy, but carries the most information.
Because the small number of signals have thousands of possible paths by which to distribute themselves.
A drawback of sparse coding within a huge number of neurons is its cost.
Worse, if a big proportion of cells never fire, then they are superfluous and evolution should have jettisoned them long ago.
The solution is to find the optimum proportion of cells that the brain can have active at once.
For maximum efficiency, between 1% and 16% of cells should be active at any given moment.
This is the energy limit we have to live with in order to be conscious at all.
The need to conserve resources is the reason most of the brain's operations must happen outside of consciousness.
It's why multitasking is a fool's errand.
We simply lack the energy to do two things at once, let alone three or five.
When we try, we do each task less well than if we had given it our full attention.
The numbers are against us.
Your brain is already smart and powerful.
So powerful that it needs a lot of power to stay powerful.
And so smart that it has built in an energy-efficiency plan.
So don't let a fraudulent myth make you guilty about your supposedly lazy brain.
Guilt would be a waste of energy.
After all this, don't you realize it's dumb to waste mental energy?
You have billions of power-hungry neurons to maintain.
So hop to it!
Roy Price is a man that most of you have probably never heard about, even though he may have been responsible for 22 somewhat mediocre minutes of your life on April 19, 2013.
He may have also been responsible for 22 very entertaining minutes, but not very many of you.
And all of that goes back to a decision that Roy had to make about three years ago.
So you see, Roy Price is a senior executive with Amazon Studios.
That's the TV production company of Amazon.
He's 47 years old, slim, spiky hair, describes himself on Twitter as "movies, TV, technology, tacos."
And Roy Price has a very responsible job, because it's his responsibility to pick the shows, the original content that Amazon is going to make.
And of course that's a highly competitive space.
I mean, there are so many TV shows already out there, that Roy can't just choose any show.
He has to find shows that are really, really great.
So in other words, he has to find shows that are on the very right end of this curve here.
So this curve here is the rating distribution of about 2,500 TV shows on the website IMDB, and the rating goes from one to 10, and the height here shows you how many shows get that rating.
So if your show gets a rating of nine points or higher, that's a winner.
Then you have a top two percent show.
That's shows like "Breaking Bad," "Game of Thrones," "The Wire," so all of these shows that are addictive, whereafter you've watched a season, your brain is basically like, "Where can I get more of these episodes?"
That kind of show.
On the left side, just for clarity, here on that end, you have a show called "Toddlers and Tiaras" -- (Laughter) -- which should tell you enough about what's going on on that end of the curve.
Now, Roy Price is not worried about getting on the left end of the curve, because I think you would have to have some serious brainpower to undercut "Toddlers and Tiaras."
So what he's worried about is this middle bulge here, the bulge of average TV, you know, those shows that aren't really good or really bad, they don't really get you excited.
So he needs to make sure that he's really on the right end of this.
So the pressure is on, and of course it's also the first time that Amazon is even doing something like this, so Roy Price does not want to take any chances.
He wants to engineer success.
He needs a guaranteed success, and so what he does is, he holds a competition.
So he takes a bunch of ideas for TV shows, and from those ideas, through an evaluation, they select eight candidates for TV shows, and then he just makes the first episode of each one of these shows and puts them online for free for everyone to watch.
And so when Amazon is giving out free stuff, you're going to take it, right?
So millions of viewers are watching those episodes.
What they don't realize is that, while they're watching their shows, actually, they are being watched.
They are being watched by Roy Price and his team, who record everything.
They record when somebody presses play, when somebody presses pause, what parts they skip, what parts they watch again.
So they collect millions of data points, because they want to have those data points to then decide which show they should make.
And sure enough, so they collect all the data, they do all the data crunching, and an answer emerges, and the answer is, "Amazon should do a sitcom about four Republican US Senators."
They did that show.
So does anyone know the name of the show?
(Audience: "Alpha House.") Yes, "Alpha House," but it seems like not too many of you here remember that show, actually, because it didn't turn out that great.
It's actually just an average show, actually -- literally, in fact, because the average of this curve here is at 7.4, and "Alpha House" lands at 7.5, so a slightly above average show, but certainly not what Roy Price and his team were aiming for.
Meanwhile, however, at about the same time, at another company, another executive did manage to land a top show using data analysis, and his name is Ted, Ted Sarandos, who is the Chief Content Officer of Netflix, and just like Roy, he's on a constant mission to find that great TV show, and he uses data as well to do that, except he does it a little bit differently.
So instead of holding a competition, what he did -- and his team of course -- was they looked at all the data they already had about Netflix viewers, you know, the ratings they give their shows, the viewing histories, what shows people like, and so on.
And then they use that data to discover all of these little bits and pieces about the audience: what kinds of shows they like, what kind of producers, what kind of actors.
And once they had all of these pieces together, they took a leap of faith, and they decided to license not a sitcom about four Senators but a drama series about a single Senator.
You guys know the show?
(Laughter) Yes, "House of Cards," and Netflix of course, nailed it with that show, at least for the first two seasons.
(Laughter) (Applause) "House of Cards" gets a 9.1 rating on this curve, so it's exactly where they wanted it to be.
Now, the question of course is, what happened here?
So you have two very competitive, data-savvy companies.
They connect all of these millions of data points, and then it works beautifully for one of them, and it doesn't work for the other one.
So why?
Because logic kind of tells you that this should be working all the time.
I mean, if you're collecting millions of data points on a decision you're going to make, then you should be able to make a pretty good decision.
You have 200 years of statistics to rely on.
You're amplifying it with very powerful computers.
The least you could expect is good TV, right?
And if data analysis does not work that way, then it actually gets a little scary, because we live in a time where we're turning to data more and more to make very serious decisions that go far beyond TV.
Does anyone here know the company Multi-Health Systems?
No one. OK, that's good actually.
OK, so Multi-Health Systems is a software company, and I hope that nobody here in this room ever comes into contact with that software, because if you do, it means you're in prison.
(Laughter) If someone here in the US is in prison, and they apply for parole, then it's very likely that data analysis software from that company will be used in determining whether to grant that parole.
So it's the same principle as Amazon and Netflix, but now instead of deciding whether a TV show is going to be good or bad, you're deciding whether a person is going to be good or bad.
And mediocre TV, 22 minutes, that can be pretty bad, but more years in prison, I guess, even worse.
And unfortunately, there is actually some evidence that this data analysis, despite having lots of data, does not always produce optimum results.
And that's not because a company like Multi-Health Systems doesn't know what to do with data.
Even the most data-savvy companies get it wrong.
Yes, even Google gets it wrong sometimes.
In 2009, Google announced that they were able, with data analysis, to predict outbreaks of influenza, the nasty kind of flu, by doing data analysis on their Google searches.
And it worked beautifully, and it made a big splash in the news, including the pinnacle of scientific success: a publication in the journal "Nature."
It worked beautifully for year after year after year, until one year it failed.
And nobody could even tell exactly why.
It just didn't work that year, and of course that again made big news, including now a retraction of a publication from the journal "Nature."
So even the most data-savvy companies, Amazon and Google, they sometimes get it wrong.
And despite all those failures, data is moving rapidly into real-life decision-making -- into the workplace, law enforcement, medicine.
So we should better make sure that data is helping.
Now, personally I've seen a lot of this struggle with data myself, because I work in computational genetics, which is also a field where lots of very smart people are using unimaginable amounts of data to make pretty serious decisions like deciding on a cancer therapy or developing a drug.
And over the years, I've noticed a sort of pattern or kind of rule, if you will, about the difference between successful decision-making with data and unsuccessful decision-making, and I find this a pattern worth sharing, and it goes something like this.
So whenever you're solving a complex problem, you're doing essentially two things.
The first one is, you take that problem apart into its bits and pieces so that you can deeply analyze those bits and pieces, and then of course you do the second part.
You put all of these bits and pieces back together again to come to your conclusion.
And sometimes you have to do it over again, but it's always those two things: taking apart and putting back together again.
And now the crucial thing is that data and data analysis is only good for the first part.
Data and data analysis, no matter how powerful, can only help you taking a problem apart and understanding its pieces.
It's not suited to put those pieces back together again and then to come to a conclusion.
There's another tool that can do that, and we all have it, and that tool is the brain.
If there's one thing a brain is good at, it's taking bits and pieces back together again, even when you have incomplete information, and coming to a good conclusion, especially if it's the brain of an expert.
And that's why I believe that Netflix was so successful, because they used data and brains where they belong in the process.
They use data to first understand lots of pieces about their audience that they otherwise wouldn't have been able to understand at that depth, but then the decision to take all these bits and pieces and put them back together again and make a show like "House of Cards," that was nowhere in the data.
Ted Sarandos and his team made that decision to license that show, which also meant, by the way, that they were taking a pretty big personal risk with that decision.
And Amazon, on the other hand, they did it the wrong way around.
They used data all the way to drive their decision-making, first when they held their competition of TV ideas, then when they selected "Alpha House" to make as a show.
Which of course was a very safe decision for them, because they could always point at the data, saying, "This is what the data tells us."
But it didn't lead to the exceptional results that they were hoping for.
So data is of course a massively useful tool to make better decisions, but I believe that things go wrong when data is starting to drive those decisions.
No matter how powerful, data is just a tool, and to keep that in mind, I find this device here quite useful.
Many of you will ...
(Laughter) Before there was data, this was the decision-making device to use.
(Laughter) Many of you will know this.
This toy here is called the Magic 8 Ball, and it's really amazing, because if you have a decision to make, a yes or no question, all you have to do is you shake the ball, and then you get an answer -- "Most Likely" -- right here in this window in real time.
I'll have it out later for tech demos.
(Laughter) Now, the thing is, of course -- so I've made some decisions in my life where, in hindsight, I should have just listened to the ball.
But, you know, of course, if you have the data available, you want to replace this with something much more sophisticated, like data analysis to come to a better decision.
But that does not change the basic setup.
So the ball may get smarter and smarter and smarter, but I believe it's still on us to make the decisions if we want to achieve something extraordinary, on the right end of the curve.
And I find that a very encouraging message, in fact, that even in the face of huge amounts of data, it still pays off to make decisions, to be an expert in what you're doing and take risks.
Because in the end, it's not data, it's risks that will land you on the right end of the curve.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the early 1960s, Dick Fosbury tried his hand at almost every sport, but never excelled at anything, until, at the age of 16, he turned to the high jump.
But when he couldn't compete against the strong athletes at his college using the standard high jump techniques of the time, Fosbury tried to jump a different way: backwards.
Instead of jumping with his face towards the bar, bringing each leg over in the traditional straddle method, he jumped with his back towards the bar.
Fosbury improved his record by over half a foot, and left his coaches amazed by this strange new style of high jumping.
During the next few years, Fosbury perfected his high jump style, won the U.S. National trials, and assured his place in the 1968 Olympics in Mexico.
In the Olympic Games, Fosbury amazed the world with his new technique, winning a gold metal with an Olympic record leap of 2.24 meters.
By the next Olympic Games, almost all of the competing of high jumpers had adopted what came to be known as the Fosbury Flop.
What's the secret behind the technique?
It lies in a physics concept called the center of mass.
For every object, we can locate the average position of all of its mass by taking into account how the mass is spread around the object.
For instance, the center of mass of a flat, rectangular object of uniform density will be in the intersection of both diagonals, in equal distance from each corner.
We can find the center of mass for other objects by similar calculations, or by finding the object's balancing point, which lies right underneath its center of mass.
Try balancing a broom by holding it and slowly bringing your hands together until they meet.
This balancing point lies right underneath the broom's center of mass.
We humans also have a center of mass.
When most people stand up, their center of mass is around the belly, but what happens to your center of mass when you lift your hands in the air?
Your center of mass moves upwards.
It moves all the time as you move through the day, based on how your body is positioned.
It can even move outside of your body.
When you bend forward, your center of mass is located below your bent belly in a place where there is no mass at all.
Weird to think about, but that's the average position of all your mass.
Many objects' center of mass are outside their bodies.
Think of doughnuts or boomerangs.
Now look at the Fosbury Flop, and follow the position of the center of mass of the jumper.
The jumper runs very fast, so he can divert his horizontal velocity to vertical velocity, and jumps.
Wait for it...there.
Look at the jumper's center of mass as his body bends backward.
It's below the bar.
That is the secret behind the jump.
With the old, pre-Fosbury techniques, the jumper had to apply enough force to lift his center of mass above the bar by a few inches in order to clear it.
The Fosbury Flopper doesn't have to do that.
The genius of the Fosbury Flop is that the jumper can apply the same amount of force, but raise his body much higher than before.
That means he can raise the bar so high that even when his center of mass can't go any higher, his arching body can.
Fosbury's technique brought the high jump to new heights by splitting the jumper's body away from his center of mass, giving it that much more room to clear higher and higher bars.
So the Fosbury Flop may be sports history's only great leap forward, that is also a great leap backward.
All the material objects around you are composed of submicroscopic units we call molecules.
And molecules in turn are composed of individual atoms.
Molecules frequently break apart and then form new molecules.
On the other hand, virtually all the atoms you come in to contact with through the course of your life, the ones in the ground beneath you, the air you breath, the food you eat, those that make up every living thing, including you, have existed for billions of years and were created in places very unlike our planet.
How those atoms came about is what I want to share with you.
It all started 14 billion years ago with an event we call The Big Bang, which resulted in a universe consisting of gas alone.
There were no stars and no planets.
The gas was made up only of atoms belonging to the simplest elements.
It was about 75 percent hydrogen and almost all the rest was helium.
No elements like carbon, oxygen or nitrogen existed.
No iron, silver or gold.
In some places, the density of this gas was slightly higher than in others.
Due to gravity, those places attracted even more gas, which further strengthened the pull of gravity, which then drew more gas in, and so on.
Eventually, large dense gas balls formed, shrinking under their own gravity and consequently heating up on the inside.
At some point, the core of such a ball gets hot enough that nuclear fusion occurs.
Hydrogen atoms smash together to form helium, accompanied by a great release of energy, strong enough to counteract the shrinking force of the gravity.
When the energy pushing out from the fusion reactions matches the gravity pulling all the gas inwards, an equilibrium occurs.
From this a star is born.
Over its lifetime, the fusion reactions in the core of a massive star will produce not only helium, but also carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and all the other elements in the periodic table up to iron.
But eventually, the core's fuel runs out, leaving it to collapse completely.
That causes an unbelievably powerful explosion we call a supernova.
Now there are two things to note about how supernovas create elements.
First, this explosion releases so much energy that fusion goes wild forming elements with atoms even heavier than iron like silver, gold and uranium.
Second, all the elements that had been accumulating in the core of the star, like carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, iron, as well as all of those formed in the supernova explosion, are ejected in to interstellar space where they mix with the gas that's already there.
History then repeats itself.
Gas clouds, now containing many elements besides the original hydrogen and helium, have higher density areas that attract more matter, and so on.
As before, new stars result.
Our sun was born this way about 5 billion years ago.
That means that the gas it arose from had itself been enriched with many elements from supernova explosions since the universe began.
So that's how the sun wound up with all the elements.
It's still mostly hydrogen at 71 percent, with most of the rest being helium at 27 percent.
But bear in mind that while the first stars were made up of hydrogen and helium alone, the remaining elements in the periodic table make up two percent of the sun.
And what about Earth?
Planets form as an incidental process to star formation out of the same gas cloud as the star itself.
Small planets like ours don't have enough gravity to hold on to much hydrogen or helium gas since both of those are very light.
So, even though carbon, nitrogen, oxygen and so on made up only two percent of the gas cloud from which Earth was formed, these heavier elements form the bulk of our planet and everything on it.
Think about this: with the exception of hydrogen and some helium, the ground you walk on, the air you breath, you, everything is made of atoms that were created inside stars.
When scientists first worked this out over the first half of the 20th Century, the famous astronomer Harlow Shapley commented, "We are brothers of the boulders, cousins of the clouds."
Our story is about a girl named Iris.
Iris is very sensitive.
(Bird cawing) So much that she is always in tears.
She cries when she's sad, when she's happy, (Godzilla roars) and even tears up when things just get to her.
She has special lacrimal glands to make new tears and special tubes, called lacrimal puncta, to drain old ones away.
And she cries so much that she goes through ten ounces of tears per day, thirty gallons a year!
In fact, if you look closely, you'll see that she's crying a little bit all the time.
The basal tears that Iris constantly produces form a thin coating of three layers that cover her and keep dirt and debris away.
Right next to Iris is the mucus layer, which keeps the whole thing fastened to her.
On top of it is the aqueous layer, which keeps Iris hydrated, repels invasive bacteria, and protects her skin, or cornea, from damage.
And, finally, there is the lipid layer, an oily outer film that keeps the surface smooth for Iris to see through, and prevents the other layers from evaporating.
Normally, Iris goes about her day without really noticing the basal tears doing their thing.
That's kind of their whole point.
But one day, she meets a girl named Onion.
Iris is immediately smitten.
Onion looks gorgeous in her bright purple jacket, and she smells terrific.
So, Iris invites Onion to her house for dinner.
But when she comes in and takes off her jacket, something terrible happens.
You see, when Onion's jacket is removed, a chemical reaction happens, converting the sulfoxides that make her smell so great into sulfenic acid, which then becomes a nasty substance with a long name: syn-Propanethial S-oxide.
The gas stings Iris, and suddenly, she can't help it, she starts weeping uncontrollably.
These reflex tears are different from the basal tears that Iris is used to.
Because they're designed to wash away harmful substances, or particles, they're released in much larger amounts, and their aqueous layer contains more antibodies to stop any microorganisms that may be trying to get in, as well.
Both Iris and Onion are devastated.
They know they can't continue their relationship if Iris is going to hurt and cry every time Onion takes off her jacket.
So, they decide to break up.
As Onion walks out the door, Iris stops crying.
And immediately starts again.
Only now, she's not crying reflex tears but emotional tears.
When someone is either too sad or too happy, it feels like a loss of control, which can be dangerous.
So, emotional tears are sent in to stabilize the mood as quickly as possible, along with other physical reactions, such as an increased heart rate and slower breathing.
But scientists still aren't sure exactly how or why the tears themselves are helpful.
They may be a social mechanism to elicit sympathy or show submission.
But some studies have also found that emotional tears contain higher levels of stress hormones, such as ACTH and enkephalin, an endorphin and natural pain killer.
In this case, emotional tears are also directly calming Iris down, as well as signaling her emotional state to others.
Sorry things didn't work out with Onion, Iris, but don't worry.
As long as you have all three kinds of tears working to keep you balanced and healthy, it will get better.
You'll see.
Our grandparents' generation created an amazing system of canals and reservoirs that made it possible for people to live in places where there wasn't a lot of water.
For example, during the Great Depression, they created the Hoover Dam, which in turn, created Lake Mead and made it possible for the cities of Las Vegas and Phoenix and Los Angeles to provide water for people who lived in a really dry place.
In the 20th century, we literally spent trillions of dollars building infrastructure to get water to our cities.
In terms of economic development, it was a great investment.
But in the last decade, we've seen the combined effects of climate change, population growth and competition for water resources threaten these vital lifelines and water resources.
This figure shows you the change in the lake level of Lake Mead that happened in the last 15 years.
You can see starting around the year 2000, the lake level started to drop.
And it was dropping at such a rate that it would have left the drinking water intakes for Las Vegas high and dry.
The city became so concerned about this that they recently constructed a new drinking water intake structure that they referred to as the "Third Straw" to pull water out of the greater depths of the lake.
The challenges associated with providing water to a modern city are not restricted to the American Southwest.
In the year 2007, the third largest city in Australia, Brisbane, came within 6 months of running out of water.
A similar drama is playing out today in São Paulo, Brazil, where the main reservoir for the city has gone from being completely full in 2010, to being nearly empty today as the city approaches the 2016 Summer Olympics.
For those of us who are fortunate enough to live in one of the world's great cities, we've never truly experienced the effects of a catastrophic drought.
We like to complain about the navy showers we have to take.
We like our neighbors to see our dirty cars and our brown lawns.
But we've never really faced the prospect of turning on the tap and having nothing come out.
And that's because when things have gotten bad in the past, it's always been possible to expand a reservoir or dig a few more groundwater wells.
Well, in a time when all of the water resources are spoken for, it's not going to be possible to rely on this tried and true way of providing ourselves with water.
Some people think that we're going to solve the urban water problem by taking water from our rural neighbors.
But that's an approach that's fraught with political, legal and social dangers.
And even if we succeed in grabbing the water from our rural neighbors, we're just transferring the problem to someone else and there's a good chance it will come back and bite us in the form of higher food prices and damage to the aquatic ecosystems that already rely upon that water.
I think that there's a better way to solve our urban water crisis and I think that's to open up four new local sources of water that I liken to faucets.
If we can make smart investments in these new sources of water in the coming years, we can solve our urban water problem and decrease the likelihood that we'll ever run across the effects of a catastrophic drought.
Now, if you told me 20 years ago that a modern city could exist without a supply of imported water, I probably would have dismissed you as an unrealistic and uninformed dreamer.
But my own experiences working with some of the world's most water-starved cities in the last decades have shown me that we have the technologies and the management skills to actually transition away from imported water, and that's what I want to tell you about tonight.
The first source of local water supply that we need to develop to solve our urban water problem will flow with the rainwater that falls in our cities.
One of the great tragedies of urban development is that as our cities grew, we started covering all the surfaces with concrete and asphalt.
And when we did that, we had to build storm sewers to get the water that fell on the cities out before it could cause flooding, and that's a waste of a vital water resource.
Let me give you an example.
This figure here shows you the volume of water that could be collected in the city of San Jose if they could harvest the stormwater that fell within the city limits.
You can see from the intersection of the blue line and the black dotted line that if San Jose could just capture half of the water that fell within the city, they'd have enough water to get them through an entire year.
Now, I know what some of you are probably thinking.
"The answer to our problem is to start building great big tanks and attaching them to the downspouts of our roof gutters, rainwater harvesting."
Now, that's an idea that might work in some places.
But if you live in a place where it mainly rains in the winter time and most of the water demand is in the summertime, it's not a very cost-effective way to solve a water problem.
And if you experience the effects of a multiyear drought, like California's currently experiencing, you just can't build a rainwater tank that's big enough to solve your problem.
I think there's a lot more practical way to harvest the stormwater and the rainwater that falls in our cities, and that's to capture it and let it percolate into the ground.
After all, many of our cities are sitting on top of a natural water storage system that can accommodate huge volumes of water.
For example, historically, Los Angeles has obtained about a third of its water supply from a massive aquifer that underlies the San Fernando Valley.
Now, when you look at the water that comes off of your roof and runs off of your lawn and flows down the gutter, you might say to yourself, "Do I really want to drink that stuff?"
Well, the answer is you don't want to drink it until it's been treated a little bit.
And so the challenge that we face in urban water harvesting is to capture the water, clean the water and get it underground.
And that's exactly what the city of Los Angeles is doing with a new project that they're building in Burbank, California.
This figure here shows the stormwater park that they're building by hooking a series of stormwater collection systems, or storm sewers, and routing that water into an abandoned gravel quarry.
The water that's captured in the quarry is slowly passed through a man-made wetland, and then it goes into that ball field there and percolates into the ground, recharging the drinking water aquifer of the city.
And in the process of passing through the wetland and percolating through the ground, the water encounters microbes that live on the surfaces of the plants and the surfaces of the soil, and that purifies the water.
And if the water's still not clean enough to drink after it's been through this natural treatment process, the city can treat it again when they pump if back out of the groundwater aquifers before they deliver it to people to drink.
The second tap that we need to open up to solve our urban water problem will flow with the wastewater that comes out of our sewage treatment plants.
Now, many of you are probably familiar with the concept of recycled water.
You've probably seen signs like this that tell you that the shrubbery and the highway median and the local golf course is being watered with water that used to be in a sewage treatment plant.
We've been doing this for a couple of decades now.
But what we're learning from our experience is that this approach is much more expensive that we expected it to be.
Because once we build the first few water recycling systems close to the sewage treatment plant, we have to build longer and longer pipe networks to get that water to where it needs to go.
And that becomes prohibitive in terms of cost.
What we're finding is that a much more cost-effective and practical way of recycling wastewater is to turn treated wastewater into drinking water through a two-step process.
In the first step in this process we pressurize the water and pass it through a reverse osmosis membrane: a thin, permeable plastic membrane that allows water molecules to pass through but traps and retains the salts, the viruses and the organic chemicals that might be present in the wastewater.
In the second step in the process, we add a small amount of hydrogen peroxide and shine ultraviolet light on the water.
The ultraviolet light cleaves the hydrogen peroxide into two parts that are called hydroxyl radicals, and these hydroxyl radicals are very potent forms of oxygen that break down most organic chemicals.
After the water's been through this two-stage process, it's safe to drink.
I know, I've been studying recycled water using every measurement technique known to modern science for the past 15 years.
We've detected some chemicals that can make it through the first step in the process, but by the time we get to the second step, the advanced oxidation process, we rarely see any chemicals present.
And that's in stark contrast to the taken-for-granted water supplies that we regularly drink all the time.
There's another way we can recycle water.
This is an engineered treatment wetland that we recently built on the Santa Ana River in Southern California.
The treatment wetland receives water from a part of the Santa Ana River that in the summertime consists almost entirely of wastewater effluent from cities like Riverside and San Bernardino.
The water comes into our treatment wetland, it's exposed to sunlight and algae and those break down the organic chemicals, remove the nutrients and inactivate the waterborne pathogens.
The water gets put back in the Santa Ana River, it flows down to Anaheim, gets taken out at Anaheim and percolated into the ground, and becomes the drinking water of the city of Anaheim, completing the trip from the sewers of Riverside County to the drinking water supply of Orange County.
Now, you might think that this idea of drinking wastewater is some sort of futuristic fantasy or not commonly done.
Well, in California, we already recycle about 40 billion gallons a year of wastewater through the two-stage advanced treatment process I was telling you about.
That's enough water to be the supply of about a million people if it were their sole water supply.
The third tap that we need to open up will not be a tap at all, it will be a kind of virtual tap, it will be the water conservation that we manage to do.
And the place where we need to think about water conservation is outdoors because in California and other modern American cities, about half of our water use happens outdoors.
In the current drought, we've seen that it's possible to have our lawns survive and our plants survive with about half as much water.
So there's no need to start painting concrete green and putting in Astroturf and buying cactuses.
We can have California-friendly landscaping with soil moisture detectors and smart irrigation controllers and have beautiful green landscapes in our cities.
The fourth and final water tap that we need to open up to solve our urban water problem will flow with desalinated seawater.
Now, I know what you probably heard people say about seawater desalination.
"It's a great thing to do if you have lots of oil, not a lot of water and you don't care about climate change."
Seawater desalination is energy-intensive no matter how you slice it.
But that characterization of seawater desalination as being a nonstarter is hopelessly out of date.
We've made tremendous progress in seawater desalination in the past two decades.
This picture shows you the largest seawater desalination plant in the Western hemisphere that's currently being built north of San Diego.
Compared to the seawater desalination plant that was built in Santa Barbara 25 years ago, this treatment plant will use about half the energy to produce a gallon of water.
But just because seawater desalination has become less energy-intensive, doesn't mean we should start building desalination plants everywhere.
Among the different choices we have, it's probably the most energy-intensive and potentially environmentally damaging of the options to create a local water supply.
So there it is.
With these four sources of water, we can move away from our reliance on imported water.
Through reform in the way we landscape our surfaces and our properties, we can reduce outdoor water use by about 50 percent, thereby increasing the water supply by 25 percent.
We can recycle the water that makes it into the sewer, thereby increasing our water supply by 40 percent.
And we can make up the difference through a combination of stormwater harvesting and seawater desalination.
So, let's create a water supply that will be able to withstand any of the challenges that climate change throws at us in the coming years.
Let's create a water supply that uses local sources and leaves more water in the environment for fish and for food.
Let's create a water system that's consistent with out environmental values.
And let's do it for our children and our grandchildren and let's tell them this is the system that they have to take care of in the future because it's our last chance to create a new kind of water system.
Thank you very much for your attention.
(Applause)
Why does your mouth feel like it's on fire when you eat a spicy pepper?
And how do you soothe the burn?
Why does wasabi make your eyes water?
And how spicy is the spiciest spice?
Let's back up a bit.
First, what is spiciness?
Even though we often say that something tastes spicy, it's not actually a taste, like sweet or salty or sour.
Instead, what's really happening is that certain compounds in spicy foods activate the type of sensory neurons called polymodal nociceptors.
You have these all over your body, including your mouth and nose, and they're the same receptors that are activated by extreme heat.
So, when you eat a chili pepper, your mouth feels like it's burning because your brain actually thinks it's burning.
The opposite happens when you eat something with menthol in it.
The cool, minty compound is activating your cold receptors.
When these heat-sensitive receptors are activated, your body thinks it's in contact with a dangerous heat source and reacts accordingly.
This is why you start to sweat, and your heart starts beating faster.
The peppers have elicited the same fight-or-flight response with which your body reacts to most threats.
But you may have noticed that not all spicy foods are spicy in the same way.
And the difference lies in the types of compounds involved.
The capsaicin and piperine, found in black pepper and chili peppers, are made up of larger, heavier molecules called alkylamides, and those mostly stay in your mouth.
Mustard, horseradish, and wasabi are made up of smaller molecules, called isothiocyanates, that easily float up into your sinuses.
This is why chili peppers burn your mouth, and wasabi burns your nose.
The standard measure of a food's spiciness is its rating on the Scoville scale, which measures how much its capsaicin content can be diluted before the heat is no longer detectable to humans.
A sweet bell pepper gets 0 Scoville heat units, while Tabasco sauce clocks in between 1,200-2,400 units.
The race to create the hottest pepper is a constant battle, but two peppers generally come out on top: The Trinidad Moruga Scorpion and the Carolina Reaper.
These peppers measure between 1.5 and 2 million Scoville heat units, which is about half the units found in pepper spray.
So, why would anyone want to eat something that causes such high levels of pain?
Nobody really knows when or why humans started eating hot peppers.
Archaeologists have found spices like mustard along with human artifacts dating as far back as 23,000 years ago.
But they don't know whether the spices were used for food or medication or just decoration.
More recently, a 6,000 year old crockpot, lined with charred fish and meat, also contained mustard.
One theory says that humans starting adding spices to food to kill off bacteria.
And some studies show that spice developed mostly in warmer climates where microbes also happen to be more prevalent.
But why we continue to subject ourselves to spicy food today is still a bit of a mystery.
For some people, eating spicy food is like riding rollercoasters; they enjoy the ensuing thrill, even if the immediate sensation is unpleasant.
Some studies have even shown that those who like to eat hot stuff are more likely to enjoy other adrenaline-rich activities, like gambling.
The taste for spicy food may even be genetic.
And if you're thinking about training a bit, to up your tolerance for spice, know this: According to some studies, the pain doesn't get any better.
You just get tougher.
In fact, researchers have found that people who like to eat spicy foods don't rate the burn any less painful than those who don't.
They just seem to like the pain more.
So, torment your heat receptors all you want, but remember, when it comes to spicy food, you're going to get burned.
There is an environmental mystery afoot, and it begins with a seemingly trivial detail that reveals a disaster of global proportions.
One day, you notice that the honey you slather on your morning toast is more expensive.
Instead of switching to jam, you investigate the reason for the price hike.
What you find is shocking.
The number of domesticated honeybees in the US has been decreasing at an alarming rate.
This decline appears too big to be explained by the usual causes of bee death alone: disease, parasites or starvation.
A typical crime scene has almost no adult bees left in the hive, except, perhaps, a lonely queen and a few other survivors.
It's full of untouched food stores and a brood of unborn larvae, suggesting that the adults vacated without waiting for them to hatch.
But what's particularly eerie is that there's no tell-tale mass of dead or dying bees nearby.
Either they have forgotten their way back to the hive, or they have simply disappeared.
These mysterious disappearances aren't new.
Humans have been collecting honey for centuries.
But it wasn't until European settlers in the 1600's introduced the subspecies, Apis mellifera, that we domesticated bees.
Since the 19th century, beekeepers have reported occasional mass disappearances, giving them enigmatic names like disappearing disease, spring dwindle disease and autumn collapse.
But when in 2006 such losses were found to affect more than half of all hives in the US, the phenomenon got a new name: colony collapse disorder.
The most frightening thing about this mystery isn't that we'll have to go back to using regular sugar in our tea.
We farm bees for their honey, but they also pollinate our crops on an industrial scale, generating over 1/3 of America's food production this way.
So, how can we find the culprit behind this calamity?
Here are three of the possible offenders.
Exhibit A: Pests and Disease.
Most infamous is the varroa mite, a minuscule red pest that not only invades colonies and feeds on bees, but also transfers pathogens that stunt bee growth and shortens their life span.
Exhibit B: Genetics.
The queen is the core of a healthy hive.
But nowadays, the millions of queen bees distributed in commercial hives are bred from just a few original queens, which raises the worry about a lack of genetic diversity which could weaken bees' defenses against pathogens and pests.
Exhibit C: Chemicals.
Pesticides used both on commercial beehives and agricultural crops to ward off parasites could be getting into the food and water that honeybees consume.
Researchers have even found that some pesticides damage the honeybees' homing abilities.
So we have a file full of clues but no clear leads.
In reality, scientists, the actual detectives on this case, face disagreement over what causes colony collapse disorder.
For now, we assume that several factors are the cause.
Honeybees aren't necessarily in danger of extinction, but fewer bees overall means less pollination and higher food costs, so it's crucial that scientists solve the case of the vanishing bees.
Because while having less honey might be a buzzkill, crop shortages are something that would truly sting.
If someone called you scum, you'd probably be offended, but scientifically, they might not be far off.
Have you ever thought about where your food comes from?
You might say it comes from plants, animals, or even fungi, but you'd probably rather not think about the rotting organisms and poop that feed those plants, animals, and fungi.
So really, you and most of the matter in your body are just two or three degrees of separation from things like pond scum.
All species in an ecosystem, from the creatures in a coral reef to the fish in a lake to the lions on the savannah, are directly or indirectly nourished by dead stuff.
Most of the organic matter in our bodies, if we trace it back far enough, comes from CO2 and water through photosynthesis.
Plants use the energy from sunlight to transform carbon dioxide and water from the environment into glucose and oxygen.
That glucose is then transformed into more complex organic molecules to form leaves, stems, roots, fruit, and so on.
The energy stored in these organic molecules supports the food chains with which we're familiar.
You've probably seen illustrations like this or this.
These green food chains start with living plants at their base.
But in real-life terrestrial ecosystems, less than 10% of plant matter is eaten while it's still alive.
What about the other 90?
Well, just look at the ground on an autumn day.
Living plants shed dead body parts: fallen leaves, broken branches, and even underground roots.
Many plants are lucky enough to go their whole lives without being eaten, eventually dying and leaving remains.
All of these uneaten, undigested, and dead plant parts, that 90% of terrestrial plant matter?
That becomes detritus, the base of what we call the brown food chain, which looks more like this.
What happens to plants also happens to all other organisms up the food chain: some are eaten alive, but most are eaten only when they're dead and rotting.
And all along this food chain, living things shed organic matter and expel digestive waste before dying and leaving their remains to decay.
All that death sounds grim, right?
But it's not.
All detritus is ultimately consumed by microbes and other scavengers, so it actually forms the base of the brown food chain that supports many other organisms, including us.
Scientists are learning that this detritus is an unexpectedly huge energy source, fueling most natural ecosystems.
But the interactions within an ecosystem are even more complex than that.
What a food chain really represents is a single pathway of energy flow.
And within any ecosystem, many of these flows are linked together to form a rich network of interactions, or food web, with dead matter supporting that network at every step.
The resulting food web is so connected that almost every species is no more than two degrees from detritus, even us humans.
You probably don't eat rotting things, poop, or pond scum directly, but your food sources probably do.
Many animals we eat either feed directly on detritus themselves, like pork, poultry, mushrooms, shellfish, or catfish and other bottom feeders, or they are fed animal by-products.
So, if you're thinking nature is full of waste, you're right.
But one organism's garbage is another's gold, and all that rotting dead stuff ultimately provides the energy that nourishes us and most of life on Earth, as it passes through the food web.
Now that's some food for thought.
Pick a card, any card.
Actually, just pick up all of them and take a look.
This standard 52-card deck has been used for centuries.
Everyday, thousands just like it are shuffled in casinos all over the world, the order rearranged each time.
And yet, every time you pick up a well-shuffled deck like this one, you are almost certainly holding an arrangement of cards that has never before existed in all of history.
How can this be?
The answer lies in how many different arrangements of 52 cards, or any objects, are possible.
Now, 52 may not seem like such a high number, but let's start with an even smaller one.
Say we have four people trying to sit in four numbered chairs.
How many ways can they be seated?
To start off, any of the four people can sit in the first chair.
One this choice is made, only three people remain standing.
After the second person sits down, only two people are left as candidates for the third chair.
And after the third person has sat down, the last person standing has no choice but to sit in the fourth chair.
If we manually write out all the possible arrangements, or permutations, it turns out that there are 24 ways that four people can be seated into four chairs, but when dealing with larger numbers, this can take quite a while.
So let's see if there's a quicker way.
Going from the beginning again, you can see that each of the four initial choices for the first chair leads to three more possible choices for the second chair, and each of those choices leads to two more for the third chair.
So instead of counting each final scenario individually, we can multiply the number of choices for each chair: four times three times two times one to achieve the same result of 24.
An interesting pattern emerges.
We start with the number of objects we're arranging, four in this case, and multiply it by consecutively smaller integers until we reach one.
This is an exciting discovery.
So exciting that mathematicians have chosen to symbolize this kind of calculation, known as a factorial, with an exclamation mark.
As a general rule, the factorial of any positive integer is calculated as the product of that same integer and all smaller integers down to one.
In our simple example, the number of ways four people can be arranged into chairs is written as four factorial, which equals 24.
So let's go back to our deck.
Just as there were four factorial ways of arranging four people, there are 52 factorial ways of arranging 52 cards.
Fortunately, we don't have to calculate this by hand.
Just enter the function into a calculator, and it will show you that the number of possible arrangements is 8.07 x 10^67, or roughly eight followed by 67 zeros.
Just how big is this number?
Well, if a new permutation of 52 cards were written out every second starting 13.8 billion years ago, when the Big Bang is thought to have occurred, the writing would still be continuing today and for millions of years to come.
In fact, there are more possible ways to arrange this simple deck of cards than there are atoms on Earth.
So the next time it's your turn to shuffle, take a moment to remember that you're holding something that may have never before existed and may never exist again.
Sugar is playing hide and seek with you.
You'd think it would be pretty easy for you to win, considering all the sugar in sodas, ice cream, candy, and big white bags labeled sugar.
People get about half of their added sugars from those drinks and treats, so it might seem like sugar is hiding in plain sight, but like someone in the witness protection program, the other half is hidden in places you'd least suspect.
Check the ingredients on ketchup, bologna, spaghetti sauce, soy milk, sports drinks, fish sticks, and peanut butter.
You'll find sugar hiding in most of those products.
In fact, you'll find added sugars in three-quarters of the more than 600,000 items available in grocery stores.
But how is sugar hiding?
Can't you just look on food labels?
It's not that easy.
Just like your friend Robert might go by Bob, Robby, Rob, Bobby, or Roberto, added sugar has a lot of aliases.
And by a lot, we don't mean five or six, try fifty-six.
There's brown rice syrup, barley malt, demerara, Florida Crystals, muscovado, and, of course, high fructose corn syrup, sometimes called HFCS, or corn sugar.
Even sugar's tricky nicknames have nicknames.
Grape or apple concentrate has the same effects on your body as its 55 sugary twins.
And even though organic evaporated cane juice sounds healthy, when you evaporate it, you get sugar!
Chemically speaking, it's all the same.
And even trickier, when multiple added types of sugars are used in one type of product, they get buried down in a long list of ingredients, so the sugar content might appear to be okay, but when you add them all together, sugar can be the single biggest ingredient.
Currently, the FDA doesn't suggest a recommended daily limit for sugar, so it's hard to tell if this 65 grams in a bottle of soda is a little or a lot.
But the World Health Organization recommends limiting sugar to just 5% of your total calories, or about 25 grams per day.
So, 65 grams is well over twice that amount.
But just what is sugar?
What's the difference between glucose and fructose?
Well, both are carbohydrates with the same chemical composition of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.
But they have very different structures and behave quite differently in our bodies.
Glucose is the best source of energy for nearly all organisms on Earth.
It can be metabolized by all organs in the body.
Fructose, on the other hand, is metabolized primarily in the liver, and when your liver gets overloaded with sweet, sweet fructose, the excess is metabolized to fat.
Fresh fruits actually contain fructose, but it's naturally occurring and doesn't cause an overload because the fiber in fruit slows its absorption.
This gives your liver the time it needs to do its job.
It's sugar that makes cookies chewy and candy crunchy.
It even turns bread crust a beautiful, golden brown.
It's also a great preservative; it doesn't spoil or evaporate, so the foods it's added to are easier to store and ship long distances and tend to be cheaper.
That's why sugar is hiding everywhere.
Actually, it might be easier to list the foods that added sugar isn't hiding in, things like: vegetables, eggs, meats, fish, fruit, raw nuts, even your kitchen sink.
Simply choosing water over soda, juices, and sports drinks is a great way to avoid hidden added sugar.
At the very least, try to pay attention to food labels, so you can keep your sugar intake at a healthy level.
Because in this game of hide and seek, every time you don't find added sugar, you win!
A few years ago, I got one of those spam emails.
And it managed to get through my spam filter.
I'm not quite sure how, but it turned up in my inbox, and it was from a guy called Solomon Odonkoh.
(Laughter) I know.
(Laughter) It went like this: it said, "Hello James Veitch, I have an interesting business proposal I want to share with you, Solomon."
Now, my hand was kind of hovering on the delete button, right?
I was looking at my phone. I thought, I could just delete this.
Or I could do what I think we've all always wanted to do.
(Laughter) And I said, "Solomon, Your email intrigues me."
(Laughter) (Applause) And the game was afoot.
He said, "Dear James Veitch, We shall be shipping Gold to you."
(Laughter) "You will earn 10% of any gold you distributes."
(Laughter) So I knew I was dealing with a professional.
(Laughter) I said, "How much is it worth?"
He said, "We will start with smaller quantity," -- I was like, aww -- and then he said, "of 25 kgs.
(Laughter) The worth should be about $2.5 million."
I said, "Solomon, if we're going to do it, let's go big.
(Applause) I can handle it. How much gold do you have?"
(Laughter) He said, "It is not a matter of how much gold I have, what matters is your capability of handling.
We can start with 50 kgs as trial shipment."
I said, "50 kgs?
There's no point doing this at all unless you're shipping at least a metric ton."
(Laughter) (Applause) He said, "What do you do for a living?"
(Laughter) I said, "I'm a hedge fund executive bank manager."
(Laughter) This isn't the first time I've shipped bullion, my friend, no no no.
Then I started to panic.
I was like, "Where are you based?"
I don't know about you, but I think if we're going via the postal service, it ought to be signed for.
He said, "It will not be easy to convince my company to do larger quantity shipment."
I said, "Solomon, I'm completely with you on this one.
I'm putting together a visual for you to take into the board meeting.
Hold tight."
(Laughter) This is what I sent Solomon.
(Laughter) (Applause) I don't know if we have any statisticians in the house, but there's definitely something going on.
(Laughter) I said, "Solomon, attached to this email you'll find a helpful chart.
I've had one of my assistants run the numbers.
(Laughter) We're ready for shipping as much gold as possible."
There's always a moment where they try to tug your heartstrings, and this was it for Solomon.
He said, "I will be so much happy if the deal goes well, because I'm going to get a very good commission as well."
And he said, "On RealEstate, what about you?"
I thought about it for a long time.
And I said, "One word; Hummus."
