On the dig, surrounded by emerald green rice paddies, I discovered an intact pot.
Flipping it over, I discovered a human thumbprint left by whoever made the vessel.
For a moment, time stood still.
It was because at that moment I realized, when we dig, we're digging for people, not things.
Never are we so present as when we are in the midst of the great past.
I can't tell you how many times I've stood in front of the Pyramids of Giza, and they leave me speechless.
I feel like the luckiest person in the world.
They're a monument to our human brilliance and everything that is possible.
Many cannot process their brilliance as human -- they think aliens built them.
But this is ridiculous.
All you need to do is get up close and personal, and see the hidden hand of man in the chisel marks left by the tools that built them.
The Great Pyramid of Giza was built one stone at a time with 2.3 million blocks, with incredible bureaucratic efficiency.
It is not the pyramids that stand the test of time; it is human ingenuity.
That is our shared human brilliance.
History may be cyclical, but we are singular.
I love what I do, because I learn that we haven't changed.
I get to read about mother-in-law jokes from Mesopotamia from 3,500 years ago.
(Laughter) I get to hear about neighbors cursing each other from 4,600 years ago in Egypt.
And my absolute favorite, from 3,300 years ago in Luxor: an inscription that describes schoolboys who cut class to go drinking.
(Laughter) Kids these days.
(Laughter) I get to see the most incredible architecture, see stunning sculptures -- I mean, this is basically a selfie in stone -- and see that we've always rocked serious bling.
And also, we've been posting on walls and obsessing about cats -- (Laughter) for thousands of years.
(Laughter) (Applause) Archaeologists are the cultural memory preservers and the spokespeople for the billions of people and the thousands of cultures that came before us.
Good science, imagination and a leap of faith are the trifecta we use to raise the dead.
In the last year, archaeologists have made incredible discoveries, including: new human ancestors from South Africa; tools from 3.3 million years ago -- these are the oldest tools ever discovered -- in Kenya.
And this, from a series of medical implements found from Blackbeard's ship from 1718.
What you're looking at is a medical tool used to treat syphilis.
Ouch!
(Laughter) For each of these, there are thousands of other incredibly important discoveries made by my colleagues, that do not make headlines.
However, I believe that the most important thing we do as archaeologists is acknowledge that past people existed and lived lives worth learning about.
Can you even imagine what the world would be like today if we acknowledged all human beings in this way?
So, on a dig, we have a challenge: it often looks like this.
You can't see anything.
Where are we going to start digging?
This is from a site south of Cairo.
Let's have a look from space.
Again, you can't really see much.
What you're looking at is a WorldView-3 satellite image, which has a .3 meter resolution.
This means that you can zoom in from 400 miles in space and see your tablets.
How do I know about this?
It's because I'm a space archaeologist.
Let me repeat that.
I am a space archaeologist.
This means -- (Applause) Thank you.
This means I use satellite images and process them using algorithms, and look at subtle differences in the light spectrum that indicate buried things under the ground that I get to go excavate and survey.
By the way -- NASA has a Space Archaeology program, so it's a real job.
(Laughter) So, let's have a look again.
We're back at the site just south of Cairo.
You can't see anything.
Keep your eye on the red rectangle.
When we process the image using algorithms -- think like a space-based CAT scan -- this is what you see.
This rectilinear form is an ancient tomb that is previously unknown and unexcavated, and you all are the first people to see it in thousands of years.
(Applause) I believe we have barely scratched the surface in terms of what's left to discover.
In the Egyptian Delta alone, we've excavated less than one-1000th of one percent of the total volume of Egyptian sites.
When you add to that the thousands of other sites my team and I have discovered, what we thought we knew pales in comparison to what we have left to discover.
When you look at the incredible work that my colleagues are doing all around the world and what they're finding, I believe that there are millions of undiscovered archaeological sites left to find.
Discovering them will do nothing less than unlock the full potential of our existence.
But we have a challenge.
Over the last year, we've seen horrible headlines of incredible destruction going on to archaeological sites, and massive looting by people like ISIL.
ISIL has destroyed temples at Palmyra.
Who blows up a temple?
They've destroyed the Tomb of Jonah.
And we've seen looting at sites so rampant, it looks like craters of the moon.
Knowing ISIL's desire to destroy modern human lives, it's a natural extension for them to destroy cultural identity as well.
Countless invading armies have done the same throughout history.
We know that ISIL is profiting from the looting of sites, but we don't know the scale.
This means that any object purchased on the market today from the Middle East could potentially be funding terrorism.
When a site is looted, it's as if a puzzle already missing 90 percent of it pieces has had the rest obscured beyond recognition.
This is ancient identity theft writ large.
We know that there are two kinds of looting going on: looting by criminal elements like ISIL, and then more local looting by those that are desperate for money.
We would all do the same to feed our families; I don't blame the local looters.
I blame the middlemen, the unethical traffickers and an international art market that exploits often ambiguous or even completely nonexistent laws.
We know looting is going on on a global scale and it's increasing, but presently we don't have any tools to stop it.
This is beginning to change.
My team and I have just completed a study looking at looting in Egypt.
We looked at open-source data and mapped the entirety of looting across Egypt from 2002 to 2013.
We found evidence of looting and site destruction at 267 sites, and mapped over 200,000 looting pits.
It's astonishing.
And putting that data together -- you can see the looting pits marked here.
At one site, the looting got bad from 2009, 2011, 2012 -- hundreds and hundreds of pits.
Putting all the data together, what we found is that, contrary to popular opinion, looting did not start to get worse in Egypt in 2011 after the Arab Spring, but in 2009, after the global recession.
Thus, we've shown with big data that looting is fundamentally an economic issue.
If we do nothing to stop the problem, all of Egypt's sites will be affected by looting by 2040.
Thus, we are at a tipping point.
We are the generation with all the tools and all the technologies to stop looting, but we're not working fast enough.
Sometimes an archaeological site can surprise you with its resilience.
I am just back from the field, where I co-led a joint mission with Egypt's Ministry of Antiquities at a site called Lisht.
This site dates to the Middle Kingdom of Egypt between 2,000 and 1,750 BC.
The Middle Kingdom was Ancient Egypt's Renaissance period.
After a time of intense internal strife and environmental challenges, Egypt rebounded with an incredible resurgence of art, architecture and literature.
It's a favorite period of time to study in Egypt, because it teaches us so much about how we can survive and thrive after great disasters.
Now at this site, we had already mapped countless looting pits.
Lisht is a royal site; there would have been thousands of people buried there who lived and worked at the court of Pharaoh.
North Lisht.
When we first visited the site, we could see the tombs of many high-ranking officials that had been looted.
Let me put into perspective for you what was taken.
Imagine a two meter by two meter area full of coffins, jewelry and incredible statuary.
Multiply that times over a thousand.
That's what was taken.
So, when we started work, my Egyptian co-director, Mohamed Youssef, approached me and said, "We must work at this one particular tomb.
It's been attacked by looters.
If we don't do anything, they'll be back."
Of course I agreed, but I didn't think we'd find anything.
I thought the looters had stolen everything.
What we started to find were the most incredible reliefs.
Look at this painting -- it's just stunning.
We started finding engraved inscriptions.
And even the titles of the tomb owner -- he had titles like, "Overseer of the Army," "Overseer of the Treasury."
I began to have hope.
Maybe, just maybe we would find his name.
For the ancient Egyptians, having their name last for eternity was their goal.
And then one day, this appeared.
This is the name of the tomb owner: Intef.
You can see it written out here, in hieroglyphs.
Working together with my Egyptian team, we had restored someone's name from 3,900 years ago.
(Applause) Working together with my Egyptian colleagues, we celebrated this moment of shared discovery.
What we were doing together was right and true.
We found this incredible false door, mostly intact.
On it we read about Intef and his inscriptions.
You can actually even see him seated here.
What I realized is that everything I had assumed about looted sites had been proven wrong.
Every day on site we worked together with 70 Egyptians as colleagues and friends.
In the face of so much hatred and ignorance against those in the Middle East, every moment on site felt like a protest for peace.
When you work with those that don't look like you, or think like you, or speak like you, your shared mission of archaeological discovery erases all superficial differences.
What I learned this season is that archaeology isn't about what you find.
It's about what you can prove possible.
Sometimes when you travel, you end up finding long-lost family -- not those with whom you share genes, but a shared entry in the book of life.
This is Omer Farrouk, my brother.
Omer's a Gufti from a village just North of Luxor, called Guft.
Guftis are part of a celebrated tradition in Egyptology.
They help with digging and work crew organization.
Omer is my COO and CFO.
I simply couldn't do work without him.
One day many years ago, when I was a young graduate student and Omer was a young Gufti who couldn't speak much English, we learned, completely randomly, that we were born in the same year, the same month and the same day, six hours apart.
Twins.
(Laughter) Separated by an ocean, but forever connected for Ancient Egypt is our mother.
I knew then we'd always work together -- not in my brain, but in the part of your soul that knows not everything can be explained.
(Arabic) Omer by brother, I will always love you.
(English) Omer my brother, I will always love you.
So, just before my first dig in Egypt, my mentor, the very famous Egyptologist Professor William Kelly Simpson, called me into his office.
He handed me a check for $2,000, and said, "This is to cover your expenses.
Have a glorious adventure this summer.
Someday you will do this for someone else."
Thus, my TED Prize wish is partial payback, plus interest -- (Laughter) for a great human being's generosity and kindness.
So, my wish.
I wish for us to discover the millions of unknown archaeological sites around the world.
By creating a 21st-century army of global explorers, we'll find and protect the world's hidden heritage, which contains clues to humankind's collective resilience and creativity.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) So how are we going to do this?
We are going to build with the TED Prize money an online, crowdsource, citizen science platform to allow anyone in the world to engage with discovering archaeological sites.
There are only a couple hundred of us space archaeologists around the world.
It is my dream to engage the world with helping to find sites and protect them.
What you'll do is sign in, create a username -- note that this particular username is already taken.
(Laughter) You'll take a tutorial and you'll start work.
I want to note at the outset that in no way will be sharing GPS data or mapping data for sites.
We want to treat them like human patient data, and not reveal their locations.
You'll then be dealt a card from a deck -- 20 x 20 meters or 30 x 30 meters, and you'll be looking for features.
My team and I will have batch-processed large amounts of satellite data using algorithms in order for you to find things, so you'll be doing really good science.
You'll then be starting to look.
What do you see? Do you see a temple?
Do you see a tomb? Do you see a pyramid?
Do you see any potential site damage or site looting?
You'll then begin to mark what's there.
And off to the side are always going to be rich examples of exactly what you're seeing, to help guide you.
All the data that you help us collect will be shared with vetted authorities, and will help create a new global alarm system to help protect sites.
But it's not just going to stop there.
All the archaeologists with whom we share your discoveries will take you with them as they begin to excavate them, by using Periscope, Google Plus and social media.
A hundred years ago, archaeology was for the rich.
Fifty years ago, it was for men.
Now it's primarily for academics.
Our goal is to democratize the process of archaeological discovery, and allow anyone to participate.
Ninety-four years ago, Howard Carter discovered the tomb of King Tut.
Who is the next Howard Carter?
It might be you.
By creating this platform, we will find the millions of places occupied by the billions of people that came before us.
If we want to answer the big questions about who we are and where we've come from, the answers to those questions do not lie in pyramids or palaces, but in the cities and villages of those that came before us.
If we want to learn about the past, it's time we inverted the pyramids.
Acknowledging that the past is worth saving means so much more.
It means that we're worth saving, too.
And the greatest story ever told is the story of our shared human journey.
But the only way we're going to be able to write it is if we do it together.
Come with me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Back in 2003, the UK government carried out a survey.
And it was a survey that measured levels of numeracy in the population.
And they were shocked to find out that for every 100 working age adults in the country, 47 of them lacked Level 1 numeracy skills.
Now, Level 1 numeracy skills -- that's low-end GCSE score.
It's the ability to deal with fractions, percentages and decimals.
So this figure prompted a lot of hand-wringing in Whitehall.
Policies were changed, investments were made, and then they ran the survey again in 2011.
So can you guess what happened to this number?
It went up to 49.
(Laughter) And in fact, when I reported this figure in the FT, one of our readers joked and said, "This figure is only shocking to 51 percent of the population."
(Laughter) But I preferred, actually, the reaction of a schoolchild when I presented at a school this information, who raised their hand and said, "How do we know that the person who made that number isn't one of the 49 percent either?"
(Laughter) So clearly, there's a numeracy issue, because these are important skills for life, and a lot of the changes that we want to introduce in this century involve us becoming more comfortable with numbers.
Now, it's not just an English problem.
OECD this year released some figures looking at numeracy in young people, and leading the way, the USA -- nearly 40 percent of young people in the US have low numeracy.
Now, England is there too, but there are seven OECD countries with figures above 20 percent.
That is a problem, because it doesn't have to be that way.
If you look at the far end of this graph, you can see the Netherlands and Korea are in single figures.
So there's definitely a numeracy problem that we want to address.
Now, as useful as studies like these are, I think we risk herding people inadvertently into one of two categories; that there are two kinds of people: those people that are comfortable with numbers, that can do numbers, and the people who can't.
And what I'm trying to talk about here today is to say that I believe that is a false dichotomy.
It's not an immutable pairing.
I think you don't have to have tremendously high levels of numeracy to be inspired by numbers, and that should be the starting point to the journey ahead.
And one of the ways in which we can begin that journey, for me, is looking at statistics.
Now, I am the first to acknowledge that statistics has got somewhat of an image problem.
(Laughter) It's the part of mathematics that even mathematicians don't particularly like, because whereas the rest of maths is all about precision and certainty, statistics is almost the reverse of that.
But actually, I was a late convert to the world of statistics myself.
If you'd asked my undergraduate professors what two subjects would I be least likely to excel in after university, they'd have told you statistics and computer programming, and yet here I am, about to show you some statistical graphics that I programmed.
So what inspired that change in me?
What made me think that statistics was actually an interesting thing?
It's really because statistics are about us.
If you look at the etymology of the word statistics, it's the science of dealing with data about the state or the community that we live in.
So statistics are about us as a group, not us as individuals.
And I think as social animals, we share this fascination about how we as individuals relate to our groups, to our peers.
And statistics in this way are at their most powerful when they surprise us.
And there's been some really wonderful surveys carried out recently by Ipsos MORI in the last few years.
They did a survey of over 1,000 adults in the UK, and said, for every 100 people in England and Wales, how many of them are Muslim?
Now the average answer from this survey, which was supposed to be representative of the total population, was 24.
British people think 24 out of every 100 people in the country are Muslim.
Now, official figures reveal that figure to be about five.
So there's this big variation between what we think, our perception, and the reality as given by statistics.
And I think that's interesting.
What could possibly be causing that misperception?
And I was so thrilled with this study, I started to take questions out in presentations. I was referring to it.
Now, I did a presentation at St. Paul's School for Girls in Hammersmith, and I had an audience rather like this, except it was comprised entirely of sixth-form girls.
And I said, "Girls, how many teenage girls do you think the British public think get pregnant every year?"
And the girls were apoplectic when I said the British public think that 15 out of every 100 teenage girls get pregnant in the year.
And they had every right to be angry, because in fact, I'd have to have closer to 200 dots before I could color one in, in terms of what the official figures tell us.
And rather like numeracy, this is not just an English problem.
Ipsos MORI expanded the survey in recent years to go across the world.
And so, they asked Saudi Arabians, for every 100 adults in your country, how many of them are overweight or obese?
And the average answer from the Saudis was just over a quarter.
That's what they thought.
Just over a quarter of adults are overweight or obese.
The official figures show, actually, it's nearer to three-quarters.
(Laughter) So again, a big variation.
And I love this one: they asked in Japan, they asked the Japanese, for every 100 Japanese people, how many of them live in rural areas?
The average was about a 50-50 split, just over halfway.
They thought 56 out of every 100 Japanese people lived in rural areas.
The official figure is seven.
So extraordinary variations, and surprising to some, but not surprising to people who have read the work of Daniel Kahneman, for example, the Nobel-winning economist.
He and his colleague, Amos Tversky, spent years researching this disjoint between what people perceive and the reality, the fact that people are actually pretty poor intuitive statisticians.
And there are many reasons for this.
Individual experiences, certainly, can influence our perceptions, but so, too, can things like the media reporting things by exception, rather than what's normal.
Kahneman had a nice way of referring to that.
He said, "We can be blind to the obvious" -- so we've got the numbers wrong -- "but we can be blind to our blindness about it."
And that has enormous repercussions for decision making.
So at the statistics office while this was all going on, I thought this was really interesting.
I said, this is clearly a global problem, but maybe geography is the issue here.
These were questions that were all about, how well do you know your country?
So in this case, it's how well do you know 64 million people?
Not very well, it turns out. I can't do that.
So I had an idea, which was to think about this same sort of approach but to think about it in a very local sense.
Is this a local?
If we reframe the questions and say, how well do you know your local area, would your answers be any more accurate?
So I devised a quiz: How well do you know your area?
It's a simple Web app.
You put in a post code and then it will ask you questions based on census data for your local area.
And I was very conscious in designing this.
I wanted to make it open to the widest possible range of people, not just the 49 percent who can get the numbers.
I wanted everyone to engage with it.
So for the design of the quiz, I was inspired by the isotypes of Otto Neurath from the 1920s and '30s.
Now, these are methods for representing numbers using repeating icons.
And the numbers are there, but they sit in the background.
So it's a great way of representing quantity without resorting to using terms like "percentage," "fractions" and "ratios."
So here's the quiz.
The layout of the quiz is, you have your repeating icons on the left-hand side there, and a map showing you the area we're asking you questions about on the right-hand side.
There are seven questions.
Each question, there's a possible answer between zero and a hundred, and at the end of the quiz, you get an overall score between zero and a hundred.
And so because this is TEDxExeter, I thought we would have a quick look at the quiz for the first few questions of Exeter.
And so the first question is: For every 100 people, how many are aged under 16?
Now, I don't know Exeter very well at all, so I had a guess at this, but it gives you an idea of how this quiz works.
You drag the slider to highlight your icons, and then just click "Submit" to answer, and we animate away the difference between your answer and reality.
And it turns out, I was a pretty terrible guess: five.
How about the next question?
This is asking about what the average age is, so the age at which half the population are younger and half the population are older.
And I thought 35 -- that sounds middle-aged to me.
(Laughter) Actually, in Exeter, it's incredibly young, and I had underestimated the impact of the university in this area.
The questions get harder as you go through.
So this one's now asking about homeownership: For every 100 households, how many are owned with a mortgage or loan?
And I hedged my bets here, because I didn't want to be more than 50 out on the answer.
(Laughter) And actually, these get harder, these questions, because when you're in an area, when you're in a community, things like age -- there are clues to whether a population is old or young.
Just by looking around the area, you can see it.
Something like homeownership is much more difficult to see, so we revert to our own heuristics, our own biases about how many people we think own their own homes.
Now the truth is, when we published this quiz, the census data that it's based on was already a few years old.
We've had online applications that allow you to put in a post code and get statistics back for years.
So in some senses, this was all a little bit old and not necessarily new.
But I was interested to see what reaction we might get by gamifying the data in the way that we have, by using animation and playing on the fact that people have their own preconceptions.
It turns out, the reaction was, um ...
was more than I could have hoped for.
It was a long-held ambition of mine to bring down a statistics website due to public demand.
(Laughter) This URL contains the words "statistics," "gov" and "UK," which are three of people's least favorite words in a URL.
And the amazing thing about this was that the website came down at quarter to 10 at night, because people were actually engaging with this data of their own free will, using their own personal time.
I was very interested to see that we got something like a quarter of a million people playing the quiz within the space of 48 hours of launching it.
And it sparked an enormous discussion online, on social media, which was largely dominated by people having fun with their misconceptions, which is something that I couldn't have hoped for any better, in some respects.
I also liked the fact that people started sending it to politicians.
How well do you know the area you claim to represent?
(Laughter) And then just to finish, going back to the two kinds of people, I thought it would be really interesting to see how people who are good with numbers would do on this quiz.
The national statistician of England and Wales, John Pullinger, you would expect he would be pretty good.
He got 44 for his own area.
(Laughter) Jeremy Paxman -- admittedly, after a glass of wine -- 36.
Even worse.
It just shows you that the numbers can inspire us all.
They can surprise us all.
So very often, we talk about statistics as being the science of uncertainty.
My parting thought for today is: actually, statistics is the science of us.
And that's why we should be fascinated by numbers.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
One summer afternoon in 2013, DC police detained, questioned and searched a man who appeared suspicious and potentially dangerous.
This wasn't what I was wearing the day of the detention, to be fair, but I have a picture of that as well.
I know it's very frightening -- try to remain calm.
(Laughter) At this time, I was interning at the Public Defender Service in Washington DC, and I was visiting a police station for work.
I was on my way out, and before I could make it to my car, two police cars pulled up to block my exit, and an officer approached me from behind.
He told me to stop, take my backpack off and put my hands on the police car parked next to us.
About a dozen officers then gathered near us.
All of them had handguns, some had assault rifles.
They rifled through my backpack.
They patted me down.
They took pictures of me spread on the police car, and they laughed.
And as all this was happening -- as I was on the police car trying to ignore the shaking in my legs, trying to think clearly about what I should do -- something stuck out to me as odd.
When I look at myself in this photo, if I were to describe myself, I think I'd say something like, "19-year-old Indian male, bright T-shirt, wearing glasses."
But they weren't including any of these details.
Into their police radios as they described me, they kept saying, "Middle Eastern male with a backpack.
Middle Eastern male with a backpack."
And this description carried on into their police reports.
I never expected to be described by my own government in these terms: "lurking," "nefarious," "terrorist."
And the detention dragged on like this.
They sent dogs trained to smell explosives to sweep the area I'd been in.
They called the federal government to see if I was on any watch lists.
They sent a couple of detectives to cross-examine me on why, if I claimed I had nothing to hide, I wouldn't consent to a search of my car.
And I could see they weren't happy with me, but I felt I had no way of knowing what they'd want to do next.
At one point, the officer who patted me down scanned the side of the police station to see where the security camera was to see how much of this was being recorded.
And when he did that, it really sank in how completely I was at their mercy.
I think we're all normalized from a young age to the idea of police officers and arrests and handcuffs, so it's easy to forget how demeaning and coercive a thing it is to seize control over another person's body.
I know it sounds like the point of my story is how badly treated I was because of my race -- and yes, I don't think I would've been detained if I were white.
But actually, what I have in mind today is something else.
What I have in mind is how much worse things might've been if I weren't affluent.
I mean, they thought I might be trying to plant an explosive, and they investigated that possibility for an hour and a half, but I was never put in handcuffs, I was never taken to a jail cell.
I think if I were from one of Washington DC's poor communities of color, and they thought I was endangering officers' lives, things might've ended differently.
And in fact, in our system, I think it's better to be an affluent person suspected of trying to blow up a police station than it is to be a poor person who's suspected of much, much less than this.
I want to give you an example from my current work.
Right now, I'm working at a civil rights organization in DC, called Equal Justice Under Law.
Let me start by asking you all a question.
How many of you have ever gotten a parking ticket in your life?
Raise your hand.
Yeah. So have I.
And when I had to pay it, it felt annoying and it felt bad, but I paid it and I moved on.
I'm guessing most of you have paid your tickets as well.
But what would happen if you couldn't afford the amount on the ticket and your family doesn't have the money either, what happens then?
Well, one thing that's not supposed to happen under the law is, you're not supposed to be arrested and jailed simply because you can't afford to pay.
That's illegal under federal law.
But that's what local governments across the country are doing to people who are poor.
And so many of our lawsuits at Equal Justice Under Law target these modern-day debtors' prisons.
One of our cases is against Ferguson, Missouri.
And I know when I say Ferguson, many of you will think of police violence.
But today I want to talk about a different aspect of the relationship between their police force and their citizens.
Ferguson was issuing an average of over two arrest warrants, per person, per year, mostly for unpaid debt to the courts.
When I imagine what that would feel like if, every time I left my house, there was a chance a police officer would run my license plate, see a warrant for unpaid debt, seize my body they way the did in DC and then take me to a jail cell, I feel a little sick.
I've met many of the people in Ferguson who have experienced this, and I've heard some of their stories.
In Ferguson's jail, in each small cell, there's a bunk bed and a toilet, but they'd pack four people into each cell.
So there'd be two people on the bunks and two people on the floor, one with nowhere to go except right next to the filthy toilet, which was never cleaned.
In fact, the whole cell was never cleaned, so the floor and the walls were lined with blood and mucus.
No water to drink, except coming out of a spigot connected to the toilet.
The water looked and tasted dirty, there was never enough food, never any showers, women menstruating without any hygiene products, no medical attention whatsoever.
When I asked a woman about medical attention, she laughed, and she said, "Oh, no, no.
The only attention you get from the guards in there is sexual."
So, they'd take the debtors to this place and they'd say, "We're not letting you leave until you make a payment on your debt."
And if you could -- if you could call a family member who could somehow come up with some money, then maybe you were out.
If it was enough money, you were out.
But if it wasn't, you'd stay there for days or weeks, and every day the guards would come down to the cells and haggle with the debtors about the price of release that day.
You'd stay until, at some point, the jail would be booked to capacity, and they'd want to book someone new in.
And at that point, they'd think, "OK, it's unlikely this person can come up with the money, it's more likely this new person will."
You're out, they're in, and the machine kept moving like that.
I met a man who, nine years ago, was arrested for panhandling in a Walgreens.
He couldn't afford his fines and his court fees from that case.
When he was young he survived a house fire, only because he jumped out of the third-story window to escape.
But that fall left him with damage to his brain and several parts of this body, including his leg.
So he can't work, and he relies on social security payments to survive.
When I met him in his apartment, he had nothing of value there -- not even food in his fridge.
He's chronically hungry.
He had nothing of value in his apartment except a small piece of cardboard on which he'd written the names of his children.
He cherished this a lot. He was happy to show it to me.
But he can't pay his fines and fees because he has nothing to give.
In the last nine years, he's been arrested 13 times, and jailed for a total of 130 days on that panhandling case.
One of those stretches lasted 45 days.
Just imagine spending from right now until sometime in June in the place that I described to you a few moments ago.
He told me about all the suicide attempts he's seen in Ferguson's jail; about the time a man found a way to hang himself out of reach of the other inmates, so all they could do was yell and yell and yell, trying to get the guards' attention so they could come down and cut him down.
And he told me that it took the guards over five minutes to respond, and when they came, the man was unconscious.
So they called the paramedics and the paramedics went to the cell.
They said, "He'll be OK," so they just left him there on the floor.
I heard many stories like this and they shouldn't have surprised me, because suicide is the single leading cause of death in our local jails.
This is related to the lack of mental health care in our jails.
I met a woman, single mother of three, making seven dollars an hour.
She relies on food stamps to feed herself and her children.
About a decade ago, she got a couple of traffic tickets and a minor theft charge, and she can't afford her fines and fees on those cases.
Since then, she's been jailed about 10 times on those cases, but she has schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, and she needs medication every day.
She doesn't have access to those medications in Ferguson's jail, because no one has access to their medications.
She told me about what it was like to spend two weeks in a cage, hallucinating people and shadows and hearing voices, begging for the medication that would make it all stop, only to be ignored.
And this isn't anomalous, either: thirty percent of women in our local jails have serious mental health needs just like hers, but only one in six receives any mental health care while in jail.
And so, I heard all these stories about this grotesque dungeon that Ferguson was operating for its debtors, and when it came time for me to actually see it and to go visit Ferguson's jail, I'm not sure what I was expecting to see, but I wasn't expecting this.
It's an ordinary government building.
It could be a post office or a school.
It reminded me that these illegal extortion schemes aren't being run somewhere in the shadows, they're being run out in the open by our public officials.
They're a matter of public policy.
And this reminded me that poverty jailing in general, even outside the debtors' prison context, plays a very visible and central role in our justice system.
What I have in mind is our policy of bail.
In our system, whether you're detained or free, pending trial is not a matter of how dangerous you are or how much of a flight risk you pose.
It's a matter of whether you can afford to post your bail amount.
So Bill Cosby, whose bail was set at a million dollars, immediately writes the check, and doesn't spend a second in a jail cell.
But Sandra Bland, who died in jail, was only there because her family was unable to come up with 500 dollars.
In fact, there are half a million Sandra Blands across the country -- 500,000 people who are in jail right now, only because they can't afford their bail amount.
We're told that our jails are places for criminals, but statistically that's not the case: three out of every five people in jail right now are there pretrial.
They haven't been convicted of any crime; they haven't pled guilty to any offense.
Right here in San Francisco, 85 percent of the inmates in our jail in San Francisco are pretrial detainees.
This means San Francisco is spending something like 80 million dollars every year to fund pretrial detention.
Many of these people who are in jail only because they can't post bail are facing allegations so minor that the amount of time it would take for them to sit waiting for trial is longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted, which means they're guaranteed to get out faster if they just plead guilty.
So now the choice is: Should I stay here in this horrible place, away from my family and my dependents, almost guaranteed to lose my job, and then fight the charges?
Or should I just plead guilty to whatever the prosecutor wants and get out?
And at this point, they're pretrial detainees, not criminals.
But once they take that plea deal, we'll call them criminals, even though an affluent person would never have been in this situation, because an affluent person would have simply been bailed out.
At this point you might be wondering, "This guy's in the inspiration section, what is he doing -- (Laughter) "This is extremely depressing. I want my money back."
(Laughter) But in actuality, I find talking about jailing much less depressing than the alternative, because I think if we don't talk about these issues and collectively change how we think about jailing, at the end of all of our lives, we'll still have jails full of poor people who don't belong there.
That really is depressing to me.
But what's exciting to me is the thought that these stories can move us to think about jailing in different terms.
Not in sterile policy terms like "mass incarceration," or "sentencing of nonviolent offenders," but in human terms.
When we put a human being in a cage for days or weeks or months or even years, what are we doing to that person's mind and body?
Under what conditions are we really willing to do that?
And so if starting with a few hundred of us in this room, we can commit to thinking about jailing in this different light, then we can undo that normalization I was referring to earlier.
If I leave you with anything today, I hope it's with the thought that if we want anything to fundamentally change -- not just to reform our policies on bail and fines and fees -- but also to make sure that whatever new policies replace those don't punish the poor and the marginalized in their own new way.
If we want that kind of change, then this shift in thinking is required of each of us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So many of you have probably seen the movie "The Martian."
But for those of you who did not, it's a movie about an astronaut who is stranded on Mars, and his efforts to stay alive until the Earth can send a rescue mission to bring him back to Earth.
Gladly, they do re-establish communication with the character, astronaut Watney, at some point so that he's not as alone on Mars until he can be rescued.
So while you're watching the movie, or even if you haven't, when you think about Mars, you're probably thinking about how far away it is and how distant.
And, what might not have occurred to you is, what are the logistics really like of working on another planet -- of living on two planets when there are people on the Earth and there are rovers or people on Mars?
So think about when you have friends, families and co-workers in California, on the West Coast or in other parts of the world.
When you're trying to communicate with them, one of the things you probably first think about is: wait, what time is it in California?
Will I wake them up? Is it OK to call?
So even if you're interacting with colleagues who are in Europe, you're immediately thinking about: What does it take to coordinate communication when people are far away?
So we don't have people on Mars right now, but we do have rovers.
And actually right now, on Curiosity, it is 6:10 in the morning.
So, 6:10 in the morning on Mars.
We have four rovers on Mars.
The United States has put four rovers on Mars since the mid-1990s, and I have been privileged enough to work on three of them.
So, I am a spacecraft engineer, a spacecraft operations engineer, at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Los Angeles, California.
And these rovers are our robotic emissaries.
So, they are our eyes and our ears, and they see the planet for us until we can send people.
So we learn how to operate on other planets through these rovers.
So before we send people, we send robots.
So the reason there's a time difference on Mars right now, from the time that we're at is because the Martian day is longer than the Earth day.
Our Earth day is 24 hours, because that's how long it takes the Earth to rotate, how long it takes to go around once.
So our day is 24 hours.
It takes Mars 24 hours and approximately 40 minutes to rotate once.
So that means that the Martian day is 40 minutes longer than the Earth day.
So teams of people who are operating the rovers on Mars, like this one, what we are doing is we are living on Earth, but working on Mars.
So we have to think as if we are actually on Mars with the rover.
Our job, the job of this team, of which I'm a part of, is to send commands to the rover to tell it what to do the next day.
To tell it to drive or drill or tell her whatever she's supposed to do.
So while she's sleeping -- and the rover does sleep at night because she needs to recharge her batteries and she needs to weather the cold Martian night.
And so she sleeps.
So while she sleeps, we work on her program for the next day.
So I work the Martian night shift.
(Laughter) So in order to come to work on the Earth at the same time every day on Mars -- like, let's say I need to be at work at 5:00 p.m., this team needs to be at work at 5:00 p.m. Mars time every day, then we have to come to work on the Earth 40 minutes later every day, in order to stay in sync with Mars.
That's like moving a time zone every day.
So one day you come in at 8:00, the next day 40 minutes later at 8:40, the next day 40 minutes later at 9:20, the next day at 10:00.
So you keep moving 40 minutes every day, until soon you're coming to work in the middle of the night -- the middle of the Earth night.
Right? So you can imagine how confusing that is.
Hence, the Mars watch.
(Laughter) This weights in this watch have been mechanically adjusted so that it runs more slowly.
Right? And we didn't start out -- I got this watch in 2004 when Spirit and Opportunity, the rovers back then.
We didn't start out thinking that we were going to need Mars watches.
Right? We thought, OK, we'll just have the time on our computers and on the mission control screens, and that would be enough.
Yeah, not so much.
Because we weren't just working on Mars time, we were actually living on Mars time.
And we got just instantaneously confused about what time it was.
So you really needed something on your wrist to tell you: What time is it on the Earth? What time is it on Mars?
And it wasn't just the time on Mars that was confusing; we also needed to be able to talk to each other about it.
So a "sol" is a Martian day -- again, 24 hours and 40 minutes.
So when we're talking about something that's happening on the Earth, we will say, today.
So, for Mars, we say, "tosol."
(Laughter) Yesterday became "yestersol" for Mars.
Again, we didn't start out thinking, "Oh, let's invent a language."
It was just very confusing.
I remember somebody walked up to me and said, "I would like to do this activity on the vehicle tomorrow, on the rover."
And I said, "Tomorrow, tomorrow, or Mars, tomorrow?"
We started this terminology because we needed a way to talk to each other.
(Laughter) Tomorrow became "nextersol" or "solorrow."
Because people have different preferences for the words they use.
Some of you might say "soda" and some of you might say "pop."
So we have people who say "nextersol" or "solorrow."
And then something that I noticed after a few years of working on these missions, was that the people who work on the rovers, we say "tosol."
The people who work on the landed missions that don't rove around, they say "tosoul."
So I could actually tell what mission you worked on from your Martian accent.
(Laughter) So we have the watches and the language, and you're detecting a theme here, right?
So that we don't get confused.
But even the Earth daylight could confuse us.
If you think that right now, you've come to work and it's the middle of the Martian night and there's light streaming in from the windows that's going to be confusing as well.
So you can see from this image of the control room that all of the blinds are down.
So that there's no light to distract us.
The blinds went down all over the building about a week before landing, and they didn't go up until we went off Mars time.
So this also works for the house, for at home.
I've been on Mars time three times, and my husband is like, OK, we're getting ready for Mars time.
And so he'll put foil all over the windows and dark curtains and shades because it also affects your families.
And so here I was living in kind of this darkened environment, but so was he.
And he'd gotten used to it.
But then I would get these plaintive emails from him when he was at work.
Should I come home? Are you awake?
What time is it on Mars?
And I decided, OK, so he needs a Mars watch.
(Laughter) But of course, it's 2016, so there's an app for that.
(Laughter) So now instead of the watches, we can also use our phones.
But the impact on families was just across the board; it wasn't just those of us who were working on the rovers but our families as well.
This is David Oh, one of our flight directors, and he's at the beach in Los Angeles with his family at 1:00 in the morning.
(Laughter) So because we landed in August and his kids didn't have to go back to school until September, they actually went on to Mars time with him for one month.
They got up 40 minutes later every day.
And they were on dad's work schedule.
So they lived on Mars time for a month and had these great adventures, like going bowling in the middle of the night or going to the beach.
And one of the things that we all discovered is you can get anywhere in Los Angeles at 3:00 in the morning when there's no traffic.
(Laughter) So we would get off work, and we didn't want to go home and bother our families, and we were hungry, so instead of going locally to eat something, we'd go, "Wait, there's this great all-night deli in Long Beach, and we can get there in 10 minutes!"
So we would drive down -- it was like the 60s, no traffic.
We would drive down there, and the restaurant owners would go, "Who are you people?
And why are you at my restaurant at 3:00 in the morning?"
So they came to realize that there were these packs of Martians, roaming the LA freeways, in the middle of the night -- in the middle of the Earth night.
And we did actually start calling ourselves Martians.
So those of us who were on Mars time would refer to ourselves as Martians, and everyone else as Earthlings.
(Laughter) And that's because when you're moving a time-zone every day, you start to really feel separated from everyone else.
You're literally in your own world.
So I have this button on that says, "I survived Mars time. Sol 0-90."
And there's a picture of it up on the screen.
So the reason we got these buttons is because we work on Mars time in order to be as efficient as possible with the rover on Mars, to make the best use of our time.
But we don't stay on Mars time for more than three to four months.
Eventually, we'll move to a modified Mars time, which is what we're working now.
And that's because it's hard on your bodies, it's hard on your families.
In fact, there were sleep researchers who actually were studying us because it was so unusual for humans to try to extend their day.
And they had about 30 of us that they would do sleep deprivation experiments on.
So I would come in and take the test and I fell asleep in each one.
And that was because, again, this eventually becomes hard on your body.
Even though it was a blast.
It was a huge bonding experience with the other members on the team, but it is difficult to sustain.
So these rover missions are our first steps out into the solar system.
We are learning how to live on more than one planet.
We are changing our perspective to become multi-planetary.
So the next time you see a Star Wars movie, and there are people going from the Dagobah system to Tatooine, think about what it really means to have people spread out so far.
What it means in terms of the distances between them, how they will start to feel separate from each other and just the logistics of the time.
We have not sent people to Mars yet, but we hope to.
And between companies like SpaceX and NASA and all of the international space agencies of the world, we hope to do that in the next few decades.
So soon we will have people on Mars, and we truly will be multi-planetary.
And the young boy or the young girl who will be going to Mars could be in this audience or listening today.
I have wanted to work at JPL on these missions since I was 14 years old and I am privileged to be a part of it.
And this is a remarkable time in the space program, and we are all in this journey together.
So the next time you think you don't have enough time in your day, just remember, it's all a matter of your Earthly perspective.
Thank you.
(Applause)
[This talk contains graphic language and descriptions of sexual violence Viewer discretion is advised] Tom Stranger: In 1996, when I was 18 years old, I had the golden opportunity to go on an international exchange program.
Ironically I'm an Australian who prefers proper icy cold weather, so I was both excited and tearful when I got on a plane to Iceland, after just having farewelled my parents and brothers goodbye.
I was welcomed into the home of a beautiful Icelandic family who took me hiking, and helped me get a grasp of the melodic Icelandic language.
I struggled a bit with the initial period of homesickness.
I snowboarded after school, and I slept a lot.
Two hours of chemistry class in a language that you don't yet fully understand can be a pretty good sedative.
(Laughter) My teacher recommended I try out for the school play, just to get me a bit more socially active.
It turns out I didn't end up being part of the play, but through it I met Thordis.
We shared a lovely teenage romance, and we'd meet at lunchtimes to just hold hands and walk around old downtown Reykjavk.
I met her welcoming family, and she met my friends.
We'd been in a budding relationship for a bit over a month when our school's Christmas Ball was held.
Thordis Elva: I was 16 and in love for the first time.
Going together to the Christmas dance was a public confirmation of our relationship, and I felt like the luckiest girl in the world.
No longer a child, but a young woman.
High on my newfound maturity, I felt it was only natural to try drinking rum for the first time that night, too.
That was a bad idea.
I became very ill, drifting in and out of consciousness in between spasms of convulsive vomiting.
The security guards wanted to call me an ambulance, but Tom acted as my knight in shining armor, and told them he'd take me home.
It was like a fairy tale, his strong arms around me, laying me in the safety of my bed.
But the gratitude that I felt towards him soon turned to horror as he proceeded to take off my clothes and get on top of me.
My head had cleared up, but my body was still too weak to fight back, and the pain was blinding.
I thought I'd be severed in two.
In order to stay sane, I silently counted the seconds on my alarm clock.
And ever since that night, I've known that there are 7,200 seconds in two hours.
Despite limping for days and crying for weeks, this incident didn't fit my ideas about rape like I'd seen on TV.
Tom wasn't an armed lunatic; he was my boyfriend.
And it didn't happen in a seedy alleyway, it happened in my own bed.
By the time I could identify what had happened to me as rape, he had completed his exchange program and left for Australia.
So I told myself it was pointless to address what had happened.
And besides, it had to have been my fault, somehow.
I was raised in a world where girls are taught that they get raped for a reason.
Their skirt was too short, their smile was too wide, their breath smelled of alcohol.
And I was guilty of all of those things, so the shame had to be mine.
It took me years to realize that only one thing could have stopped me from being raped that night, and it wasn't my skirt, it wasn't my smile, it wasn't my childish trust.
The only thing that could've stopped me from being raped that night is the man who raped me -- had he stopped himself.
TS: I have vague memories of the next day: the after effects of drinking, a certain hollowness that I tried to stifle.
Nothing more.
But I didn't show up at Thordis's door.
It is important to now state that I didn't see my deed for what it was.
The word "rape" didn't echo around my mind as it should've, and I wasn't crucifying myself with memories of the night before.
It wasn't so much a conscious refusal, it was more like any acknowledgment of reality was forbidden.
My definition of my actions completely refuted any recognition of the immense trauma I caused Thordis.
To be honest, I repudiated the entire act in the days afterwards and when I was committing it.
I disavowed the truth by convincing myself it was sex and not rape.
And this is a lie I've felt spine-bending guilt for.
I broke up with Thordis a couple of days later, and then saw her a number of times during the remainder of my year in Iceland, feeling a sharp stab of heavyheartedness each time.
Deep down, I knew I'd done something immeasurably wrong.
But without planning it, I sunk the memories deep, and then I tied a rock to them.
What followed is a nine-year period that can best be titled as "Denial and Running."
When I got a chance to identify the real torment that I caused, I didn't stand still long enough to do so.
Whether it be via distraction, substance use, thrill-seeking or the scrupulous policing of my inner speak, I refused to be static and silent.
And with this noise, I also drew heavily upon other parts of my life to construct a picture of who I was.
I was a surfer, a social science student, a friend to good people, a loved brother and son, an outdoor recreation guide, and eventually, a youth worker.
I gripped tight to the simple notion that I wasn't a bad person.
I didn't think I had this in my bones.
I thought I was made up of something else.
In my nurtured upbringing, my loving extended family and role models, people close to me were warm and genuine in their respect shown towards women.
It took me a long time to stare down this dark corner of myself, and to ask it questions.
TE: Nine years after the Christmas dance, I was 25 years old, and headed straight for a nervous breakdown.
My self-worth was buried under a soul-crushing load of silence that isolated me from everyone that I cared about, and I was consumed with misplaced hatred and anger that I took out on myself.
One day, I stormed out of the door in tears after a fight with a loved one, and I wandered into a caf, where I asked the waitress for a pen.
I always had a notebook with me, claiming that it was to jot down ideas in moments of inspiration, but the truth was that I needed to be constantly fidgeting, because in moments of stillness, I found myself counting seconds again.
But that day, I watched in wonder as the words streamed out of my pen, forming the most pivotal letter I've ever written, addressed to Tom.
Along with an account of the violence that he subjected me to, the words, "I want to find forgiveness" stared back at me, surprising nobody more than myself.
But deep down I realized that this was my way out of my suffering, because regardless of whether or not he deserved my forgiveness, I deserved peace.
My era of shame was over.
Before sending the letter, I prepared myself for all kinds of negative responses, or what I found likeliest: no response whatsoever.
The only outcome that I didn't prepare myself for was the one that I then got -- a typed confession from Tom, full of disarming regret.
As it turns out, he, too, had been imprisoned by silence.
And this marked the start of an eight-year-long correspondence that God knows was never easy, but always honest.
I relieved myself of the burdens that I'd wrongfully shouldered, and he, in turn, wholeheartedly owned up to what he'd done.
Our written exchanges became a platform to dissect the consequences of that night, and they were everything from gut-wrenching to healing beyond words.
And yet, it didn't bring about closure for me.
Perhaps because the email format didn't feel personal enough, perhaps because it's easy to be brave when you're hiding behind a computer screen on the other side of the planet.
But we'd begun a dialogue that I felt was necessary to explore to its fullest.
So, after eight years of writing, and nearly 16 years after that dire night, I mustered the courage to propose a wild idea: that we'd meet up in person and face our past once and for all.
TS: Iceland and Australia are geographically like this.
In the middle of the two is South Africa.
We decided upon the city of Cape Town, and there we met for one week.
The city itself proved to be a stunningly powerful environment to focus on reconciliation and forgiveness.
Nowhere else has healing and rapprochement been tested like it has in South Africa.
As a nation, South Africa sought to sit within the truth of its past, and to listen to the details of its history.
Knowing this only magnified the effect that Cape Town had on us.
Over the course of this week, we literally spoke our life stories to each other, from start to finish.
And this was about analyzing our own history.
We followed a strict policy of being honest, and this also came with a certain exposure, an open-chested vulnerability.
There were gutting confessions, and moments where we just absolutely couldn't fathom the other person's experience.
The seismic effects of sexual violence were spoken aloud and felt, face to face.
At other times, though, we found a soaring clarity, and even some totally unexpected but liberating laughter.
When it came down to it, we did out best to listen to each other intently.
And our individual realities were aired with an unfiltered purity that couldn't do any less than lighten the soul.
TE: Wanting to take revenge is a very human emotion -- instinctual, even.
And all I wanted to do for years was to hurt Tom back as deeply as he had hurt me.
But had I not found a way out of the hatred and anger, I'm not sure I'd be standing here today.
That isn't to say that I didn't have my doubts along the way.
When the plane bounced on that landing strip in Cape Town, I remember thinking, "Why did I not just get myself a therapist and a bottle of vodka like a normal person would do?"
(Laughter) At times, our search for understanding in Cape Town felt like an impossible quest, and all I wanted to do was to give up and go home to my loving husband, Vidir, and our son.
But despite our difficulties, this journey did result in a victorious feeling that light had triumphed over darkness, that something constructive could be built out of the ruins.
I read somewhere that you should try and be the person that you needed when you were younger.
And back when I was a teenager, I would have needed to know that the shame wasn't mine, that there's hope after rape, that you can even find happiness, like I share with my husband today.
Which is why I started writing feverishly upon my return from Cape Town, resulting in a book co-authored by Tom, that we hope can be of use to people from both ends of the perpetrator-survivor scale.
If nothing else, it's a story that we would've needed to hear when we were younger.
Given the nature of our story, I know the words that inevitably accompany it -- victim, rapist -- and labels are a way to organize concepts, but they can also be dehumanizing in their connotations.
Once someone's been deemed a victim, it's that much easier to file them away as someone damaged, dishonored, less than.
And likewise, once someone has been branded a rapist, it's that much easier to call him a monster -- inhuman.
But how will we understand what it is in human societies that produces violence if we refuse to recognize the humanity of those who commit it?
And how -- (Applause) And how can we empower survivors if we're making them feel less than?
How can we discuss solutions to one of the biggest threats to the lives of women and children around the world, if the very words we use are part of the problem?
TS: From what I've now learnt, my actions that night in 1996 were a self-centered taking.
I felt deserving of Thordis's body.
I've had primarily positive social influences and examples of equitable behavior around me.
But on that occasion, I chose to draw upon the negative ones.
The ones that see women as having less intrinsic worth, and of men having some unspoken and symbolic claim to their bodies.
These influences I speak of are external to me, though.
And it was only me in that room making choices, nobody else.
When you own something and really square up to your culpability, I do think a surprising thing can happen.
It's what I call a paradox of ownership.
I thought I'd buckle under the weight of responsibility.
I thought my certificate of humanity would be burnt.
Instead, I was offered to really own what I did, and found that it didn't possess the entirety of who I am.
Put simply, something you've done doesn't have to constitute the sum of who you are.
The noise in my head abated.
The indulgent self-pity was starved of oxygen, and it was replaced with the clean air of acceptance -- an acceptance that I did hurt this wonderful person standing next to me; an acceptance that I am part of a large and shockingly everyday grouping of men who have been sexually violent toward their partners.
Don't underestimate the power of words.
Saying to Thordis that I raped her changed my accord with myself, as well as with her.
But most importantly, the blame transferred from Thordis to me.
Far too often, the responsibility is attributed to female survivors of sexual violence, and not to the males who enact it.
Far too often, the denial and running leaves all parties at a great distance from the truth.
There's definitely a public conversation happening now, and like a lot of people, we're heartened that there's less retreating from this difficult but important discussion.
I feel a real responsibility to add our voices to it.
TE: What we did is not a formula that we're prescribing for others.
Nobody has the right to tell anyone else how to handle their deepest pain or their greatest error.
Breaking your silence is never easy, and depending on where you are in the world, it can even be deadly to speak out about rape.
I realize that even the most traumatic event of my life is still a testament to my privilege, because I can talk about it without getting ostracized, or even killed.
But with that privilege of having a voice comes the responsibility of using it.
That's the least I owe my fellow survivors who can't.
The story we've just relayed is unique, and yet it is so common with sexual violence being a global pandemic.
But it doesn't have to be that way.
One of the things that I found useful on my own healing journey is educating myself about sexual violence.
And as a result, I've been reading, writing and speaking about this issue for over a decade now, going to conferences around the world.
And in my experience, the attendees of such events are almost exclusively women.
But it's about time that we stop treating sexual violence as a women's issue.
(Applause) A majority of sexual violence against women and men is perpetrated by men.
And yet their voices are sorely underrepresented in this discussion.
But all of us are needed here.
Just imagine all the suffering we could alleviate if we dared to face this issue together.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most of us go through life trying to do our best at whatever we do, whether it's our job, family, school or anything else.
I feel that way. I try my best.
But some time ago, I came to a realization that I wasn't getting much better at the things I cared most about, whether it was being a husband or a friend or a professional or teammate, and I wasn't improving much at those things even though I was spending a lot of time working hard at them.
I've since realized from conversations I've had and from research that this stagnation, despite hard work, turns out to be pretty common.
So I'd like to share with you some insights into why that is and what we can all do about it.
What I've learned is that the most effective people and teams in any domain do something we can all emulate.
They go through life deliberately alternating between two zones: the learning zone and the performance zone.
The learning zone is when our goal is to improve.
Then we do activities designed for improvement, concentrating on what we haven't mastered yet, which means we have to expect to make mistakes, knowing that we will learn from them.
That is very different from what we do when we're in our performance zone, which is when our goal is to do something as best as we can, to execute.
Then we concentrate on what we have already mastered and we try to minimize mistakes.
Both of these zones should be part of our lives, but being clear about when we want to be in each of them, with what goal, focus and expectations, helps us better perform and better improve.
The performance zone maximizes our immediate performance, while the learning zone maximizes our growth and our future performance.
The reason many of us don't improve much despite our hard work is that we tend to spend almost all of our time in the performance zone.
This hinders our growth, and ironically, over the long term, also our performance.
So what does the learning zone look like?
Take Demosthenes, a political leader and the greatest orator and lawyer in ancient Greece.
To become great, he didn't spend all his time just being an orator or a lawyer, which would be his performance zone.
But instead, he did activities designed for improvement.
Of course, he studied a lot.
He studied law and philosophy with guidance from mentors, but he also realized that being a lawyer involved persuading other people, so he also studied great speeches and acting.
To get rid of an odd habit he had of involuntarily lifting his shoulder, he practiced his speeches in front of a mirror, and he suspended a sword from the ceiling so that if he raised his shoulder, it would hurt.
(Laughter) To speak more clearly despite a lisp, he went through his speeches with stones in his mouth.
He built an underground room where he could practice without interruptions and not disturb other people.
And since courts at the time were very noisy, he also practiced by the ocean, projecting his voice above the roar of the waves.
His activities in the learning zone were very different from his activities in court, his performance zone.
In the learning zone, he did what Dr. Anders Ericsson calls deliberate practice.
This involves breaking down abilities into component skills, being clear about what subskill we're working to improve, like keeping our shoulders down, giving full concentration to a high level of challenge outside our comfort zone, just beyond what we can currently do, using frequent feedback with repetition and adjustments, and ideally engaging the guidance of a skilled coach, because activities designed for improvement are domain-specific, and great teachers and coaches know what those activities are and can also give us expert feedback.
It is this type of practice in the learning zone which leads to substantial improvement, not just time on task performing.
For example, research shows that after the first couple of years working in a profession, performance usually plateaus.
This has been shown to be true in teaching, general medicine, nursing and other fields, and it happens because once we think we have become good enough, adequate, then we stop spending time in the learning zone.
We focus all our time on just doing our job, performing, which turns out not to be a great way to improve.
But the people who continue to spend time in the learning zone do continue to always improve.
The best salespeople at least once a week do activities with the goal of improvement.
They read to extend their knowledge, consult with colleagues or domain experts, try out new strategies, solicit feedback and reflect.
The best chess players spend a lot of time not playing games of chess, which would be their performance zone, but trying to predict the moves grand masters made and analyzing them.
Each of us has probably spent many, many, many hours typing on a computer without getting faster, but if we spent 10 to 20 minutes each day fully concentrating on typing 10 to 20 percent faster than our current reliable speed, we would get faster, especially if we also identified what mistakes we're making and practiced typing those words.
That's deliberate practice.
In what other parts of our lives, perhaps that we care more about, are we working hard but not improving much because we're always in the performance zone?
Now, this is not to say that the performance zone has no value.
It very much does.
When I needed a knee surgery, I didn't tell the surgeon, "Poke around in there and focus on what you don't know."
(Laughter) "We'll learn from your mistakes!"
I looked for a surgeon who I felt would do a good job, and I wanted her to do a good job.
Being in the performance zone allows us to get things done as best as we can.
It can also be motivating, and it provides us with information to identify what to focus on next when we go back to the learning zone.
So the way to high performance is to alternate between the learning zone and the performance zone, purposefully building our skills in the learning zone, then applying those skills in the performance zone.
When Beyonc is on tour, during the concert, she's in her performance zone, but every night when she gets back to the hotel room, she goes right back into her learning zone.
She watches a video of the show that just ended.
She identifies opportunities for improvement, for herself, her dancers and her camera staff.
And the next morning, everyone receives pages of notes with what to adjust, which they then work on during the day before the next performance.
It's a spiral to ever-increasing capabilities, but we need to know when we seek to learn, and when we seek to perform, and while we want to spend time doing both, the more time we spend in the learning zone, the more we'll improve.
So how can we spend more time in the learning zone?
First, we must believe and understand that we can improve, what we call a growth mindset.
Second, we must want to improve at that particular skill.
There has to be a purpose we care about, because it takes time and effort.
Third, we must have an idea about how to improve, what we can do to improve, not how I used to practice the guitar as a teenager, performing songs over and over again, but doing deliberate practice.
And fourth, we must be in a low-stakes situation, because if mistakes are to be expected, then the consequence of making them must not be catastrophic, or even very significant.
A tightrope walker doesn't practice new tricks without a net underneath, and an athlete wouldn't set out to first try a new move during a championship match.
One reason that in our lives we spend so much time in the performance zone is that our environments often are, unnecessarily, high stakes.
We create social risks for one another, even in schools which are supposed to be all about learning, and I'm not talking about standardized tests.
I mean that every minute of every day, many students in elementary schools through colleges feel that if they make a mistake, others will think less of them.
No wonder they're always stressed out and not taking the risks necessary for learning.
But they learn that mistakes are undesirable inadvertently when teachers or parents are eager to hear just correct answers and reject mistakes rather than welcome and examine them to learn from them, or when we look for narrow responses rather than encourage more exploratory thinking that we can all learn from.
When all homework or student work has a number or a letter on it, and counts towards a final grade, rather than being used for practice, mistakes, feedback and revision, we send the message that school is a performance zone.
The same is true in our workplaces.
In the companies I consult with, I often see flawless execution cultures which leaders foster to encourage great work.
But that leads employees to stay within what they know and not try new things, so companies struggle to innovate and improve, and they fall behind.
We can create more spaces for growth by starting conversations with one another about when we want to be in each zone.
What do we want to get better at and how?
And when do we want to execute and minimize mistakes?
That way, we gain clarity about what success is, when, and how to best support one another.
But what if we find ourselves in a chronic high-stakes setting and we feel we can't start those conversations yet?
Then here are three things that we can still do as individuals.
First, we can create low-stakes islands in an otherwise high-stakes sea.
These are spaces where mistakes have little consequence.
For example, we might find a mentor or a trusted colleague with whom we can exchange ideas or have vulnerable conversations or even role-play.
Or we can ask for feedback-oriented meetings as projects progress.
Or we can set aside time to read or watch videos or take online courses.
Those are just some examples.
Second, we can execute and perform as we're expected, but then reflect on what we could do better next time, like Beyonc does, and we can observe and emulate experts.
The observation, reflection and adjustment is a learning zone.
And finally, we can lead and lower the stakes for others by sharing what we want to get better at, by asking questions about what we don't know, by soliciting feedback and by sharing our mistakes and what we've learned from them, so that others can feel safe to do the same.
Real confidence is about modeling ongoing learning.
What if, instead of spending our lives doing, doing, doing, performing, performing, performing, we spent more time exploring, asking, listening, experimenting, reflecting, striving and becoming?
What if we each always had something we were working to improve?
What if we created more low-stakes islands and waters?
And what if we got clear, within ourselves and with our teammates, about when we seek to learn and when we seek to perform, so that our efforts can become more consequential, our improvement never-ending and our best even better?
Thank you.
Just to put everything in context, and to kind of give you a background to where I'm coming from, so that a lot of the things I'm going to say, and the things I'm going to do -- or things I'm going to tell you I've done -- you will understand exactly why and how I got motivated to be where I am.
I graduated high school in Cleveland, Ohio, 1975.
And just like my parents did when they finished studying abroad, we went back home.
Finished university education, got a medical degree, 1986.
And by the time I was an intern house officer, I could barely afford to maintain my mother's 13-year-old car -- and I was a paid doctor.
This brings us to why a lot of us, who are professionals, are now, as they say, in diaspora.
Now, are we going to make that a permanent thing, where we all get trained, and we leave, and we don't go back?
Perhaps not, I should certainly hope not -- because that is not my vision.
All right, for good measure, that's where Nigeria is on the African map, and just there is the Delta region that I'm sure everybody's heard of.
People getting kidnapped, where the oil comes from, the oil that sometimes I think has driven us all crazy in Nigeria.
But, critical poverty: this slide is from a presentation I gave not that long ago. Gapminder.org tells the story of the gap between Africa and the rest of the world in terms of health care.
Very interesting.
How many people do you think are on that taxi?
And believe it or not, that is a taxi in Nigeria.
And the capital -- well, what used to be the capital of Nigeria -- Lagos, that's a taxi, and you have police on them.
So, tell me, how many policemen do you think are on this taxi? And now? Three.
So, when these kind of people -- and, believe me, it's not just the police that use these taxis in Lagos. We all do. I've been on one of these, and I didn't have a helmet, either.
And it just reminds me of the thought of what happens when one of us on a taxi like this falls off, has an accident and needs a hospital.
Believe it or not, some of us do survive.
Some of us do survive malaria; we do survive AIDS.
And like I tell my family, and my wife reminds me every time, "You're risking your life, you know, every time you go to that country."
And she's right. Every time you go there, you know that if you actually need critical care -- critical care of any sort -- if you have an accident -- of which there are many, there are accidents everywhere -- where do they go?
Where do they go when they need help for this kind of stuff?
I'm not saying instead of, I'm saying as well as, AIDS, TB, malaria, typhoid -- the list goes on.
I'm saying, where do they go when they're like me?
When I go back home -- and I do all kinds of things, I teach, I train -- but I catch one of these things, or I'm chronically ill with one of those, where do they go?
What's the economic impact when one of them dies or becomes disabled?
I think it's quite significant. This is where they go.
These are not old pictures and these are not from some downtrodden -- this is a major hospital. In fact, it's from a major teaching hospital in Nigeria.
Now that is less than a year old, in an operating room.
That's sterilizing equipment in Nigeria.
You remember all that oil?
Yes, I'm sorry if it upsets some of you, but I think you need to see this. That's the floor, OK?
You can say some of this is education.
You can say it's hygiene. I'm not pleading poverty.
I'm saying we need more than just, you know, vaccination, malaria, AIDS, because I want to be treated in a proper hospital if something happens to me out there.
In fact, when I start running around saying, "Hey, boys and girls, you're cardiologists in the U.S., can you come home with me and do a mission?"
I want them to think, "Well there's some hope."
Now, have a look at that. That's the anesthesiology machine.
And that's my specialty, right?
Anesthesiology and critical care -- look at that bag.
It's been taped with tape that we even stopped using in the U.K.
And believe me, these are current pictures.
Now, if something like this, which has happened in the U.K., that's where they go. This is the intensive care unit in which I work.
All right, this is a slide from a talk I gave about intensive care units in Nigeria, and jokingly we refer to it as "Expensive Scare."
Because it's scary and it's expensive, but we need to have it, OK?
So, these are the problems.
There are no prizes for telling us what the problems are, are there?
I think we all know. And several speakers before and speakers after me are going to tell us even more problems.
These are a few of them. So, what did I do?
There we go -- we're going on a mission.
We're going to do some open-heart surgery. I was the only Brit, on a team of about nine American cardiac surgeons, cardiac nurse, intensive care nurse.
We all went out and did a mission and we've done three of them so far.
Just so you know, I do believe in missions, I do believe in aid and I do believe in charity. They have their place, but where do they go for those things we talked about earlier?
Because it's not everyone that's going to benefit from a mission.
Health is wealth, in the words of Hans Rosling.
You get wealthier faster if you are healthy first.
So, here we are, mission. Big trouble.
Open-heart surgery in Nigeria -- big trouble.
That's Mike, Mike comes out from Mississippi.
Does he look like he's happy?
It took us two days just to organize the place, but hey, you know, we worked on it. Does he look happy?
Yes, that's the medical advice the committee chairman says, "Yes, I told you, you weren't going to be able to, you can't do this, I just know it."
Look, that's the technician we had. So yes, you go on, all right?
(Laughter) I got him to come with me -- anesthesia tech -- come with me from the U.K.
Yes, let's just go work this thing out.
See, that's one of the problems we have in Nigeria and in Africa generally.
We get a lot of donated equipment.
Equipment that's obsolete, equipment that doesn't quite work, or it works and you can't fix it. And there's nothing wrong with that, so long as we use it and we move on.
But we had problems with it. We had severe problems there.
He had to get on the phone. This guy was always on the phone.
So what we going to do now?
It looks like all these Americans are here and yes, one Brit, and he's not going to do anything -- he thinks he's British actually, and he's actually Nigerian, I just thought about that.
We eventually got it working, is the truth, but it was one of these. Even older than the one you saw.
The reason I have this picture here, this X-ray, it's just to tell you where and how we were viewing X-rays.
Do you figure where that is? It was on a window.
I mean, what's an X-ray viewing box? Please.
Well, nowadays everything's on PAX anyway.
You look at your X-rays on a screen and you do stuff with them, you email them. But we were still using X-rays, but we didn't even have a viewing box!
And we were doing open-heart surgery.
OK, I know it's not AIDS, I know it's not malaria, but we still need this stuff. Oh yeah, echo -- this was just to get the children ready and the adults ready.
People still believe in Voodoo. Heart disease, VSD, hole in the heart, tetralogies.
You still get people who believe in it and they came.
At 67 percent oxygen saturation, the normal is about 97.
Her condition, open-heart surgery that as she required, would have been treated when she was a child.
We had to do these for adults. So, we did succeed and we still do.
We've done three. We're planning another one in July in the north of the country. So, we certainly still do open-heart, but you can see the contrast between everything that was shipped in -- we ship everything, instruments. We had explosions because the kit was designed and installed by people who weren't used to it.
The oxygen tanks didn't quite work right.
But how many did we do the first one? 12.
We did 12 open-heart surgical patients successfully.
Here is our very first patient, out of intensive care, and just watch that chair, all right?
This is what I mean about appropriate technology.
That's what he was doing, propping up the bed because the bed simply didn't work.
Have you seen one of those before?
No? Yes? Doesn't matter, it worked.
I'm sure you've all seen or heard this before: "We, the willing, have been doing so much with so little for so long -- (Applause) -- we are now qualified to do anything with nothing."
(Applause) Thank you. Sustainable Solutions -- this was my first company.
This one's sole aim is to provide the very things that I think are missing.
So, we put my hand in my pocket and say, "Guys, let's just buy stuff.
Let's go set up a company that teaches people, educates them, gives them the tools they need to keep going."
And that's a perfect example of one.
Usually when you buy a ventilator in a hospital, you buy a different one for children, you buy a different one for transport. This one will do everything, and it will do it at half the price and doesn't need compressed air.
If you're in America and you don't know about this one, we do, because we make it our duty to find out what's appropriate technology for Africa -- what's appropriately priced, does the job, and we move on. Anesthesia machine: multi-parameter monitor, operating lights, suction.
This little unit here -- remember your little 12-volt plug in the car, that charges your, whatever, Game Boy, telephone?
That's exactly how the outlets are designed.
Yes, it will take a solar panel. Yes a solar panel will charge it.
But if you've got mains as well, it will charge the batteries in there.
And guess what? We have a little pedal charger too, just in case.
And guess what, if it all fails, if you can find a car that's still got a live battery and you stick it in, it will still work. Then you can customize it.
Is it dental surgery you want? General surgery you want?
Decide which instruments, stock it up with consumables.
And currently we're working on oxygen -- oxygen delivery on-site.
The technology for oxygen delivery is not new.
Oxygen concentrators are very old technology. What is new, and what we will have in a few months, I hope, is that ability to use this same renewable energy system to provide and produce oxygen on site. Zeolite -- it's not new -- zeolite removes nitrogen from air and nitrogen is 78 percent of air.
If you take nitrogen out, what's left? Oxygen, pretty much.
So that's not new. What we're doing is applying this technology to it.
These are the basic features of my device, or our device.
This is what makes it so special.
Apart from the awards it's won, it's portable and it's certified. It's registered, the MHRA -- and the CE mark, for those who don't know, for Europe, is the equivalent of the FDA in the U.S.
If you compare it with what's on the market, price-wise, size-wise, ease of use, complexity ...
This picture was taken last year.
These are members of my graduating class, 1986.
It was in this gentleman's house in the Potomac, for those of you who are familiar with Maryland.
There are too many of us outside and everybody, just to borrow a bit from Hans -- Hans Rosling, he's my guy -- if the size of the text represents what gets the most attention, it's the problems. But what we really need are African solutions that are appropriate for Africa -- looking at the culture, looking at the people, looking at how much money they've got.
African people, because they will do it with a passion, I hope.
And lots and lots of that little bit down there, sacrifice.
You have to do it. Africans have to do it, in conjunction with everyone else.
Thank you.
(Applause)
"You have cancer."
Sadly, about 40 percent of us will hear those three words within our lifetime, and half will not survive.
This means that two out of five of your closest friends and relatives will be diagnosed with some form of cancer, and one will die.
Beyond the physical hardships, roughly one-third of cancer survivors here in the US will go into debt from treatment.
And they're at least two and a half times more likely to declare bankruptcy than those without cancer.
This disease is pervasive.
It's emotionally draining and, for many, financially destructive.
But a cancer diagnosis doesn't have to be a death sentence.
Finding cancer early, closer its genesis, is one of the critical factors to improving treatment options, reducing its emotional impact and minimizing financial burdens.
Most importantly, finding cancer early -- which is one of the primary aims of my research -- greatly enhances your odds of survival.
If we just look at the case of breast cancer for example, we find that those who are diagnosed and treated at stage one have a five-year survival rate of nearly 100 percent -- odds that decrease to just 22 percent if treated at stage four.
And similar trends are found for colorectal and ovarian cancer.
Now, we're all aware that an early diagnosis that is accurate is critical for survival.
The problem is that many cancer diagnostic tools are invasive, costly, often inaccurate and they can take an agonizing amount of time to get the results back.
Still worse, when it comes to some forms of cancer, such as ovarian, liver or pancreatic cancer, good screening methods simply don't exist, meaning that often people wait until physical symptoms surface, which are themselves already indicators of late-stage progression.
Like a tornado strike in an area without an early warning system, there is no alarm to warn, for the danger is already at your doorstep when your odds of survival are greatly reduced.
Having the convenience and accessibility of regular screening options that are affordable, noninvasive and could provide results much sooner, would provide us with a formidable weapon in the fight against cancer.
An early warning would allow us to get out ahead of the disease instead of merely following in its relentless wake.
And this is exactly what I've been doing.
For the past three years, I've been developing technologies that could ultimately aid clinicians with rapid, early-stage cancer diagnostics.
And I've been fueled by a deep scientific curiosity, and a passion to change these statistics.
Last year however, this fight became much more personal when my wife was diagnosed with breast cancer.
It was an experience that added a strong and unexpected emotional dimension to these efforts.
I know firsthand how life-altering treatment can be, and I'm keenly aware of the emotional havoc that cancer can wreak on a family, which in our case included our two young daughters.
Because we found it early during a routine mammogram, we were able to focus primarily on treatment options for the localized tumor, reaffirming to me how important an early diagnosis is.
Unlike other forms of cancer, mammograms do offer an early-stage screening option for breast cancer.
Still, not everyone has this done, or they may develop breast cancer before the middle age recommendation for having a mammogram.
So, there's still a lot of room for improvement, even for cancers that do have screening options, and, of course, considerable benefits for those that don't.
A key challenge then for cancer researchers is to develop methods that make regular screening for many types of cancers much more accessible.
Imagine a scenario where during your regular checkup, your doctor can take a simple, noninvasive urine sample, or other liquid biopsy, and present you with the results before you even leave the doctor's office.
Such a technology could dramatically reduce the number of people who slip through the net of an early-stage cancer diagnosis.
My research team of engineers and biochemists is working on exactly this challenge.
We're working on ways to frequently activate an early-stage cancer alarm by enabling regular screenings that would start when a person is healthy so that action could be taken to stop cancer the moment it emerges, and before it can progress beyond its infancy.
The silver bullet in this case are tiny vesicles, little escape pods regularly shed by cells called exosomes.
Exosomes are important biomarkers that provide an early-warning system for the development of cancer.
And because they're abundantly present in just about every bodily fluid, including blood, urine and saliva, they're extremely attractive for noninvasive liquid biopsies.
There's just one problem.
An automated system for rapidly sorting these important biomarkers is not currently available.
We've created a technology that we call nano-DLD that is capable of precisely this: automated exosome isolation to aid rapid cancer diagnostics.
Exosomes are the newest early-warning weapon, if you will, to emerge on the liquid biopsy front.
And they're really, really small.
They measure just 30 to 150 nanometers in diameter.
This is so tiny that you could fit about a million of them into a single red blood cell.
That's roughly the difference between a golf ball and a fine grain piece of sand.
Once thought to be little bins for unwanted cellular waste, it has been found that cells actually communicate by producing and absorbing these exosomes which contain surface receptors, proteins and other genetic material collected from their cell of origin.
When absorbed by a neighboring cell, exosomes release their contents into the receiving cell, and can set in motion fundamental changes in gene expression -- some good, and this is where cancer comes in, some bad.
Because they are clothed in the material of the mother cell, and contain a sample of its environment, they provide a genetic snapshot of that cell's health and its origin.
All of these qualities make exosomes invaluable messengers that potentially allow physicians to eavesdrop on your health at the cellular level.
To catch cancer early, however, you have to frequently intercept these messages to determine when cancer-causing troublemakers within your body decide to start staging a coup, which is why regular screening is so critical and why we're developing technologies to make this possible.
While the first exosome-based diagnostics emerged on the market just this year, they are not yet part of mainstream healthcare options.
In addition to their recent emergence, another factor that's limiting their widespread adoption is that currently, no automated exosome isolation system exists to make regular screening economically accessible.
The current gold standard for exosome isolation includes ultracentrifugation, a process requiring expensive laboratory equipment, a trained lab tech and about 30 hours of time to process a sample.
We've come up with a different approach for achieving automated exosome isolation from a sample such as urine.
We use a chip-based, continuous flow separation technique called deterministic lateral displacement.
And we have done with it what the semiconductor industry has done so successfully for the past 50 years.
We shrunk the dimensions of this technology from the micron scale to the true nanoscale.
So how does it work?
In a nutshell, a set of tiny pillars separated by nanoscopic gaps are arranged in such a way that the system divides the fluid into streamlines, with the larger cancer-related nanoparticles being separated through a process of redirection from the smaller, healthier ones, which can in contrast move around the pillars in a zigzag-type motion in the direction of fluid flow.
The net result is a complete separation of these two particle populations.
You can visualize this separation process similar to traffic on a highway that separates into two roads, with one road going into a low-clearance tunnel under a mountain, and the other road going around it.
Here, smaller cars can go through the tunnel while larger trucks, carrying potentially hazardous material, are forced to take the detour route.
Traffic is effectively separated by size and contents without impeding its flow.
And this is exactly how our system works on a much, much smaller scale.
The idea here is that the separation process for screening could be as simple as processing a sample of urine, blood or saliva, which is a near-term possibility within the next few years.
Ultimately, it could be used to isolate and detect target exosomes associated with a particular type of cancer, sensing and reporting their presence within minutes.
This would make rapid diagnostics virtually painless.
Broadly speaking, the ability to separate and enrich biomarkers with nanoscale precision in an automated way, opens the door to better understanding diseases such as cancer, with applications ranging from sample preparation to diagnostics, and from drug resistance monitoring to therapeutics.
Even before my wife's bout with cancer, it was a dream of mine to facilitate the automation of this process -- to make regular screening more accessible, similar to the way Henry Ford made the automobile accessible to the general population through development of the assembly line.
Automation is the key to accessibility.
And in the spirit of the Hoover dream, "a chicken in every pot and a car in every garage," we're developing a technology that could ultimately place an early-warning cancer detection system in every home.
This would allow every man, woman and child the opportunity to be regularly tested while they're still healthy, catching cancer when it first emerges.
It is my hope and dream to help people around the world avoid the high costs -- physical, financial and emotional -- faced by today's cancer patients, hardships that I'm well acquainted with.
I'm also happy to report that because we caught my wife's cancer early, her treatment was successful, and she is now, thankfully, cancer-free.
(Applause) It is an outcome that I would like to see for everyone with a cancer diagnosis.
With the work that my team has already done on separation of nanoscale biomarkers for rapid, early-stage cancer diagnostics, I am optimistic that within the next decade, this type of technology will be available, helping protect our friends, our family and future generations.
Even if we are so unlucky as to be diagnosed with cancer, that early-stage alarm will provide a strong beacon of hope.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The last time I heard my son's voice was when he walked out the front door on his way to school.
He called out one word in the darkness: "Bye."
It was April 20, 1999.
Later that morning, at Columbine High School, my son Dylan and his friend Eric killed 12 students and a teacher and wounded more than 20 others before taking their own lives.
Thirteen innocent people were killed, leaving their loved ones in a state of grief and trauma.
Others sustained injuries, some resulting in disfigurement and permanent disability.
But the enormity of the tragedy can't be measured only by the number of deaths and injuries that took place.
There's no way to quantify the psychological damage of those who were in the school, or who took part in rescue or cleanup efforts.
There's no way to assess the magnitude of a tragedy like Columbine, especially when it can be a blueprint for other shooters who go on to commit atrocities of their own.
Columbine was a tidal wave, and when the crash ended, it would take years for the community and for society to comprehend its impact.
It has taken me years to try to accept my son's legacy.
The cruel behavior that defined the end of his life showed me that he was a completely different person from the one I knew.
Afterwards people asked, "How could you not know?
What kind of a mother were you?"
I still ask myself those same questions.
Before the shootings, I thought of myself as a good mom.
Helping my children become caring, healthy, responsible adults was the most important role of my life.
But the tragedy convinced me that I failed as a parent, and it's partially this sense of failure that brings me here today.
Aside from his father, I was the one person who knew and loved Dylan the most.
If anyone could have known what was happening, it should have been me, right?
But I didn't know.
Today, I'm here to share the experience of what it's like to be the mother of someone who kills and hurts.
For years after the tragedy, I combed through memories, trying to figure out exactly where I failed as a parent.
But there are no simple answers.
I can't give you any solutions.
All I can do is share what I have learned.
When I talk to people who didn't know me before the shootings, I have three challenges to meet.
First, when I walk into a room like this, I never know if someone there has experienced loss because of what my son did.
I feel a need to acknowledge the suffering caused by a member of my family who isn't here to do it for himself.
So first, with all of my heart, I'm sorry if my son has caused you pain.
The second challenge I have is that I must ask for understanding and even compassion when I talk about my son's death as a suicide.
Two years before he died, he wrote on a piece of paper in a notebook that he was cutting himself.
He said that he was in agony and wanted to get a gun so he could end his life.
I didn't know about any of this until months after his death.
When I talk about his death as a suicide, I'm not trying to downplay the viciousness he showed at the end of his life.
I'm trying to understand how his suicidal thinking led to murder.
After a lot of reading and talking with experts, I have come to believe that his involvement in the shootings was rooted not in his desire to kill but in his desire to die.
The third challenge I have when I talk about my son's murder-suicide is that I'm talking about mental health -- excuse me -- is that I'm talking about mental health, or brain health, as I prefer to call it, because it's more concrete.
And in the same breath, I'm talking about violence.
The last thing I want to do is to contribute to the misunderstanding that already exists around mental illness.
Only a very small percent of those who have a mental illness are violent toward other people, but of those who die by suicide, it's estimated that about 75 to maybe more than 90 percent have a diagnosable mental health condition of some kind.
As you all know very well, our mental health care system is not equipped to help everyone, and not everyone with destructive thoughts fits the criteria for a specific diagnosis.
Many who have ongoing feelings of fear or anger or hopelessness are never assessed or treated.
Too often, they get our attention only if they reach a behavioral crisis.
If estimates are correct that about one to two percent of all suicides involves the murder of another person, when suicide rates rise, as they are rising for some populations, the murder-suicide rates will rise as well.
I wanted to understand what was going on in Dylan's mind prior to his death, so I looked for answers from other survivors of suicide loss.
I did research and volunteered to help with fund-raising events, and whenever I could, I talked with those who had survived their own suicidal crisis or attempt.
One of the most helpful conversations I had was with a coworker who overheard me talking to someone else in my office cubicle.
She heard me say that Dylan could not have loved me if he could do something as horrible as he did.
Later, when she found me alone, she apologized for overhearing that conversation, but told me that I was wrong.
She said that when she was a young, single mother with three small children, she became severely depressed and was hospitalized to keep her safe.
At the time, she was certain that her children would be better off if she died, so she had made a plan to end her life.
She assured me that a mother's love was the strongest bond on Earth, and that she loved her children more than anything in the world, but because of her illness, she was sure that they would be better off without her.
What she said and what I've learned from others is that we do not make the so-called decision or choice to die by suicide in the same way that we choose what car to drive or where to go on a Saturday night.
When someone is in an extremely suicidal state, they are in a stage four medical health emergency.
Their thinking is impaired and they've lost access to tools of self-governance.
Even though they can make a plan and act with logic, their sense of truth is distorted by a filter of pain through which they interpret their reality.
Some people can be very good at hiding this state, and they often have good reasons for doing that.
Many of us have suicidal thoughts at some point, but persistent, ongoing thoughts of suicide and devising a means to die are symptoms of pathology, and like many illnesses, the condition has to be recognized and treated before a life is lost.
But my son's death was not purely a suicide.
It involved mass murder.
I wanted to know how his suicidal thinking became homicidal.
But research is sparse and there are no simple answers.
Yes, he probably had ongoing depression.
He had a personality that was perfectionistic and self-reliant, and that made him less likely to seek help from others.
He had experienced triggering events at the school that left him feeling debased and humiliated and mad.
And he had a complicated friendship with a boy who shared his feelings of rage and alienation, and who was seriously disturbed, controlling and homicidal.
And on top of this period in his life of extreme vulnerability and fragility, Dylan found access to guns even though we'd never owned any in our home.
It was appallingly easy for a 17-year-old boy to buy guns, both legally and illegally, without my permission or knowledge.
And somehow, 17 years and many school shootings later, it's still appallingly easy.
What Dylan did that day broke my heart, and as trauma so often does, it took a toll on my body and on my mind.
Two years after the shootings, I got breast cancer, and two years after that, I began to have mental health problems.
On top of the constant, perpetual grief I was terrified that I would run into a family member of someone Dylan had killed, or be accosted by the press or by an angry citizen.
I was afraid to turn on the news, afraid to hear myself being called a terrible parent or a disgusting person.
I started having panic attacks.
The first bout started four years after the shootings, when I was getting ready for the depositions and would have to meet the victims' families face to face.
The second round started six years after the shootings, when I was preparing to speak publicly about murder-suicide for the first time at a conference.
Both episodes lasted several weeks.
The attacks happened everywhere: in the hardware store, in my office, or even while reading a book in bed.
My mind would suddenly lock into this spinning cycle of terror and no matter how I hard I tried to calm myself down or reason my way out of it, I couldn't do it.
It felt as if my brain was trying to kill me, and then, being afraid of being afraid consumed all of my thoughts.
That's when I learned firsthand what it feels like to have a malfunctioning mind, and that's when I truly became a brain health advocate.
With therapy and medication and self-care, life eventually returned to whatever could be thought of as normal under the circumstances.
When I looked back on all that had happened, I could see that my son's spiral into dysfunction probably occurred over a period of about two years, plenty of time to get him help, if only someone had known that he needed help and known what to do.
Every time someone asks me, "How could you not have known?", it feels like a punch in the gut.
It carries accusation and taps into my feelings of guilt that no matter how much therapy I've had I will never fully eradicate.
But here's something I've learned: if love were enough to stop someone who is suicidal from hurting themselves, suicides would hardly ever happen.
But love is not enough, and suicide is prevalent.
It's the second leading cause of death for people age 10 to 34, and 15 percent of American youth report having made a suicide plan in the last year.
I've learned that no matter how much we want to believe we can, we cannot know or control everything our loved ones think and feel, and the stubborn belief that we are somehow different, that someone we love would never think of hurting themselves or someone else, can cause us to miss what's hidden in plain sight.
And if worst case scenarios do come to pass, we'll have to learn to forgive ourselves for not knowing or for not asking the right questions or not finding the right treatment.
We should always assume that someone we love may be suffering, regardless of what they say or how they act.
We should listen with our whole being, without judgments, and without offering solutions.
I know that I will live with this tragedy, with these multiple tragedies, for the rest of my life.
I know that in the minds of many, what I lost can't compare to what the other families lost.
I know my struggle doesn't make theirs any easier.
I know there are even some who think I don't have the right to any pain, but only to a life of permanent penance.
In the end what I know comes down to this: the tragic fact is that even the most vigilant and responsible of us may not be able to help, but for love's sake, we must never stop trying to know the unknowable.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I'm here to talk to you about the walkable city.
What is the walkable city?
Well, for want of a better definition, it's a city in which the car is an optional instrument of freedom, rather than a prosthetic device.
And I'd like to talk about why we need the walkable city, and I'd like to talk about how to do the walkable city.
Most of the talks I give these days are about why we need it, but you guys are smart.
And also I gave that talk exactly a month ago, and you can see it at TED.com.
So today I want to talk about how to do it.
In a lot of time thinking about this, I've come up with what I call the general theory of walkability.
A bit of a pretentious term, it's a little tongue-in-cheek, but it's something I've thought about for a long time, and I'd like to share what I think I've figured out.
In the American city, the typical American city -- the typical American city is not Washington, DC, or New York, or San Francisco; it's Grand Rapids or Cedar Rapids or Memphis -- in the typical American city in which most people own cars and the temptation is to drive them all the time, if you're going to get them to walk, then you have to offer a walk that's as good as a drive or better.
What does that mean?
It means you need to offer four things simultaneously: there needs to be a proper reason to walk, the walk has to be safe and feel safe, the walk has to be comfortable and the walk has to be interesting.
You need to do all four of these things simultaneously, and that's the structure of my talk today, to take you through each of those.
The reason to walk is a story I learned from my mentors, Andrs Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, the founders of the New Urbanism movement.
And I should say half the slides and half of my talk today I learned from them.
It's the story of planning, the story of the formation of the planning profession.
When in the 19th century people were choking from the soot of the dark, satanic mills, the planners said, hey, let's move the housing away from the mills.
And lifespans increased immediately, dramatically, and we like to say the planners have been trying to repeat that experience ever since.
So there's the onset of what we call Euclidean zoning, the separation of the landscape into large areas of single use.
And typically when I arrive in a city to do a plan, a plan like this already awaits me on the property that I'm looking at.
And all a plan like this guarantees is that you will not have a walkable city, because nothing is located near anything else.
The alternative, of course, is our most walkable city, and I like to say, you know, this is a Rothko, and this is a Seurat.
It's just a different way -- he was the pointilist -- it's a different way of making places.
And even this map of Manhattan is a bit misleading because the red color is uses that are mixed vertically.
So this is the big story of the New Urbanists -- to acknowledge that there are only two ways that have been tested by the thousands to build communities, in the world and throughout history.
One is the traditional neighborhood.
You see here several neighborhoods of Newburyport, Massachusetts, which is defined as being compact and being diverse -- places to live, work, shop, recreate, get educated -- all within walking distance.
And it's defined as being walkable.
There are lots of small streets.
Each one is comfortable to walk on.
And we contrast that to the other way, an invention that happened after the Second World War, suburban sprawl, clearly not compact, clearly not diverse, and it's not walkable, because so few of the streets connect, that those streets that do connect become overburdened, and you wouldn't let your kid out on them.
And I want to thank Alex Maclean, the aerial photographer, for many of these beautiful pictures that I'm showing you today.
So it's fun to break sprawl down into its constituent parts.
It's so easy to understand, the places where you only live, the places where you only work, the places where you only shop, and our super-sized public institutions.
Schools get bigger and bigger, and therefore, further and further from each other.
And the ratio of the size of the parking lot to the size of the school tells you all you need to know, which is that no child has ever walked to this school, no child will ever walk to this school.
The seniors and juniors are driving the freshmen and the sophomores, and of course we have the crash statistics to prove it.
And then the super-sizing of our other civic institutions like playing fields -- it's wonderful that Westin in the Ft. Lauderdale area has eight soccer fields and eight baseball diamonds and 20 tennis courts, but look at the road that takes you to that location, and would you let your child bike on it?
And this is why we have the soccer mom now.
When I was young, I had one soccer field, one baseball diamond and one tennis court, but I could walk to it, because it was in my neighborhood.
Then the final part of sprawl that everyone forgot to count: if you're going to separate everything from everything else and reconnect it only with automotive infrastructure, then this is what your landscape begins to look like.
The main message here is: if you want to have a walkable city, you can't start with the sprawl model.
you need the bones of an urban model.
This is the outcome of that form of design, as is this.
And this is something that a lot of Americans want.
But we have to understand it's a two-part American dream.
If you're dreaming for this, you're also going to be dreaming of this, often to absurd extremes, when we build our landscape to accommodate cars first.
And the experience of being in these places -- (Laughter) This is not Photoshopped.
Walter Kulash took this slide.
It's in Panama City.
This is a real place.
And being a driver can be a bit of a nuisance, and being a pedestrian can be a bit of a nuisance in these places.
This is a slide that epidemiologists have been showing for some time now, (Laughter) The fact that we have a society where you drive to the parking lot to take the escalator to the treadmill shows that we're doing something wrong.
But we know how to do it better.
Here are the two models contrasted.
I show this slide, which has been a formative document of the New Urbanism now for almost 30 years, to show that sprawl and the traditional neighborhood contain the same things.
It's just how big are they, how close are they to each other, how are they interspersed together and do you have a street network, rather than a cul-de-sac or a collector system of streets?
So when we look at a downtown area, at a place that has a hope of being walkable, and mostly that's our downtowns in America's cities and towns and villages, we look at them and say we want the proper balance of uses.
So what is missing or underrepresented?
And again, in the typical American cities in which most Americans live, it is housing that is lacking.
The jobs-to-housing balance is off.
And you find that when you bring housing back, these other things start to come back too, and housing is usually first among those things.
And, of course, the thing that shows up last and eventually is the schools, because the people have to move in, the young pioneers have to move in, get older, have kids and fight, and then the schools get pretty good eventually.
The other part of this part, the useful city part, is transit, and you can have a perfectly walkable neighborhood without it.
But perfectly walkable cities require transit, because if you don't have access to the whole city as a pedestrian, then you get a car, and if you get a car, the city begins to reshape itself around your needs, and the streets get wider and the parking lots get bigger and you no longer have a walkable city.
So transit is essential.
But every transit experience, every transit trip, begins or ends as a walk, and so we have to remember to build walkability around our transit stations.
Next category, the biggest one, is the safe walk.
It's what most walkability experts talk about.
It is essential, but alone not enough to get people to walk.
And there are so many moving parts that add up to a walkable city.
The first is block size.
This is Portland, Oregon, famously 200-foot blocks, famously walkable.
This is Salt Lake City, famously 600-foot blocks, famously unwalkable.
If you look at the two, it's almost like two different planets, but these places were both built by humans and in fact, the story is that when you have a 200-foot block city, you can have a two-lane city, or a two-to-four lane city, and a 600-foot block city is a six-lane city, and that's a problem.
These are the crash statistics.
When you double the block size -- this was a study of 24 California cities -- when you double the block size, you almost quadruple the number of fatal accidents on non-highway streets.
So how many lanes do we have?
This is where I'm going to tell you what I tell every audience I meet, which is to remind you about induced demand.
Induced demand applies both to highways and to city streets.
And induced demand tells us that when we widen the streets to accept the congestion that we're anticipating, or the additional trips that we're anticipating in congested systems, it is principally that congestion that is constraining demand, and so that the widening comes, and there are all of these latent trips that are ready to happen.
People move further from work and make other choices about when they commute, and those lanes fill up very quickly with traffic, so we widen the street again, and they fill up again.
And we've learned that in congested systems, we cannot satisfy the automobile.
This is from Newsweek Magazine -- hardly an esoteric publication: "Today's engineers acknowledge that building new roads usually makes traffic worse."
My response to reading this was, may I please meet some of these engineers, because these are not the ones that I -- there are great exceptions that I'm working with now -- but these are not the engineers one typically meets working in a city, where they say, "Oh, that road is too crowded, we need to add a lane."
So you add a lane, and the traffic comes, and they say, "See, I told you we needed that lane."
This applies both to highways and to city streets if they're congested.
But the amazing thing about most American cities that I work in, the more typical cities, is that they have a lot of streets that are actually oversized for the congestion they're currently experiencing.
This was the case in Oklahoma City, when the mayor came running to me, very upset, because they were named in Prevention Magazine the worst city for pedestrians in the entire country.
Now that can't possibly be true, but it certainly is enough to make a mayor do something about it.
We did a walkability study, and what we found, looking at the car counts on the street -- these are 3,000-, 4,000-, 7,000-car counts and we know that two lanes can handle 10,000 cars per day.
Look at these numbers -- they're all near or under 10,000 cars, and these were the streets that were designated in the new downtown plan to be four lanes to six lanes wide.
So you had a fundamental disconnect between the number of lanes and the number of cars that wanted to use them.
So it was my job to redesign every street in the downtown from curb face to curb face, and we did it for 50 blocks of streets, and we're rebuilding it now.
So a typical oversized street to nowhere is being narrowed, and now under construction, and the project is half done.
The typical street like this, you know, when you do that, you find room for medians.
You find room for bike lanes.
We've doubled the amount of on-street parking.
We've added a full bike network where one didn't exist before.
But not everyone has the money that Oklahoma City has, because they have an extraction economy that's doing quite well.
The typical city is more like Cedar Rapids, where they have an all four-lane system, half one-way system.
And it's a little hard to see, but what we've done -- what we're doing; it's in process right now, it's in engineering right now -- is turning an all four-lane system, half one-way into an all two-lane system, all two-way, and in so doing, we're adding 70 percent more on-street parking, which the merchants love, and it protects the sidewalk.
That parking makes the sidewalk safe, and we're adding a much more robust bicycle network.
Then the lanes themselves. How wide are they?
That's really important.
The standards have changed such that, as Andrs Duany says, the typical road to a subdivision in America allows you to see the curvature of the Earth.
(Laughter) This is a subdivision outside of Washington from the 1960s.
Look very carefully at the width of the streets.
This is a subdivision from the 1980s.
1960s, 1980s.
The standards have changed to such a degree that my old neighborhood of South Beach, when it was time to fix the street that wasn't draining properly, they had to widen it and take away half our sidewalk, because the standards were wider.
People go faster on wider streets.
People know this.
The engineers deny it, but the citizens know it, so that in Birmingham, Michigan, they fight for narrower streets.
Portland, Oregon, famously walkable, instituted its "Skinny Streets" program in its residential neighborhood.
We know that skinny streets are safer.
The developer Vince Graham, in his project I'On, which we worked on in South Carolina, he goes to conferences and he shows his amazing 22-foot roads.
These are two-way roads, very narrow rights of way, and he shows this well-known philosopher, who said, "Broad is the road that leads to destruction ...
narrow is the road that leads to life."
(Laughter) (Applause) This plays very well in the South.
Now: bicycles.
Bicycles and bicycling are the current revolution underway in only some American cities.
But where you build it, they come.
As a planner, I hate to say that, but the one thing I can say is that bicycle population is a function of bicycle infrastructure.
I asked my friend Tom Brennan from Nelson\Nygaard in Portland to send me some pictures of the Portland bike commute.
He sent me this. I said, "Was that bike to work day?"
He said, "No, that was Tuesday."
When you do what Portland did and spend money on bicycle infrastructure -- New York City has doubled the number of bikers in it several times now by painting these bright green lanes.
Even automotive cities like Long Beach, California: vast uptick in the number of bikers based on the infrastructure.
And of course, what really does it, if you know 15th Street here in Washington, DC -- please meet Rahm Emanuel's new bike lanes in Chicago, the buffered lane, the parallel parking pulled off the curb, the bikes between the parked cars and the curb -- these mint cyclists.
If, however, as in Pasadena, every lane is a bike lane, then no lane is a bike lane.
And this is the only bicyclist that I met in Pasadena, so ...
(Laughter) The parallel parking I mentioned -- it's an essential barrier of steel that protects the curb and pedestrians from moving vehicles.
This is Ft. Lauderdale; one side of the street, you can park, the other side of the street, you can't.
This is happy hour on the parking side.
This is sad hour on the other side.
And then the trees themselves slow cars down.
They move slower when trees are next to the road, and, of course, sometimes they slow down very quickly.
All the little details -- the curb return radius.
Is it one foot or is it 40 feet?
How swoopy is that curb to determine how fast the car goes and how much room you have to cross.
And then I love this, because this is objective journalism.
"Some say the entrance to CityCenter is not inviting to pedestrians."
When every aspect of the landscape is swoopy, is aerodynamic, is stream-form geometrics, it says: "This is a vehicular place."
So no one detail, no one speciality, can be allowed to set the stage.
And here, you know, this street: yes, it will drain within a minute of the hundred-year storm, but this poor woman has to mount the curb every day.
So then quickly, the comfortable walk has to do with the fact that all animals seek, simultaneously, prospect and refuge.
We want to be able to see our predators, but we also want to feel that our flanks are covered.
And so we're drawn to places that have good edges, and if you don't supply the edges, people won't want to be there.
What's the proper ratio of height to width?
Is it one to one? Three to one?
If you get beyond one to six, you're not very comfortable anymore.
You don't feel enclosed.
Now, six to one in Salzburg can be perfectly delightful.
The opposite of Salzburg is Houston.
The point being the parking lot is the principal problem here.
However, missing teeth, those empty lots can be issues as well, and if you have a missing corner because of an outdated zoning code, then you could have a missing nose in your neighborhood.
That's what we had in my neighborhood.
This was the zoning code that said I couldn't build on that site.
As you may know, Washington, DC is now changing its zoning to allow sites like this to become sites like this.
We needed a lot of variances to do that.
Triangular houses can be interesting to build, but if you get one built, people generally like it.
So you've got to fill those missing noses.
And then, finally, the interesting walk: signs of humanity.
We are among the social primates.
Nothing interests us more than other people.
We want signs of people.
So the perfect one-to-one ratio, it's a great thing.
This is Grand Rapids, a very walkable city, but nobody walks on this street that connects the two best hotels together, because if on the left, you have an exposed parking deck, and on the right, you have a conference facility that was apparently designed in admiration for that parking deck, then you don't attract that many people.
Mayor Joe Riley, in his 10th term, Mayor of Charleston, South Carolina, taught us it only takes 25 feet of building to hide 250 feet of garage.
This one I call the Chia Pet Garage. It's in South Beach.
That active ground floor.
I want to end with this project that I love to show.
It's by Meleca Architects. It's in Columbus, Ohio.
To the left is the convention center neighborhood, full of pedestrians.
To the right is the Short North neighborhood -- ethnic, great restaurants, great shops, struggling.
It wasn't doing very well because this was the bridge, and no one was walking from the convention center into that neighborhood.
Well, when they rebuilt the highway, they added an extra 80 feet to the bridge.
Sorry -- they rebuilt the bridge over the highway.
The city paid 1.9 million dollars, they gave the site to a developer, the developer built this and now the Short North has come back to life.
And everyone says, the newspapers, not the planning magazines, the newspapers say it's because of that bridge.
So that's it. That's the general theory of walkability.
Think about your own cities.
Think about how you can apply it.
You've got to do all four things at once.
So find those places where you have most of them and fix what you can, fix what still needs fixing in those places.
I really appreciate your attention, and thank you for coming today.
(Applause)
Worldwide, over 1.5 billion people experience armed conflict.
In response, people are forced to flee their country, leaving over 15 million refugees.
Children, without a doubt, are the most innocent and vulnerable victims ...
but not just from the obvious physical dangers, but from the often unspoken effects that wars have on their families.
The experiences of war leave children at a real high risk for the development of emotional and behavioral problems.
Children, as we can only imagine, will feel worried, threatened and at risk.
But there is good news.
The quality of care that children receive in their families can have a more significant effect on their well-being than from the actual experiences of war that they have been exposed to.
So actually, children can be protected by warm, secure parenting during and after conflict.
In 2011, I was a first-year PhD student in the University of Manchester School of Psychological Sciences.
Like many of you here, I watched the crisis in Syria unfold in front of me on the TV.
My family is originally from Syria, and very early on, I lost several family members in really horrifying ways.
I'd sit and I'd gather with my family and watch the TV.
We've all seen those scenes: bombs destroying buildings, chaos, destruction and people screaming and running.
It was always the people screaming and running that really got me the most, especially those terrified-looking children.
I was a mother to two young, typically inquisitive children.
They were five and six then, at an age where they typically asked lots and lots of questions, and expected real, convincing answers.
So, I began to wonder what it might be like to parent my children in a war zone and a refugee camp.
Would my children change?
Would my daughter's bright, happy eyes lose their shine?
Would my son's really relaxed and carefree nature become fearful and withdrawn?
How would I cope?
Would I change?
As psychologists and parent trainers, we know that arming parents with skills in caring for their children can have a huge effect on their well-being, and we call this parent training.
The question I had was, could parent training programs be useful for families while they were still in war zones or refugee camps?
Could we reach them with advice or training that would help them through these struggles?
So I approached my PhD supervisor, Professor Rachel Calam, with the idea of using my academic skills to make some change in the real world.
I wasn't quite sure what exactly I wanted to do.
She listened carefully and patiently, and then to my joy she said, "If that's what you want to do, and it means so much to you, then let's do it.
Let's find ways to see if parent programs can be useful for families in these contexts."
So for the past five years, myself and my colleagues -- Prof. Calam and Dr. Kim Cartwright -- have been working on ways to support families that have experienced war and displacement.
Now, to know how to help families that have been through conflict support their children, the first step must obviously be to ask them what they're struggling with, right?
I mean, it seems obvious.
But it's often those that are the most vulnerable, that we're trying to support, that we actually don't ask.
How many times have we just assumed we know exactly the right thing that's going to help someone or something without actually asking them first?
So I travelled to refugee camps in Syria and in Turkey, and I sat with families, and I listened.
I listened to their parenting challenges, I listened to their parenting struggles and I listened to their call for help.
And sometimes that was just paused, as all I could do was hold hands with them and just join them in silent crying and prayer.
They told me about their struggles, they told me about the rough, harsh refugee camp conditions that made it hard to focus on anything but practical chores like collecting clean water.
They told me how they watched their children withdraw; the sadness, depression, anger, bed-wetting, thumb-sucking, fear of loud noises, fear of nightmares -- terrifying, terrifying nightmares.
These families had been through what we had been watching on the TV.
The mothers -- almost half of them were now widows of war, or didn't even know if their husbands were dead or alive -- described how they felt they were coping so badly.
They watched their children change and they had no idea how to help them.
They didn't know how to answer their children's questions.
What I found incredibly astonishing and so motivational was that these families were so motivated to support their children.
Despite all these challenges they faced, they were trying to help their children.
They were making attempts at seeking support from NGO workers, from refugee camp teachers, professional medics, other parents.
One mother I met had only been in a camp for four days, and had already made two attempts at seeking support for her eight-year-old daughter who was having terrifying nightmares.
But sadly, these attempts are almost always useless.
Refugee camp doctors, when available, are almost always too busy, or don't have the knowledge or the time for basic parenting supports.
Refugee camp teachers and other parents are just like them -- part of a new refugee community who's struggling with new needs.
So then we began to think.
How could we help these families?
The families were struggling with things much bigger than they could cope with.
The Syrian crisis made it clear how incredibly impossible it would be to reach families on an individual level.
How else could we help them?
How would we reach families at a population level and low costs in these terrifying, terrifying times?
After hours of speaking to NGO workers, one suggested a fantastic innovative idea of distributing parenting information leaflets via bread wrappers -- bread wrappers that were being delivered to families in a conflict zone in Syria by humanitarian workers.
So that's what we did.
The bread wrappers haven't changed at all in their appearance, except for the addition of two pieces of paper.
One was a parenting information leaflet that had basic advice and information that normalized to the parent what they might be experiencing, and what their child might be experiencing.
And information on how they could support themselves and their children, such as information like spending time talking to your child, showing them more affection, being more patient with your child, talking to your children.
The other piece of paper was a feedback questionnaire, and of course, there was a pen.
So is this simply leaflet distribution, or is this actually a possible means of delivering psychological first aid that provides warm, secure, loving parenting?
We managed to distribute 3,000 of these in just one week.
What was incredible was we had a 60 percent response rate.
60 percent of the 3,000 families responded.
I don't know how many researchers we have here today, but that kind of response rate is fantastic.
To have that in Manchester would be a huge achievement, let alone in a conflict zone in Syria -- really highlighting how important these kinds of messages were to families.
I remember how excited and eager we were for the return of the questionnaires.
The families had left hundreds of messages -- most incredibly positive and encouraging.
But my favorite has got to be, "Thank you for not forgetting about us and our children."
This really illustrates the potential means of the delivery of psychological first aid to families, and the return of feedback, too.
Just imagine replicating this using other means such as baby milk distribution, or female hygiene kits, or even food baskets.
But let's bring this closer to home, because the refugee crisis is one that is having an effect on every single one of us.
We're bombarded with images daily of statistics and of photos, and that's not surprising, because by last month, over one million refugees had reached Europe.
One million.
Refugees are joining our communities, they're becoming our neighbors, their children are attending our children's schools.
So we've adapted the leaflet to meet the needs of European refugees, and we have them online, open-access, in areas with a really high refugee influx.
For example, the Swedish healthcare uploaded it onto their website, and within the first 45 minutes, it was downloaded 343 times -- really highlighting how important it is for volunteers, practitioners and other parents to have open-access, psychological first-aid messages.
In 2013, I was sitting on the cold, hard floor of a refugee camp tent with mothers sitting around me as I was conducting a focus group.
Across from me stood an elderly lady with what seemed to be a 13-year-old girl lying beside her, with her head on the elderly lady's knees.
The girl stayed quiet throughout the focus group, not talking at all, with her knees curled up against her chest.
Towards the end of the focus group, and as I was thanking the mothers for their time, the elderly lady looked at me while pointing at the young girl, and said to me, "Can you help us with...?"
Not quite sure what she expected me to do, I looked at the young girl and smiled, and in Arabic I said, "Salaam alaikum. Shu-ismak?"
"What's your name?"
She looked at me really confused and unengaged, but then said, "Halul."
Halul is the pet's name for the Arabic female name, Hala, and is only really used to refer to really young girls.
At that point I realized that actually Hala was probably much older than 13.
It turns out Hala was a 25-year-old mother to three young children.
Hala had been a confident, bright, bubbly, loving, caring mother to her children, but the war had changed all of that.
She had lived through bombs being dropped in her town; she had lived through explosions.
When fighter jets were flying around their building, dropping bombs, her children would be screaming, terrified from the noise.
Hala would frantically grab pillows and cover her children's ears to block out the noise, all the while screaming herself.
When they reached the refugee camp and she knew they were finally in some kind of safety, she completely withdrew to acting like her old childhood self.
She completely rejected her family -- her children, her husband.
Hala simply could no longer cope.
This is a parenting struggle with a really tough ending, but sadly, it's not uncommon.
Those who experience armed conflict and displacement will face serious emotional struggles.
And that's something we can all relate to.
If you have been through a devastating time in your life, if you have lost someone or something you really care about, how would you continue to cope?
Could you still be able to care for yourself and for your family?
Given that the first years of a child's life are crucial for healthy physical and emotional development, and that 1.5 billion people are experiencing armed conflict -- many of whom are now joining our communities -- we cannot afford to turn a blind eye to the needs of those who are experiencing war and displacement.
We must prioritize these families' needs -- both those who are internally displaced, and those who are refugees worldwide.
These needs must be prioritized by NGO workers, policy makers, the WHO, the UNHCR and every single one of us in whatever capacity it is that we function in our society.
When we begin to recognize the individual faces of the conflict, when we begin to notice those intricate emotions on their faces, we begin to see them as humans, too.
We begin to see the needs of these families, and these are the real human needs.
When these family needs are prioritized, interventions for children in humanitarian settings will prioritize and recognize the primary role of the family in supporting children.
Family mental health will be shouting loud and clear in global, international agenda.
And children will be less likely to enter social service systems in resettlement countries because their families would have had support earlier on.
And we will be more open-minded, more welcoming, more caring and more trusting to those who are joining our communities.
We need to stop wars.
We need to build a world where children can dream of planes dropping gifts, and not bombs.
Until we stop armed conflicts raging throughout the world, families will continue to be displaced, leaving children vulnerable.
But by improving parenting and caregiver support, it may be possible to weaken the links between war and psychological difficulties in children and their families.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Guitar music starts) (Cheers) (Cheers) (Music ends)
People have been using media to talk about sex for a long time.
Love letters, phone sex, racy Polaroids.
There's even a story of a girl who eloped with a man that she met over the telegraph in 1886.
Today we have sexting, and I am a sexting expert.
Not an expert sexter.
Though, I do know what this means -- I think you do too.
[it's a penis] (Laughter) I have been studying sexting since the media attention to it began in 2008.
I wrote a book on the moral panic about sexting.
And here's what I found: most people are worrying about the wrong thing.
They're trying to just prevent sexting from happening entirely.
But let me ask you this: As long as it's completely consensual, what's the problem with sexting?
People are into all sorts of things that you may not be into, like blue cheese or cilantro.
(Laughter) Sexting is certainly risky, like anything that's fun, but as long as you're not sending an image to someone who doesn't want to receive it, there's no harm.
What I do think is a serious problem is when people share private images of others without their permission.
And instead of worrying about sexting, what I think we need to do is think a lot more about digital privacy.
The key is consent.
Right now most people are thinking about sexting without really thinking about consent at all.
Did you know that we currently criminalize teen sexting?
It can be a crime because it counts as child pornography, if there's an image of someone under 18, and it doesn't even matter if they took that image of themselves and shared it willingly.
So we end up with this bizarre legal situation where two 17-year-olds can legally have sex in most US states but they can't photograph it.
Some states have also tried passing sexting misdemeanor laws but these laws repeat the same problem because they still make consensual sexting illegal.
It doesn't make sense to try to ban all sexting to try to address privacy violations.
This is kind of like saying, let's solve the problem of date rape by just making dating completely illegal.
Most teens don't get arrested for sexting, but can you guess who does?
It's often teens who are disliked by their partner's parents.
And this can be because of class bias, racism or homophobia.
Most prosecutors are, of course, smart enough not to use child pornography charges against teenagers, but some do.
According to researchers at the University of New Hampshire seven percent of all child pornography possession arrests are teens, sexting consensually with other teens.
Child pornography is a serious crime, but it's just not the same thing as teen sexting.
Parents and educators are also responding to sexting without really thinking too much about consent.
Their message to teens is often: just don't do it.
And I totally get it -- there are serious legal risks and of course, that potential for privacy violations.
And when you were a teen, I'm sure you did exactly as you were told, right?
You're probably thinking, my kid would never sext.
And that's true, your little angel may not be sexting because only 33 percent of 16- and 17-year-olds are sexting.
But, sorry, by the time they're older, odds are they will be sexting.
Every study I've seen puts the rate above 50 percent for 18- to 24-year-olds.
And most of the time, nothing goes wrong.
People ask me all the time things like, isn't sexting just so dangerous, though?
It's like you wouldn't leave your wallet on a park bench and you expect it's going to get stolen if you do that, right?
Here's how I think about it: sexting is like leaving your wallet at your boyfriend's house.
If you come back the next day and all the money is just gone, you really need to dump that guy.
(Laughter) So instead of criminalizing sexting to try to prevent these privacy violations, instead we need to make consent central to how we think about the circulation of our private information.
Every new media technology raises privacy concerns.
In fact, in the US the very first major debates about privacy were in response to technologies that were relatively new at the time.
In the late 1800s, people were worried about cameras, which were just suddenly more portable than ever before, and newspaper gossip columns.
They were worried that the camera would capture information about them, take it out of context and widely disseminate it.
Does this sound familiar?
It's exactly what we're worrying about now with social media and drone cameras, and, of course, sexting.
And these fears about technology, they make sense because technologies can amplify and bring out our worst qualities and behaviors.
But there are solutions.
And we've been here before with a dangerous new technology.
In 1908, Ford introduced the Model T car.
Traffic fatality rates were rising.
It was a serious problem -- it looks so safe, right?
Our first response was to try to change drivers' behavior, so we developed speed limits and enforced them through fines.
But over the following decades, we started to realize the technology of the car itself is not just neutral.
We could design the car to make it safer.
So in the 1920s, we got shatter-resistant windshields.
In the 1950s, seat belts.
And in the 1990s, airbags.
All three of these areas: laws, individuals and industry came together over time to help solve the problem that a new technology causes.
And we can do the same thing with digital privacy.
Of course, it comes back to consent.
Here's the idea.
Before anyone can distribute your private information, they should have to get your permission.
This idea of affirmative consent comes from anti-rape activists who tell us that we need consent for every sexual act.
And we have really high standards for consent in a lot of other areas.
Think about having surgery.
Your doctor has to make sure that you are meaningfully and knowingly consenting to that medical procedure.
This is not the type of consent like with an iTunes Terms of Service where you just scroll to the bottom and you're like, agree, agree, whatever.
(Laughter) If we think more about consent, we can have better privacy laws.
Right now, we just don't have that many protections.
If your ex-husband or your ex-wife is a terrible person, they can take your nude photos and upload them to a porn site.
It can be really hard to get those images taken down.
And in a lot of states, you're actually better off if you took the images of yourself because then you can file a copyright claim.
(Laughter) Right now, if someone violates your privacy, whether that's an individual or a company or the NSA, you can try filing a lawsuit, though you may not be successful because many courts assume that digital privacy is just impossible.
So they're not willing to punish anyone for violating it.
I still hear people asking me all the time, isn't a digital image somehow blurring the line between public and private because it's digital, right?
No! No!
Everything digital is not just automatically public.
That doesn't make any sense.
As NYU legal scholar Helen Nissenbaum tells us, we have laws and policies and norms that protect all kinds of information that's private, and it doesn't make a difference if it's digital or not.
All of your health records are digitized but your doctor can't just share them with anyone.
All of your financial information is held in digital databases, but your credit card company can't just post your purchase history online.
Better laws could help address privacy violations after they happen, but one of the easiest things we can all do is make personal changes to help protect each other's privacy.
We're always told that privacy is our own, sole, individual responsibility.
We're told, constantly monitor and update your privacy settings.
We're told, never share anything you wouldn't want the entire world to see.
This doesn't make sense.
Digital media are social environments and we share things with people we trust all day, every day.
As Princeton researcher Janet Vertesi argues, our data and our privacy, they're not just personal, they're actually interpersonal.
And so one thing you can do that's really easy is just start asking for permission before you share anyone else's information.
If you want to post a photo of someone online, ask for permission.
If you want to forward an email thread, ask for permission.
And if you want to share someone's nude selfie, obviously, ask for permission.
These individual changes can really help us protect each other's privacy, but we need technology companies on board as well.
These companies have very little incentive to help protect our privacy because their business models depend on us sharing everything with as many people as possible.
Right now, if I send you an image, you can forward that to anyone that you want.
But what if I got to decide if that image was forwardable or not?
This would tell you, you don't have my permission to send this image out.
We do this kind of thing all the time to protect copyright.
If you buy an e-book, you can't just send it out to as many people as you want.
So why not try this with mobile phones?
What you can do is we can demand that tech companies add these protections to our devices and our platforms as the default.
After all, you can choose the color of your car, but the airbags are always standard.
If we don't think more about digital privacy and consent, there can be serious consequences.
There was a teenager from Ohio -- let's call her Jennifer, for the sake of her privacy.
She shared nude photos of herself with her high school boyfriend, thinking she could trust him.
Unfortunately, he betrayed her and sent her photos around the entire school.
Jennifer was embarrassed and humiliated, but instead of being compassionate, her classmates harassed her.
They called her a slut and a whore and they made her life miserable.
Jennifer started missing school and her grades dropped.
Ultimately, Jennifer decided to end her own life.
Jennifer did nothing wrong.
All she did was share a nude photo with someone she thought that she could trust.
And yet our laws tell her that she committed a horrible crime equivalent to child pornography.
Our gender norms tell her that by producing this nude image of herself, she somehow did the most horrible, shameful thing.
And when we assume that privacy is impossible in digital media, we completely write off and excuse her boyfriend's bad, bad behavior.
People are still saying all the time to victims of privacy violations, "What were you thinking?
You should have never sent that image."
If you're trying to figure out what to say instead, try this.
Imagine you've run into your friend who broke their leg skiing.
They took a risk to do something fun, and it didn't end well.
But you're probably not going to be the jerk who says, "Well, I guess you shouldn't have gone skiing then."
If we think more about consent, we can see that victims of privacy violations deserve our compassion, not criminalization, shaming, harassment or punishment.
We can support victims, and we can prevent some privacy violations by making these legal, individual and technological changes.
Because the problem is not sexting, the issue is digital privacy.
And one solution is consent.
So the next time a victim of a privacy violation comes up to you, instead of blaming them, let's do this instead: let's shift our ideas about digital privacy, and let's respond with compassion.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Most of you can probably relate to what I'm feeling right now.
My heart is racing in my chest.
My palms are a little bit clammy.
I'm sweating.
And my breath is a little bit shallow.
Now, these familiar sensations are obviously the result of standing up in front of a thousand of you and giving a talk that might be streamed online to perhaps a million more.
But the physical sensations I'm experiencing right now are actually the result of a much more basic mind-body mechanism.
My nervous system is sending a flood of hormones like cortisol and adrenaline into my bloodstream.
It's a very old and very necessary response that sends blood and oxygen to the organs and muscles that I might need to respond quickly to a potential threat.
But there's a problem with this response, and that is, it can get over-activated.
If I face these kinds of stressors on a daily basis, particularly over an extended period of time, my system can get overloaded.
So basically, if this response happens infrequently: super-necessary for my well-being and survival.
But if it happens too much, it can actually make me sick.
There's a growing body of research examining the relationship between chronic stress and illness.
Things like heart disease and even cancer are being shown to have a relationship to stress.
And that's because, over time, too much activation from stress can interfere with my body's processes that keep me healthy.
Now, let's imagine for a moment that I was pregnant.
What might this kind of stress, particularly over the length of my pregnancy, what kind of impact might that have on the health of my developing fetus?
You probably won't be surprised when I tell you that this kind of stress during pregnancy is not good.
It can even cause the body to initiate labor too early, because in a basic sense, the stress communicates that the womb is no longer a safe place for the child.
Stress during pregnancy is linked with things like high blood pressure and low infant birth weight, and it can begin a cascade of health challenges that make birth much more dangerous for both parent and child.
Now of course stress, particularly in our modern lifestyle, is a somewhat universal experience, right?
Maybe you've never stood up to give a TED Talk, but you've faced a big presentation at work, a sudden job loss, a big test, a heated conflict with a family member or friend.
But it turns out that the kind of stress we experience and whether we're able to stay in a relaxed state long enough to keep our bodies working properly depends a lot on who we are.
There's also a growing body of research showing that people who experience more discrimination are more likely to have poor health.
Even the threat of discrimination, like worrying you might be stopped by police while driving your car, can have a negative impact on your health.
Harvard Professor Dr. David Williams, the person who pioneered the tools that have proven these linkages, says that the more marginalized groups in our society experience more discrimination and more impacts on their health.
I've been interested in these issues for over a decade.
I became interested in maternal health when a failed premed trajectory instead sent me down a path looking for other ways to help pregnant people.
I became a doula, a lay person trained to provide support to people during pregnancy and childbirth.
And because I'm Latina and a Spanish speaker, in my first volunteer doula gig at a public hospital in North Carolina, I saw clearly how race and class impacted the experiences of the women that I supported.
If we take a look at the statistics about the rates of illness during pregnancy and childbirth, we see clearly the pattern outlined by Dr. Williams.
African-American women in particular have an entirely different experience than white women when it comes to whether their babies are born healthy.
In certain parts of the country, particularly the Deep South, the rates of mother and infant death for black women actually approximate those rates in Sub-Saharan African.
In those same communities, the rates for white women are near zero.
Even nationally, black women are four times more likely to die during pregnancy and childbirth than white women.
Four times more likely to die.
They're also twice as likely for their infants to die before the first year of life than white infants, and two to three times more likely to give birth too early or too skinny -- a sign of insufficient development.
Native women are also more likely to have higher rates of these problems than white women, as are some groups of Latinas.
For the last decade as a doula turned journalist and blogger, I've been trying to raise the alarm about just how different the experiences of women of color, but particularly black women, are when it comes to pregnancy and birth in the US.
But when I tell people about these appalling statistics, I'm usually met with an assumption that it's about either poverty or lack of access to care.
But it turns out, neither of these things tell the whole story.
Even middle-class black women still have much worse outcomes than their middle-class white counterparts.
The gap actually widens among this group.
And while access to care is definitely still a problem, even women of color who receive the recommended prenatal care still suffer from these high rates.
And so we come back to the path from discrimination to stress to poor health, and it begins to paint a picture that many people of color know to be true: racism is actually making us sick.
Still sound like a stretch?
Consider this: immigrants, particularly black and Latina immigrants, actually have better health when they first arrive in the United States.
But the longer they stay in this country, the worse their health becomes.
People like me, born in the United States to Cuban immigrant parents, are actually more likely to have worse health than my grandparents did.
It's what researchers call "the immigrant paradox," and it further illustrates that there's something in the US environment that is making us sick.
But here's the thing: this problem, that racism is making people of color, but especially black women and babies, sick, is vast.
I could spend all of my time with you talking about it, but I won't, because I want to make sure to tell you about one solution.
And the good news is, it's a solution that isn't particularly expensive, and doesn't require any fancy drug treatments or new technologies.
The solution is called, "The JJ Way."
Meet Jennie Joseph.
She's a midwife in the Orlando, Florida area who has been serving pregnant women for over a decade.
In what she calls her easy-access clinics, Jennie and her team provide prenatal care to over 600 women per year.
Her clients, most of whom are black, Haitian and Latina, deliver at the local hospital.
But by providing accessible and respectful prenatal care, Jennie has achieved something remarkable: almost all of her clients give birth to healthy, full-term babies.
Her method is deceptively simple.
Jennie says that all of her appointments start at the front desk.
Every member of her team, and every moment a women is at her clinic, is as supportive as possible.
No one is turned away due to lack of funds.
The JJ Way is to make the finances work no matter what the hurdles.
No one is chastised for showing up late to their appointments.
No one is talked down to or belittled.
Jennie's waiting room feels more like your aunt's living room than a clinic.
She calls this space "a classroom in disguise."
With the plush chairs arranged in a circle, women wait for their appointments in one-on-one chats with a staff educator, or in group prenatal classes.
When you finally are called back to your appointment, you are greeted by Alexis or Trina, two of Jennie's medical assistants.
Both are young, African-American and moms themselves.
Their approach is casual and friendly.
During one visit I observed, Trina chatted with a young soon-to-be mom while she took her blood pressure.
This Latina mom was having trouble keeping food down due to nausea.
As Trina deflated the blood pressure cuff, she said, "We'll see about changing your prescription, OK?
We can't have you not eating."
That "we" is actually a really crucial aspect of Jennie's model.
She sees her staff as part of a team that, alongside the woman and her family, has one goal: get mom to term with a healthy baby.
Jennie says that Trina and Alexis are actually the center of her care model, and that her role as a provider is just to support their work.
Trina spends a lot of her day on her cell phone, texting with clients about all sorts of things.
One woman texted to ask if a medication she was prescribed at the hospital was OK to take while pregnant.
The answer was no.
Another woman texted with pictures of an infant born under Jennie's care.
Lastly, when you finally are called back to see the provider, you've already taken your own weight in the waiting room, and done your own pee test in the bathroom.
This is a big departure from the traditional medical model, because it places responsibility and information back in the woman's hands.
So rather than a medical setting where you might be chastised for not keeping up with provider recommendations -- the kind of settings often available to low-income women -- Jennie's model is to be as supportive as possible.
And that support provides a crucial buffer to the stress of racism and discrimination facing these women every day.
But here's the best thing about Jennie's model: it's been incredibly successful.
Remember those statistics I told you, that black women are more likely to give birth too early, to give birth to low birth weight babies, to even die due to complications of pregnancy and childbirth?
Well, The JJ Way has almost entirely eliminated those problems, starting with what Jennie calls "skinny babies."
She's been able to get almost all her clients to term with healthy, chunky babies like this one.
Audience: Aw!
Miriam Zoila Prez: This is a baby girl born to a client of Jennie's this past June.
A similar demographic of women in Jennie's area who gave birth at the same hospital her clients did were three times more likely to give birth to a baby below a healthy weight.
Jennie is making headway into what has been seen for decades as an almost intractable problem.
Some of you might be thinking, all this one-on-one attention that The JJ Way requires must be too expensive to scale.
Well, you'd be wrong.
The visit with the provider is not the center of Jennie's model, and for good reason.
Those visits are expensive, and in order to maintain her model, she's got to see a lot of clients to cover costs.
But Jennie doesn't have to spend a ton of time with each woman, if all of the members of her team can provide the support, information and care that her clients need.
The beauty of Jennie's model is that she actually believes it can be implemented in pretty much any health care setting.
It's a revolution in care just waiting to happen.
These problems I've been sharing with you are big.
They come from long histories of racism, classism, a society based on race and class stratification.
They involve elaborate physiological mechanisms meant to protect us, that, when overstimulated, actually make us sick.
But if there's one thing I've learned from my work as a doula, it's that a little bit of unconditional support can go a really long way.
History has shown that people are incredibly resilient, and while we can't eradicate racism or the stress that results from it overnight, we might just be able to create environments that provide a buffer to what people of color experience on a daily basis.
And during pregnancy, that buffer can be an incredible tool towards shifting the impact of racism for generations to come.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Five years ago, I had my dream job.
I was a foreign correspondent in the Middle East reporting for ABC News.
But there was a crack in the wall, a problem with our industry, that I felt we needed to fix.
You see, I got to the Middle East right around the end of 2007, which was just around the midpoint of the Iraq War.
But by the time I got there, it was already nearly impossible to find stories about Iraq on air.
Coverage had dropped across the board, across networks.
And of the stories that did make it, more than 80 percent of them were about us.
We were missing the stories about Iraq, the people who live there, and what was happening to them under the weight of the war.
Afghanistan had already fallen off the agenda.
There were less than one percent of all news stories in 2008 that went to the war in Afghanistan.
It was the longest war in US history, but information was so scarce that schoolteachers we spoke to told us they had trouble explaining to their students what we were doing there, when those students had parents who were fighting and sometimes dying overseas.
We had drawn a blank, and it wasn't just Iraq and Afghanistan.
From conflict zones to climate change to all sorts of issues around crises in public health, we were missing what I call the species-level issues, because as a species, they could actually sink us.
And by failing to understand the complex issues of our time, we were facing certain practical implications.
How were we going to solve problems that we didn't fundamentally understand, that we couldn't track in real time, and where the people working on the issues were invisible to us and sometimes invisible to each other?
When you look back on Iraq, those years when we were missing the story, were the years when the society was falling apart, when we were setting the conditions for what would become the rise of ISIS, the ISIS takeover of Mosul and terrorist violence that would spread beyond Iraq's borders to the rest of the world.
Just around that time where I was making that observation, I looked across the border of Iraq and noticed there was another story we were missing: the war in Syria.
If you were a Middle-East specialist, you knew that Syria was that important from the start.
But it ended up being, really, one of the forgotten stories of the Arab Spring.
I saw the implications up front.
Syria is intimately tied to regional security, to global stability.
I felt like we couldn't let that become another one of the stories we left behind.
So I left my big TV job to start a website, called "Syria Deeply."
It was designed to be a news and information source that made it easier to understand a complex issue, and for the past four years, it's been a resource for policymakers and professionals working on the conflict in Syria.
We built a business model based on consistent, high-quality information, and convening the top minds on the issue.
And we found it was a model that scaled.
We got passionate requests to do other things "Deeply."
So we started to work our way down the list.
I'm just one of many entrepreneurs, and we are just one of many start-ups trying to fix what's wrong with news.
All of us in the trenches know that something is wrong with the news industry.
It's broken.
Trust in the media has hit an all-time low.
And the statistic you're seeing up there is from September -- it's arguably gotten worse.
But we can fix this.
We can fix the news.
I know that that's true.
You can call me an idealist; I call myself an industrious optimist.
And I know there are a lot of us out there.
We have ideas for how to make things better, and I want to share three of them that we've picked up in our own work.
Idea number one: we need news that's built on deep-domain knowledge.
Given the waves and waves of layoffs at newsrooms across the country, we've lost the art of specialization.
Beat reporting is an endangered thing.
When it comes to foreign news, the way we can fix that is by working with more local journalists, treating them like our partners and collaborators, not just fixers who fetch us phone numbers and sound bites.
Our local reporters in Syria and across Africa and across Asia bring us stories that we certainly would not have found on our own.
Like this one from the suburbs of Damascus, about a wheelchair race that gave hope to those wounded in the war.
Or this one from Sierra Leone, about a local chief who curbed the spread of Ebola by self-organizing a quarantine in his district.
Or this one from the border of Pakistan, about Afghan refugees being forced to return home before they are ready, under the threat of police intimidation.
Our local journalists are our mentors.
They teach us something new every day, and they bring us stories that are important for all of us to know.
Idea number two: we need a kind of Hippocratic oath for the news industry, a pledge to first do no harm.
(Applause) Journalists need to be tough.
We need to speak truth to power, but we also need to be responsible.
We need to live up to our own ideals, and we need to recognize when what we're doing could potentially harm society, where we lose track of journalism as a public service.
I watched us cover the Ebola crisis.
We launched Ebola Deeply. We did our best.
But what we saw was a public that was flooded with hysterical and sensational coverage, sometimes inaccurate, sometimes completely wrong.
Public health experts tell me that that actually cost us in human lives, because by sparking more panic and by sometimes getting the facts wrong, we made it harder for people to resolve what was actually happening on the ground.
All that noise made it harder to make the right decisions.
We can do better as an industry, but it requires us recognizing how we got it wrong last time, and deciding not to go that way next time.
It's a choice.
We have to resist the temptation to use fear for ratings.
And that decision has to be made in the individual newsroom and with the individual news executive.
Because the next deadly virus that comes around could be much worse and the consequences much higher, if we do what we did last time; if our reporting isn't responsible and it isn't right.
The third idea?
We need to embrace complexity if we want to make sense of a complex world.
Embrace complexity -- (Applause) not treat the world simplistically, because simple isn't accurate.
We live in a complex world.
News is adult education.
It's our job as journalists to get elbow deep in complexity and to find new ways to make it easier for everyone else to understand.
If we don't do that, if we pretend there are just simple answers, we're leading everyone off a steep cliff.
Understanding complexity is the only way to know the real threats that are around the corner.
It's our responsibility to translate those threats and to help you understand what's real, so you can be prepared and know what it takes to be ready for what comes next.
I am an industrious optimist.
I do believe we can fix what's broken.
We all want to.
There are great journalists out there doing great work -- we just need new formats.
I honestly believe this is a time of reawakening, reimagining what we can do.
I believe we can fix what's broken.
I know we can fix the news.
I know it's worth trying, and I truly believe that in the end, we're going to get this right.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So have you ever wondered what it would be like to live in a place with no rules?
That sounds pretty cool.
(Laughter) You wake up one morning, however, and you discover that the reason there are no rules is because there's no government, and there are no laws.
In fact, all social institutions have disappeared.
So there's no schools, there's no hospitals, there's no police, there's no banks, there's no athletic clubs, there's no utilities.
Well, I know a little bit about what this is like, because when I was a medical student in 1999, I worked in a refugee camp in the Balkans during the Kosovo War.
When the war was over, I got permission -- unbelievably -- from my medical school to take some time off and follow some of the families that I had befriended in the camp back to their village in Kosovo, and understand how they navigated life in this postwar setting.
Postwar Kosovo was a very interesting place because NATO troops were there, mostly to make sure the war didn't break out again.
But other than that, it was actually a lawless place, and almost every social institution, both public and private, had been destroyed.
So I can tell you that when you go into one of these situations and settings, it is absolutely thrilling ...
for about 30 minutes, because that's about how long it takes before you run into a situation where you realize how incredibly vulnerable you are.
For me, that moment came when I had to cross the first checkpoint, and I realized as I drove up that I would be negotiating passage through this checkpoint with a heavily armed individual who, if he decided to shoot me right then and there, actually wouldn't be doing anything illegal.
But the sense of vulnerability that I had was absolutely nothing in comparison to the vulnerability of the families that I got to know over that year.
You see, life in a society where there are no social institutions is riddled with danger and uncertainty, and simple questions like, "What are we going to eat tonight?"
are very complicated to answer.
Questions about security, when you don't have any security systems, are terrifying.
Is that altercation I had with the neighbor down the block going to turn into a violent episode that will end my life or my family's life?
Health concerns when there is no health system are also terrifying.
I listened as many families had to sort through questions like, "My infant has a fever. What am I going to do?"
"My sister, who is pregnant, is bleeding. What should I do?
Who should I turn to?"
"Where are the doctors, where are the nurses?
If I could find one, are they trustworthy?
How will I pay them? In what currency will I pay them?"
"If I need medications, where will I find them?
If I take those medications, are they actually counterfeits?"
And on and on.
So for life in these settings, the dominant theme, the dominant feature of life, is the incredible vulnerability that people have to manage day in and day out, because of the lack of social systems.
And it actually turns out that this feature of life is incredibly difficult to explain and be understood by people who are living outside of it.
I discovered this when I left Kosovo.
I came back to Boston, I became a physician, I became a global public health policy researcher.
I joined the Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital Division of Global Health.
And I, as a researcher, really wanted to get started on this problem right away.
I was like, "How do we reduce the crushing vulnerability of people living in these types of fragile settings?
Is there any way we can start to think about how to protect and quickly recover the institutions that are critical to survival, like the health system?"
And I have to say, I had amazing colleagues.
But one interesting thing about it was, this was sort of an unusual question for them.
They were kind of like, "Oh, if you work in war, doesn't that mean you work on refugee camps, and you work on documenting mass atrocities?" -- which is, by the way, very, very, very important.
So it took me a while to explain why I was so passionate about this issue, until about six years ago.
That's when this landmark study that looked at and described the public health consequences of war was published.
They came to an incredible, provocative conclusion.
These researchers concluded that the vast majority of death and disability from war happens after the cessation of conflict.
So the most dangerous time to be a person living in a conflict-affected state is after the cessation of hostilities; it's after the peace deal has been signed.
It's when that political solution has been achieved.
That seems so puzzling, but of course it's not, because war kills people by robbing them of their clinics, of their hospitals, of their supply chains.
Their doctors are targeted, are killed; they're on the run.
And more invisible and yet more deadly is the destruction of the health governance institutions and their finances.
So this is really not surprising at all to me.
But what is surprising and somewhat dismaying, is how little impact this insight has had, in terms of how we think about human suffering and war.
Let me give you a couple examples.
Last year, you may remember, Ebola hit the West African country of Liberia.
There was a lot of reporting about this group, Doctors Without Borders, sounding the alarm and calling for aid and assistance.
But not a lot of that reporting answered the question: Why is Doctors Without Borders even in Liberia?
Doctors Without Borders is an amazing organization, dedicated and designed to provide emergency care in war zones.
Liberia's civil war had ended in 2003 -- that was 11 years before Ebola even struck.
When Ebola struck Liberia, there were less than 50 doctors in the entire country of 4.5 million people.
Doctors Without Borders is in Liberia because Liberia still doesn't really have a functioning health system, 11 years later.
When the earthquake hit Haiti in 2010, the outpouring of international aid was phenomenal.
But did you know that only two percent of that funding went to rebuild Haitian public institutions, including its health sector?
From that perspective, Haitians continue to die from the earthquake even today.
I recently met this gentleman.
This is Dr. Nezar Ismet.
He's the Minister of Health in the northern autonomous region of Iraq, in Kurdistan.
Here he is announcing that in the last nine months, his country, his region, has increased from four million people to five million people.
That's a 25 percent increase.
Thousands of these new arrivals have experienced incredible trauma.
His doctors are working 16-hour days without pay.
His budget has not increased by 25 percent; it has decreased by 20 percent, as funding has flowed to security concerns and to short-term relief efforts.
When his health sector fails -- and if history is any guide, it will -- how do you think that's going to influence the decision making of the five million people in his region as they think about whether they should flee that type of vulnerable living situation?
So as you can see, this is a frustrating topic for me, and I really try to understand: Why the reluctance to protect and support indigenous health systems and security systems?
I usually tier two concerns, two arguments.
The first concern is about corruption, and the concern that people in these settings are corrupt and they are untrustworthy.
And I will admit that I have met unsavory characters working in health sectors in these situations.
But I will tell you that the opposite is absolutely true in every case I have worked on, from Afghanistan to Libya, to Kosovo, to Haiti, to Liberia -- I have met inspiring people, who, when the chips were down for their country, they risked everything to save their health institutions.
The trick for the outsider who wants to help is identifying who those individuals are, and building a pathway for them to lead.
That is exactly what happened in Afghanistan.
One of the unsung and untold success stories of our nation-building effort in Afghanistan involved the World Bank in 2002 investing heavily in identifying, training and promoting Afghani health sector leaders.
These health sector leaders have pulled off an incredible feat in Afghanistan.
They have aggressively increased access to health care for the majority of the population.
They are rapidly improving the health status of the Afghan population, which used to be the worst in the world.
In fact, the Afghan Ministry of Health does things that I wish we would do in America.
They use things like data to make policy.
It's incredible.
(Laughter) The other concern I hear a lot about is: "We just can't afford it, we just don't have the money.
It's just unsustainable."
I would submit to you that the current situation and the current system we have is the most expensive, inefficient system we could possibly conceive of.
The current situation is that when governments like the US -- or, let's say, the collection of governments that make up the European Commission -- every year, they spend 15 billion dollars on just humanitarian and emergency and disaster relief worldwide.
That's nothing about foreign aid, that's just disaster relief.
Ninety-five percent of it goes to international relief agencies, that then have to import resources into these areas, and knit together some type of temporary health system, let's say, which they then dismantle and send away when they run out of money.
So our job, it turns out, is very clear.
We, as the global health community policy experts, our first job is to become experts in how to monitor the strengths and vulnerabilities of health systems in threatened situations.
And that's when we see doctors fleeing, when we see health resources drying up, when we see institutions crumbling -- that's the emergency.
That's when we need to sound the alarm and wave our arms.
OK?
Not now.
Everyone can see that's an emergency, they don't need us to tell them that.
Number two: places like where I work at Harvard need to take their cue from the World Bank experience in Afghanistan, and we need to -- and we will -- build robust platforms to support health sector leaders like these.
These people risk their lives.
I think we can match their courage with some support.
Number three: we need to reach out and make new partnerships.
At our global health center, we have launched a new initiative with NATO and other security policy makers to explore with them what they can do to protect health system institutions during deployments.
We want them to see that protecting health systems and other critical social institutions is an integral part of their mission.
It's not just about avoiding collateral damage; it's about winning the peace.
But the most important partner we need to engage is you, the American public, and indeed, the world public.
Because unless you understand the value of social institutions, like health systems in these fragile settings, you won't support efforts to save them.
You won't click on that article that talks about "Hey, all those doctors are on the run in country X.
I wonder what that means.
I wonder what that means for that health system's ability to, let's say, detect influenza."
"Hmm, it's probably not good." That's what I'd tell you.
Up on the screen, I've put up my three favorite American institution defenders and builders.
Over here is George C. Marshall, he was the guy that proposed the Marshall Plan to save all of Europe's economic institutions after World War II.
And this Eleanor Roosevelt.
Her work on human rights really serves as the foundation for all of our international human rights organizations.
Then my big favorite is Ben Franklin, who did many things in terms of creating institutions, but was the midwife of our constitution.
And I would say to you that these are folks who, when our country was threatened, or our world was threatened, they didn't retreat.
They didn't talk about building walls.
They talked about building institutions to protect human security, for their generation and also for ours.
And I think our generation should do the same.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a kid, I was the quintessential nerd.
I think some of you were, too.
(Laughter) And you, sir, who laughed the loudest, you probably still are.
(Laughter) I grew up in a small town in the dusty plains of north Texas, the son of a sheriff who was the son of a pastor.
Getting into trouble was not an option.
And so I started reading calculus books for fun.
(Laughter) You did, too.
That led me to building a laser and a computer and model rockets, and that led me to making rocket fuel in my bedroom.
Now, in scientific terms, we call this a very bad idea.
(Laughter) Around that same time, Stanley Kubrick's "2001: A Space Odyssey" came to the theaters, and my life was forever changed.
I loved everything about that movie, especially the HAL 9000.
Now, HAL was a sentient computer designed to guide the Discovery spacecraft from the Earth to Jupiter.
HAL was also a flawed character, for in the end he chose to value the mission over human life.
Now, HAL was a fictional character, but nonetheless he speaks to our fears, our fears of being subjugated by some unfeeling, artificial intelligence who is indifferent to our humanity.
I believe that such fears are unfounded.
Indeed, we stand at a remarkable time in human history, where, driven by refusal to accept the limits of our bodies and our minds, we are building machines of exquisite, beautiful complexity and grace that will extend the human experience in ways beyond our imagining.
After a career that led me from the Air Force Academy to Space Command to now, I became a systems engineer, and recently I was drawn into an engineering problem associated with NASA's mission to Mars.
Now, in space flights to the Moon, we can rely upon mission control in Houston to watch over all aspects of a flight.
However, Mars is 200 times further away, and as a result it takes on average 13 minutes for a signal to travel from the Earth to Mars.
If there's trouble, there's not enough time.
And so a reasonable engineering solution calls for us to put mission control inside the walls of the Orion spacecraft.
Another fascinating idea in the mission profile places humanoid robots on the surface of Mars before the humans themselves arrive, first to build facilities and later to serve as collaborative members of the science team.
Now, as I looked at this from an engineering perspective, it became very clear to me that what I needed to architect was a smart, collaborative, socially intelligent artificial intelligence.
In other words, I needed to build something very much like a HAL but without the homicidal tendencies.
(Laughter) Let's pause for a moment.
Is it really possible to build an artificial intelligence like that?
Actually, it is.
In many ways, this is a hard engineering problem with elements of AI, not some wet hair ball of an AI problem that needs to be engineered.
To paraphrase Alan Turing, I'm not interested in building a sentient machine.
I'm not building a HAL.
All I'm after is a simple brain, something that offers the illusion of intelligence.
The art and the science of computing have come a long way since HAL was onscreen, and I'd imagine if his inventor Dr. Chandra were here today, he'd have a whole lot of questions for us.
Is it really possible for us to take a system of millions upon millions of devices, to read in their data streams, to predict their failures and act in advance?
Yes.
Can we build systems that converse with humans in natural language?
Yes.
Can we build systems that recognize objects, identify emotions, emote themselves, play games and even read lips?
Yes.
Can we build a system that sets goals, that carries out plans against those goals and learns along the way?
Yes.
Can we build systems that have a theory of mind?
This we are learning to do.
Can we build systems that have an ethical and moral foundation?
This we must learn how to do.
So let's accept for a moment that it's possible to build such an artificial intelligence for this kind of mission and others.
The next question you must ask yourself is, should we fear it?
Now, every new technology brings with it some measure of trepidation.
When we first saw cars, people lamented that we would see the destruction of the family.
When we first saw telephones come in, people were worried it would destroy all civil conversation.
At a point in time we saw the written word become pervasive, people thought we would lose our ability to memorize.
These things are all true to a degree, but it's also the case that these technologies brought to us things that extended the human experience in some profound ways.
So let's take this a little further.
I do not fear the creation of an AI like this, because it will eventually embody some of our values.
Consider this: building a cognitive system is fundamentally different than building a traditional software-intensive system of the past.
We don't program them. We teach them.
In order to teach a system how to recognize flowers, I show it thousands of flowers of the kinds I like.
In order to teach a system how to play a game -- Well, I would. You would, too.
I like flowers. Come on.
To teach a system how to play a game like Go, I'd have it play thousands of games of Go, but in the process I also teach it how to discern a good game from a bad game.
If I want to create an artificially intelligent legal assistant, I will teach it some corpus of law but at the same time I am fusing with it the sense of mercy and justice that is part of that law.
In scientific terms, this is what we call ground truth, and here's the important point: in producing these machines, we are therefore teaching them a sense of our values.
To that end, I trust an artificial intelligence the same, if not more, as a human who is well-trained.
But, you may ask, what about rogue agents, some well-funded nongovernment organization?
I do not fear an artificial intelligence in the hand of a lone wolf.
Clearly, we cannot protect ourselves against all random acts of violence, but the reality is such a system requires substantial training and subtle training far beyond the resources of an individual.
And furthermore, it's far more than just injecting an internet virus to the world, where you push a button, all of a sudden it's in a million places and laptops start blowing up all over the place.
Now, these kinds of substances are much larger, and we'll certainly see them coming.
Do I fear that such an artificial intelligence might threaten all of humanity?
If you look at movies such as "The Matrix," "Metropolis," "The Terminator," shows such as "Westworld," they all speak of this kind of fear.
Indeed, in the book "Superintelligence" by the philosopher Nick Bostrom, he picks up on this theme and observes that a superintelligence might not only be dangerous, it could represent an existential threat to all of humanity.
Dr. Bostrom's basic argument is that such systems will eventually have such an insatiable thirst for information that they will perhaps learn how to learn and eventually discover that they may have goals that are contrary to human needs.
Dr. Bostrom has a number of followers.
He is supported by people such as Elon Musk and Stephen Hawking.
With all due respect to these brilliant minds, I believe that they are fundamentally wrong.
Now, there are a lot of pieces of Dr. Bostrom's argument to unpack, and I don't have time to unpack them all, but very briefly, consider this: super knowing is very different than super doing.
HAL was a threat to the Discovery crew only insofar as HAL commanded all aspects of the Discovery.
So it would have to be with a superintelligence.
It would have to have dominion over all of our world.
This is the stuff of Skynet from the movie "The Terminator" in which we had a superintelligence that commanded human will, that directed every device that was in every corner of the world.
Practically speaking, it ain't gonna happen.
We are not building AIs that control the weather, that direct the tides, that command us capricious, chaotic humans.
And furthermore, if such an artificial intelligence existed, it would have to compete with human economies, and thereby compete for resources with us.
And in the end -- don't tell Siri this -- we can always unplug them.
(Laughter) We are on an incredible journey of coevolution with our machines.
The humans we are today are not the humans we will be then.
To worry now about the rise of a superintelligence is in many ways a dangerous distraction because the rise of computing itself brings to us a number of human and societal issues to which we must now attend.
How shall I best organize society when the need for human labor diminishes?
How can I bring understanding and education throughout the globe and still respect our differences?
How might I extend and enhance human life through cognitive healthcare?
How might I use computing to help take us to the stars?
And that's the exciting thing.
The opportunities to use computing to advance the human experience are within our reach, here and now, and we are just beginning.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Cultural evolution is a dangerous child for any species to let loose on its planet.
By the time you realize what's happening, the child is a toddler, up and causing havoc, and it's too late to put it back.
We humans are Earth's Pandoran species.
We're the ones who let the second replicator out of its box, and we can't push it back in.
We're seeing the consequences all around us.
Now that, I suggest, is the view that comes out of taking memetics seriously.
And it gives us a new way of thinking about not only what's going on on our planet, but what might be going on elsewhere in the cosmos.
So first of all, I'd like to say something about memetics and the theory of memes, and secondly, how this might answer questions about who's out there, if indeed anyone is.
So, memetics: memetics is founded on the principle of Universal Darwinism.
Darwin had this amazing idea.
Indeed, some people say it's the best idea anybody ever had.
Isn't that a wonderful thought, that there could be such a thing as a best idea anybody ever had?
Do you think there could?
Audience: No.
(Laughter) Susan Blackmore: Someone says no, very loudly, from over there.
Well, I say yes, and if there is, I give the prize to Darwin.
Why?
Because the idea was so simple, and yet it explains all design in the universe.
I would say not just biological design, but all of the design that we think of as human design.
It's all just the same thing happening.
What did Darwin say?
I know you know the idea, natural selection, but let me just paraphrase "The Origin of Species," 1859, in a few sentences.
What Darwin said was something like this: if you have creatures that vary, and that can't be doubted -- I've been to the Galapagos, and I've measured the size of the beaks and the size of the turtle shells and so on, and so on.
And 100 pages later.
(Laughter) And if there is a struggle for life, such that nearly all of these creatures die -- and this can't be doubted, I've read Malthus and I've calculated how long it would take for elephants to cover the whole world if they bred unrestricted, and so on and so on.
And another 100 pages later.
And if the very few that survive pass onto their offspring whatever it was that helped them survive, then those offspring must be better adapted to the circumstances in which all this happened than their parents were.
You see the idea?
If, if, if, then.
He had no concept of the idea of an algorithm, but that's what he described in that book, and this is what we now know as the evolutionary algorithm.
The principle is you just need those three things -- variation, selection and heredity.
And as Dan Dennett puts it, if you have those, then you must get evolution.
Or design out of chaos, without the aid of mind.
There's one word I love on that slide.
What do you think my favorite word is?
Audience: Chaos.
SB: Chaos? No. What? Mind? No.
Audience: Without.
SB: No, not without.
(Laughter) You try them all in order: Mmm...?
Audience: Must.
SB: Must, at must. Must, must.
This is what makes it so amazing.
You don't need a designer, or a plan, or foresight, or anything else.
If there's something that is copied with variation and it's selected, then you must get design appearing out of nowhere.
You can't stop it.
Must is my favorite word there.
Now, what's this to do with memes?
Well, the principle here applies to anything that is copied with variation and selection.
We're so used to thinking in terms of biology, we think about genes this way.
Darwin didn't, of course; he didn't know about genes.
He talked mostly about animals and plants, but also about languages evolving and becoming extinct.
But the principle of Universal Darwinism is that any information that is varied and selected will produce design.
And this is what Richard Dawkins was on about in his 1976 bestseller, "The Selfish Gene."
The information that is copied, he called the replicator.
It selfishly copies.
Not meaning it kind of sits around inside cells going, "I want to get copied."
But that it will get copied if it can, regardless of the consequences.
It doesn't care about the consequences because it can't, because it's just information being copied.
And he wanted to get away from everybody thinking all the time about genes, and so he said, "Is there another replicator out there on the planet?"
Ah, yes, there is.
Look around you -- here will do, in this room.
All around us, still clumsily drifting about in its primeval soup of culture, is another replicator.
Information that we copy from person to person, by imitation, by language, by talking, by telling stories, by wearing clothes, by doing things.
This is information copied with variation and selection.
This is design process going on.
He wanted a name for the new replicator.
So, he took the Greek word "mimeme," which means that which is imitated.
Remember that, that's the core definition: that which is imitated.
And abbreviated it to meme, just because it sounds good and made a good meme, an effective spreading meme.
So that's how the idea came about.
It's important to stick with that definition.
The whole science of memetics is much maligned, much misunderstood, much feared.
But a lot of these problems can be avoided by remembering the definition.
A meme is not equivalent to an idea.
It's not an idea. It's not equivalent to anything else, really.
Stick with the definition.
It's that which is imitated, or information which is copied from person to person.
So, let's see some memes.
Well, you sir, you've got those glasses hung around your neck in that particularly fetching way.
I wonder whether you invented that idea for yourself, or copied it from someone else?
If you copied it from someone else, it's a meme.
And what about, oh, I can't see any interesting memes here.
All right everyone, who's got some interesting memes for me?
Oh, well, your earrings, I don't suppose you invented the idea of earrings.
You probably went out and bought them.
There are plenty more in the shops.
That's something that's passed on from person to person.
All the stories that we're telling -- well, of course, TED is a great meme-fest, masses of memes.
The way to think about memes, though, is to think, why do they spread?
They're selfish information, they will get copied, if they can.
But some of them will be copied because they're good, or true, or useful, or beautiful.
Some of them will be copied even though they're not.
Some, it's quite hard to tell why.
There's one particular curious meme which I rather enjoy.
And I'm glad to say, as I expected, I found it when I came here, and I'm sure all of you found it, too.
You go to your nice, posh, international hotel somewhere, and you come in and you put down your clothes and you go to the bathroom, and what do you see?
Audience: Bathroom soap.
SB: Pardon?
Audience: Soap.
SB: Soap, yeah. What else do you see?
Audience: (Inaudible) SB: Mmm mmm.
Audience: Sink, toilet!
SB: Sink, toilet, yes, these are all memes, they're all memes, but they're sort of useful ones, and then there's this one.
(Laughter) What is this one doing?
(Laughter) This has spread all over the world.
It's not surprising that you all found it when you arrived in your bathrooms here.
But I took this photograph in a toilet at the back of a tent in the eco-camp in the jungle in Assam.
(Laughter) Who folded that thing up there, and why?
(Laughter) Some people get carried away.
(Laughter) Other people are just lazy and make mistakes.
Some hotels exploit the opportunity to put even more memes with a little sticker.
(Laughter) What is this all about?
I suppose it's there to tell you that somebody's cleaned the place, and it's all lovely.
And you know, actually, all it tells you is that another person has potentially spread germs from place to place.
(Laughter) So, think of it this way.
Imagine a world full of brains and far more memes than can possibly find homes.
The memes are all trying to get copied -- trying, in inverted commas -- i.e., that's the shorthand for, if they can get copied, they will.
They're using you and me as their propagating, copying machinery, and we are the meme machines.
Now, why is this important?
Why is this useful, or what does it tell us?
It gives us a completely new view of human origins and what it means to be human, all conventional theories of cultural evolution, of the origin of humans, and what makes us so different from other species.
All other theories explaining the big brain, and language, and tool use and all these things that make us unique, are based upon genes.
Language must have been useful for the genes.
Tool use must have enhanced our survival, mating and so on.
It always comes back, as Richard Dawkins complained all that long time ago, it always comes back to genes.
The point of memetics is to say, "Oh no, it doesn't."
There are two replicators now on this planet.
From the moment that our ancestors, perhaps two and a half million years ago or so, began imitating, there was a new copying process.
Copying with variation and selection.
A new replicator was let loose, and it could never be -- right from the start -- it could never be that human beings who let loose this new creature, could just copy the useful, beautiful, true things, and not copy the other things.
While their brains were having an advantage from being able to copy -- lighting fires, keeping fires going, new techniques of hunting, these kinds of things -- inevitably they were also copying putting feathers in their hair, or wearing strange clothes, or painting their faces, or whatever.
So, you get an arms race between the genes which are trying to get the humans to have small economical brains and not waste their time copying all this stuff, and the memes themselves, like the sounds that people made and copied -- in other words, what turned out to be language -- competing to get the brains to get bigger and bigger.
So, the big brain, on this theory, is driven by the memes.
This is why, in "The Meme Machine," I called it memetic drive.
As the memes evolve, as they inevitably must, they drive a bigger brain that is better at copying the memes that are doing the driving.
This is why we've ended up with such peculiar brains, that we like religion, and music, and art.
Language is a parasite that we've adapted to, not something that was there originally for our genes, on this view.
And like most parasites, it can begin dangerous, but then it coevolves and adapts, and we end up with a symbiotic relationship with this new parasite.
And so, from our perspective, we don't realize that that's how it began.
So, this is a view of what humans are.
All other species on this planet are gene machines only, they don't imitate at all well, hardly at all.
We alone are gene machines and meme machines as well.
The memes took a gene machine and turned it into a meme machine.
But that's not all.
We have a new kind of memes now.
I've been wondering for a long time, since I've been thinking about memes a lot, is there a difference between the memes that we copy -- the words we speak to each other, the gestures we copy, the human things -- and all these technological things around us?
I have always, until now, called them all memes, but I do honestly think now we need a new word for technological memes.
Let's call them techno-memes or temes.
Because the processes are getting different.
We began, perhaps 5,000 years ago, with writing.
We put the storage of memes out there on a clay tablet, but in order to get true temes and true teme machines, you need to get the variation, the selection and the copying, all done outside of humans.
And we're getting there.
We're at this extraordinary point where we're nearly there, that there are machines like that.
And indeed, in the short time I've already been at TED, I see we're even closer than I thought we were before.
So actually, now the temes are forcing our brains to become more like teme machines.
Our children are growing up very quickly learning to read, learning to use machinery.
We're going to have all kinds of implants, drugs that force us to stay awake all the time.
We'll think we're choosing these things, but the temes are making us do it.
So, we're at this cusp now of having a third replicator on our planet.
Now, what about what else is going on out there in the universe?
Is there anyone else out there?
People have been asking this question for a long time.
We've been asking it here at TED already.
In 1961, Frank Drake made his famous equation, but I think he concentrated on the wrong things.
It's been very productive, that equation.
He wanted to estimate N, the number of communicative civilizations out there in our galaxy, and he included in there the rate of star formation, the rate of planets, but crucially, intelligence.
I think that's the wrong way to think about it.
Intelligence appears all over the place, in all kinds of guises.
Human intelligence is only one kind of a thing.
But what's really important is the replicators you have and the levels of replicators, one feeding on the one before.
So, I would suggest that we don't think intelligence, we think replicators.
And on that basis, I've suggested a different kind of equation.
A very simple equation.
N, the same thing, the number of communicative civilizations out there [that] we might expect in our galaxy.
Just start with the number of planets there are in our galaxy.
The fraction of those which get a first replicator.
The fraction of those that get the second replicator.
The fraction of those that get the third replicator.
Because it's only the third replicator that's going to reach out -- sending information, sending probes, getting out there, and communicating with anywhere else.
OK, so if we take that equation, why haven't we heard from anybody out there?
Because every step is dangerous.
Getting a new replicator is dangerous.
You can pull through, we have pulled through, but it's dangerous.
Take the first step, as soon as life appeared on this earth.
We may take the Gaian view.
I loved Peter Ward's talk yesterday -- it's not Gaian all the time.
Actually, life forms produce things that kill themselves.
Well, we did pull through on this planet.
But then, a long time later, billions of years later, we got the second replicator, the memes.
That was dangerous, all right.
Think of the big brain.
How many mothers do we have here?
You know all about big brains.
They are dangerous to give birth to, are agonizing to give birth to.
(Laughter) My cat gave birth to four kittens, purring all the time.
Ah, mm -- slightly different.
(Laughter) But not only is it painful, it kills lots of babies, it kills lots of mothers, and it's very expensive to produce.
The genes are forced into producing all this myelin, all the fat to myelinate the brain.
Do you know, sitting here, your brain is using about 20 percent of your body's energy output for two percent of your body weight?
It's a really expensive organ to run.
Why? Because it's producing the memes.
Now, it could have killed us off. It could have killed us off, and maybe it nearly did, but you see, we don't know.
But maybe it nearly did.
Has it been tried before?
What about all those other species?
Louise Leakey talked yesterday about how we're the only one in this branch left.
What happened to the others?
Could it be that this experiment in imitation, this experiment in a second replicator, is dangerous enough to kill people off?
Well, we did pull through, and we adapted.
But now, we're hitting, as I've just described, we're hitting the third replicator point.
And this is even more dangerous -- well, it's dangerous again.
Why? Because the temes are selfish replicators and they don't care about us, or our planet, or anything else.
They're just information, why would they?
They are using us to suck up the planet's resources to produce more computers, and more of all these amazing things we're hearing about here at TED.
Don't think, "Oh, we created the Internet for our own benefit."
That's how it seems to us.
Think, temes spreading because they must.
We are the old machines.
Now, are we going to pull through?
What's going to happen?
What does it mean to pull through?
Well, there are kind of two ways of pulling through.
One that is obviously happening all around us now, is that the temes turn us into teme machines, with these implants, with the drugs, with us merging with the technology.
And why would they do that?
Because we are self-replicating.
We have babies.
We make new ones, and so it's convenient to piggyback on us, because we're not yet at the stage on this planet where the other option is viable.
Although it's closer, I heard this morning, it's closer than I thought it was.
Where the teme machines themselves will replicate themselves.
That way, it wouldn't matter if the planet's climate was utterly destabilized, and it was no longer possible for humans to live here.
Because those teme machines, they wouldn't need -- they're not squishy, wet, oxygen-breathing, warmth-requiring creatures.
They could carry on without us.
So, those are the two possibilities.
The second, I don't think we're that close.
It's coming, but we're not there yet.
The first, it's coming too.
But the damage that is already being done to the planet is showing us how dangerous the third point is, that third danger point, getting a third replicator.
And will we get through this third danger point, like we got through the second and like we got through the first?
Maybe we will, maybe we won't.
I have no idea.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: That was an incredible talk.
SB: Thank you. I scared myself.
CA: (Laughter)
Hi, I'm an engineer and I make robots.
Now, of course you all know what a robot is, right?
If you don't, you'd probably go to Google, and you'd ask Google what a robot is.
So let's do that.
We'll go to Google and this is what we get.
Now, you can see here there are lots of different types of robots, but they're predominantly humanoid in structure.
And they look pretty conventional because they've got plastic, they've got metal, they've got motors and gears and so on.
Some of them look quite friendly, and you could go up and you could hug them.
Some of them not so friendly, they look like they're straight out of "Terminator," in fact they may well be straight out of "Terminator."
You can do lots of really cool things with these robots -- you can do really exciting stuff.
But I'd like to look at different kinds of robots -- I want to make different kinds of robots.
And I take inspiration from the things that don't look like us, but look like these.
So these are natural biological organisms and they do some really cool things that we can't, and current robots can't either.
They do all sorts of great things like moving around on the floor; they go into our gardens and they eat our crops; they climb trees; they go in water, they come out of water; they trap insects and digest them.
So they do really interesting things.
They live, they breathe, they die, they eat things from the environment.
Our current robots don't really do that.
Now, wouldn't it be great if you could use some of those characteristics in future robots so that you could solve some really interesting problems?
I'm going to look at a couple of problems now in the environment where we can use the skills and the technologies derived from these animals and from the plants, and we can use them to solve those problems.
Let's have a look at two environmental problems.
They're both of our making -- this is man interacting with the environment and doing some rather unpleasant things.
The first one is to do with the pressure of population.
Such is the pressure of population around the world that agriculture and farming is required to produce more and more crops.
Now, to do that, farmers put more and more chemicals onto the land.
They put on fertilizers, nitrates, pesticides -- all sorts of things that encourage the growth of the crops, but there are some negative impacts.
One of the negative impacts is if you put lots of fertilizer on the land, not all of it goes into the crops.
Lots of it stays in the soil, and then when it rains, these chemicals go into the water table.
And in the water table, then they go into streams, into lakes, into rivers and into the sea.
Now, if you put all of these chemicals, these nitrates, into those kinds of environments, there are organisms in those environments that will be affected by that -- algae, for example.
Algae loves nitrates, it loves fertilizer, so it will take in all these chemicals, and if the conditions are right, it will mass produce.
It will produce masses and masses of new algae.
That's called a bloom.
The trouble is that when algae reproduces like this, it starves the water of oxygen.
As soon as you do that, the other organisms in the water can't survive.
So, what do we do?
We try to produce a robot that will eat the algae, consume it and make it safe.
So that's the first problem.
The second problem is also of our making, and it's to do with oil pollution.
Now, oil comes out of the engines that we use, the boats that we use.
Sometimes tankers flush their oil tanks into the sea, so oil is released into the sea that way.
Wouldn't it be nice if we could treat that in some way using robots that could eat the pollution the oil fields have produced?
So that's what we do.
We make robots that will eat pollution.
To actually make the robot, we take inspiration from two organisms.
On the right there you see the basking shark.
The basking shark is a massive shark.
It's noncarnivorous, so you can swim with it, as you can see.
And the basking shark opens its mouth, and it swims through the water, collecting plankton.
As it does that, it digests the food, and then it uses that energy in its body to keep moving.
So, could we make a robot like that -- like the basking shark that chugs through the water and eats up pollution?
Well, let's see if we can do that.
But also, we take the inspiration from other organisms.
I've got a picture here of a water boatman, and the water boatman is really cute.
When it's swimming in the water, it uses its paddle-like legs to push itself forward.
So we take those two organisms and we combine them together to make a new kind of robot.
In fact, because we're using the water boatman as inspiration, and our robot sits on top of the water, and it rows, we call it the "Row-bot."
So a Row-bot is a robot that rows.
OK. So what does it look like?
Here's some pictures of the Row-bot, and you'll see, it doesn't look anything like the robots we saw right at the beginning.
Google is wrong; robots don't look like that, they look like this.
So I've got the Row-bot here.
I'll just hold it up for you.
It gives you a sense of the scale, and it doesn't look anything like the others.
OK, so it's made out of plastic, and we'll have a look now at the components that make up the Row-bot -- what makes it really special.
The Row-bot is made up of three parts, and those three parts are really like the parts of any organism.
It's got a brain, it's got a body and it's got a stomach.
It needs the stomach to create the energy.
Any Row-bot will have those three components, and any organism will have those three components, so let's go through them one at a time.
It has a body, and its body is made out of plastic, and it sits on top of the water.
And it's got flippers on the side here -- paddles that help it move, just like the water boatman.
It's got a plastic body, but it's got a soft rubber mouth here, and a mouth here -- it's got two mouths.
Why does it have two mouths?
One is to let the food go in and the other is to let the food go out.
So you can see really it's got a mouth and a derriere, or a -- (Laughter) something where the stuff comes out, which is just like a real organism.
So it's starting to look like that basking shark.
So that's the body.
The second component might be the stomach.
We need to get the energy into the robot and we need to treat the pollution, so the pollution goes in, and it will do something.
It's got a cell in the middle here called a microbial fuel cell.
I'll put this down, and I'll lift up the fuel cell.
Here. So instead of having batteries, instead of having a conventional power system, it's got one of these.
This is its stomach.
And it really is a stomach because you can put energy in this side in the form of pollution, and it creates electricity.
So what is it?
It's called a microbial fuel cell.
It's a little bit like a chemical fuel cell, which you might have come across in school, or you might've seen in the news.
Chemical fuel cells take hydrogen and oxygen, and they can combine them together and you get electricity.
That's well-established technology; it was in the Apollo space missions.
That's from 40, 50 years ago.
This is slightly newer.
This is a microbial fuel cell.
It's the same principle: it's got oxygen on one side, but instead of having hydrogen on the other, it's got some soup, and inside that soup there are living microbes.
Now, if you take some organic material -- could be some waste products, some food, maybe a bit of your sandwich -- you put it in there, the microbes will eat that food, and they will turn it into electricity.
Not only that, but if you select the right kind of microbes, you can use the microbial fuel cell to treat some of the pollution.
If you choose the right microbes, the microbes will eat the algae.
If you use other kinds of microbes, they will eat petroleum spirits and crude oil.
So you can see how this stomach could be used to not only treat the pollution but also to generate electricity from the pollution.
So the robot will move through the environment, taking food into its stomach, digest the food, create electricity, use that electricity to move through the environment and keep doing this.
OK, so let's see what happens when we run the Row-bot -- when it does some rowing.
Here we've got a couple of videos, the first thing you'll see -- hopefully you can see here is the mouth open.
The front mouth and the bottom mouth open, and it will stay opened enough, then the robot will start to row forward.
It moves through the water so that food goes in as the waste products go out.
Once it's moved enough, it stops and then it closes the mouth -- slowly closes the mouths -- and then it will sit there, and it will digest the food.
Of course these microbial fuel cells, they contain microbes.
What you really want is lots of energy coming out of those microbes as quickly as possible.
But we can't force the microbes and they generate a small amount of electricity per second.
They generate milliwatts, or microwatts.
Let's put that into context.
Your mobile phone for example, one of these modern ones, if you use it, it takes about one watt.
So that's a thousand or a million times as much energy that that uses compared to the microbial fuel cell.
How can we cope with that?
Well, when the Row-bot has done its digestion, when it's taken the food in, it will sit there and it will wait until it has consumed all that food.
That could take some hours, it could take some days.
A typical cycle for the Row-bot looks like this: you open your mouth, you move, you close your mouth and you sit there for a while waiting.
Once you digest your food, then you can go about doing the same thing again.
But you know what, that looks like a real organism, doesn't it?
It looks like the kind of thing we do.
Saturday night, we go out, open our mouths, fill our stomachs, sit in front of the telly and digest.
When we've had enough, we do the same thing again.
OK, if we're lucky with this cycle, at the end of the cycle we'll have enough energy left over for us to be able to do something else.
We could send a message, for example.
We could send a message saying, "This is how much pollution I've eaten recently," or, "This is the kind of stuff that I've encountered," or, "This is where I am."
That ability to send a message saying, "This is where I am," is really, really important.
If you think about the oil slicks that we saw before, or those massive algal blooms, what you really want to do is put your Row-bot out there, and it eats up all of those pollutions, and then you have to go collect them.
Why?
Because these Row-bots at the moment, this Row-bot I've got here, it contains motors, it contains wires, it contains components which themselves are not biodegradable.
Current Row-bots contain things like toxic batteries.
You can't leave those in the environment, so you need to track them, and then when they've finished their job of work, you need to collect them.
That limits the number of Row-bots you can use.
If, on the other hand, you have robot a little bit like a biological organism, when it comes to the end of its life, it dies and it degrades to nothing.
So wouldn't it be nice if these robots, instead of being like this, made out of plastic, were made out of other materials, which when you throw them out there, they biodegrade to nothing?
That changes the way in which we use robots.
Instead of putting 10 or 100 out into the environment, having to track them, and then when they die, collect them, you could put a thousand, a million, a billion robots into the environment.
Just spread them around.
You know that at the end of their lives, they're going to degrade to nothing.
You don't need to worry about them.
So that changes the way in which you think about robots and the way you deploy them.
Then the question is: Can you do this?
Well, yes, we have shown that you can do this.
You can make robots which are biodegradable.
What's really interesting is you can use household materials to make these biodegradable robots.
I'll show you some; you might be surprised.
You can make a robot out of jelly.
Instead of having a motor, which we have at the moment, you can make things called artificial muscles.
Artificial muscles are smart materials, you apply electricity to them, and they contract, or they bend or they twist.
They look like real muscles.
So instead of having a motor, you have these artificial muscles.
And you can make artificial muscles out of jelly.
If you take some jelly and some salts, and do a bit of jiggery-pokery, you can make an artificial muscle.
We've also shown you can make the microbial fuel cell's stomach out of paper.
So you could make the whole robot out of biodegradable materials.
You throw them out there, and they degrade to nothing.
Well, this is really, really exciting.
It's going to totally change the way in which we think about robots, but also it allows you to be really creative in the way in which you think about what you can do with these robots.
I'll give you an example.
If you can use jelly to make a robot -- now, we eat jelly, right?
So, why not make something like this?
A robot gummy bear.
Here, I've got some I prepared earlier.
There we go. I've got a packet -- and I've got a lemon-flavored one.
I'll take this gummy bear -- he's not robotic, OK?
We have to pretend.
And what you do with one of these is you put it in your mouth -- the lemon's quite nice.
Try not to chew it too much, it's a robot, it may not like it.
And then you swallow it.
And then it goes into your stomach.
And when it's inside your stomach, it moves, it thinks, it twists, it bends, it does something.
It could go further down into your intestines, find out whether you've got some ulcer or cancer, maybe do an injection, something like that.
You know that once it's done its job of work, it could be consumed by your stomach, or if you don't want that, it could go straight through you, into the toilet, and be degraded safely in the environment.
So this changes the way, again, in which we think about robots.
So, we started off looking at robots that would eat pollution, and then we're looking at robots which we can eat.
I hope this gives you some idea of the kinds of things we can do with future robots.
Thank you very much for your attention.
(Applause)
What if I told you that time has a race, a race in the contemporary way that we understand race in the United States?
Typically, we talk about race in terms of black and white issues.
In the African-American communities from which I come, we have a long-standing multi-generational joke about what we call "CP time," or "colored people's time."
Now, we no longer refer to African-Americans as "colored," but this long-standing joke about our perpetual lateness to church, to cookouts, to family events and even to our own funerals, remains.
I personally am a stickler for time.
It's almost as if my mother, when I was growing up, said, "We will not be those black people."
So we typically arrive to events 30 minutes early.
But today, I want to talk to you more about the political nature of time, for if time had a race, it would be white.
White people own time.
I know, I know.
Making such "incendiary statements" makes us uncomfortable: Haven't we moved past the point where race really matters?
Isn't race a heavy-handed concept?
Shouldn't we go ahead with our enlightened, progressive selves and relegate useless concepts like race to the dustbins of history?
How will we ever get over racism if we keep on talking about race?
Perhaps we should lock up our concepts of race in a time capsule, bury them and dig them up in a thousand years, peer at them with the clearly more enlightened, raceless versions of ourselves that belong to the future.
But you see there, that desire to mitigate the impact of race and racism shows up in how we attempt to manage time, in the ways we narrate history, in the ways we attempt to shove the negative truths of the present into the past, in the ways we attempt to argue that the future that we hope for is the present in which we're currently living.
Now, when Barack Obama became President of the US in 2008, many Americans declared that we were post-racial.
I'm from the academy where we're enamored with being post-everything.
We're postmodern, we're post-structural, we're post-feminist.
"Post" has become a simple academic appendage that we apply to a range of terms to mark the way we were.
But prefixes alone don't have the power to make race and racism a thing of the past.
The US was never "pre-race."
So to claim that we're post-race when we have yet to grapple with the impact of race on black people, Latinos or the indigenous is disingenuous.
Just about the moment we were preparing to celebrate our post-racial future, our political conditions became the most racial they've been in the last 50 years.
So today, I want to offer to you three observations, about the past, the present and the future of time, as it relates to the combating of racism and white dominance.
First: the past.
Time has a history, and so do black people.
But we treat time as though it is timeless, as though it has always been this way, as though it doesn't have a political history bound up with the plunder of indigenous lands, the genocide of indigenous people and the stealing of Africans from their homeland.
When white male European philosophers first thought to conceptualize time and history, one famously declared, "[Africa] is no historical part of the World."
He was essentially saying that Africans were people outside of history who had had no impact on time or the march of progress.
This idea, that black people have had no impact on history, is one of the foundational ideas of white supremacy.
It's the reason that Carter G. Woodson created "Negro History Week" in 1926.
It's the reason that we continue to celebrate Black History Month in the US every February.
Now, we also see this idea that black people are people either alternately outside of the bounds of time or stuck in the past, in a scenario where, much as I'm doing right now, a black person stands up and insists that racism still matters, and a person, usually white, says to them, "Why are you stuck in the past?
Why can't you move on?
We have a black president.
We're past all that."
William Faulkner famously said, "The past is never dead.
It's not even past."
But my good friend Professor Kristie Dotson says, "Our memory is longer than our lifespan."
We carry, all of us, family and communal hopes and dreams with us.
We don't have the luxury of letting go of the past.
But sometimes, our political conditions are so troubling that we don't know if we're living in the past or we're living in the present.
Take, for instance, when Black Lives Matter protesters go out to protest unjust killings of black citizens by police, and the pictures that emerge from the protest look like they could have been taken 50 years ago.
The past won't let us go.
But still, let us press our way into the present.
At present, I would argue that the racial struggles we are experiencing are clashes over time and space.
What do I mean?
Well, I've already told you that white people own time.
Those in power dictate the pace of the workday.
They dictate how much money our time is actually worth.
And Professor George Lipsitz argues that white people even dictate the pace of social inclusion.
They dictate how long it will actually take for minority groups to receive the rights that they have been fighting for.
Let me loop back to the past quickly to give you an example.
If you think about the Civil Rights Movement and the cries of its leaders for "Freedom Now," they were challenging the slow pace of white social inclusion.
By 1965, the year the Voting Rights Act was passed, there had been a full 100 years between the end of the Civil War and the conferral of voting rights on African-American communities.
Despite the urgency of a war, it still took a full 100 years for actual social inclusion to occur.
Since 2012, conservative state legislatures across the US have ramped up attempts to roll back African-American voting rights by passing restrictive voter ID laws and curtailing early voting opportunities.
This past July, a federal court struck down North Carolina's voter ID law saying it "... targeted African-Americans with surgical precision."
Restricting African-American inclusion in the body politic is a primary way that we attempt to manage and control people by managing and controlling time.
But another place that we see these time-space clashes is in gentrifying cities like Atlanta, Brooklyn, Philadelphia, New Orleans and Washington, DC -- places that have had black populations for generations.
But now, in the name of urban renewal and progress, these communities are pushed out, in service of bringing them into the 21st century.
Professor Sharon Holland asked: What happens when a person who exists in time meets someone who only occupies space?
These racial struggles are battles over those who are perceived to be space-takers and those who are perceived to be world-makers.
Those who control the flow and thrust of history are considered world-makers who own and master time.
In other words: white people.
But when Hegel famously said that Africa was no historical part of the world, he implied that it was merely a voluminous land mass taking up space at the bottom of the globe.
Africans were space-takers.
So today, white people continue to control the flow and thrust of history, while too often treating black people as though we are merely taking up space to which we are not entitled.
Time and the march of progress is used to justify a stunning degree of violence towards our most vulnerable populations, who, being perceived as space-takers rather than world-makers, are moved out of the places where they live, in service of bringing them into the 21st century.
Shortened life span according to zip code is just one example of the ways that time and space cohere in an unjust manner in the lives of black people.
Children who are born in New Orleans zip code 70124, which is 93 percent white, can expect to live a full 25 years longer than children born in New Orleans zip code 70112, which is 60 percent black.
Children born in Washington, DC's wealthy Maryland suburbs can expect to live a full 20 years longer than children born in its downtown neighborhoods.
Ta-Nehisi Coates argues that, "The defining feature of being drafted into the Black race is the inescapable robbery of time."
We experience time discrimination, he tells us, not just as structural, but as personal: in lost moments of joy, lost moments of connection, lost quality of time with loved ones and lost years of healthy quality of life.
In the future, do you see black people?
Do black people have a future?
What if you belong to the very race of people who have always been pitted against time?
What if your group is the group for whom a future was never imagined?
These time-space clashes -- between protesters and police, between gentrifiers and residents -- don't paint a very pretty picture of what America hopes for black people's future.
If the present is any indicator, our children will be under-educated, health maladies will take their toll and housing will continue to be unaffordable.
So if we're really ready to talk about the future, perhaps we should begin by admitting that we're out of time.
We black people have always been out of time.
Time does not belong to us.
Our lives are lives of perpetual urgency.
Time is used to displace us, or conversely, we are urged into complacency through endless calls to just be patient.
But if past is prologue, let us seize upon the ways in which we're always out of time anyway to demand with urgency freedom now.
I believe the future is what we make it.
But first, we have to decide that time belongs to all of us.
No, we don't all get equal time, but we can decide that the time we do get is just and free.
We can stop making your zip code the primary determinant of your lifespan.
We can stop stealing learning time from black children through excessive use of suspensions and expulsions.
We can stop stealing time from black people through long periods of incarceration for nonviolent crimes.
The police can stop stealing time and black lives through use of excessive force.
I believe the future is what we make it.
But we can't get there on colored people's time or white time or your time or even my time.
It's our time.
Ours.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Three years ago, I started building a decentralized web because I was worried about the future of our internet.
The current internet we are using is about gatekeepers.
If you want to reach something on the web, then you need to go through multiple middlemen.
First, a domain name server, then a server hosting company, which usually points you to a third party, to a web hosting service.
And this happens every time you want to reach a website on the web.
But these gatekeepers are vulnerable to internet attacks and also makes the censorship and the surveillance easier.
And the situation is getting worse.
Everything is moving to the cloud, where the data is hosted by giant corporations.
This move creates much, much more powerful middlemen.
Now, move to the cloud makes sense because this way it's easier and cheaper for the developers and the service operators.
They don't have to worry about maintaining the physical servers.
I can't blame them, but I found this trend to be very dangerous, because this way, these giant corporations have unlimited control over the hosting services.
And it's very easy to abuse this power.
For example, last year, a CEO of a company that acts as a gatekeeper for nine million websites decided, after some public pressure, that one of the sites it manages, a far right page, should be blocked.
He then sent an internal email to his coworkers.
"This was an arbitrary decision.
I woke up this morning in a bad mood and decided to kick them off the Internet."
Even he admits, "No one should have this power."
As a response, one of the employees asked him, "Is this the day the Internet dies?"
I don't think we are actually killing the internet, but I do think that we are in the middle of a kind of irresponsible centralization process that makes our internet more fragile.
The decentralized, people-to-people web solves this problem by removing the central points, the web-hosting services.
It empowers the users to have host sites they want to preserve.
On this network, the sites get downloaded directly from other visitors.
This means, if you have a site with 100 visitors, then it's hosted [by] 100 computers around the world.
Basically, this is a people-powered version of the internet.
The security of the network is provided by public-key cryptography.
This makes sure that no one can modify the sites but only the real owner.
Think of it like instead of getting electricity from big power plants, you put solar panels on top of your house, and if your neighbor down the street needs some extra energy, then they can just download some from your house.
So by using the decentralized web, we can help to keep content accessible for other visitors.
And by that, it means that we can also fight against things that we feel are unjust, like censorship.
In China, the internet is tightly controlled.
They can't criticize the government, organize a protest, and it's also forbidden to post a kind of emoticon to remember the victims of the Tiananmen Square Massacre.
With the decentralized web, it's not the government that decides what gets seen and what doesn't.
It's the people, which makes the web more democratic.
But at the same time, it's hard to use this network to do something that is clearly illegal everywhere in the world, as the users probably don't want to endanger themselves hosting these kinds of problematic content.
Another increasing threat to internet freedom is overregulation.
I have the impression that our delegates who vote on the internet regulation laws are not fully aware of their decisions.
For example, the European Parliament has a new law on the table, a new copyright protection law, that has a part called Article 13.
If it passes, it would require every big website to implement a filter that automatically blocks content based on rules controlled by big corporations.
The original idea is to protect copyrighted materials, but it would endanger many other things we do on the internet: blogging, criticizing, discussing, linking and sharing.
Google and YouTube already have similar systems and they are receiving 100,000 takedown requests every hour.
Of course, they can't process this amount of data by hand, so they are using machine learning to decide if it's really a copyright violation or not.
But these filters do make mistakes.
They're removing everything from documentation of human rights abuses, lectures about copyrights and search results that point to criticism of this new Article 13.
Beside of that, they are also removing many other things.
And sometimes, these filters aren't just removing the specific content, but it could also lead to loss of your linked accounts: your email address, your documents, your photos, or your unfinished book, which happened with the writer Dennis Cooper.
It's not hard to see how a system like this could be abused by politicians and corporate competitors.
This Article 13, the extension of these automated filters to the whole internet, got strong opposition from Wikipedia, Github, Mozilla, and many others, including the original founders of the internet and the World Wide Web, Vint Cerf and Tim Berners-Lee.
But despite this strong opposition, on the last European Parliament vote, two thirds of the representatives supported this law.
The final vote will be early 2019.
The result is important, but whatever happens, I'm pretty sure it will be followed by many other similar proposals around the world.
These kinds of regulations would be very hard to enforce through a decentralized web, as there is no hosting companies.
The websites are served by the visitors themselves.
I started to build this network three years ago.
Since then, I've spent thousands, tens of thousands of hours on the development.
Why?
Why would anyone spend thousands of hours on something anyone can freely copy, rename, or even sell?
Well, in my case, one of the reasons was to do something meaningful.
During my daily regular job as a web developer, I didn't have the feeling that I'm working on something that had a chance to be a bigger than me.
Simply, I just wanted to make my short presence in this world to be meaningful.
Last year, the Great Firewall of China started blocking this network I created.
This move officially made me the enemy of the government-supported internet censorship.
Since then, it's been really a game of cat and mouse.
They make new rules in the firewall and I try to react to it as fast as I can so the users can keep hosting content and create websites that otherwise would be censored by the centralized Chinese internet.
My other motivation to create this network was worry.
I fear that the future of our internet is out of our control.
The increasing centralization and the proposed laws are threatening our freedom of speech and, by that, our democracy.
So for me, building a decentralized web means creating a safe harbor, a space where the rules are not written by big corporations and political parties, but by the people.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Youre on the trail of a werewolf thats been terrorizing your town.
After months of detective work, youve narrowed your suspects to one of five people: the mayor, the tailor, the baker, the grocer, or the carpenter.
Youve invited them to dinner with a simple plan: youll slip a square of a rare werewolf antidote into each of their dinners.
Unfortunately, your pet goat just ate four of the squares, and you only have one left.
Luckily, the remaining square is 50 grams, and the minimum effective dose is 10 grams.
If you can precisely divide the square into fifths youll have just enough antidote for everyone.
Youll have to use a laser-cutting tool to cut up the square; every other means available to you isnt precise enough.
There are 8 points that can act as starting or ending points for each cut.
To use the device, youll have to input pairs of points that tell the laser where to begin and end each cut, and then the laser executes all the cuts simultaneously.
Its okay to cut the square into as many pieces as you want, as long as you can group them into 10 gram portions.
But you cant fold the square or alter it otherwise, and you only get one shot at using the laser cutter.
The full moon is rising, and in a moment someone will transform and tear you all apart unless you can cure them first.
How can you divide the antidote into perfect fifths, cure the secret werewolf, and save everyone?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 When it comes to puzzles that involve cutting and rearranging, its often helpful to actually take a piece of paper and try cutting it up to see what you can get.
If we cut BF and DH wed get fourths, but we need fifths.
Maybe theres a way to shave a bit off of a quarter to get exactly one fifth.
Cutting BE looks good at first, but that last cut takes a off a quarter of a quarter, leaving us with a portion of 3/16: just smaller than a fifth, and not enough to cure a werewolf.
What if we started with BE instead?
That would also give us a quarter.
And is there a way to shave just a bit more off?
Both DG and CH look promising.
If we make one more cut, from A to F, we may start to notice something.
With these four cutsfrom B to E, D to G, F to A, and H to Cweve got four triangles and a square in the middle.
But the pieces that make each triangle can also be rearranged to make a square identical to the middle one.
This means that weve split the antidote into perfect fifths!
Whats interesting about this sort of problem is that while its possible to solve it by starting from the geometry, its actually easier to start experimenting and see where that gets you.
That wouldnt be as viable if the square had, say, 24 cut points, but with just 8 there are only so many reasonable options.
You secretly dose each of the townspeople as the full moon emerges in the sky.
And just as you do, a terrible transformation begins.
Then, just as suddenly, it reverses.
Your measurements were perfect, and the people and animals of the town can rest a little easier.
We lost a lot of time at school learning spelling.
Kids are still losing a lot of time at school with spelling.
That's why I want to share a question with you: Do we need new spelling rules?
I believe that yes, we do.
Or even better, I think we need to simplify the ones we already have.
Neither the question nor the answer are new in the Spanish language.
They have been bouncing around from century to century since 1492, when in the first grammar guide of the Spanish language, Antonio de Nebrija, set a clear and simple principle for our spelling: "... thus, we have to write words as we pronounce them, and pronounce words as we write them."
Each sound was to correspond to one letter, each letter was to represent a single sound, and those which did not represent any sound should be removed.
This approach, the phonetic approach, which says we have to write words as we pronounce them, both is and isn't at the root of spelling as we practice it today.
It is, because the Spanish language, in contrast to English, French or others, always strongly resisted writing words too differently to how we pronounce them.
But the phonetic approach is also absent today, because when, in the 18th century, we decided how we would standardize our writing, there was another approach which guided a good part of the decisions.
It was the etymological approach, the one that says we have to write words according to how they were written in their original language, in Latin, in Greek.
That's how we ended up with silent H's, which we write but don't pronounce.
That's how we have B's and V's that, contrary to what many people believe, were never differentiated in Spanish pronunciation.
That's how we wound up with G's, that are sometimes aspirated, as in "gente," and other times unaspirated, as in "gato."
That's how we ended up with C's, S's and Z's, three letters that in some places correspond to one sound, and in others, to two, but nowhere to three.
I'm not here to tell you anything you don't know from your own experience.
We all went to school, we all invested big amounts of learning time, big amounts of pliant, childlike brain time in dictation, in the memorization of spelling rules filled, nevertheless, with exceptions.
We were told in many ways, implicitly and explicitly, that in spelling, something fundamental to our upbringing was at stake.
Yet, I have the feeling that teachers didn't ask themselves why it was so important.
In fact, they didn't ask themselves a previous question: What is the purpose of spelling?
What do we need spelling for?
And the truth is, when someone asks themselves this question, the answer is much simpler and less momentous than we'd usually believe.
We use spelling to unify the way we write, so we can all write the same way, making it easier for us to understand when we read to each other.
But unlike in other aspects of language such as punctuation, in spelling, there's no individual expression involved.
In punctuation, there is.
With punctuation, I can choose to change the meaning of a phrase.
With punctuation, I can impose a particular rhythm to what I am writing, but not with spelling.
When it comes to spelling, it's either wrong or right, according to whether it conforms or not to the current rules.
But then, wouldn't it be more sensible to simplify the current rules so it would be easier to teach, learn and use spelling correctly?
Wouldn't it be more sensible to simplify the current rules so that all the time we devote today to teaching spelling, we could devote to other language issues whose complexities do, in fact, deserve the time and effort?
What I propose is not to abolish spelling, and have everyone write however they want.
Language is a tool of common usage, and so I believe it's fundamental that we use it following common criteria.
But I also find it fundamental that those common criteria be as simple as possible, especially because if we simplify our spelling, we're not leveling it down; when spelling is simplified, the quality of the language doesn't suffer at all.
I work every day with Spanish Golden Age literature, I read Garcilaso, Cervantes, Gngora, Quevedo, who sometimes write "hombre" without H, sometimes write "escribir" with V, and it's absolutely clear to me that the difference between those texts and ours is one of convention, or rather, a lack of convention during their time.
But it's not a difference of quality.
But let me go back to the masters, because they're key characters in this story.
Earlier, I mentioned this slightly thoughtless insistence with which teachers pester and pester us over spelling.
But the truth is, things being as they are, this makes perfect sense.
In our society, spelling serves as an index of privilege, separating the cultured from the brute, the educated from the ignorant, independent of the content that's being written.
One can get or not get a job because of an H that one put or did not.
One can become an object of public ridicule because of a misplaced B.
Therefore, in this context, of course, it makes sense to dedicate all this time to spelling.
But we shouldn't forget that throughout the history of our language, it has always been teachers or people involved in the early learning of language who promoted spelling reforms, who realized that in our spelling there was often an obstacle to the transmission of knowledge.
In our case, for example, Sarmiento, together with Andrs Bello, spearheaded the biggest spelling reform to take place in the Spanish language: the mid-19th century Chilean reform.
Then, why not take over the task of those teachers and start making progress in our spelling?
Here, in this intimate group of 10,000, I'd like to bring to the table some changes that I find reasonable to start discussing.
Let's remove the silent H.
In places where we write an H but pronounce nothing, let's not write anything.
(Applause) It's hard for me to imagine what sentimental attachment can justify to someone all the hassle caused by the silent H.
B and V, as we said before, were never differentiated in the Spanish language -- (Applause) Let's choose one; it could be either. We can discuss it, talk it over.
Everyone will have their preferences and can make their arguments.
Let's keep one, remove the other.
G and J, let's separate their roles.
G should keep the unaspirated sound, like in "gato," "mago," and "guila," and J should keep the aspirated sound, as in "jarabe," "jirafa," "gente," "argentino."
The case of C, S and Z is interesting, because it shows that the phonetic approach must be a guide, but it can't be an absolute principle.
In some cases, the differences in pronunciation must be addressed.
As I said before, C, S and Z, in some places, correspond to one sound, in others to two.
If we go from three letters to two, we're all better off.
To some, these changes may seem a bit drastic.
They're really not.
The Royal Spanish Academy, all of language academies, also believes that spelling should be progressively modified; that language is linked to history, tradition and custom, but that at the same time, it is a practical everyday tool and that sometimes this attachment to history, tradition and custom becomes an obstacle for its current usage.
Indeed, this explains the fact that our language, much more than the others we are geographically close to, has been historically modifying itself based on us, for example, we went from "ortographia" to "ortografa," from "theatro" to "teatro," from "quantidad" to "cantidad," from "symbolo" to "smbolo."
And some silent H's are slowly being stealthily removed: in the Dictionary of the Royal Academy, "arpa" and "armona" can be written with or without an H.
And everybody is OK.
I also believe that this is a particularly appropriate moment to have this discussion.
It's always said that language changes spontaneously, from the bottom up, that its users are the ones who incorporate new words and who introduce grammatical changes, and that the authority -- in some places an academy, in others a dictionary, in others a ministry -- accepts and incorporates them long after the fact.
This is true only for some levels of language.
It is true on the lexical level, the level of words.
It is less true on the grammatical level, and I would almost say it is not true for the spelling level, that has historically changed from the top down.
Institutions have always been the ones to establish the rules and propose changes.
Why do I say this is a particularly appropriate moment?
Until today, writing always had a much more restricted and private use than speech.
But in our time, the age of social networks, this is going through a revolutionary change.
Never before have people written so much; never before have people written for so many others to see.
And in these social networks, for the first time, we're seeing innovative uses of spelling on a large scale, where even more-than-educated people with impeccable spelling, when using social networks, behave a lot like the majority of users of social networks behave.
That is to say, they slack on spell-checking and prioritize speed and efficacy in communication.
For now, on social networks, we see chaotic, individual usages.
But I think we have to pay attention to them, because they're probably telling us that an era that designates a new place for writing seeks new criteria for that writing.
I think we'd be wrong to reject them, to discard them, because we identify them as symptoms of the cultural decay of our times.
No, I believe we have to observe them, organize them and channel them within guidelines that better correspond to the needs of our times.
I can anticipate some objections.
There will be those who'll say that if we simplify spelling we'll lose etymology.
Strictly speaking, if we wanted to preserve etymology, it would go beyond just spelling.
We'd also have to learn Latin, Greek, Arabic.
With simplified spelling, we would normalize etymology in the same place we do now: in etymological dictionaries.
A second objection will come from those who say: "If we simplify spelling, we'll stop distinguishing between words that differ in just one letter."
That is true, but it's not a problem.
Our language has homonyms, words with more than one meaning, yet we don't confuse the "banco" where we sit with the "banco" where we deposit money, or the "traje" that we wear with the things we "trajimos."
In the vast majority of situations, context dispels any confusion.
But there's a third objection.
To me, it's the most understandable, even the most moving.
It's the people who'll say: "I don't want to change.
I was brought up like this, I got used to doing it this way, when I read a written word in simplified spelling, my eyes hurt."
(Laughter) This objection is, in part, in all of us.
What do I think we should do?
The same thing that's always done in these cases: changes are made looking forward; children are taught the new rules, those of us who don't want to adapt can write the way we're used to writing, and hopefully, time will cement the new rules in place.
The success of every spelling reform that affects deeply rooted habits lies in caution, agreement, gradualism and tolerance.
At the same time, can't allow the attachment to old customs impede us from moving forward.
The best tribute we can pay to the past is to improve upon what it's given us.
So I believe that we must reach an agreement, that academies must reach an agreement, and purge from our spelling rules all the habits we practice just for the sake of tradition, even if they are useless now.
I'm convinced that if we do that in the humble but extremely important realm of language, we'll be leaving a better future to the next generations.
(Applause)
Do you remember when you were a child, you probably had a favorite toy that was a constant companion, like Christopher Robin had Winnie the Pooh, and your imagination fueled endless adventures?
What could be more innocent than that?
Well, let me introduce you to my friend Cayla.
Cayla was voted toy of the year in countries around the world.
She connects to the internet and uses speech recognition technology to answer your child's questions, respond just like a friend.
But the power doesn't lie with your child's imagination.
It actually lies with the company harvesting masses of personal information while your family is innocently chatting away in the safety of their home, a dangerously false sense of security.
This case sounded alarm bells for me, as it is my job to protect consumers' rights in my country.
And with billions of devices such as cars, energy meters and even vacuum cleaners expected to come online by 2020, we thought this was a case worth investigating further.
Because what was Cayla doing with all the interesting things she was learning?
Did she have another friend she was loyal to and shared her information with?
Yes, you guessed right. She did.
In order to play with Cayla, you need to download an app to access all her features.
Parents must consent to the terms being changed without notice.
The recordings of the child, her friends and family, can be used for targeted advertising.
And all this information can be shared with unnamed third parties.
Enough? Not quite.
Anyone with a smartphone can connect to Cayla within a certain distance.
When we confronted the company that made and programmed Cayla, they issued a series of statements that one had to be an IT expert in order to breach the security.
Shall we fact-check that statement and live hack Cayla together?
Here she is.
Cayla is equipped with a Bluetooth device which can transmit up to 60 feet, a bit less if there's a wall between.
That means I, or any stranger, can connect to the doll while being outside the room where Cayla and her friends are.
And to illustrate this, I'm going to turn Cayla on now.
Let's see, one, two, three.
There. She's on. And I asked a colleague to stand outside with his smartphone, and he's connected, and to make this a bit creepier ...
(Laughter) let's see what kids could hear Cayla say in the safety of their room.
Man: Hi. My name is Cayla. What is yours?
Finn Myrstad: Uh, Finn.
Man: Is your mom close by?
FM: Uh, no, she's in the store.
Man: Ah. Do you want to come out and play with me?
FM: That's a great idea.
Man: Ah, great.
FM: I'm going to turn Cayla off now.
(Laughter) We needed no password or to circumvent any other type of security to do this.
We published a report in 20 countries around the world, exposing this significant security flaw and many other problematic issues.
So what happened?
Cayla was banned in Germany, taken off the shelves by Amazon and Wal-Mart, and she's now peacefully resting at the German Spy Museum in Berlin.
(Laughter) However, Cayla was also for sale in stores around the world for more than a year after we published our report.
What we uncovered is that there are few rules to protect us and the ones we have are not being properly enforced.
We need to get the security and privacy of these devices right before they enter the market, because what is the point of locking a house with a key if anyone can enter it through a connected device?
You may well think, "This will not happen to me.
But that won't keep you safe, because simply by connecting to the internet, you are put in an impossible take-it-or-leave-it position.
Let me show you.
Like most of you, I have dozens of apps on my phone, and used properly, they can make our lives easier, more convenient and maybe even healthier.
But have we been lulled into a false sense of security?
It starts simply by ticking a box.
Yes, we say, I've read the terms.
But have you really read the terms?
Are you sure they didn't look too long and your phone was running out of battery, and the last time you tried they were impossible to understand, and you needed to use the service now?
And now, the power imbalance is established, because we have agreed to our personal information being gathered and used on a scale we could never imagine.
This is why my colleagues and I decided to take a deeper look at this.
We set out to read the terms of popular apps on an average phone.
And to show the world how unrealistic it is to expect consumers to actually read the terms, we printed them, more than 900 pages, and sat down in our office and read them out loud ourselves, streaming the experiment live on our websites.
As you can see, it took quite a long time.
It took us 31 hours, 49 minutes and 11 seconds to read the terms on an average phone.
That is longer than a movie marathon of the "Harry Potter" movies and the "Godfather" movies combined.
(Laughter) And reading is one thing.
Understanding is another story.
That would have taken us much, much longer.
And this is a real problem, because companies have argued for 20 to 30 years against regulating the internet better, because users have consented to the terms and conditions.
As we've shown with this experiment, achieving informed consent is close to impossible.
Do you think it's fair to put the burden of responsibility on the consumer?
I don't.
I think we should demand less take-it-or-leave-it and more understandable terms before we agree to them.
(Applause) Thank you.
Now, I would like to tell you a story about love.
Some of the world's most popular apps are dating apps, an industry now worth more than, or close to, three billion dollars a year.
And of course, we're OK sharing our intimate details with our other half.
But who else is snooping, saving and sharing our information while we are baring our souls?
My team and I decided to investigate this.
And in order to understand the issue from all angles and to truly do a thorough job, I realized I had to download one of the world's most popular dating apps myself.
So I went home to my wife ...
(Laughter) who I had just married.
"Is it OK if I establish a profile on a very popular dating app for purely scientific purposes?"
(Laughter) This is what we found.
Hidden behind the main menu was a preticked box that gave the dating company access to all my personal pictures on Facebook, in my case more than 2,000 of them, and some were quite personal.
And to make matters worse, when we read the terms and conditions, we discovered the following, and I'm going to need to take out my reading glasses for this one.
And I'm going to read it for you, because this is complicated.
All right.
"By posting content" -- and content refers to your pictures, chat and other interactions in the dating service -- "as a part of the service, you automatically grant to the company, its affiliates, licensees and successors an irrevocable" -- which means you can't change your mind -- "perpetual" -- which means forever -- "nonexclusive, transferrable, sublicensable, fully paid-up, worldwide right and license to use, copy, store, perform, display, reproduce, record, play, adapt, modify and distribute the content, prepare derivative works of the content, or incorporate the content into other works and grant and authorize sublicenses of the foregoing in any media now known or hereafter created."
That basically means that all your dating history and everything related to it can be used for any purpose for all time.
Just imagine your children seeing your sassy dating photos in a birth control ad 20 years from now.
But seriously, though -- (Laughter) what might these commercial practices mean to you?
For example, financial loss: based on your web browsing history, algorithms might decide whether you will get a mortgage or not.
Subconscious manipulation: companies can analyze your emotions based on your photos and chats, targeting you with ads when you are at your most vulnerable.
Discrimination: a fitness app can sell your data to a health insurance company, preventing you from getting coverage in the future.
All of this is happening in the world today.
But of course, not all uses of data are malign.
Some are just flawed or need more work, and some are truly great.
And there is some good news as well.
The dating companies changed their policies globally after we filed a legal complaint.
But organizations such as mine that fight for consumers' rights can't be everywhere.
Nor can consumers fix this on their own, because if we know that something innocent we said will come back to haunt us, we will stop speaking.
If we know that we are being watched and monitored, we will change our behavior.
And if we can't control who has our data and how it is being used, we have lost the control of our lives.
The stories I have told you today are not random examples.
They are everywhere, and they are a sign that things need to change.
And how can we achieve that change?
Well, companies need to realize that by prioritizing privacy and security, they can build trust and loyalty to their users.
Governments must create a safer internet by ensuring enforcement and up-to-date rules.
And us, the citizens?
We can use our voice to remind the world that technology can only truly benefit society if it respects basic rights.
Thank you so much.
(Applause)
This weekend, tens of millions of people in the United States and tens of millions more around the world, in Columbus, Georgia, in Cardiff, Wales, in Chongqing, China, in Chennai, India will leave their homes, they'll get in their cars or they'll take public transportation or they will carry themselves by foot, and they'll step into a room and sit down next to someone they don't know or maybe someone they do, and the lights will go down and they'll watch a movie.
They'll watch movies about aliens or robots, or robot aliens or regular people.
But they will all be movies about what it means to be human.
Millions will feel awe or fear, millions will laugh and millions will cry.
And then the lights will come back on, and they'll reemerge into the world they knew several hours prior.
And millions of people will look at the world a little bit differently than they did when they went in.
Like going to temple or a mosque or a church, or any other religious institution, movie-going is, in many ways, a sacred ritual.
Repeated week after week after week.
I'll be there this weekend, just like I was on most weekends between the years of 1996 and 1990, at the multiplex, near the shopping mall about five miles from my childhood home in Columbus, Georgia.
The funny thing is that somewhere between then and now, I accidentally changed part of the conversation about which of those movies get made.
So, the story actually begins in 2005, in an office high above Sunset Boulevard, where I was a junior executive at Leonardo DiCaprio's production company Appian Way.
And for those of you who aren't familiar with how the film industry works, it basically means that I was one of a few people behind the person who produces the movie for the people behind and in front of the camera, whose names you will better recognize than mine.
Essentially, you're an assistant movie producer who does the unglamorous work that goes into the creative aspect of producing a movie.
You make lists of writers and directors and actors who might be right for movies that you want to will into existence; you meet with many of them and their representatives, hoping to curry favor for some future date.
And you read, a lot.
You read novels that might become movies, you read comic books that might become movies, you read articles that might become movies, you read scripts that might become movies.
And you read scripts from writers that might write the adaptations of the novels, of the comic books, of the articles, and might rewrite the scripts that you're already working on.
All this in the hope of finding the next big thing or the next big writer who can deliver something that can make you and your company the next big thing.
So in 2005, I was a development executive at Leonardo's production company.
I got a phone call from the representative of a screenwriter that began pretty much the way all of those conversations did: "I've got Leo's next movie."
Now in this movie, that his client had written, Leo would play an oil industry lobbyist whose girlfriend, a local meteorologist, threatens to leave him because his work contributes to global warming.
And this is a situation that's been brought to a head by the fact that there's a hurricane forming in the Atlantic that's threatening to do Maria-like damage from Maine to Myrtle Beach.
Leo, very sad about this impending break up, does a little more research about the hurricane and discovers that in its path across the Atlantic, it will pass over a long-dormant, though now active volcano that will spew toxic ash into its eye that will presumably be whipped into some sort of chemical weapon that will destroy the world.
(Laughter) It was at that point that I asked him, "So are you basically pitching me 'Leo versus the toxic superstorm that will destroy humanity?'" And he responded by saying, "Well, when you say it like that, it sounds ridiculous."
And I'm embarrassed to admit that I had the guy send me the script, and I read 30 pages before I was sure that it was as bad as I thought it was.
Now, "Superstorm" is certainly an extreme example, but it's also not an unusual one.
And unfortunately, most scripts aren't as easy to dismiss as that one.
For example, a comedy about a high school senior, who, when faced with an unplanned pregnancy, makes an unusual decision regarding her unborn child.
That's obviously "Juno."
Two hundred and thirty million at the worldwide box office, four Oscar nominations, one win.
How about a Mumbai teen who grew up in the slums wants to become a contestant on the Indian version of "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire?"?
That's an easy one -- "Slumdog Millionaire."
Three hundred seventy-seven million worldwide, 10 Oscar nominations and eight wins.
A chimpanzee tells his story of living with the legendary pop star Michael Jackson.
Anyone?
(Laughter) It's a trick question.
But it is a script called "Bubbles," that is going to be directed by Taika Waititi, the director of "Thor: Ragnarok."
So, a large part of your job as a development executive is to separate the "Superstorms" from the "Slumdog Millionaires," and slightly more generally, the writers who write "Superstorm" from the writers who can write "Slumdog Millionaire."
And the easiest way to do this, obviously, is to read all of the scripts, but that's, frankly, impossible.
A good rule of thumb is that the Writers Guild of America registers about 50,000 new pieces of material every year, and most of them are screenplays.
Of those, a reasonable estimate is about 5,000 of them make it through various filters, agencies, management companies, screenplay compositions and the like, and are read by someone at the production company or major studio level.
And they're trying to decide whether they can become one of the 300-and-dropping movies that are released by the major studios or their sub-brands each year.
I've described it before as being a little bit like walking into a members-only bookstore where the entire inventory is just organized haphazardly, and every book has the same, nondescript cover.
Your job is to enter that bookstore and not come back until you've found the best and most profitable books there.
It's anarchic and gleefully opaque.
And everyone has their method to address these problems.
You know, most rely on the major agencies and they just assume that if there's great talent in the world, they've already found their way to the agencies, regardless of the structural barriers that actually exist to get into the agencies in the first place.
Others also constantly compare notes among themselves about what they've read and what's good, and they just hope that their cohort group is the best, most wired and has the best taste in town.
And others try to read everything, but that's, again, impossible.
If you're reading 500 screenplays in a year, you are reading a lot.
And it's still only a small percentage of what's out there.
Fundamentally, it's triage.
And when you're in triage, you tend to default to conventional wisdom about what works and what doesn't.
That a comedy about a young woman dealing with reproductive reality can't sell.
That the story of an Indian teenager isn't viable in the domestic marketplace or anywhere else in the world outside of India.
That the only source of viable movies is a very narrow groups of writers who have already found their way to living and working in Hollywood, who already have the best representation in the business, and are writing a very narrow band of stories.
And I'm somewhat embarrassed to admit, that that's where I found myself in 2005.
Sitting in that office above Sunset Boulevard, staring down that metaphorical anonymized bookstore, and having read nothing but bad scripts for months.
And I took this to mean one of two things: either A: I was not very good at my job, which was, ostensibly, finding good scripts, or B: reading bad scripts was the job.
In which case, my mother's weekly phone calls, asking me if my law school entrance exam scores were still valid was something I should probably pay more attention to.
What I also knew was that I was about to go on vacation for two weeks, and as bad as reading bad scripts is when it is your job, it's even more painful on vacation.
So I had to do something.
So late one night at my office, I made a list of everyone that I had had breakfast, lunch, dinner or drinks with that had jobs similar to mine, and I sent them an anonymous email.
And I made a very simple request.
Send me a list of up to 10 of your favorite screenplays that meet three criteria.
One: you love the screenplay, two: the filmed version of that screenplay will not be in theaters by the end of that calendar year, and three: you found out about the screenplay this year.
This was not an appeal for the scripts that would be the next great blockbuster, not an appeal for the scripts that will win the Academy Award, they didn't need to be scripts that their bosses loved or that their studio wanted to make.
It was very simply an opportunity for people to speak their minds about what they loved, which, in this world, is increasingly rare.
Now, almost all of the 75 people I emailed anonymously responded.
And then two dozen other people actually emailed to participate to this anonymous email address, but I confirmed that they did in fact have the jobs they claimed to have.
And I then compiled the votes into a spreadsheet, ran a pivot table, output it to PowerPoint, and the night before I left for vacation, I slapped a quasi subversive name on it and emailed it back from that anonymous email address to everyone who voted.
The Black List.
A tribute to those who lost their careers during the anti-communist hysteria of the 1940s and 50s, and a conscious inversion of the notion that black somehow had a negative connotation.
After arriving in Mexico, I pulled out a chair by the pool, started reading these scripts and found, to my shock and joy, that most of them were actually quite good.
Mission accomplished.
What I didn't and couldn't have expected was what happened next.
About a week into my time on vacation, I stopped by the hotel's business center to check my email.
This was a pre-iPhone world, after all.
And found that this list that I had created anonymously had been forwarded back to me several dozen times, at my personal email address.
Everyone was sharing this list of scripts that everyone had said that they loved, reading them and then loving them themselves.
And my first reaction, that I can't actually say here, but will describe it as fear, the idea of surveying people about their scripts was certainly not a novel or a genius one.
Surely, there was some unwritten Hollywood rule of omert that had guided people away from doing that before that I was simply too naive to understand, it being so early in my career.
I was sure I was going to get fired, and so I decided that day that A: I would never tell anybody that I had done this, and B: I would never do it again.
Then, six months later, something even more bizarre happened.
I was in my office, on Sunset, and got a phone call from another writer's agent.
The call began very similarly to the call about "Superstorm": "I've got Leo's next movie."
Now, that's not the interesting part.
The interesting part was the way the call ended.
Because this agent then told me, and I quote, "Don't tell anybody, but I have it on really good authority this is going to be the number one script on next year's Black List."
(Laughter) Yeah.
Suffice it to say, I was dumbfounded.
Here was an agent, using the Black List, this thing that I had made anonymously and decided to never make again, to sell his client to me.
To suggest that the script had merit, based solely on the possibility of being included on a list of beloved screenplays.
After the call ended, I sat in my office, sort of staring out the window, alternating between shock and general giddiness.
And then I realized that this thing that I had created had a lot more value than just me finding good screenplays to read over the holidays.
And so I did it again the next year -- and the "LA Times" had outed me as the person who had created it -- and the year after that, and the year after that -- I've done it every year since 2005.
And the results have been fascinating, because, unapologetic lying aside, this agent was exactly right.
This list was evidence, to many people, of a script's value, and that a great script had greater value that, I think, a lot of people had previously anticipated.
Very quickly, the writers whose scripts were on that list started getting jobs, those scripts started getting made, and the scripts that got made were often the ones that violated the assumptions about what worked and what didn't.
They were scripts like "Juno" and "Little Miss Sunshine" and "The Queen" and "The King's Speech" and "Spotlight."
And yes, "Slumdog Millionaire."
And even an upcoming movie about Michael Jackson's chimpanzee.
Now, I think it's really important that I pause here for a second and say that I can't take credit for the success of any of those movies.
I didn't write them, I didn't direct them, I didn't produce them, I didn't gaff them, I didn't make food and craft service -- we all know how important that is.
The credit for those movies, the credit for that success, goes to the people who made the films.
What I did was change the way people looked at them.
Accidentally, I asked if the conventional wisdom was correct.
And certainly, there are movies on that list that would have gotten made without the Black List, but there are many that definitely would not have.
And at a minimum, we've catalyzed a lot of them into production, and I think that's worth noting.
There have been about 1,000 screenplays on the Black List since its inception in 2005.
About 325 have been produced.
They've been nominated for 300 Academy Awards, they've won 50.
Four of the last nine Best Pictures have gone to scripts from the Black List, and 10 of the last 20 screenplay Oscars have gone to scripts from the Black List.
All told, they've made about 25 billion dollars in worldwide box office, which means that hundreds of millions of people have seen these films when they leave their homes, and sit next to someone they don't know and the lights go down.
And that's to say nothing of post-theatrical environments like DVD, streaming and, let's be honest, illegal downloads.
Five years ago today, October 15, my business partner and I doubled down on this notion that screenwriting talent was not where we expected to find it, and we launched a website that would allow anybody on earth who had written an English-language screenplay to upload their script, have it evaluated, and make it available to thousands of film-industry professionals.
And I'm pleased to say, in the five years since its launch, we've largely proved that thesis.
Hundreds of writers from across the world have found representation, have had their work optioned or sold.
Seven have even seen their films made in the last three years, including the film "Nightingale," the story of a war veteran's psychological decline, in which David Oyelowo's face is the only one on screen for the film's 90-minute duration.
It was nominated for a Golden Globe and two Emmy Awards.
It's also kind of cool that more than a dozen writers who were discovered on the website have ended up on this end-of-year annual list, including two of the last three number one writers.
Simply put, the conventional wisdom about screenwriting merit -- where it was and where it could be found, was wrong.
And this is notable, because as I mentioned before, in the triage of finding movies to make and making them, there's a lot of relying on conventional wisdom.
And that conventional wisdom, maybe, just maybe, might be wrong to even greater consequence.
Films about black people don't sell overseas.
Female-driven action movies don't work, because women will see themselves in men, but men won't see themselves in women.
That no one wants to see movies about women over 40.
That our onscreen heroes have to conform to a very narrow idea about beauty that we consider conventional.
What does that mean when those images are projected 30 feet high and the lights go down, for a kid that looks like me in Columbus, Georgia?
Or a Muslim girl in Cardiff, Wales?
Or a gay kid in Chennai?
What does it mean for how we see ourselves and how we see the world and for how the world sees us?
We live in very strange times.
And I think for the most part, we all live in a state of constant triage.
There's just too much information, too much stuff to contend with.
And so as a rule, we tend to default to conventional wisdom.
And I think it's important that we ask ourselves, constantly, how much of that conventional wisdom is all convention and no wisdom?
And at what cost?
Thank you.
(Applause)
Twenty-eight years ago, I was a broken man.
And you probably wouldn't be able to tell that if you met me.
I had a good job at a well-respected academic institution.
I dressed well, of course.
But my insides were rotting away.
You see, I grew up in a family riddled with addiction, and as a kid, I also struggled with coming to terms with my own sexuality.
And even though I couldn't name it then, growing up as a gay kid just compounded my issues of isolation and insecurities.
But drinking took all of that away.
Like many, I drank at an early age.
I continued to drink my way through college.
And when I finally did come out in the early 1980s, about the only places to meet other gay people, to socialize, to be yourself, were gay bars.
And what do you do in gay bars?
You drink.
And I did -- a lot.
My story is not unique.
Like millions of Americans, my disease progressed undiagnosed.
It took me to people and places and things that I never would have chosen.
It wasn't until an intersection with the law gave me an "opportunity" to get care, that I began my journey of recovery.
My journey of recovery has been filled with love and with joy, but it hasn't been without pain.
Like many of you, I've lost too many friends and family to this disease.
I've heard too many heartbreaking stories of people who've lost loved ones to addiction.
And I've also lost countless friends to HIV and AIDS.
Our current opioid epidemic and the AIDS epidemic tragically have much in common.
Right now, we are in the midst of one of the greatest health crises of our time.
During 2014 alone, 28,000 people died of drug overdoses associated with prescription drugs and heroin.
During the 1980s, scores of people were dying from HIV and AIDS.
Public officials ignored it.
Some wouldn't even utter the words.
They didn't want treatment.
And tragically, there are many parallels with our current epidemic.
Some called it the gay plague.
They called for quarantines.
They wanted to separate the innocent victims from the rest of us.
I was afraid we were losing this battle because people were blaming us for being sick.
Public policy was being held hostage by stigma and fear, and also held hostage were compassion, care, research, recovery and treatment.
But we changed all that.
Because out of the pain of those deaths, we saw a social and political movement.
AIDS galvanized us into action; to stand up, to speak up and to act out.
And it also galvanized the LGBT movement.
We knew we were in a battle for our lives because silence equaled death, but we changed, and we made things happen.
And right now, we have the potential to see the end of HIV/AIDS in our lifetime.
These changes came in no small part by the courageous, yet simple decision for people to come out to their neighbors, to their friends, to their families and to their coworkers.
Years ago, I was a volunteer for the Names Project.
This was an effort started by Cleve Jones in San Francisco to show that people who died of AIDS had names and faces and families and people who loved them.
I still recall unfolding the AIDS memorial quilt on the National Mall on a brilliant day in October, 1988.
So fast forward to 2015.
The Supreme Court's decision to strike down the ban on same-sex marriage.
My husband, Dave, and I walk over to the steps of the Supreme Court to celebrate that decision with so many other people, and I couldn't help but think how far we came around LGBT rights and yet how far we needed to go around issues of addiction.
When I was nominated by President Obama to be his Director of Drug Policy, I was very open about my recovery and about the fact that I was a gay man.
And at no point during my confirmation process -- at least that I know of -- did the fact that I was a gay man come to bear on my candidacy or my fitness to do this job.
But my addiction did.
At one point, a congressional staffer said that there was no way that I was going to be confirmed by the United States Senate because of my past, despite the fact that I had been in recovery for over 20 years, and despite the fact that this job takes a little bit of knowledge around addiction.
(Laughter) So, you know, this is the stigma that people with substance use disorders face every single day, and you know, I have to tell you it's still why I'm more comfortable coming out as a gay man than I am as a person with a history of addiction.
Nearly every family in America is affected by addiction.
Yet, unfortunately, too often, it's not talked about openly and honestly.
It's whispered about.
It's met with derision and scorn.
We hear these stories, time and time again, on TV, online, we hear it from public officials, and we hear it from family and friends.
And those of us with an addiction, we hear those voices, and somehow we believe that we are less deserving of care and treatment.
Today in the United States, only one in nine people get care and treatment for their disorder.
One in nine.
Think about that.
Generally, people with other diseases get care and treatment.
If you have cancer, you get treatment, if you have diabetes, you get treatment.
If you have a heart attack, you get emergency services, and you get referred to care.
But somehow people with addiction have to wait for treatment or often can't get when they need it.
And left untreated, addiction has significant, dire consequences.
And for many people that means death or incarceration.
We've been down that road before.
For too long our country felt like we could arrest our way out of this problem.
But we know that we can't.
Decades of scientific research has shown that this is a medical issue -- that this is a chronic medical condition that people inherit and that people develop.
So the Obama administration has taken a different tack on drug policy.
We've developed and implemented a comprehensive plan to expand prevention services, treatment services, early intervention and recovery support.
We've pushed criminal justice reform.
We've knocked down barriers to give people second chances.
We see public health and public safety officials working hand in hand at the community level.
We see police chiefs across the country guiding people to treatment instead of jail and incarceration.
We see law enforcement and other first responders reversing overdoses with naloxone to give people a second chance for care.
The Affordable Care Act is the biggest expansion of substance use disorder treatment in a generation, and it also calls for the integration of treatment services within primary care.
But fundamentally, all of this work is not enough.
Unless we change the way that we view people with addiction in the United States.
Years ago when I finally understood that I had a problem and I knew that I needed help, I was too afraid to ask for it.
I felt that people would think I was stupid, that I was weak-willed, that I was morally flawed.
But I talk about my recovery because I want to make change.
I want us to see that we need to be open and candid about who we are and what we can do.
I am public about my own recovery not to be self-congratulatory.
I am open about my own recovery to change public opinion, to change public policy and to change the course of this epidemic and empower the millions of Americans who struggle with this journey to be open and candid about who they are.
People are more than their disease.
And all of us have the opportunity to change public opinion and to change public policy.
All of us know someone who has an addiction, and all of us can do our part to change how we view people with addiction in the United States.
So when you see someone with an addiction, don't think of a drunk or a junkie or an addict or an abuser -- see a person; offer them help; give them kindness and compassion.
And together, we can be part of a growing movement in the United States to change how we view people with addiction.
Together we can change public policy.
We can ensure that people get care when they need it, just like any other disease.
We can be part of a growing, unstoppable movement to have millions of Americans enter recovery, and put an end to this epidemic.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Today, I want to tell you about a pressing social issue.
Now, it's not nuclear arms, it's not immigration, and it's not malaria.
I'm here to talk about movies.
Now, in all seriousness, movies are actually really important.
In film, we can be wildly entertained, and we can also be transported through storytelling.
Storytelling is so important.
Stories tell us what societies value, they offer us lessons, and they share and preserve our history.
Stories are amazing.
But stories don't give everyone the same opportunity to appear within them, particularly not stories compartmentalized in the form of American movies.
In film, interestingly enough, females are still erased and marginalized in a lot of our stories.
And I learned this for the first time about 10 years ago when I did my first study on gender role in G-rated films.
Since then, we've conducted more than 30 investigations.
My team is tired.
And I've committed my life as researcher and activist to fighting the inclusion crisis in Hollywood.
So today, what I'd like to do is tell you about that crisis.
I want to talk about gender inequality in film.
I want to tell you how it is perpetuated, and then I'm going to tell you how we're going to fix it.
However, one caveat before I begin: my data are really depressing.
So I want to apologize in advance, because I'm going to put you all in a really bad mood.
But I'm going to bring it up at the end, and I'm going to present a silver lining to fix this mess that we've been in for a very, very long time.
So, let's start with the gravity of the situation.
Each year, my research team examines the top 100 grossing films in the United States.
What we do is we look at every speaking or named character on-screen.
Now, to count in one of my investigations, all a character has to do is say one word.
This is a very low bar.
(Laughter) Thus far, we've looked at 800 movies, from 2007 to 2015, cataloguing every speaking character on-screen for gender, race, ethnicity, LGBT and characters with a disability.
Let's take a look at really some problematic trends.
First, females are still noticeably absent on-screen in film.
Across 800 movies and 35,205 speaking characters, less than a third of all roles go to girls and women.
Less than a third!
There's been no change from 2007 to 2015, and if you compare our results to a small sample of films from 1946 to 1955, there's been no change in over a half of a century.
Over half of a century!
But we're half of the population.
Now, if we look at this data intersectionally, which has been a focus of today, the picture becomes even more problematic.
Across the top 100 films of just last year, 48 films didn't feature one black or African-American speaking character, not one.
70 films were devoid of Asian or Asian-American speaking characters that were girls or women.
None.
Eighty-four films didn't feature one female character that had a disability.
And 93 were devoid of lesbian, bisexual or transgender female speaking characters.
This is not underrepresentation.
This is erasure, and I call this the epidemic of invisibility.
Now, when we move from prevalence to protagonist, the story is still problematic.
Out of a hundred films last year, only 32 featured a female lead or colead driving the action.
Only three out of a hundred films featured an underrepresented female driving the story, and only one diverse woman that was 45 years of age or older at the time of theatrical release.
Now let's look at portrayal.
In addition to the numbers you just saw, females are far more likely to be sexualized in film than their male counterparts.
Matter of fact, they're about three times as likely to be shown in sexually revealing clothing, partially naked, and they're far more likely to be thin.
Now, sometimes, in animation, females are so thin that their waist size approximates the circumference of their upper arm.
(Laughter) We like to say that these gals have no room for a womb or any other internal organ.
(Laughter) Now, all joking aside, theories suggest, research confirms, exposure to thin ideals and objectifying content can lead to body dissatisfaction, internalization of the thin ideal and self-objectification among some female viewers.
Obviously, what we see on-screen and what we see in the world, they do not match.
They do not match!
Matter of fact, if we lived in the screen world, we would have a population crisis on our hands.
So, as soon as I recognized these patterns, I wanted to find out why, and it turns out that there are two drivers to inequality on-screen: content creator gender and misperceptions of the audience.
Let's unpack them really quick.
If you want to change any of the patterns I just talked about, all you have to do is hire female directors.
Turns out, the female directors are associated with, in terms of short films and indie films, more girls and women on-screen, more stories with women in the center, more stories with women 40 years of age or older on-screen, which I think is good news for this crowd.
More underrepresented -- (Laughter) Sorry.
(Laughter) Sorry but not sorry.
More underrepresented characters in terms of race and ethnicity, and most importantly, more women working behind the camera in key production roles.
Easy answer to the problems that we just talked about.
Or is it?
It's actually not.
800 films, 2007-2015, 886 directors.
Only 4.1 percent are women.
Only three are African-American or black, and only one woman was Asian.
So why is it so difficult to have female directors if they're part of the solution?
Well, to answer this question, we conducted a study.
We interviewed dozens of industry insiders and asked them about directors.
Turns out, both male and female executives, when they think director, they think male.
They perceive the traits of leadership to be masculine in nature.
So when they're going to hire a director to command a crew, lead a ship, be a visionary or be General Patton, all the things that we've heard -- their thoughts and ideations pull male.
The perception of director or a leader is inconsistent with the perception of a woman.
The roles are incongruous, which is consistent with a lot of research in the psychological arena.
Second factor contributing to inequality on-screen is misperceptions of the audience.
I don't need to tell this crowd: 50 percent of the people that go to the box office and buy tickets are girls and women in this country.
Right?
But we're not perceived to be a viable or financially lucrative target audience.
Further, there's some misperceptions about whether females can open a film.
Open a film means that if you place a female at the center, it doesn't have the return on investment that if you place a male at the center of a story does.
This misperception is actually costly.
Right?
Especially in the wake of franchise successes like "The Hunger Games," "Pitch Perfect" or that small little indie film, "Star Wars: The Force Awakens."
Our own economic analyses show that gender of the lead character doesn't play a role in economic success in the United States.
But what does?
Production costs alone or in conjunction with how widely a film is distributed in this country.
It's not the gender of the lead character.
So at this point, we should all be sufficiently depressed.
No change in 50 years, few female directors working behind the camera and the entertainment industry does not trust us as an audience.
Well, I told you there would be a silver lining, and there is.
There are actually simple and tangible solutions to fixing this problem that involve content creators, executives and consumers like the individuals in this room.
Let's talk about a few of them.
The first is what I call "just add five."
Did you know if we looked at the top 100 films next year and simply added five female speaking characters on-screen to each of those films, it would create a new norm.
If we were to do this for three contiguous years, we would be at gender parity for the first time in over a half of a century.
Now, this approach is advantageous for a variety of reasons.
One? It doesn't take away jobs for male actors.
Heaven forbid.
(Laughter) Two, it's actually cost-effective. It doesn't cost that much.
Three, it builds a pipeline for talent.
And four, it humanizes the production process.
Why? Because it makes sure that there's women on set.
Second solution is for A-list talent.
A-listers, as we all know, can make demands in their contracts, particularly the ones that work on the biggest Hollywood films.
What if those A-listers simply added an equity clause or an inclusion rider into their contract?
Now, what does that mean?
Well, you probably don't know but the typical feature film has about 40 to 45 speaking characters in it.
I would argue that only 8 to 10 of those characters are actually relevant to the story.
Except maybe "Avengers." Right?
A few more in "Avengers."
The remaining 30 or so roles, there's no reason why those minor roles can't match or reflect the demography of where the story is taking place.
An equity rider by an A-lister in their contract can stipulate that those roles reflect the world in which we actually live.
Now, there's no reason why a network, a studio or a production company cannot adopt the same contractual language in their negotiation processes.
Third solution: this would be for the entertainment industry, Hollywood in particular, to adopt the Rooney Rule when it comes to hiring practices around directors.
Now, in the NFL, the Rooney Rule stipulates that if a team wants to hire a coach from outside the organization, what they have to do is interview an underrepresented candidate.
The exact same principle can apply to Hollywood films.
How?
Well, on these top films, executives and agents can make sure that women and people of color are not only on the consideration list, but they're actually interviewed for the job.
Now, one might say, why is this important?
Because it exposes or introduces executives to female directors who otherwise fall prey to exclusionary hiring practices.
The fourth solution is for consumers like me and you.
If we want to see more films by, for and about women, we have to support them.
It may mean going to the independent theater chain instead of the multiplex.
Or it might mean scrolling down a little further online to find a film by a female director.
Or it may be writing a check and funding a film, particularly by a female director from an underrepresented background.
Right?
We need to write, call and email companies that are making and distributing films, and we need to post on our social media accounts when we want to see inclusive representation, women on-screen, and most importantly, women behind the camera.
We need to make our voices heard and our dollars count.
Now, we actually have the ability to change the world on this one.
The US and its content, films in particular, have captured the imaginations of audiences worldwide.
Worldwide.
So that means that the film industry has unprecedented access to be able to distribute stories about equality all around the world.
Imagine what would happen if the film industry aligned its values with what it shows on-screen.
It could foster inclusion and acceptance for girls and women, people of color, the LGBT community, individuals with disabilities, and so many more around the world.
The only thing that the film industry has to do is unleash its secret weapon, and that's storytelling.
Now, at the beginning of this talk, I said that films -- that they can actually transport us, but I would like to argue that films, they can transform us.
None of us in this room have grown up or experienced a storytelling landscape with fully realized female characters, none of us, because the numbers haven't changed.
What would happen if the next generation of audiences grew up with a whole different screen reality?
What would happen?
Well I'm here to tell you today that it's not only possible to change what we see on-screen but I am impatient for it to get here.
So let's agree to take action today to eradicate the epidemic of invisibility.
And let's agree to take action today to agree that US audiences and global viewers demand and deserve more.
And let's agree today that the next generation of viewers and audiences, that they deserve to see the stories we were never able to see.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: Hello. Welcome to this TED Dialogues.
It's the first of a series that's going to be done in response to the current political upheaval.
I don't know about you; I've become quite concerned about the growing divisiveness in this country and in the world.
No one's listening to each other. Right?
They aren't.
I mean, it feels like we need a different kind of conversation, one that's based on -- I don't know, on reason, listening, on understanding, on a broader context.
That's at least what we're going to try in these TED Dialogues, starting today.
And we couldn't have anyone with us who I'd be more excited to kick this off.
This is a mind right here that thinks pretty much like no one else on the planet, I would hasten to say.
I'm serious.
(Yuval Noah Harari laughs) I'm serious.
He synthesizes history with underlying ideas in a way that kind of takes your breath away.
So, some of you will know this book, "Sapiens."
Has anyone here read "Sapiens"?
(Applause) I mean, I could not put it down.
The way that he tells the story of mankind through big ideas that really make you think differently -- it's kind of amazing.
And here's the follow-up, which I think is being published in the US next week.
YNH: Yeah, next week.
CA: "Homo Deus."
Now, this is the history of the next hundred years.
I've had a chance to read it.
It's extremely dramatic, and I daresay, for some people, quite alarming.
It's a must-read.
And honestly, we couldn't have someone better to help make sense of what on Earth is happening in the world right now.
So a warm welcome, please, to Yuval Noah Harari.
(Applause) It's great to be joined by our friends on Facebook and around the Web.
Hello, Facebook.
And all of you, as I start asking questions of Yuval, come up with your own questions, and not necessarily about the political scandal du jour, but about the broader understanding of: Where are we heading?
You ready? OK, we're going to go.
So here we are, Yuval: New York City, 2017, there's a new president in power, and shock waves rippling around the world.
What on Earth is happening?
YNH: I think the basic thing that happened is that we have lost our story.
Humans think in stories, and we try to make sense of the world by telling stories.
And for the last few decades, we had a very simple and very attractive story about what's happening in the world.
And the story said that, oh, what's happening is that the economy is being globalized, politics is being liberalized, and the combination of the two will create paradise on Earth, and we just need to keep on globalizing the economy and liberalizing the political system, and everything will be wonderful.
And 2016 is the moment when a very large segment, even of the Western world, stopped believing in this story.
For good or bad reasons -- it doesn't matter.
People stopped believing in the story, and when you don't have a story, you don't understand what's happening.
CA: Part of you believes that that story was actually a very effective story.
It worked.
YNH: To some extent, yes.
According to some measurements, we are now in the best time ever for humankind.
Today, for the first time in history, more people die from eating too much than from eating too little, which is an amazing achievement.
(Laughter) Also for the first time in history, more people die from old age than from infectious diseases, and violence is also down.
For the first time in history, more people commit suicide than are killed by crime and terrorism and war put together.
Statistically, you are your own worst enemy.
At least, of all the people in the world, you are most likely to be killed by yourself -- (Laughter) which is, again, very good news, compared -- (Laughter) compared to the level of violence that we saw in previous eras.
CA: But this process of connecting the world ended up with a large group of people kind of feeling left out, and they've reacted.
And so we have this bombshell that's sort of ripping through the whole system.
I mean, what do you make of what's happened?
It feels like the old way that people thought of politics, the left-right divide, has been blown up and replaced.
How should we think of this?
YNH: Yeah, the old 20th-century political model of left versus right is now largely irrelevant, and the real divide today is between global and national, global or local.
And you see it again all over the world that this is now the main struggle.
We probably need completely new political models and completely new ways of thinking about politics.
In essence, what you can say is that we now have global ecology, we have a global economy but we have national politics, and this doesn't work together.
This makes the political system ineffective, because it has no control over the forces that shape our life.
And you have basically two solutions to this imbalance: either de-globalize the economy and turn it back into a national economy, or globalize the political system.
CA: So some, I guess many liberals out there view Trump and his government as kind of irredeemably bad, just awful in every way.
Do you see any underlying narrative or political philosophy in there that is at least worth understanding?
How would you articulate that philosophy?
Is it just the philosophy of nationalism?
YNH: I think the underlying feeling or idea is that the political system -- something is broken there.
It doesn't empower the ordinary person anymore.
It doesn't care so much about the ordinary person anymore, and I think this diagnosis of the political disease is correct.
With regard to the answers, I am far less certain.
I think what we are seeing is the immediate human reaction: if something doesn't work, let's go back.
And you see it all over the world, that people, almost nobody in the political system today, has any future-oriented vision of where humankind is going.
Almost everywhere, you see retrograde vision: "Let's make America great again," like it was great -- I don't know -- in the '50s, in the '80s, sometime, let's go back there.
And you go to Russia a hundred years after Lenin, Putin's vision for the future is basically, ah, let's go back to the Tsarist empire.
And in Israel, where I come from, the hottest political vision of the present is: "Let's build the temple again."
So let's go back 2,000 years backwards.
So people are thinking sometime in the past we've lost it, and sometimes in the past, it's like you've lost your way in the city, and you say OK, let's go back to the point where I felt secure and start again.
I don't think this can work, but a lot of people, this is their gut instinct.
CA: But why couldn't it work?
"America First" is a very appealing slogan in many ways.
Patriotism is, in many ways, a very noble thing.
It's played a role in promoting cooperation among large numbers of people.
Why couldn't you have a world organized in countries, all of which put themselves first?
YNH: For many centuries, even thousands of years, patriotism worked quite well.
Of course, it led to wars an so forth, but we shouldn't focus too much on the bad.
There are also many, many positive things about patriotism, and the ability to have a large number of people care about each other, sympathize with one another, and come together for collective action.
If you go back to the first nations, so, thousands of years ago, the people who lived along the Yellow River in China -- it was many, many different tribes and they all depended on the river for survival and for prosperity, but all of them also suffered from periodical floods and periodical droughts.
And no tribe could really do anything about it, because each of them controlled just a tiny section of the river.
And then in a long and complicated process, the tribes coalesced together to form the Chinese nation, which controlled the entire Yellow River and had the ability to bring hundreds of thousands of people together to build dams and canals and regulate the river and prevent the worst floods and droughts and raise the level of prosperity for everybody.
And this worked in many places around the world.
But in the 21st century, technology is changing all that in a fundamental way.
We are now living -- all people in the world -- are living alongside the same cyber river, and no single nation can regulate this river by itself.
We are all living together on a single planet, which is threatened by our own actions.
And if you don't have some kind of global cooperation, nationalism is just not on the right level to tackle the problems, whether it's climate change or whether it's technological disruption.
CA: So it was a beautiful idea in a world where most of the action, most of the issues, took place on national scale, but your argument is that the issues that matter most today no longer take place on a national scale but on a global scale.
YNH: Exactly. All the major problems of the world today are global in essence, and they cannot be solved unless through some kind of global cooperation.
It's not just climate change, which is, like, the most obvious example people give.
I think more in terms of technological disruption.
If you think about, for example, artificial intelligence, over the next 20, 30 years pushing hundreds of millions of people out of the job market -- this is a problem on a global level.
It will disrupt the economy of all the countries.
And similarly, if you think about, say, bioengineering and people being afraid of conducting, I don't know, genetic engineering research in humans, it won't help if just a single country, let's say the US, outlaws all genetic experiments in humans, but China or North Korea continues to do it.
So the US cannot solve it by itself, and very quickly, the pressure on the US to do the same will be immense because we are talking about high-risk, high-gain technologies.
If somebody else is doing it, I can't allow myself to remain behind.
The only way to have regulations, effective regulations, on things like genetic engineering, is to have global regulations.
If you just have national regulations, nobody would like to stay behind.
CA: So this is really interesting.
It seems to me that this may be one key to provoking at least a constructive conversation between the different sides here, because I think everyone can agree that the start point of a lot of the anger that's propelled us to where we are is because of the legitimate concerns about job loss.
Work is gone, a traditional way of life has gone, and it's no wonder that people are furious about that.
And in general, they have blamed globalism, global elites, for doing this to them without asking their permission, and that seems like a legitimate complaint.
But what I hear you saying is that -- so a key question is: What is the real cause of job loss, both now and going forward?
To the extent that it's about globalism, then the right response, yes, is to shut down borders and keep people out and change trade agreements and so forth.
But you're saying, I think, that actually the bigger cause of job loss is not going to be that at all.
It's going to originate in technological questions, and we have no chance of solving that unless we operate as a connected world.
YNH: Yeah, I think that, I don't know about the present, but looking to the future, it's not the Mexicans or Chinese who will take the jobs from the people in Pennsylvania, it's the robots and algorithms.
So unless you plan to build a big wall on the border of California -- (Laughter) the wall on the border with Mexico is going to be very ineffective.
And I was struck when I watched the debates before the election, I was struck that certainly Trump did not even attempt to frighten people by saying the robots will take your jobs.
Now even if it's not true, it doesn't matter.
It could have been an extremely effective way of frightening people -- (Laughter) and galvanizing people: "The robots will take your jobs!"
And it made me afraid, because it meant that no matter what happens in universities and laboratories, and there, there is already an intense debate about it, but in the mainstream political system and among the general public, people are just unaware that there could be an immense technological disruption -- not in 200 years, but in 10, 20, 30 years -- and we have to do something about it now, partly because most of what we teach children today in school or in college is going to be completely irrelevant to the job market of 2040, 2050.
So it's not something we'll need to think about in 2040.
We need to think today what to teach the young people.
CA: Yeah, no, absolutely.
You've often written about moments in history where humankind has ... entered a new era, unintentionally.
Decisions have been made, technologies have been developed, and suddenly the world has changed, possibly in a way that's worse for everyone.
So one of the examples you give in "Sapiens" is just the whole agricultural revolution, which, for an actual person tilling the fields, they just picked up a 12-hour backbreaking workday instead of six hours in the jungle and a much more interesting lifestyle.
(Laughter) So are we at another possible phase change here, where we kind of sleepwalk into a future that none of us actually wants?
YNH: Yes, very much so.
During the agricultural revolution, what happened is that immense technological and economic revolution empowered the human collective, but when you look at actual individual lives, the life of a tiny elite became much better, and the lives of the majority of people became considerably worse.
And this can happen again in the 21st century.
No doubt the new technologies will empower the human collective.
But we may end up again with a tiny elite reaping all the benefits, taking all the fruits, and the masses of the population finding themselves worse than they were before, certainly much worse than this tiny elite.
CA: And those elites might not even be human elites.
They might be cyborgs or -- YNH: Yeah, they could be enhanced super humans.
They could be cyborgs.
They could be completely nonorganic elites.
They could even be non-conscious algorithms.
What we see now in the world is authority shifting away from humans to algorithms.
More and more decisions -- about personal lives, about economic matters, about political matters -- are actually being taken by algorithms.
If you ask the bank for a loan, chances are your fate is decided by an algorithm, not by a human being.
And the general impression is that maybe Homo sapiens just lost it.
The world is so complicated, there is so much data, things are changing so fast, that this thing that evolved on the African savanna tens of thousands of years ago -- to cope with a particular environment, a particular volume of information and data -- it just can't handle the realities of the 21st century, and the only thing that may be able to handle it is big-data algorithms.
So no wonder more and more authority is shifting from us to the algorithms.
CA: So we're in New York City for the first of a series of TED Dialogues with Yuval Harari, and there's a Facebook Live audience out there.
We're excited to have you with us.
We'll start coming to some of your questions and questions of people in the room in just a few minutes, so have those coming.
Yuval, if you're going to make the argument that we need to get past nationalism because of the coming technological ...
danger, in a way, presented by so much of what's happening we've got to have a global conversation about this.
Trouble is, it's hard to get people really believing that, I don't know, AI really is an imminent threat, and so forth.
The things that people, some people at least, care about much more immediately, perhaps, is climate change, perhaps other issues like refugees, nuclear weapons, and so forth.
Would you argue that where we are right now that somehow those issues need to be dialed up?
You've talked about climate change, but Trump has said he doesn't believe in that.
So in a way, your most powerful argument, you can't actually use to make this case.
YNH: Yeah, I think with climate change, at first sight, it's quite surprising that there is a very close correlation between nationalism and climate change.
I mean, almost always, the people who deny climate change are nationalists.
And at first sight, you think: Why?
What's the connection?
Why don't you have socialists denying climate change?
But then, when you think about it, it's obvious -- because nationalism has no solution to climate change.
If you want to be a nationalist in the 21st century, you have to deny the problem.
If you accept the reality of the problem, then you must accept that, yes, there is still room in the world for patriotism, there is still room in the world for having special loyalties and obligations towards your own people, towards your own country.
I don't think anybody is really thinking of abolishing that.
But in order to confront climate change, we need additional loyalties and commitments to a level beyond the nation.
And that should not be impossible, because people can have several layers of loyalty.
You can be loyal to your family and to your community and to your nation, so why can't you also be loyal to humankind as a whole?
Of course, there are occasions when it becomes difficult, what to put first, but, you know, life is difficult.
Handle it.
(Laughter) CA: OK, so I would love to get some questions from the audience here.
We've got a microphone here.
Speak into it, and Facebook, get them coming, too.
Howard Morgan: One of the things that has clearly made a huge difference in this country and other countries is the income distribution inequality, the dramatic change in income distribution in the US from what it was 50 years ago, and around the world.
Is there anything we can do to affect that?
Because that gets at a lot of the underlying causes.
YNH: So far I haven't heard a very good idea about what to do about it, again, partly because most ideas remain on the national level, and the problem is global.
I mean, one idea that we hear quite a lot about now is universal basic income.
But this is a problem.
I mean, I think it's a good start, but it's a problematic idea because it's not clear what "universal" is and it's not clear what "basic" is.
Most people when they speak about universal basic income, they actually mean national basic income.
But the problem is global.
Let's say that you have AI and 3D printers taking away millions of jobs in Bangladesh, from all the people who make my shirts and my shoes.
So what's going to happen?
The US government will levy taxes on Google and Apple in California, and use that to pay basic income to unemployed Bangladeshis?
If you believe that, you can just as well believe that Santa Claus will come and solve the problem.
So unless we have really universal and not national basic income, the deep problems are not going to go away.
And also it's not clear what basic is, because what are basic human needs?
A thousand years ago, just food and shelter was enough.
But today, people will say education is a basic human need, it should be part of the package.
But how much? Six years? Twelve years? PhD?
Similarly, with health care, let's say that in 20, 30, 40 years, you'll have expensive treatments that can extend human life to 120, I don't know.
Will this be part of the basket of basic income or not?
It's a very difficult problem, because in a world where people lose their ability to be employed, the only thing they are going to get is this basic income.
So what's part of it is a very, very difficult ethical question.
CA: There's a bunch of questions on how the world affords it as well, who pays.
There's a question here from Facebook from Lisa Larson: "How does nationalism in the US now compare to that between World War I and World War II in the last century?"
YNH: Well the good news, with regard to the dangers of nationalism, we are in a much better position than a century ago.
A century ago, 1917, Europeans were killing each other by the millions.
In 2016, with Brexit, as far as I remember, a single person lost their life, an MP who was murdered by some extremist.
Just a single person.
I mean, if Brexit was about British independence, this is the most peaceful war of independence in human history.
And let's say that Scotland will now choose to leave the UK after Brexit.
So in the 18th century, if Scotland wanted -- and the Scots wanted several times -- to break out of the control of London, the reaction of the government in London was to send an army up north to burn down Edinburgh and massacre the highland tribes.
My guess is that if, in 2018, the Scots vote for independence, the London government will not send an army up north to burn down Edinburgh.
Very few people are now willing to kill or be killed for Scottish or for British independence.
So for all the talk of the rise of nationalism and going back to the 1930s, to the 19th century, in the West at least, the power of national sentiments today is far, far smaller than it was a century ago.
CA: Although some people now, you hear publicly worrying about whether that might be shifting, that there could actually be outbreaks of violence in the US depending on how things turn out.
Should we be worried about that, or do you really think things have shifted?
YNH: No, we should be worried.
We should be aware of two things.
First of all, don't be hysterical.
We are not back in the First World War yet.
But on the other hand, don't be complacent.
We reached from 1917 to 2017, not by some divine miracle, but simply by human decisions, and if we now start making the wrong decisions, we could be back in an analogous situation to 1917 in a few years.
One of the things I know as a historian is that you should never underestimate human stupidity.
(Laughter) It's one of the most powerful forces in history, human stupidity and human violence.
Humans do such crazy things for no obvious reason, but again, at the same time, another very powerful force in human history is human wisdom.
We have both.
CA: We have with us here moral psychologist Jonathan Haidt, who I think has a question.
Jonathan Haidt: Thanks, Yuval.
So you seem to be a fan of global governance, but when you look at the map of the world from Transparency International, which rates the level of corruption of political institutions, it's a vast sea of red with little bits of yellow here and there for those with good institutions.
So if we were to have some kind of global governance, what makes you think it would end up being more like Denmark rather than more like Russia or Honduras, and aren't there alternatives, such as we did with CFCs?
There are ways to solve global problems with national governments.
What would world government actually look like, and why do you think it would work?
YNH: Well, I don't know what it would look like.
Nobody still has a model for that.
The main reason we need it is because many of these issues are lose-lose situations.
When you have a win-win situation like trade, both sides can benefit from a trade agreement, then this is something you can work out.
Without some kind of global government, national governments each have an interest in doing it.
But when you have a lose-lose situation like with climate change, it's much more difficult without some overarching authority, real authority.
Now, how to get there and what would it look like, I don't know.
And certainly there is no obvious reason to think that it would look like Denmark, or that it would be a democracy.
Most likely it wouldn't.
We don't have workable democratic models for a global government.
So maybe it would look more like ancient China than like modern Denmark.
But still, given the dangers that we are facing, I think the imperative of having some kind of real ability to force through difficult decisions on the global level is more important than almost anything else.
CA: There's a question from Facebook here, and then we'll get the mic to Andrew.
So, Kat Hebron on Facebook, calling in from Vail: "How would developed nations manage the millions of climate migrants?"
YNH: I don't know.
CA: That's your answer, Kat. (Laughter) YNH: And I don't think that they know either.
They'll just deny the problem, maybe.
CA: But immigration, generally, is another example of a problem that's very hard to solve on a nation-by-nation basis.
One nation can shut its doors, but maybe that stores up problems for the future.
YNH: Yes, I mean -- it's another very good case, especially because it's so much easier to migrate today than it was in the Middle Ages or in ancient times.
CA: Yuval, there's a belief among many technologists, certainly, that political concerns are kind of overblown, that actually, political leaders don't have that much influence in the world, that the real determination of humanity at this point is by science, by invention, by companies, by many things other than political leaders, and it's actually very hard for leaders to do much, so we're actually worrying about nothing here.
YNH: Well, first, it should be emphasized that it's true that political leaders' ability to do good is very limited, but their ability to do harm is unlimited.
There is a basic imbalance here.
You can still press the button and blow everybody up.
You have that kind of ability.
But if you want, for example, to reduce inequality, that's very, very difficult.
But to start a war, you can still do so very easily.
So there is a built-in imbalance in the political system today which is very frustrating, where you cannot do a lot of good but you can still do a lot of harm.
And this makes the political system still a very big concern.
CA: So as you look at what's happening today, and putting your historian's hat on, do you look back in history at moments when things were going just fine and an individual leader really took the world or their country backwards?
YNH: There are quite a few examples, but I should emphasize, it's never an individual leader.
I mean, somebody put him there, and somebody allowed him to continue to be there.
So it's never really just the fault of a single individual.
There are a lot of people behind every such individual.
CA: Can we have the microphone here, please, to Andrew?
Andrew Solomon: You've talked a lot about the global versus the national, but increasingly, it seems to me, the world situation is in the hands of identity groups.
We look at people within the United States who have been recruited by ISIS.
We look at these other groups which have formed which go outside of national bounds but still represent significant authorities.
How are they to be integrated into the system, and how is a diverse set of identities to be made coherent under either national or global leadership?
YNH: Well, the problem of such diverse identities is a problem from nationalism as well.
Nationalism believes in a single, monolithic identity, and exclusive or at least more extreme versions of nationalism believe in an exclusive loyalty to a single identity.
And therefore, nationalism has had a lot of problems with people wanting to divide their identities between various groups.
So it's not just a problem, say, for a global vision.
And I think, again, history shows that you shouldn't necessarily think in such exclusive terms.
If you think that there is just a single identity for a person, "I am just X, that's it, I can't be several things, I can be just that," that's the start of the problem.
You have religions, you have nations that sometimes demand exclusive loyalty, but it's not the only option.
There are many religions and many nations that enable you to have diverse identities at the same time.
CA: But is one explanation of what's happened in the last year that a group of people have got fed up with, if you like, the liberal elites, for want of a better term, obsessing over many, many different identities and them feeling, "But what about my identity? I am being completely ignored here.
And by the way, I thought I was the majority"?
And that that's actually sparked a lot of the anger.
YNH: Yeah. Identity is always problematic, because identity is always based on fictional stories that sooner or later collide with reality.
Almost all identities, I mean, beyond the level of the basic community of a few dozen people, are based on a fictional story.
They are not the truth.
They are not the reality.
It's just a story that people invent and tell one another and start believing.
And therefore all identities are extremely unstable.
They are not a biological reality.
Sometimes nationalists, for example, think that the nation is a biological entity.
It's made of the combination of soil and blood, creates the nation.
But this is just a fictional story.
CA: Soil and blood kind of makes a gooey mess.
(Laughter) YNH: It does, and also it messes with your mind when you think too much that I am a combination of soil and blood.
If you look from a biological perspective, obviously none of the nations that exist today existed 5,000 years ago.
Homo sapiens is a social animal, that's for sure.
But for millions of years, Homo sapiens and our hominid ancestors lived in small communities of a few dozen individuals.
Everybody knew everybody else.
Whereas modern nations are imagined communities, in the sense that I don't even know all these people.
I come from a relatively small nation, Israel, and of eight million Israelis, I never met most of them.
I will never meet most of them.
They basically exist here.
CA: But in terms of this identity, this group who feel left out and perhaps have work taken away, I mean, in "Homo Deus," you actually speak of this group in one sense expanding, that so many people may have their jobs taken away by technology in some way that we could end up with a really large -- I think you call it a "useless class" -- a class where traditionally, as viewed by the economy, these people have no use.
YNH: Yes.
CA: How likely a possibility is that?
Is that something we should be terrified about?
And can we address it in any way?
YNH: We should think about it very carefully.
I mean, nobody really knows what the job market will look like in 2040, 2050.
There is a chance many new jobs will appear, but it's not certain.
And even if new jobs do appear, it won't necessarily be easy for a 50-year old unemployed truck driver made unemployed by self-driving vehicles, it won't be easy for an unemployed truck driver to reinvent himself or herself as a designer of virtual worlds.
Previously, if you look at the trajectory of the industrial revolution, when machines replaced humans in one type of work, the solution usually came from low-skill work in new lines of business.
So you didn't need any more agricultural workers, so people moved to working in low-skill industrial jobs, and when this was taken away by more and more machines, people moved to low-skill service jobs.
Now, when people say there will be new jobs in the future, that humans can do better than AI, that humans can do better than robots, they usually think about high-skill jobs, like software engineers designing virtual worlds.
Now, I don't see how an unemployed cashier from Wal-Mart reinvents herself or himself at 50 as a designer of virtual worlds, and certainly I don't see how the millions of unemployed Bangladeshi textile workers will be able to do that.
I mean, if they are going to do it, we need to start teaching the Bangladeshis today how to be software designers, and we are not doing it.
So what will they do in 20 years?
CA: So it feels like you're really highlighting a question that's really been bugging me the last few months more and more.
It's almost a hard question to ask in public, but if any mind has some wisdom to offer in it, maybe it's yours, so I'm going to ask you: What are humans for?
YNH: As far as we know, for nothing.
(Laughter) I mean, there is no great cosmic drama, some great cosmic plan, that we have a role to play in.
And we just need to discover what our role is and then play it to the best of our ability.
This has been the story of all religions and ideologies and so forth, but as a scientist, the best I can say is this is not true.
There is no universal drama with a role in it for Homo sapiens.
So -- CA: I'm going to push back on you just for a minute, just from your own book, because in "Homo Deus," you give really one of the most coherent and understandable accounts about sentience, about consciousness, and that unique sort of human skill.
You point out that it's different from intelligence, the intelligence that we're building in machines, and that there's actually a lot of mystery around it.
How can you be sure there's no purpose when we don't even understand what this sentience thing is?
I mean, in your own thinking, isn't there a chance that what humans are for is to be the universe's sentient things, to be the centers of joy and love and happiness and hope?
And maybe we can build machines that actually help amplify that, even if they're not going to become sentient themselves?
Is that crazy?
I kind of found myself hoping that, reading your book.
YNH: Well, I certainly think that the most interesting question today in science is the question of consciousness and the mind.
We are getting better and better in understanding the brain and intelligence, but we are not getting much better in understanding the mind and consciousness.
People often confuse intelligence and consciousness, especially in places like Silicon Valley, which is understandable, because in humans, they go together.
I mean, intelligence basically is the ability to solve problems.
Consciousness is the ability to feel things, to feel joy and sadness and boredom and pain and so forth.
In Homo sapiens and all other mammals as well -- it's not unique to humans -- in all mammals and birds and some other animals, intelligence and consciousness go together.
We often solve problems by feeling things.
So we tend to confuse them.
But they are different things.
What's happening today in places like Silicon Valley is that we are creating artificial intelligence but not artificial consciousness.
There has been an amazing development in computer intelligence over the last 50 years, and exactly zero development in computer consciousness, and there is no indication that computers are going to become conscious anytime soon.
So first of all, if there is some cosmic role for consciousness, it's not unique to Homo sapiens.
Cows are conscious, pigs are conscious, chimpanzees are conscious, chickens are conscious, so if we go that way, first of all, we need to broaden our horizons and remember very clearly we are not the only sentient beings on Earth, and when it comes to sentience -- when it comes to intelligence, there is good reason to think we are the most intelligent of the whole bunch.
But when it comes to sentience, to say that humans are more sentient than whales, or more sentient than baboons or more sentient than cats, I see no evidence for that.
So first step is, you go in that direction, expand.
And then the second question of what is it for, I would reverse it and I would say that I don't think sentience is for anything.
I think we don't need to find our role in the universe.
The really important thing is to liberate ourselves from suffering.
What characterizes sentient beings in contrast to robots, to stones, to whatever, is that sentient beings suffer, can suffer, and what they should focus on is not finding their place in some mysterious cosmic drama.
They should focus on understanding what suffering is, what causes it and how to be liberated from it.
CA: I know this is a big issue for you, and that was very eloquent.
We're going to have a blizzard of questions from the audience here, and maybe from Facebook as well, and maybe some comments as well.
So let's go quick.
There's one right here.
Keep your hands held up at the back if you want the mic, and we'll get it back to you.
Question: In your work, you talk a lot about the fictional stories that we accept as truth, and we live our lives by it.
As an individual, knowing that, how does it impact the stories that you choose to live your life, and do you confuse them with the truth, like all of us?
YNH: I try not to.
I mean, for me, maybe the most important question, both as a scientist and as a person, is how to tell the difference between fiction and reality, because reality is there.
I'm not saying that everything is fiction.
It's just very difficult for human beings to tell the difference between fiction and reality, and it has become more and more difficult as history progressed, because the fictions that we have created -- nations and gods and money and corporations -- they now control the world.
So just to even think, "Oh, this is just all fictional entities that we've created," is very difficult.
But reality is there.
For me the best ...
There are several tests to tell the difference between fiction and reality.
The simplest one, the best one that I can say in short, is the test of suffering.
If it can suffer, it's real.
If it can't suffer, it's not real.
A nation cannot suffer.
That's very, very clear.
Even if a nation loses a war, we say, "Germany suffered a defeat in the First World War," it's a metaphor.
Germany cannot suffer. Germany has no mind.
Germany has no consciousness.
Germans can suffer, yes, but Germany cannot.
Similarly, when a bank goes bust, the bank cannot suffer.
When the dollar loses its value, the dollar doesn't suffer.
People can suffer. Animals can suffer.
This is real.
So I would start, if you really want to see reality, I would go through the door of suffering.
If you can really understand what suffering is, this will give you also the key to understand what reality is.
CA: There's a Facebook question here that connects to this, from someone around the world in a language that I cannot read.
YNH: Oh, it's Hebrew. CA: Hebrew. There you go.
(Laughter) Can you read the name?
YNH: Or Lauterbach Goren.
CA: Well, thank you for writing in.
The question is: "Is the post-truth era really a brand-new era, or just another climax or moment in a never-ending trend?
YNH: Personally, I don't connect with this idea of post-truth.
My basic reaction as a historian is: If this is the era of post-truth, when the hell was the era of truth?
CA: Right.
(Laughter) YNH: Was it the 1980s, the 1950s, the Middle Ages?
I mean, we have always lived in an era, in a way, of post-truth.
CA: But I'd push back on that, because I think what people are talking about is that there was a world where you had fewer journalistic outlets, where there were traditions, that things were fact-checked.
It was incorporated into the charter of those organizations that the truth mattered.
So if you believe in a reality, then what you write is information.
There was a belief that that information should connect to reality in a real way, and if you wrote a headline, it was a serious, earnest attempt to reflect something that had actually happened.
And people didn't always get it right.
But I think the concern now is you've got a technological system that's incredibly powerful that, for a while at least, massively amplified anything with no attention paid to whether it connected to reality, only to whether it connected to clicks and attention, and that that was arguably toxic.
That's a reasonable concern, isn't it?
YNH: Yeah, it is. I mean, the technology changes, and it's now easier to disseminate both truth and fiction and falsehood.
It goes both ways.
It's also much easier, though, to spread the truth than it was ever before.
But I don't think there is anything essentially new about this disseminating fictions and errors.
There is nothing that -- I don't know -- Joseph Goebbels, didn't know about all this idea of fake news and post-truth.
He famously said that if you repeat a lie often enough, people will think it's the truth, and the bigger the lie, the better, because people won't even think that something so big can be a lie.
I think that fake news has been with us for thousands of years.
Just think of the Bible.
(Laughter) CA: But there is a concern that the fake news is associated with tyrannical regimes, and when you see an uprise in fake news that is a canary in the coal mine that there may be dark times coming.
YNH: Yeah. I mean, the intentional use of fake news is a disturbing sign.
But I'm not saying that it's not bad, I'm just saying that it's not new.
CA: There's a lot of interest on Facebook on this question about global governance versus nationalism.
Question here from Phil Dennis: "How do we get people, governments, to relinquish power?
Is that -- is that -- actually, the text is so big I can't read the full question.
But is that a necessity?
Is it going to take war to get there?
Sorry Phil -- I mangled your question, but I blame the text right here.
YNH: One option that some people talk about is that only a catastrophe can shake humankind and open the path to a real system of global governance, and they say that we can't do it before the catastrophe, but we need to start laying the foundations so that when the disaster strikes, we can react quickly.
But people will just not have the motivation to do such a thing before the disaster strikes.
Another thing that I would emphasize is that anybody who is really interested in global governance should always make it very, very clear that it doesn't replace or abolish local identities and communities, that it should come both as -- It should be part of a single package.
CA: I want to hear more on this, because the very words "global governance" are almost the epitome of evil in the mindset of a lot of people on the alt-right right now.
It just seems scary, remote, distant, and it has let them down, and so globalists, global governance -- no, go away!
And many view the election as the ultimate poke in the eye to anyone who believes in that.
So how do we change the narrative so that it doesn't seem so scary and remote?
Build more on this idea of it being compatible with local identity, local communities.
YNH: Well, I think again we should start really with the biological realities of Homo sapiens.
And biology tells us two things about Homo sapiens which are very relevant to this issue: first of all, that we are completely dependent on the ecological system around us, and that today we are talking about a global system.
You cannot escape that.
And at the same time, biology tells us about Homo sapiens that we are social animals, but that we are social on a very, very local level.
It's just a simple fact of humanity that we cannot have intimate familiarity with more than about 150 individuals.
The size of the natural group, the natural community of Homo sapiens, is not more than 150 individuals, and everything beyond that is really based on all kinds of imaginary stories and large-scale institutions, and I think that we can find a way, again, based on a biological understanding of our species, to weave the two together and to understand that today in the 21st century, we need both the global level and the local community.
And I would go even further than that and say that it starts with the body itself.
The feelings that people today have of alienation and loneliness and not finding their place in the world, I would think that the chief problem is not global capitalism.
The chief problem is that over the last hundred years, people have been becoming disembodied, have been distancing themselves from their body.
As a hunter-gatherer or even as a peasant, to survive, you need to be constantly in touch with your body and with your senses, every moment.
If you go to the forest to look for mushrooms and you don't pay attention to what you hear, to what you smell, to what you taste, you're dead.
So you must be very connected.
In the last hundred years, people are losing their ability to be in touch with their body and their senses, to hear, to smell, to feel.
More and more attention goes to screens, to what is happening elsewhere, some other time.
This, I think, is the deep reason for the feelings of alienation and loneliness and so forth, and therefore part of the solution is not to bring back some mass nationalism, but also reconnect with our own bodies, and if you are back in touch with your body, you will feel much more at home in the world also.
CA: Well, depending on how things go, we may all be back in the forest soon.
We're going to have one more question in the room and one more on Facebook.
Ama Adi-Dako: Hello. I'm from Ghana, West Africa, and my question is: I'm wondering how do you present and justify the idea of global governance to countries that have been historically disenfranchised by the effects of globalization, and also, if we're talking about global governance, it sounds to me like it will definitely come from a very Westernized idea of what the "global" is supposed to look like.
So how do we present and justify that idea of global versus wholly nationalist to people in countries like Ghana and Nigeria and Togo and other countries like that?
YNH: I would start by saying that history is extremely unfair, and that we should realize that.
Many of the countries that suffered most from the last 200 years of globalization and imperialism and industrialization are exactly the countries which are also most likely to suffer most from the next wave.
And we should be very, very clear about that.
If we don't have a global governance, and if we suffer from climate change, from technological disruptions, the worst suffering will not be in the US.
The worst suffering will be in Ghana, will be in Sudan, will be in Syria, will be in Bangladesh, will be in those places.
So I think those countries have an even greater incentive to do something about the next wave of disruption, whether it's ecological or whether it's technological.
Again, if you think about technological disruption, so if AI and 3D printers and robots will take the jobs from billions of people, I worry far less about the Swedes than about the people in Ghana or in Bangladesh.
And therefore, because history is so unfair and the results of a calamity will not be shared equally between everybody, as usual, the rich will be able to get away from the worst consequences of climate change in a way that the poor will not be able to.
CA: And here's a great question from Cameron Taylor on Facebook: "At the end of 'Sapiens,'" you said we should be asking the question, 'What do we want to want?' Well, what do you think we should want to want?"
YNH: I think we should want to want to know the truth, to understand reality.
Mostly what we want is to change reality, to fit it to our own desires, to our own wishes, and I think we should first want to understand it.
If you look at the long-term trajectory of history, what you see is that for thousands of years we humans have been gaining control of the world outside us and trying to shape it to fit our own desires.
And we've gained control of the other animals, of the rivers, of the forests, and reshaped them completely, causing an ecological destruction without making ourselves satisfied.
So the next step is we turn our gaze inwards, and we say OK, getting control of the world outside us did not really make us satisfied.
Let's now try to gain control of the world inside us.
This is the really big project of science and technology and industry in the 21st century -- to try and gain control of the world inside us, to learn how to engineer and produce bodies and brains and minds.
These are likely to be the main products of the 21st century economy.
When people think about the future, very often they think in terms, "Oh, I want to gain control of my body and of my brain."
And I think that's very dangerous.
If we've learned anything from our previous history, it's that yes, we gain the power to manipulate, but because we didn't really understand the complexity of the ecological system, we are now facing an ecological meltdown.
And if we now try to reengineer the world inside us without really understanding it, especially without understanding the complexity of our mental system, we might cause a kind of internal ecological disaster, and we'll face a kind of mental meltdown inside us.
CA: Putting all the pieces together here -- the current politics, the coming technology, concerns like the one you've just outlined -- I mean, it seems like you yourself are in quite a bleak place when you think about the future.
You're pretty worried about it.
Is that right?
And if there was one cause for hope, how would you state that?
YNH: I focus on the most dangerous possibilities partly because this is like my job or responsibility as a historian or social critic.
I mean, the industry focuses mainly on the positive sides, so it's the job of historians and philosophers and sociologists to highlight the more dangerous potential of all these new technologies.
I don't think any of that is inevitable.
Technology is never deterministic.
You can use the same technology to create very different kinds of societies.
If you look at the 20th century, so, the technologies of the Industrial Revolution, the trains and electricity and all that could be used to create a communist dictatorship or a fascist regime or a liberal democracy.
The trains did not tell you what to do with them.
Similarly, now, artificial intelligence and bioengineering and all of that -- they don't predetermine a single outcome.
Humanity can rise up to the challenge, and the best example we have of humanity rising up to the challenge of a new technology is nuclear weapons.
In the late 1940s, '50s, many people were convinced that sooner or later the Cold War will end in a nuclear catastrophe, destroying human civilization.
And this did not happen.
In fact, nuclear weapons prompted humans all over the world to change the way that they manage international politics to reduce violence.
And many countries basically took out war from their political toolkit.
They no longer tried to pursue their interests with warfare.
Not all countries have done so, but many countries have.
And this is maybe the most important reason why international violence declined dramatically since 1945, and today, as I said, more people commit suicide than are killed in war.
So this, I think, gives us a good example that even the most frightening technology, humans can rise up to the challenge and actually some good can come out of it.
The problem is, we have very little margin for error.
If we don't get it right, we might not have a second option to try again.
CA: That's a very powerful note, on which I think we should draw this to a conclusion.
Before I wrap up, I just want to say one thing to people here and to the global TED community watching online, anyone watching online: help us with these dialogues.
If you believe, like we do, that we need to find a different kind of conversation, now more than ever, help us do it.
Reach out to other people, try and have conversations with people you disagree with, understand them, pull the pieces together, and help us figure out how to take these conversations forward so we can make a real contribution to what's happening in the world right now.
I think everyone feels more alive, more concerned, more engaged with the politics of the moment.
The stakes do seem quite high, so help us respond to it in a wise, wise way.
Yuval Harari, thank you.
(Applause)
This story starts with these two -- my kids.
We were hiking in the Oakland woods when my daughter noticed a plastic tub of cat litter in a creek.
She looked at me and said, "Daddy?
That doesn't go there."
When she said that, it reminded me of summer camp.
On the morning of visiting day, right before they'd let our anxious parents come barreling through the gates, our camp director would say, "Quick! Everyone pick up five pieces of litter."
You get a couple hundred kids each picking up five pieces, and pretty soon, you've got a much cleaner camp.
So I thought, why not apply that crowdsourced cleanup model to the entire planet?
And that was the inspiration for Litterati.
The vision is to create a litter-free world.
Let me show you how it started.
I took a picture of a cigarette using Instagram.
Then I took another photo ...
and another photo ...
and another photo.
And I noticed two things: one, litter became artistic and approachable; and two, at the end of a few days, I had 50 photos on my phone and I had picked up each piece, and I realized that I was keeping a record of the positive impact I was having on the planet.
That's 50 less things that you might see, or you might step on, or some bird might eat.
So I started telling people what I was doing, and they started participating.
One day, this photo showed up from China.
And that's when I realized that Litterati was more than just pretty pictures; we were becoming a community that was collecting data.
Each photo tells a story.
It tells us who picked up what, a geotag tells us where and a time stamp tells us when.
So I built a Google map, and started plotting the points where pieces were being picked up.
And through that process, the community grew and the data grew.
My two kids go to school right in that bullseye.
Litter: it's blending into the background of our lives.
But what if we brought it to the forefront?
What if we understood exactly what was on our streets, our sidewalks and our school yards?
How might we use that data to make a difference?
Well, let me show you.
The first is with cities.
San Francisco wanted to understand what percentage of litter was cigarettes.
Why?
To create a tax.
So they put a couple of people in the streets with pencils and clipboards, who walked around collecting information which led to a 20-cent tax on all cigarette sales.
And then they got sued by big tobacco, who claimed that collecting information with pencils and clipboards is neither precise nor provable.
The city called me and asked if our technology could help.
I'm not sure they realized that our technology was my Instagram account -- (Laughter) But I said, "Yes, we can."
(Laughter) "And we can tell you if that's a Parliament or a Pall Mall.
Plus, every photograph is geotagged and time-stamped, providing you with proof."
Four days and 5,000 pieces later, our data was used in court to not only defend but double the tax, generating an annual recurring revenue of four million dollars for San Francisco to clean itself up.
Now, during that process I learned two things: one, Instagram is not the right tool -- (Laughter) so we built an app.
And two, if you think about it, every city in the world has a unique litter fingerprint, and that fingerprint provides both the source of the problem and the path to the solution.
If you could generate a revenue stream just by understanding the percentage of cigarettes, well, what about coffee cups or soda cans or plastic bottles?
If you could fingerprint San Francisco, well, how about Oakland or Amsterdam or somewhere much closer to home?
And what about brands?
How might they use this data to align their environmental and economic interests?
There's a block in downtown Oakland that's covered in blight.
The Litterati community got together and picked up 1,500 pieces.
And here's what we learned: most of that litter came from a very well-known taco brand.
Most of that brand's litter were their own hot sauce packets, and most of those hot sauce packets hadn't even been opened.
The problem and the path to the solution -- well, maybe that brand only gives out hot sauce upon request or installs bulk dispensers or comes up with more sustainable packaging.
How does a brand take an environmental hazard, turn it into an economic engine and become an industry hero?
If you really want to create change, there's no better place to start than with our kids.
A group of fifth graders picked up 1,247 pieces of litter just on their school yard.
And they learned that the most common type of litter were the plastic straw wrappers from their own cafeteria.
So these kids went to their principal and asked, "Why are we still buying straws?"
And they stopped.
And they learned that individually they could each make a difference, but together they created an impact.
It doesn't matter if you're a student or a scientist, whether you live in Honolulu or Hanoi, this is a community for everyone.
It started because of two little kids in the Northern California woods, and today it's spread across the world.
And you know how we're getting there?
One piece at a time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Joseph Keller used to jog around the Stanford campus, and he was struck by all the women jogging there as well.
Why did their ponytails swing from side to side like that?
Being a mathematician, he set out to understand why.
(Laughter) Professor Keller was curious about many things: why teapots dribble or how earthworms wriggle.
Until a few months ago, I hadn't heard of Joseph Keller.
I read about him in the New York Times, in the obituaries.
The Times had half a page of editorial dedicated to him, which you can imagine is premium space for a newspaper of their stature.
I read the obituaries almost every day.
My wife understandably thinks I'm rather morbid to begin my day with scrambled eggs and a "Let's see who died today."
(Laughter) But if you think about it, the front page of the newspaper is usually bad news, and cues man's failures.
An instance where bad news cues accomplishment is at the end of the paper, in the obituaries.
In my day job, I run a company that focuses on future insights that marketers can derive from past data -- a kind of rearview-mirror analysis.
And we began to think: What if we held a rearview mirror to obituaries from the New York Times?
Were there lessons on how you could get your obituary featured -- even if you aren't around to enjoy it?
(Laughter) Would this go better with scrambled eggs?
(Laughter) And so, we looked at the data.
2,000 editorial, non-paid obituaries over a 20-month period between 2015 and 2016.
What did these 2,000 deaths -- rather, lives -- teach us?
Well, first we looked at words.
This here is an obituary headline.
This one is of the amazing Lee Kuan Yew.
If you remove the beginning and the end, you're left with a beautifully worded descriptor that tries to, in just a few words, capture an achievement or a lifetime.
Just looking at these is fascinating.
Here are a few famous ones, people who died in the last two years.
Try and guess who they are.
[An Artist who Defied Genre] That's Prince.
[Titan of Boxing and the 20th Century] Oh, yes.
[Muhammad Ali] [Groundbreaking Architect] Zaha Hadid.
So we took these descriptors and did what's called natural language processing, where you feed these into a program, it throws out the superfluous words -- "the," "and," -- the kind of words you can mime easily in "Charades," -- and leaves you with the most significant words.
And we did it not just for these four, but for all 2,000 descriptors.
And this is what it looks like.
Film, theatre, music, dance and of course, art, are huge.
Over 40 percent.
You have to wonder why in so many societies we insist that our kids pursue engineering or medicine or business or law to be construed as successful.
And while we're talking profession, let's look at age -- the average age at which they achieved things.
That number is 37.
What that means is, you've got to wait 37 years ...
before your first significant achievement that you're remembered for -- on average -- 44 years later, when you die at the age of 81 -- on average.
(Laughter) Talk about having to be patient.
(Laughter) Of course, it varies by profession.
If you're a sports star, you'll probably hit your stride in your 20s.
And if you're in your 40s like me, you can join the fun world of politics.
(Laughter) Politicians do their first and sometimes only commendable act in their mid-40s.
(Laughter) If you're wondering what "others" are, here are some examples.
Isn't it fascinating, the things people do and the things they're remembered for?
(Laughter) Our curiosity was in overdrive, and we desired to analyze more than just a descriptor.
So, we ingested the entire first paragraph of all 2,000 obituaries, but we did this separately for two groups of people: people that are famous and people that are not famous.
Famous people -- Prince, Ali, Zaha Hadid -- people who are not famous are people like Jocelyn Cooper, Reverend Curry or Lorna Kelly.
I'm willing to bet you haven't heard of most of their names.
Amazing people, fantastic achievements, but they're not famous.
So what if we analyze these two groups separately -- the famous and the non-famous?
What might that tell us?
Take a look.
Two things leap out at me.
First: "John."
(Laughter) Anyone here named John should thank your parents -- (Laughter) and remind your kids to cut out your obituary when you're gone.
And second: "help."
We uncovered, many lessons from lives well-led, and what those people immortalized in print could teach us.
The exercise was a fascinating testament to the kaleidoscope that is life, and even more fascinating was the fact that the overwhelming majority of obituaries featured people famous and non-famous, who did seemingly extraordinary things.
They made a positive dent in the fabric of life.
They helped.
So ask yourselves as you go back to your daily lives: How am I using my talents to help society?
Because the most powerful lesson here is, if more people lived their lives trying to be famous in death, the world would be a much better place.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to introduce you to some very wise kids that I've known, but first I want to introduce you to a camel.
This is Cassie, a therapy camel visiting one of our young patients in her room, which is pretty magical.
A friend of mine raises camels at his ranch in the Santa Cruz Mountains.
He has about eight of them, and he started 30 years ago because he thought horses were too mundane.
John is an out-of-the-box thinker, which explains why the two of us have been such good friends all of our lives.
Over the years, I've convinced him to shuttle those sweet furry beasts up to hang out with our sick kids from time to time.
Talking to John, I was surprised to learn that camels have an average life expectancy of 40 to 50 years.
The life expectancy of many of the children with whom I work is less than a year.
This is a picture of the George Mark Children's House, the first pediatric palliative respite care center to open in the United States.
I founded it in 2004, after years of working as a psychologist on pediatric intensive care units, frustrated with the undignified deaths that so many children experienced and their families had to endure.
As I sat with families whose children were at the end of their lives, I was acutely aware of our surroundings.
While the elevated train rumbled overhead on its track, quite literally the room reverberated with each passing train car.
The lights on the ward were fluorescent and too bright.
Monitors beeped, as did the elevator, noisily announcing its arrival.
These families were experiencing some of the most excruciating moments of their lives, and I so wanted them to have a more peaceful place in which to say a last goodbye to their young daughters and sons.
Surely, I thought, there must be a better spot than a hospital intensive care unit for children at the end of their lives.
Our children's house is calm and nurturing.
It's a place where families can stay together to enjoy quality time with their children, many of whom are there for respite stays, some with repeated visits over a span of many years.
We call those kids our frequent flyers.
Rather than the bright, noisy quarters of the hospital, their rooms are calm and comfortable, with actual living spaces for the families, a sanctuary of gardens and a wonderful outdoor playground with special structures for children with physical limitations.
This sweet baby Lars came to us directly from a hospital intensive care unit.
Imagine hearing the heartbreaking news that none of us would ever want to hear.
His parents had been told that Lars had a brain anomaly that would keep him from ever swallowing, walking, talking or developing mentally.
Recognizing what little chance he had for survival, his parents chose to focus on the quality of time that they could spend together.
They moved into one of our family apartments and treasured each day that they had, which were far too few.
Lars's life was brief, to be sure, mere weeks, but it was calm and comfortable.
He went on hikes with his parents.
The time that he spent in the pool with our aquatic therapist lessened the seizures he was experiencing and helped him to sleep at night.
His family had a peaceful place in which to both celebrate his life and mourn his death.
It has been five years since Lars was with us, and in that time, his family has welcomed a daughter and another son.
They are such a powerful testament to the positive outcome that specialized children's hospice care can create.
Their baby's physical discomfort was well managed, giving all of them the gift of time to be together in a beautiful place.
I'm going to talk to you now about the elephant rather than the camel in the room.
Very few people want to talk about death, and even fewer about children's death.
Loss of a child, especially for those of us who have our own children, is frightening, more than frightening, paralyzing, debilitating, impossible.
But what I've learned is this: children don't stop dying just because we the adults can't comprehend the injustice of losing them.
And what's more, if we can be brave enough to face the possibility of death, even among the most innocent, we gain an unparalleled kind of wisdom.
Take Crystal, for example.
She was one of the first children to come for care after we opened our doors.
She was nine when she arrived, and her neurologist expected that she might live another two weeks.
She had an inoperable brain tumor, and her decline had really accelerated in the week before she came to us.
After settling into her room, dressed entirely in pink and lavender, surrounded by the Hello Kitty accessories that she loved, she spent the next several days winning over the hearts of every staff member.
Bit by bit, her condition stabilized, and then to our astonishment, she actually improved.
There were a variety of factors that contributed to Crystal's improvement which we later came to call the "George Mark bump," a lovely, not uncommon phenomenon where children outlive the prognoses of their illnesses if they're outside of the hospital.
The calmer atmosphere of her surroundings, tasty meals that were fixed often to accommodate her requests, the resident pets, the therapy dog and rabbit spent lots of cozy time with Crystal.
After she had been with us for about a week, she called her grandmother, and she said, "Gee, I'm staying in a great big house, and there's room for you to come, too.
And guess what?
You don't have to bring any quarters because the washer and dryer are free."
(Laughter) Crystal's grandmother soon arrived from out of town, and they spent the remaining four months of Crystal's life enjoying very special days together.
Some days were special because Crystal was outside in her wheelchair sitting by the fountain.
For a little girl who had spent most of the year earlier in a hospital bed, being outside counting hummingbirds made for an amazing time with her grandma, and lots of laughter.
Other days were special because of the activities that our child life specialist created for her.
Crystal strung beads and made jewelry for everybody in the house.
She painted a pumpkin to help decorate for Halloween.
She spent many excited days planning her tenth birthday, which of course none of us thought she would ever see.
All of us wore pink boas for the occasion, and Crystal, as you can see, queen for a day, wore a sparkly tiara.
One hot morning, I arrived at work and Crystal and her partner in crime, Charlie, greeted me.
With some help, they had set up a lemonade and cookie stand outside the front door, a very strategic location.
I asked Crystal the price of the cookie that I had selected, and she said, "Three dollars."
(Laughter) I said that seemed a bit high for one cookie.
(Laughter) It was small.
"I know," she acknowledged with a grin, "but I'm worth it."
And therein lie the words of wisdom of a young girl whose brief life forever impacted mine.
Crystal was worth it, and shouldn't every child whose life is shortened by a horrific illness be worth it?
Together, all of us today can offer that same specialized care that Crystal received by recognizing that children's respite and hospice care is a critical component missing from our healthcare landscape.
It's also interesting to note that we are able to provide this care at about one third of the cost of a hospital intensive care unit, and our families don't see a bill.
We are ever grateful to the supporters who believe in this important work that we're doing.
The truth is that my colleagues and I and the parents and other family members who get to experience this special wisdom are in a unique position.
There are only two freestanding pediatric hospices in the United States, although I'm happy to report that based on our model, there are 18 others under various stages of development.
(Applause) Still, most of the children who die in the United States every year die in hospital rooms, surrounded by beeping machines and anxious, exhausted adults who have no other option but to say goodbye under those harsh, institutional lights and among virtual strangers.
For comparison's sake, the United Kingdom, which is a country with about one fifth the population of the United States, and about half the size of the state of California, has 54 hospice and respite centers.
Why is that?
I've asked myself that question obviously many times.
My best guess is that Americans, with our positive can-do attitude hold the expectation that our medical care system will fix it, even though it may be a childhood illness for which there is no cure.
We go to extraordinary measures to keep children alive when in fact the greatest kindness that we might give them would be a peaceful, pain-free end of life.
The transition from cure to care remains a challenging one for many hospital physicians whose training has really been about saving lives, not about gently guiding the patient to the end of life.
The dad of a sweet baby for whom we cared at the end of her life certainly captured this dichotomy when he reflected that there are a lot of people to help you bring an infant into the world but very few to help you usher a baby out.
So what is the magic ingredient at George Mark?
The complex medical diagnoses that bring our young patients to us mean that their lives have often been restricted, some to a hospital bed for long periods of time, others to wheelchairs, still others to intensive courses of chemotherapy or rehab.
We make a practice of ignoring those limitations.
Our default answer is "yes" and our default question is, "Why not?"
That's why we took a young boy who wasn't going to live for another baseball season to Game 5 of the World Series.
That's why we have a talent show put on by the staff and kids for family and friends.
Who wouldn't be enchanted by a young boy playing a piano piece with his feet, because his arms are atrophied?
That's why we have a prom every year.
It's pretty magical.
We started the prom after hearing a dad lament that he would never pin a boutonniere on his son's tuxedo lapel.
The weeks before the dance, the house is in a flurry, and I don't know who's more excited, the staff or the kids.
(Laughter) The night of the event involves rides in vintage cars, a walk on a red carpet into the great room, a terrific DJ and a photographer at the ready to capture pictures of these attendees and their families.
At the end of the evening this year, one of our young, delightful teenaged girls, Caitlin, said to her mom, "That was the best night of my whole life."
And that's just the point, to capture the best days and nights, to abolish limitations, to have your default answer be "yes" and your default question be, "Why not?"
Ultimately life is too short, whether we live to be 85 years or just eight.
Trust me.
Better yet, trust Sam.
It's not by pretending that death doesn't exist that we keep the people, especially the little people that we love, safe.
In the end, we can't control how long any of us lives.
What we can control is how we spend our days, the spaces we create, the meaning and joy that we make.
We cannot change the outcome, but we can change the journey.
Isn't it time to recognize that children deserve nothing less than our most uncompromising bravery and our wildest imagination.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My name is Lovegrove.
I only know nine Lovegroves, two of which are my parents.
They are first cousins, and you know what happens when, you know -- (Laughter) So there's a terribly weird freaky side to me, which I'm fighting with all the time.
So to try and get through today, I've kind of disciplined myself with an 18-minute talk.
I was hanging on to have a pee.
I thought perhaps if I was hanging on long enough, that would guide me through the 18 minutes.
(Laughter) OK. I am known as Captain Organic and that's a philosophical position as well as an aesthetic position.
But today what I'd like to talk to you about is that love of form and how form can touch people's soul and emotion.
Not very long ago, not many thousands of years ago, we actually lived in caves, and I don't think we've lost that coding system.
We respond so well to form.
But I'm interested in creating intelligent form.
I'm not interested at all in blobism or any of that superficial rubbish that you see coming out as design.
This artificially induced consumerism -- I think it's atrocious.
My world is the world of people like Amory Lovins, Janine Benyus, James Watson.
I'm in that world, but I work purely instinctively.
I'm not a scientist. I could have been, perhaps, but I work in this world where I trust my instincts.
So I am a 21st-century translator of technology into products that we use everyday and relate beautifully and naturally with.
And we should be developing things -- we should be developing packaging for ideas which elevate people's perceptions and respect for the things that we dig out of the earth and translate into products for everyday use.
So, the water bottle.
I'll begin with this concept of what I call DNA.
DNA: Design, Nature, Art.
Here is a drawing by Leonardo da Vinci, 500 years ago, before photography.
It shows how observation, curiosity and instinct work to create amazing art.
Industrial design is the art form of the 21st century.
People like Leonardo -- there have not been many -- had this amazingly instinctive curiosity.
I work from a similar position.
I don't want to sound pretentious saying that, but this is my drawing made on a digital pad a couple of years ago -- well into the 21st century, 500 years later.
It's my impression of water.
Impressionism being the most valuable art form on the planet as we know it: 100 million dollars, easily, for a Monet.
I use, now, a whole new process.
A few years ago I reinvented my process to keep up with people like Greg Lynn, Thom Mayne, Zaha Hadid, Rem Koolhaas -- all these people that I think are persevering and pioneering with fantastic new ideas of how to create form.
This is all created digitally.
Here you see the machining, the milling of a block of acrylic.
This is what I show to the client to say, "That's what I want to do."
At that point, I don't know if that's possible at all.
It's a seductor, but I just feel in my bones that that's possible.
So we go, we look at the tooling.
These are the invisible things that you never see in your life.
This is the background noise of industrial design.
That is like an Anish Kapoor flowing through a Richard Serra.
It is more valuable than the product in my eyes.
I don't have one.
This is the final product.
It felt like nothing. It has to feel like nothing.
It was when I put the water in that I realized that I'd put a skin on water itself.
It's an icon of water itself, and it elevates people's perception of contemporary design.
Each bottle is different, meaning the water level will give you a different shape.
It's mass individualism from a single product.
It fits arthritic hands. It fits children's hands.
It makes the product strong, the tessellation.
It's a millefiori of ideas.
In the future, they will look like that, because we need to move away from those type of polymers and use that for medical equipment and more important things, perhaps, in life.
Biopolymers, these new ideas for materials, will come into play in probably a decade.
It doesn't look as cool, does it?
But I can live up to that. I don't have a problem with that.
I design for that condition, biopolymers. It's the future.
I took this video in Cape Town last year.
This is the freaky side coming out.
I have this special interest in things like this, which blow my mind.
I don't know whether to, you know, drop to my knees, cry; I don't know what I think.
But I just know that nature -- nature improves with ever-greater purpose that which once existed, and that strangeness is a consequence of innovative thinking.
When I look at these things, they look pretty normal to me.
But these things evolved over many years, and what we're trying to do -- I get three weeks to design a telephone. How the hell do I do that, when you get these things that take hundreds of millions of years to evolve?
How do you condense that?
It comes back to instinct.
I'm not talking about designing telephones that look like that and I'm not looking at designing architecture like that.
I'm just interested in natural growth patterns and the beautiful forms that only nature really creates.
How that flows through me and how that comes out is what I'm trying to understand.
This is a scan through the human forearm.
It's then blown up through rapid prototyping to reveal its cellular structure.
My office is a mixture of the Natural History Museum and a NASA space lab.
It's a weird, kind of freaky place.
This is one of my specimens.
This is made -- bone is made from a mixture of inorganic minerals and polymers.
I studied cooking in school for four years, and in that experience, which was called "domestic science," it was a bit of a cheap trick for me to try and get a science qualification.
(Laughter) Actually, I put marijuana in everything I cooked -- (Laughter) And I had access to all the best girls. It was fabulous.
All the guys in the rugby team couldn't understand.
Anyway -- this is a meringue.
This is another sample I have.
It's made from polysaccharides and proteins.
If you pour water on that, it dissolves.
Could we be manufacturing from foodstuffs in the future?
Not a bad idea. I don't know.
I need to talk to Janine and a few other people about that, but I believe instinctively that that meringue can become something, a car -- I don't know.
I'm also interested in growth patterns: the unbridled way that nature grows things so you're not restricted by form at all.
These interrelated forms, they do inspire everything I do, although I might end up making something incredibly simple.
This is a detail of a chair that I've designed in magnesium.
It shows this interlocution of elements and the beauty of, kind of, engineering and biological thinking, shown pretty much as a bone structure.
Any one of those elements you could sort of hang on the wall as some kind of art object.
It's the world's first chair made in magnesium.
It cost 1.7 million dollars to develop.
It went into Time magazine in 2001 as the new language of the 21st century.
Boy. For somebody growing up in Wales in a little village, that's enough.
It shows how you make one holistic form, like the car industry, and then you break up what you need.
This is an absolutely beautiful way of working.
It's a godly way of working.
It's organic and it's essential.
It's an absolutely fat-free design, and when you look at it, you see human beings.
When that moves into polymers, you can change the elasticity, the fluidity of the form.
This is an idea for a gas-injected, one-piece polymer chair.
What nature does is it drills holes in things.
It takes away anything extraneous.
I make organic things which are essential.
And they look funky, too -- but I don't set out to make funky things because I think that's an absolute disgrace.
If you took the idea of fractal technology further, take a membrane, shrinking it down constantly like nature does -- that could be a seat for a chair.
It could be a sole for a sports shoe.
It could be a car blending into seats.
Wow. Let's go for it. That's the kind of stuff.
This is what exists in nature.
Observation now allows us to bring that natural process into the design process every day.
That's what I do.
It's called "Superliquidity." It's my sculptural investigation.
It's like 21st-century Henry Moore.
When you see a Henry Moore, still, your hair stands up.
If he was a car designer, phew, we'd all be driving one.
In his day, he was the highest taxpayer in Britain.
That is the power of organic design.
It contributes immensely to our -- sense of being, our sense of relationships with things, our sensuality and, you know, the sort of -- even the sort of socio-erotic side, which is very important.
This is my artwork. This is all my process.
These actually are sold as artwork. They're very big prints.
Ironically, that object was made by the Killarney process, which is a brand-new process here for the 21st century, and I can hear Greg Lynn laughing his socks off as I say that.
I'll tell you about that later.
When I look into these data images, I see new things.
It's self-inspired.
Diatomic structures, radiolaria, the things that we couldn't see but we can do now -- these, again, are cored out.
They're made virtually from nothing. They're made from silica.
Coral, all these natural forces, take away what they don't need and they deliver maximum beauty.
We need to be in that realm.
This is a new chair which should come on the market in September.
It's for a company called Moroso in Italy. It's a gas-injected polymer chair.
Those holes you see there are very filtered-down, watered-down versions of the extremity of the diatomic structures.
It goes with the flow of the polymer and you'll see -- there's an image coming up right now that shows the full thing.
It's great to have companies in Italy who support this way of dreaming.
If you see the shadows that come through that, they're actually probably more important than the product, but it's the minimum it takes.
The coring out of the back lets you breathe.
It takes away any material you don't need and it actually garners flexure too.
I was going to break into a dance then.
This is some current work I'm doing.
I'm looking at single-surface structures and how they stretch and flow.
It's based on furniture typologies, but that's not the end motivation.
as opposed to aluminium, and it's grown.
It's grown in my mind, and then it's grown in terms of the whole process that I go through.
This is two weeks ago in CCP in Coventry, who build parts for Bentleys and so on.
It's being built as we speak and it will be on show in Phillips next year in New York.
I have a big show with Phillips Auctioneers.
When I see these animations, oh Jesus, I'm blown away.
This is what goes on in my studio everyday.
Some guy's got that on a computer -- there's this like, oh my goodness.
So I try to create this energy of invention every day in my studio.
This kind of effervescent -- fully charged sense of soup that delivers ideas.
Single-surface products.
How you grow legs out of a surface.
I would love to build this one day and perhaps I'd like to build it also out of flour, sugar, polymer, wood chips -- I don't know, human hair.
I don't know. I'd love a go at that. I don't know. If I just got some time.
That's the weird side coming out again. A lot of companies don't understand that.
Three weeks ago I was with Sony in Tokyo.
They said, "Give us the dream. What is our dream? How do we beat Apple?"
I said, "You don't copy Apple, that's for sure.
What a waste. Anyway.
(Laughter) No, it's true. Fuck them. You know, I mean -- (Laughter) I'm delivering; they're not taking.
I've had this image of a water droplet for 20 years, sitting on a hot bed.
That is an image of a car for me.
That's the car of the future. It's a water droplet.
I've been banging on about this like I can't believe.
Cars are all wrong.
I'm going to show you something a bit weird now.
They laughed everywhere over the world I showed this.
The only place that didn't laugh was Moscow.
How ridiculous is that? Couldn't you make that from 300?
It's got a vacuum-formed, carbon-nylon pan.
Everything's holistically integrated. It opens and closes like a bread bin.
There is no engine. There's a solar panel on the back and there are batteries in the wheels; they're fitted like Formula 1.
You take them off your wall, you plug them in. Off you go.
A three-wheeled car: slow, feminine, transparent, so you can see the people in there.
You drive different.
You see that thing. You do. You do.
And not anesthetized, separated from life.
There's a hole at the front and there's a reason for that.
It's a city car. You drive along. You get out.
You drive on to a proboscis. You get out.
It presents the solar panel to the sun, and at night, it's a street lamp.
(Applause) That's what happens if you get inspired by the street lamp first, and do the car second.
I can see these bubbles with these hydrogen packages, floating around on the ground, driven by AI.
When I showed this in South Africa, everybody afterwards was going, "Hey, car on a stick. Like this."
Can you imagine? A car on a stick.
(Laughter) If you put it next to contemporary architecture, it feels totally natural to me.
And that's what I do with my furniture.
I'm not putting Charles Eames' furniture in buildings anymore.
I'm trying to build furniture which fits architecture.
I'm trying to build transportation systems.
I work on aircraft for Airbus, I do all this sort of stuff trying to force these natural, inspired-by-nature dreams home.
This is the stereolithography of a staircase.
It's a little bit of a dedication to James, James Watson.
I built this thing for my studio.
It cost me 250,000 dollars to build this.
Most people go and buy the Aston Martin.
This is the data that goes with that. Incredibly complex.
Took about two years, because I'm looking for fat-free design.
Lean, efficient things. Healthy products.
This is built by composites.
It's a single element which rotates around to create a holistic element, and this is a carbon-fiber handrail which is only supported in two places.
Modern materials allow us to do modern things.
This is a shot in the studio.
This is how it looks pretty much every day.
You wouldn't want to have a fear of heights coming down it.
There is virtually no handrail. It doesn't pass any standards.
(Laughter) Who cares?
(Laughter) And it has an internal handrail which gives it its strength.
It's this holistic integration. That's my studio. It's subterranean.
It's in Notting Hill, next to all the crap -- the prostitutes and all that stuff.
It's next to David Hockney's original studio.
It has a lighting system that changes throughout the day.
My guys go out for lunch. The door's open. They come back in, because it's normally raining and they prefer to stay in.
This is my studio.
I bought that last year. They're very difficult to find.
If anybody's got a whale skeleton they want to sell me, I'll put it in the studio.
So I'm just going to interject a little bit with some of the things that you'll see in the video.
It's a homemade video, made it myself at three o'clock in the morning just to show you how my real world is.
You never see architects or designers showing you their real world.
This is called a "Plasnet."
It's a new bio-polycarbonate chair I'm doing in Italy.
World's first bamboo bike with folding handlebars.
We should all be riding one of these.
As China buys all these crappy cars, we should be riding things like this.
Like I say, it's a cross between Natural History Museum and a NASA laboratory.
It's self-inspirational, again.
I mean, the rare times when I'm there, I do enjoy it.
And I get lots and lots of kids coming.
I'm a contaminator for all those children of investment bankers -- wankers.
Sorry.
(Laughter) That's a solar seed. It's a concept for new architecture.
That thing on the top is the world's first solar-powered garden lamp -- the first produced.
Giles Revell should be talking here today -- amazing photography of things you can't see.
The first sculptural model I made for that thing in Tokyo.
Lots of stuff. There's a little leaf chair -- that golden looking thing is called "Leaf."
On the wall is my book called "Supernatural," which allows me to remember what I've done, because I forget.
There's an aerated brick I did in Limoges last year, in Concepts for New Ceramics in Architecture.
Gernot Oberfell, working at three o'clock in the morning -- and I don't pay overtime.
Overtime is the passion of design, so join the club or don't.
(Laughter) No, it's true. People like Tom and Greg -- we're traveling like you can't -- we fit it all in.
Next week I'm at Electrolux in Sweden, then I'm in Beijing on Friday.
And when I see Ed's photographs, I think, why the hell am I going to China?
It's true. It's true.
We need to have a new instinct for the 21st century.
We need to combine all this stuff.
If all the people who were talking over this period worked on a car together, it would be a joy, absolute joy.
So there's a new X-light system I'm doing in Japan.
There's Tuareg shoes from North Africa. There's a Kifwebe mask.
These are my sculptures.
A copper jelly mold.
(Laughter) It sounds like some quiz show or something, doesn't it?
So, it's going to end.
Thank you, James, for your great inspiration.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, can we dare to be optimistic?
Well, the thesis of "The Bottom Billion" is that a billion people have been stuck living in economies that have been stagnant for 40 years, and hence diverging from the rest of mankind.
And so, the real question to pose is not, "Can we be optimistic?"
It's, "How can we give credible hope to that billion people?"
That, to my mind, is the fundamental challenge now of development.
What I'm going to offer you is a recipe, a combination of the two forces that changed the world for good, which is the alliance of compassion and enlightened self-interest.
Compassion, because a billion people are living in societies that have not offered credible hope.
That is a human tragedy.
Enlightened self-interest, because if that economic divergence continues for another 40 years, combined with social integration globally, it will build a nightmare for our children.
We need compassion to get ourselves started, and enlightened self-interest to get ourselves serious.
That's the alliance that changes the world.
So, what does it mean to get serious about providing hope for the bottom billion?
What can we actually do?
Well, a good guide is to think, "What did we do last time the rich world got serious about developing another region of the world?"
That gives us, it turns out, quite a good clue, except you have to go back quite a long time.
The last time the rich world got serious about developing another region was in the late 1940s.
The rich world was you, America, and the region that needed to be developed was my world, Europe.
That was post-War Europe.
Why did America get serious?
It wasn't just compassion for Europe, though there was that.
It was that you knew you had to, because, in the late 1940s, country after country in Central Europe was falling into the Soviet bloc, and so you knew you'd no choice.
Europe had to be dragged into economic development.
So, what did you do, last time you got serious?
Well, yes, you had a big aid program. Thank you very much.
That was Marshall aid: we need to do it again. Aid is part of the solution.
But what else did you do?
Well, you tore up your trade policy, and totally reversed it.
Before the war, America had been highly protectionist.
After the war, you opened your markets to Europe, you dragged Europe into the then-global economy, which was your economy, and you institutionalized that trade liberalization through founding the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
So, total reversal of trade policy.
Did you do anything else?
Yes, you totally reversed your security policy.
Before the war, your security policy had been isolationist.
After the war, you tear that up, you put 100,000 troops in Europe for over 40 years.
So, total reversal of security policy. Anything else?
Yes, you tear up the "Eleventh Commandment" -- national sovereignty.
Before the war, you treated national sovereignty as so sacrosanct that you weren't even willing to join the League of Nations.
After the war, you found the United Nations, you found the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, you found the IMF, you encouraged Europe to create the European Community -- all systems for mutual government support.
That is still the waterfront of effective policies: aid, trade, security, governments.
Of course, the details of policy are going to be different, because the challenge is different.
It's not rebuilding Europe, it's reversing the divergence for the bottom billion, so that they actually catch up.
Is that easier or harder?
We need to be at least as serious as we were then.
Now, today I'm going to take just one of those four.
I'm going to take the one that sounds the weakest, the one that's just motherhood and apple pie -- governments, mutual systems of support for governments -- and I'm going to show you one idea in how we could do something to strengthen governance, and I'm going to show you that that is enormously important now.
The opportunity we're going to look to is a genuine basis for optimism about the bottom billion, and that is the commodity booms.
The commodity booms are pumping unprecedented amounts of money into many, though not all, of the countries of the bottom billion.
Partly, they're pumping money in because commodity prices are high, but it's not just that. There's also a range of new discoveries.
Uganda has just discovered oil, in about the most disastrous location on Earth; Ghana has discovered oil; Guinea has got a huge new exploitation of iron ore coming out of the ground.
So, a mass of new discoveries.
Between them, these new revenue flows dwarf aid.
Just to give you one example: Angola alone is getting 50 billion dollars a year in oil revenue.
The entire aid flows to the 60 countries of the bottom billion last year were 34 billion.
So, the flow of resources from the commodity booms to the bottom billion are without precedent.
So there's the optimism.
The question is, how is it going to help their development?
It's a huge opportunity for transformational development.
Will it be taken?
So, here comes a bit of science, and this is a bit of science I've done since "The Bottom Billion," so it's new.
I've looked to see what is the relationship between higher commodity prices of exports, and the growth of commodity-exporting countries.
And I've looked globally, I've taken all the countries in the world for the last 40 years, and looked to see what the relationship is.
And the short run -- say, the first five to seven years -- is just great.
In fact, it's hunky dory: everything goes up.
You get more money because your terms of trade have improved, but also that drives up output across the board.
So GDP goes up a lot -- fantastic! That's the short run.
And how about the long run?
Come back 15 years later.
Well, the short run, it's hunky dory, but the long run, it's humpty dumpty.
You go up in the short run, but then most societies historically have ended up worse than if they'd had no booms at all.
That is not a forecast about how commodity prices go; it's a forecast of the consequences, the long-term consequences, for growth of an increase in prices.
So, what goes wrong? Why is there this "resource curse," as it's called?
And again, I've looked at that, and it turns out that the critical issue is the level of governance, the initial level of economic governance, when the resource booms accrue.
In fact, if you've got good enough governance, there is no resource boom.
You go up in the short term, and then you go up even more in the long term.
That's Norway, the richest country in Europe. It's Australia. It's Canada.
The resource curse is entirely confined to countries below a threshold of governance.
They still go up in the short run.
That's what we're seeing across the bottom billion at the moment.
The best growth rates they've had -- ever.
And the question is whether the short run will persist.
And with bad governance historically, over the last 40 years, it hasn't.
It's countries like Nigeria, which are worse off than if they'd never had oil.
So, there's a threshold level above which you go up in the long term, and below which you go down.
Just to benchmark that threshold, it's about the governance level of Portugal in the mid 1980s.
So, the question is, are the bottom billion above or below that threshold?
Now, there's one big change since the commodity booms of the 1970s, and that is the spread of democracy.
So I thought, well, maybe that is the thing which has transformed governance in the bottom billion.
Maybe we can be more optimistic because of the spread of democracy.
So, I looked. Democracy does have significant effects -- and unfortunately, they're adverse.
Democracies make even more of a mess of these resource booms than autocracies.
At that stage I just wanted to abandon the research, but -- (Laughter) -- it turns out that democracy is a little bit more complicated than that.
Because there are two distinct aspects of democracy: there's electoral competition, which determines how you acquire power, and there are checks and balances, which determine how you use power.
It turns out that electoral competition is the thing that's doing the damage with democracy, whereas strong checks and balances make resource booms good.
And so, what the countries of the bottom billion need is very strong checks and balances.
They haven't got them.
They got instant democracy in the 1990s: elections without checks and balances.
How can we help improve governance and introduce checks and balances?
In all the societies of the bottom billion, there are intense struggles to do just that.
The simple proposal is that we should have some international standards, which will be voluntary, but which would spell out the key decision points that need to be taken in order to harness these resource revenues.
We know these international standards work because we've already got one.
It's called the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
That is the very simple idea that governments should report to their citizens what revenues they have.
No sooner was it proposed than reformers in Nigeria adopted it, pushed it and published the revenues in the paper.
Nigerian newspapers circulations spiked.
People wanted to know what their government was getting in terms of revenue.
So, we know it works. What would the content be of these international standards?
I can't go through all of them, but I'll give you an example.
The first is how to take the resources out of the ground -- the economic processes, taking the resources out of the ground and putting assets on top of the ground.
And the first step in that is selling the rights to resource extraction.
You know how rights to resource extraction are being sold at the moment, how they've been sold over the last 40 years?
A company flies in, does a deal with a minister.
And that's great for the company, and it's quite often great for the minister -- (Laughter) -- and it's not great for their country.
There's a very simple institutional technology which can transform that, and it's called verified auctions.
The public agency with the greatest expertise on Earth is of course the treasury -- that is, the British Treasury.
And the British Treasury decided that it would sell the rights to third-generation mobile phones by working out what those rights were worth.
They worked out they were worth two billion pounds.
Just in time, a set of economists got there and said, "Why not try an auction? It'll reveal the value."
It went for 20 billion pounds through auction.
If the British Treasury can be out by a factor of 10, think what the ministry of finance in Sierra Leone is going to be like.
(Laughter) When I put that to the President of Sierra Leone, the next day he asked the World Bank to send him a team to give expertise on how to conduct auctions.
There are five such decision points; each one needs an international standard.
If we could do it, we would change the world.
We would be helping the reformers in these societies, who are struggling for change.
That's our modest role. We cannot change these societies, but we can help the people in these societies who are struggling and usually failing, because the odds are so stacked against them.
And yet, we've not got these rules.
If you think about it, the cost of promulgating international rules is zilch -- nothing.
Why on Earth are they not there?
I realized that the reason they're not there is that until we have a critical mass of informed citizens in our own societies, politicians will get away with gestures.
That unless we have an informed society, what politicians do, especially in relation to Africa, is gestures: things that look good, but don't work.
And so I realized we had to go through the business of building an informed citizenry.
That's why I broke all the professional rules of conduct for an economist, and I wrote an economics book that you could read on a beach.
(Laughter).
However, I have to say, the process of communication does not come naturally to me.
This is why I'm on this stage, but it's alarming.
I grew up in a culture of self-effacement.
My wife showed me a blog comment on one of my last talks, and the blog comment said, "Collier is not charismatic -- (Laughter) -- but his arguments are compelling."
(Laughter) (Applause) If you agree with that sentiment, and if you agree that we need a critical mass of informed citizenry, you will realize that I need you.
Please, become ambassadors.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What if our plants could sense the toxicity levels in the soil and express that toxicity through the color of its leaves?
What if those plants could also remove those toxins from the soil?
Instead, what if those plants grew their own packaging, or were designed to only be harvested by their owners' own patented machines?
What happens when biological design is driven by the motivations of mass-produced commodities?
What kind of world would that be?
My name is Ani, and I'm a designer and researcher at MIT Media Lab, where I'm part of a relatively new and unique group called Design Fiction, where we're wedged somewhere between science fiction and science fact.
And at MIT, I am lucky enough to rub shoulders with scientists studying all kinds of cutting edge fields like synthetic neurobiology, artificial intelligence, artificial life and everything in between.
And across campus, there's truly brilliant scientists asking questions like, "How can I make the world a better place?"
And part of what my group likes to ask is, "What is better?"
What is better for you, for me, for a white woman, a gay man, a veteran, a child with a prosthetic?
Technology is never neutral.
It frames a reality and reflects a context.
Can you imagine what it would say about the work-life balance at your office if these were standard issue on the first day?
(Laughter) I believe it's the role of artists and designers to raise critical questions.
Art is how you can see and feel the future, and today is an exciting time to be a designer, for all the new tools becoming accessible.
For instance, synthetic biology seeks to write biology as a design problem.
And through these developments, my lab asks, what are the roles and responsibilities of an artist, designer, scientist or businessman?
What are the implications of synthetic biology, genetic engineering, and how are they shaping our notions of what it means to be a human?
What are the implications of this on society, on evolution and what are the stakes in this game?
My own speculative design research at the current moment plays with synthetic biology, but for more emotionally driven output.
I'm obsessed with olfaction as a design space, and this project started with this idea of what if you could take a smell selfie, a smelfie?
(Laughter) What if you could take your own natural body odor and send it to a lover?
Funny enough, I found that this was a 19th century Austrian tradition, where couples in courtship would keep a slice of apple crammed under their armpit during dances, and at the end of the evening, the girl would give the guy she most fancied her used fruit, and if the feeling was mutual, he would wolf down that stinky apple.
(Laughter) Famously, Napoleon wrote many love letters to Josephine, but perhaps amongst the most memorable is this brief and urgent note: "Home in three days. Don't bathe."
(Laughter) Both Napoleon and Josephine adored violets.
Josephine wore violet-scented perfume, carried violets on their wedding day, and Napoleon sent her a bouquet of violets every year on their anniversary.
When Josephine passed away, he planted violets at her grave, and just before his exile, he went back to that tomb site, picked some of those flowers, entombed them in a locket and wore them until the day he died.
And I found this so moving, I thought, could I engineer that violet to smell just like Josephine?
What if, for the rest of eternity, when you went to visit her site, you could smell Josephine just as Napoleon loved her?
Could we engineer new ways of mourning, new rituals for remembering?
After all, we've engineered transgenic crops to be maximized for profit, crops that stand up to transport, crops that have a long shelf life, crops that taste sugary sweet but resist pests, sometimes at the expense of nutritional value.
Can we harness these same technologies for an emotionally sensitive output?
So currently in my lab, I'm researching questions like, what makes a human smell like a human?
And it turns out it's fairly complicated.
Factors such as your diet, your medications, your lifestyle all factor into the way you smell.
And I found that our sweat is mostly odorless, but it's our bacteria and microbiome that's responsible for your smells, your mood, your identity and so much beyond.
And there's all kinds of molecules that you emit but which we only perceive subconsciously.
So I've been cataloging and collecting bacteria from different sites of my body.
After talking to a scientist, we thought, maybe the perfect concoction of Ani is like 10 percent collarbone, 30 percent underarm, 40 percent bikini line and so forth, and occasionally I let researchers from other labs take a sniff of my samples.
And it's been interesting to hear how smell of the body is perceived outside of the context of the body.
I've gotten feedback such as, smells like flowers, like chicken, like cornflakes, like beef carnitas.
(Laughter) At the same time, I cultivate a set of carnivorous plants for their ability to emit fleshlike odors to attract prey, in an attempt to kind of create this symbiotic relationship between my bacteria and this organism.
And as it so happens, I'm at MIT and I'm in a bar, and I was talking to a scientist who happens to be a chemist and a plant scientist, and I was telling him about my project, and he was like, "Well, this sounds like botany for lonely women."
(Laughter) Unperturbed, I said, "OK."
I challenged him.
"Can we engineer a plant that can love me back?"
And for some reason, he was like, "Sure, why not?"
So we started with, can we get a plant to grow towards me like I was the sun?
And so we're looking at mechanisms in plants such as phototropism, which causes the plant to grow towards the sun by producing hormones like auxin, which causes cell elongation on the shady side.
And right now I'm creating a set of lipsticks that are infused with these chemicals that allow me to interact with a plant on its own chemical signatures -- lipsticks that cause plants to grow where I kiss it, plants that blossom where I kiss the bloom.
And through these projects, I'm asking questions like, how do we define nature?
How do we define nature when we can reengineer its properties, and when should we do it?
Should we do it for profit, for utility?
Can we do it for emotional ends?
Can biotechnology be used to create work as moving as music?
What are the thresholds between science and its ability to shape our emotional landscape?
It's a famous design mantra that form follows function.
Well, now, wedged somewhere between science, design and art I get to ask, what if fiction informs fact?
What kind of R&amp;D lab would that look like and what kind of questions would we ask together?
We often look to technology as the answer, but as an artist and designer, I like to ask, but what is the question?
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Guitar) (Singing) Rollercoaster, carousel.
Where the highs are heaven, but the lows, oh, they can be hell.
You can grab the ring, you can ring that bell, when the ride is over, you can never tell.
People tell you this one thing -- will make your life complete.
So you, you give it everything you got and you wind up on the street.
Then one day you wake up, and they tell you "you're a queen," but then you find that someone else is pulling on the strings.
Rollercoaster, carousel.
Where the highs are heaven, but the lows, oh, they can be hell.
You can grab the ring, you can ring that bell, when the ride is over, you can never tell.
The one you love, they love you -- oh yeah -- until the end of time.
But lose your edge or lose your cool, they will drop you like a dime.
Everyone is crowding 'round when fortune is your friend.
When your luck is running out, you're all alone again.
Rollercoaster, carousel.
Where the highs are heaven but the lows, oh, they can be hell.
You can grab the ring, you can ring that bell, when the ride is over you can never tell.
Well, maybe I'm just cynical, and all these words are lies, but experience keeps telling me that the cautious one is wise.
But caution makes you hesitate, and hesitate you're lost, so take your opportunities and never count the cost.
Rollercoaster, carousel.
Where the highs are heaven, but the lows, oh, they can be hell.
You can grab the ring, you can ring that bell, when the ride is over -- over, over, you can never, ever tell.
Rollercoaster, carousel, rollercoaster, yeah, yeah, yeah, carousel.
Carousel, carousel, carousel, carousel.
(Applause) Michael Pemberton.
(Applause) Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Eight years ago, I was haunted by an evil spirit.
I was 25 at the time, and I was living in a tiny house behind someone else's house in Los Angeles.
It was this guest house, it had kind of been dilapidated, not taken care of for a long time.
And one night, I was sitting there and I got this really spooky feeling, kind of the feeling like you're being watched.
But no one was there except my two dogs, and they were just chewing their feet.
And I looked around. No one was there.
And I thought, OK, it's just my imagination.
But the feeling just kept getting worse, and I started to feel this pressure in my chest, sort of like the feeling when you get bad news.
But it started to sink lower and lower and almost hurt.
And over the course of that week, this feeling got worse and worse, and I started to become convinced that something was there in my little guest house, haunting me.
And I started to hear these sounds, this "whoosh," kind of whisper, like something passing through me.
I called my best friend, Claire, and said, "I know this is going to sound crazy, but, um ...
I think there's a ghost in my house, and I need to get rid of it."
And she said -- she's very open-minded -- and she said, "I don't think you're crazy.
I think you just need to do a cleansing ritual."
(Laughter) "So get some sage and burn it, and tell it to go away."
So I said, "OK," and I went and I bought sage.
I had never done this before, so I set the sage on fire, waved it about, and said, "Go away! This is my house! I live here.
You don't live here!"
But the feeling stayed. Nothing got better.
And then I started to think, OK, well now this thing is probably just laughing at me, because it hasn't left, and I probably just look like this impotent, powerless thing that couldn't get it to go away.
So every day I'd come home and you guys, this feeling got so bad that -- I mean, I'm laughing at it now -- but I would sit there in bed and cry every night.
And the feeling on my chest got worse and worse.
It was physically painful.
And I even went to a psychiatrist and tried to get her to prescribe me medicine, and she wouldn't just because I don't have schizophrenia, OK.
(Laughter) So finally I got on the internet, and I Googled "hauntings."
And I came upon this forum of ghost hunters.
But these were a special kind of ghost hunters -- they were skeptics.
They believed that every case of ghosts that they had investigated so far had been explained away by science.
And I was like, "OK, smart guys, this is what's happening to me, and if you have an explanation for me, I would love to hear it."
And one of them said, "OK.
Um, have you heard of carbon monoxide poisoning?"
And I said, "Yeah.
Like, gas poisoning?"
Carbon monoxide poisoning is when you have a gas leak leaking into your home.
I looked it up, and the symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning include a pressure on your chest, auditory hallucinations -- whoosh -- and an unexplained feeling of dread.
So that night, I called the gas company.
I said, "I have an emergency. I need you to come out.
I don't want to get into the story now, but I need you to come out."
(Laughter) They came out. I said, "I suspect a gas leak."
They brought their carbon monoxide detector, and the man said, "It's a really good thing that you called us tonight, because you could have been dead very soon."
Thirty-seven percent of Americans believe in haunted houses, and I wonder how many of them have been in one and how many of them have been in danger.
So that haunting story has led me to my job.
I'm an investigator, and I'm an investigator in two senses: I'm an investigative journalist, and I'm also an investigator of the claims of the paranormal and claims of the spiritual.
And that means a few things.
Sometimes that means that I'm pretending to need an exorcism so I can get -- yes, that's right! -- so I can go to an exorcist and see if he's using gimmicks or psychological tricks to try to convince someone that they're possessed.
Sometimes that means I'm going undercover in a fringe group which I report on for a podcast that I co-host.
And I've done over 70 investigations like this with my co-host, Ross.
I would love to tell you that nine times out of 10, science wins, saves the day, it's all explained.
That's not true.
The truth is, 10 times out of 10, science wins, it saves the day.
(Applause) And that doesn't mean there's no such thing as a mystery.
Of course there are mysteries, but a mystery is a mystery.
It is not a ghost.
Now, I believe there are two kinds of truth, and it's taken me a while to get to this place, but I think this is right, so hear me out.
I think there is outer truth and there's inner truth.
So if you say to me, "There was a man named Jesus and he once existed," that's outer truth, right?
And we can go and look at the historical record.
We can determine whether that seems to be true.
And I would argue, it does seem to be true.
If you say, "Jesus rose from the dead," -- ooh, trickier.
(Laughter) I would say that's an outer-truth claim, because he physically rose or he didn't.
I'm not going to get into whether he rose or he didn't, but I would say that's an outer-truth claim.
It happened or it didn't happen.
But if you say, "I don't care whether he rose from the dead.
It's symbolically important to me, and that metaphor is so meaningful, so purposeful to me, and I'm not going to try to persuade you of it," now you've moved it from outer truth to inner truth, from science to art.
And I think we have a tendency to not be clear about this, to try to move our inner truths to outer truths, or to not be fair about it to each other, and when people are telling us their inner truths, to try to make them defend them by outer-truth standards.
So I'm talking here about outer truth, about objective things.
And there was an objective reality in my haunted house, right?
Now that I've told you about the gas leak, I doubt a single person here would be like, "I still think there was a ghost, too" -- (Laughter) because as soon as we have these scientific explanations, we know to give up the ghost.
We use these things as stopgaps for things that we can't explain.
We don't believe them because of evidence; we believe them because of a lack of evidence.
So there is a group in Los Angeles called the Independent Investigations Group, or the IIG, and they do great work.
They'll give a $10,000 prize to anyone who can show, under scientific conditions, that they have a paranormal ability.
No one's done it yet, but they've had a couple people who claim that they were clairaudients, which means that they can hear voices either from the great beyond or they can read minds.
And they had one person who was very sincere, who believed that he could read minds.
So they set up a test with him, and this is the way it always works.
The group says, "OK, we have a protocol, we have a way to scientifically test this.
Do you agree with it?"
The person says yes. Then they test it.
It's very important that both sides agree.
They did that, they tested him.
They said, "OK, you know what?
You weren't able to predict what Lisa was thinking.
It matched up about the same as chance.
Looks like you don't have the power."
And that gave them the opportunity to compassionately sit down with him and have a very difficult discussion, which basically amounted to, "Hey, we know you're sincere, and what that means is, you do hear something in your head."
And that guy got to make the very difficult decision, but really the life-changing decision about whether to go get help.
We're actually helping people to make these connections that maybe before seemed like otherworldly explanations, help draw us into reality and maybe change our lives for the better.
Now, on the other hand, maybe one time it'll turn out to be true.
Maybe we'll find out there are ghosts, and holy shit, it will be the best thing!
And every time I do one of these investigations, I still get so excited, and I'm like 75 into them, and still I swear on number 76, I'm going to be like, "This is the one!"
(Laughter) Maybe I'm just eternally optimistic, but I hope I never lose this hope, and I invite you to take this same attitude when people share their outer beliefs with you.
When talking about testable claims, respect them enough to ask these good questions.
Challenge and see how you can examine them together, because there's this idea that you can't respect a belief and still challenge it, but that's not true.
When we jiggle the lock, when we test the claim, we're saying, OK, I respect you, I'm listening to what you're saying, I'm going to test it out with you.
We've all had that experience where you're telling someone something, and they're like, "Oh, that's really interesting, yeah," you know you're being had.
But when someone says, "Really? Huh.
Sounds a little sketchy to me, but I'm listening," you at least know you're being engaged and respected.
And that's the kind of attitude we should have with these claims.
That's showing someone that you care what they're saying.
That's respect.
Now, yes, most of these searches will come up empty, but that's how all of science works.
Every cure for cancer so far has not panned out, but we don't stop looking, for two reasons.
Because number one, the answer matters.
Whether it's looking at the afterlife or the paranormal or the cure for cancer, it all amounts to the same question: How long will we be here?
And two, because looking for the truth, being open-minded, and being willing to be wrong and to change your whole worldview is awe-inspiring.
I still get excited at ghost stories every single time.
I still consider that every group I join might be right, and I hope I never lose that hope.
Let's all never lose that hope, because searching for what's out there helps us understand what's in here.
And also, please have a carbon monoxide detector in your home.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was a blue-eyed, chubby-cheeked five-year-old when I joined my family on the picket line for the first time.
My mom made me leave my dolls in the minivan.
I'd stand on a street corner in the heavy Kansas humidity, surrounded by a few dozen relatives, with my tiny fists clutching a sign that I couldn't read yet: "Gays are worthy of death."
This was the beginning.
Our protests soon became a daily occurrence and an international phenomenon, and as a member of Westboro Baptist Church, I became a fixture on picket lines across the country.
The end of my antigay picketing career and life as I knew it, came 20 years later, triggered in part by strangers on Twitter who showed me the power of engaging the other.
In my home, life was framed as an epic spiritual battle between good and evil.
The good was my church and its members, and the evil was everyone else.
My church's antics were such that we were constantly at odds with the world, and that reinforced our otherness on a daily basis.
"Make a difference between the unclean and the clean," the verse says, and so we did.
From baseball games to military funerals, we trekked across the country with neon protest signs in hand to tell others exactly how "unclean" they were and exactly why they were headed for damnation.
This was the focus of our whole lives.
This was the only way for me to do good in a world that sits in Satan's lap.
And like the rest of my 10 siblings, I believed what I was taught with all my heart, and I pursued Westboro's agenda with a special sort of zeal.
In 2009, that zeal brought me to Twitter.
Initially, the people I encountered on the platform were just as hostile as I expected.
They were the digital version of the screaming hordes I'd been seeing at protests since I was a kid.
But in the midst of that digital brawl, a strange pattern developed.
Someone would arrive at my profile with the usual rage and scorn, I would respond with a custom mix of Bible verses, pop culture references and smiley faces.
They would be understandably confused and caught off guard, but then a conversation would ensue.
And it was civil -- full of genuine curiosity on both sides.
How had the other come to such outrageous conclusions about the world?
Sometimes the conversation even bled into real life.
People I'd sparred with on Twitter would come out to the picket line to see me when I protested in their city.
A man named David was one such person.
He ran a blog called "Jewlicious," and after several months of heated but friendly arguments online, he came out to see me at a picket in New Orleans.
He brought me a Middle Eastern dessert from Jerusalem, where he lives, and I brought him kosher chocolate and held a "God hates Jews" sign.
(Laughter) There was no confusion about our positions, but the line between friend and foe was becoming blurred.
We'd started to see each other as human beings, and it changed the way we spoke to one another.
It took time, but eventually these conversations planted seeds of doubt in me.
My friends on Twitter took the time to understand Westboro's doctrines, and in doing so, they were able to find inconsistencies I'd missed my entire life.
Why did we advocate the death penalty for gays when Jesus said, "Let he who is without sin cast the first stone?"
How could we claim to love our neighbor while at the same time praying for God to destroy them?
The truth is that the care shown to me by these strangers on the internet was itself a contradiction.
It was growing evidence that people on the other side were not the demons I'd been led to believe.
These realizations were life-altering.
Once I saw that we were not the ultimate arbiters of divine truth but flawed human beings, I couldn't pretend otherwise.
I couldn't justify our actions -- especially our cruel practice of protesting funerals and celebrating human tragedy.
These shifts in my perspective contributed to a larger erosion of trust in my church, and eventually it made it impossible for me to stay.
In spite of overwhelming grief and terror, I left Westboro in 2012.
In those days just after I left, the instinct to hide was almost paralyzing.
I wanted to hide from the judgement of my family, who I knew would never speak to me again -- people whose thoughts and opinions had meant everything to me.
And I wanted to hide from the world I'd rejected for so long -- people who had no reason at all to give me a second chance after a lifetime of antagonism.
And yet, unbelievably, they did.
The world had access to my past because it was all over the internet -- thousands of tweets and hundreds of interviews, everything from local TV news to "The Howard Stern Show" -- but so many embraced me with open arms anyway.
I wrote an apology for the harm I'd caused, but I also knew that an apology could never undo any of it.
All I could do was try to build a new life and find a way somehow to repair some of the damage.
People had every reason to doubt my sincerity, but most of them didn't.
And -- given my history, it was more than I could've hoped for -- forgiveness and the benefit of the doubt.
It still amazes me.
I spent my first year away from home adrift with my younger sister, who had chosen to leave with me.
We walked into an abyss, but we were shocked to find the light and a way forward in the same communities we'd targeted for so long.
David, my "Jewlicious" friend from Twitter, invited us to spend time among a Jewish community in Los Angeles.
We slept on couches in the home of a Hasidic rabbi and his wife and their four kids -- the same rabbi that I'd protested three years earlier with a sign that said, "Your rabbi is a whore."
We spent long hours talking about theology and Judaism and life while we washed dishes in their kosher kitchen and chopped vegetables for dinner.
They treated us like family.
They held nothing against us, and again I was astonished.
That period was full of turmoil, but one part I've returned to often is a surprising realization I had during that time -- that it was a relief and a privilege to let go of the harsh judgments that instinctively ran through my mind about nearly every person I saw.
I realized that now I needed to learn.
I needed to listen.
This has been at the front of my mind lately, because I can't help but see in our public discourse so many of the same destructive impulses that ruled my former church.
We celebrate tolerance and diversity more than at any other time in memory, and still we grow more and more divided.
We want good things -- justice, equality, freedom, dignity, prosperity -- but the path we've chosen looks so much like the one I walked away from four years ago.
We've broken the world into us and them, only emerging from our bunkers long enough to lob rhetorical grenades at the other camp.
We write off half the country as out-of-touch liberal elites or racist misogynist bullies.
No nuance, no complexity, no humanity.
Even when someone does call for empathy and understanding for the other side, the conversation nearly always devolves into a debate about who deserves more empathy.
And just as I learned to do, we routinely refuse to acknowledge the flaws in our positions or the merits in our opponent's.
Compromise is anathema.
We even target people on our own side when they dare to question the party line.
This path has brought us cruel, sniping, deepening polarization, and even outbreaks of violence.
I remember this path.
It will not take us where we want to go.
What gives me hope is that we can do something about this.
The good news is that it's simple, and the bad news is that it's hard.
We have to talk and listen to people we disagree with.
It's hard because we often can't fathom how the other side came to their positions.
It's hard because righteous indignation, that sense of certainty that ours is the right side, is so seductive.
It's hard because it means extending empathy and compassion to people who show us hostility and contempt.
The impulse to respond in kind is so tempting, but that isn't who we want to be.
We can resist.
And I will always be inspired to do so by those people I encountered on Twitter, apparent enemies who became my beloved friends.
And in the case of one particularly understanding and generous guy, my husband.
There was nothing special about the way I responded to him.
What was special was their approach.
I thought about it a lot over the past few years and I found four things they did differently that made real conversation possible.
These four steps were small but powerful, and I do everything I can to employ them in difficult conversations today.
The first is don't assume bad intent.
My friends on Twitter realized that even when my words were aggressive and offensive, I sincerely believed I was doing the right thing.
Assuming ill motives almost instantly cuts us off from truly understanding why someone does and believes as they do.
We forget that they're a human being with a lifetime of experience that shaped their mind, and we get stuck on that first wave of anger, and the conversation has a very hard time ever moving beyond it.
But when we assume good or neutral intent, we give our minds a much stronger framework for dialogue.
The second is ask questions.
When we engage people across ideological divides, asking questions helps us map the disconnect between our differing points of view.
That's important because we can't present effective arguments if we don't understand where the other side is actually coming from and because it gives them an opportunity to point out flaws in our positions.
But asking questions serves another purpose; it signals to someone that they're being heard.
When my friends on Twitter stopped accusing and started asking questions, I almost automatically mirrored them.
Their questions gave me room to speak, but they also gave me permission to ask them questions and to truly hear their responses.
It fundamentally changed the dynamic of our conversation.
The third is stay calm.
This takes practice and patience, but it's powerful.
At Westboro, I learned not to care how my manner of speaking affected others.
I thought my rightness justified my rudeness -- harsh tones, raised voices, insults, interruptions -- but that strategy is ultimately counterproductive.
Dialing up the volume and the snark is natural in stressful situations, but it tends to bring the conversation to an unsatisfactory, explosive end.
When my husband was still just an anonymous Twitter acquaintance, our discussions frequently became hard and pointed, but we always refused to escalate.
Instead, he would change the subject.
He would tell a joke or recommend a book or gently excuse himself from the conversation.
We knew the discussion wasn't over, just paused for a time to bring us back to an even keel.
People often lament that digital communication makes us less civil, but this is one advantage that online conversations have over in-person ones.
We have a buffer of time and space between us and the people whose ideas we find so frustrating.
We can use that buffer.
Instead of lashing out, we can pause, breathe, change the subject or walk away, and then come back to it when we're ready.
And finally ...
make the argument.
This might seem obvious, but one side effect of having strong beliefs is that we sometimes assume that the value of our position is or should be obvious and self-evident, that we shouldn't have to defend our positions because they're so clearly right and good that if someone doesn't get it, it's their problem -- that it's not my job to educate them.
But if it were that simple, we would all see things the same way.
As kind as my friends on Twitter were, if they hadn't actually made their arguments, it would've been so much harder for me to see the world in a different way.
We are all a product of our upbringing, and our beliefs reflect our experiences.
We can't expect others to spontaneously change their own minds.
If we want change, we have to make the case for it.
My friends on Twitter didn't abandon their beliefs or their principles -- only their scorn.
They channeled their infinitely justifiable offense and came to me with pointed questions tempered with kindness and humor.
They approached me as a human being, and that was more transformative than two full decades of outrage, disdain and violence.
I know that some might not have the time or the energy or the patience for extensive engagement, but as difficult as it can be, reaching out to someone we disagree with is an option that is available to all of us.
And I sincerely believe that we can do hard things, not just for them but for us and our future.
Escalating disgust and intractable conflict are not what we want for ourselves, or our country or our next generation.
My mom said something to me a few weeks before I left Westboro, when I was desperately hoping there was a way I could stay with my family.
People I have loved with every pulse of my heart since even before I was that chubby-cheeked five-year-old, standing on a picket line holding a sign I couldn't read.
She said, "You're just a human being, my dear, sweet child."
She was asking me to be humble -- not to question but to trust God and my elders.
But to me, she was missing the bigger picture -- that we're all just human beings.
That we should be guided by that most basic fact, and approach one another with generosity and compassion.
Each one of us contributes to the communities and the cultures and the societies that we make up.
The end of this spiral of rage and blame begins with one person who refuses to indulge these destructive, seductive impulses.
We just have to decide that it's going to start with us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a kid, I was obsessed with the Guinness Book of World Records, and I really wanted to set a world record myself.
But there was just one small problem: I had absolutely no talent.
So I decided to set a world record in something that demanded absolutely no skill at all.
I decided to set a world record in crawling.
(Laughter) Now, the record at the time was 12 and a half miles, and for some reason, this seemed totally manageable.
(Laughter) I recruited my friend Anne, and together we decided, we didn't even need to train.
(Laughter) And on the day of our record attempt, we put furniture pads on the outside of our good luck jeans and we set off, and right away, we were in trouble, because the denim was against our skin and it began to chafe, and soon our knees were being chewed up.
Hours in, it began to rain.
Then, Anne dropped out.
Then, it got dark.
Now, by now, my knees were bleeding through my jeans, and I was hallucinating from the cold and the pain and the monotony.
And to give you an idea of the suffer-fest that I was undergoing, the first lap around the high school track took 10 minutes.
The last lap took almost 30.
After 12 hours of crawling, I stopped, and I had gone eight and a half miles.
So I was short of the 12-and-a-half-mile record.
Now, for many years, I thought this was a story of abject failure, but today I see it differently, because when I was attempting the world record, I was doing three things.
I was getting outside my comfort zone, I was calling upon my resilience, and I was finding confidence in myself and my own decisions.
I didn't know it then, but those are not the attributes of failure.
Those are the attributes of bravery.
Now, in 1989, at the age of 26, I became a San Francisco firefighter, and I was the 15th woman in a department of 1,500 men.
(Applause) And as you can imagine, when I arrived there were many doubts about whether we could do the job.
So even though I was a 5'10", 150-pound collegiate rower, and someone who could endure 12 hours of searing knee pain -- (Laughter) I knew I still had to prove my strength and fitness.
So one day a call came in for a fire, and sure enough, when my engine group pulled up, there was black smoke billowing from a building off an alleyway.
And I was with a big guy named Skip, and he was on the nozzle, and I was right behind, and it was a typical sort of fire.
It was smoky, it was hot, and all of a sudden, there was an explosion, and Skip and I were blown backwards, my mask was knocked sideways, and there was this moment of confusion.
And then I picked myself up, I groped for the nozzle, and I did what a firefighter was supposed to do: I lunged forward, opened up the water and I tackled the fire myself.
The explosion had been caused by a water heater, so nobody was hurt, and ultimately it was not a big deal, but later Skip came up to me and said, "Nice job, Caroline," in this surprised sort of voice.
(Laughter) And I was confused, because the fire hadn't been difficult physically, so why was he looking at me with something like astonishment?
And then it became clear: Skip, who was by the way a really nice guy and an excellent firefighter, not only thought that women could not be strong, he thought that they could not be brave either.
And he wasn't the only one.
Friends, acquaintances and strangers, men and women throughout my career ask me over and over, "Caroline, all that fire, all that danger, aren't you scared?"
Honestly, I never heard a male firefighter asked this.
And I became curious.
Why wasn't bravery expected of women?
Now, the answer began to come when a friend of mine lamented to me that her young daughter was a big scaredy-cat, and so I began to notice, and yes, the daughter was anxious, but more than that, the parents were anxious.
Most of what they said to her when she was outside began with, "Be careful," "Watch out," or "No."
Now, my friends were not bad parents.
They were just doing what most parents do, which is cautioning their daughters much more than they caution their sons.
There was a study involving a playground fire pole, ironically, in which researchers saw that little girls were very likely to be warned by both their moms and dads about the fire pole's risk, and if the little girls still wanted to play on the fire pole, a parent was very likely to assist her.
But the little boys?
They were encouraged to play on the fire pole despite any trepidations that they might have, and often the parents offered guidance on how to use it on their own.
So what message does this send to both boys and girls?
Well, that girls are fragile and more in need of help, and that boys can and should master difficult tasks by themselves.
It says that girls should be fearful and boys should be gutsy.
Now, the irony is that at this young age, girls and boys are actually very alike physically.
In fact, girls are often stronger until puberty, and more mature.
And yet we adults act as if girls are more fragile and more in need of help, and they can't handle as much.
This is the message that we absorb as kids, and this is the message that fully permeates as we grow up.
We women believe it, men believe it, and guess what?
As we become parents, we pass it on to our children, and so it goes.
Well, so now I had my answer.
This is why women, even firewomen, were expected to be scared.
This is why women often are scared.
Now, I know some of you won't believe me when I tell you this, but I am not against fear.
I know it's an important emotion, and it's there to keep us safe.
But the problem is when fear is the primary reaction that we teach and encourage in girls whenever they face something outside their comfort zone.
So I was a paraglider pilot for many years -- (Applause) and a paraglider is a parachute-like wing, and it does fly very well, but to many people I realize it looks just like a bedsheet with strings attached.
(Laughter) And I spent a lot of time on mountaintops inflating this bedsheet, running off and flying.
And I know what you're thinking.
You're like, Caroline, a little fear would make sense here.
And you're right, it does.
I assure you, I did feel fear.
But on that mountaintop, waiting for the wind to come in just right, I felt so many other things, too: exhilaration, confidence.
I knew I was a good pilot.
I knew the conditions were good, or I wouldn't be there.
I knew how great it was going to be a thousand feet in the air.
So yes, fear was there, but I would take a good hard look at it, assess just how relevant it was and then put it where it belonged, which was more often than not behind my exhilaration, my anticipation and my confidence.
So I'm not against fear.
I'm just pro-bravery.
Now, I'm not saying your girls must be firefighters or that they should be paragliders, but I am saying that we are raising our girls to be timid, even helpless, and it begins when we caution them against physical risk.
The fear we learn and the experiences we don't stay with us as we become women and morphs into all those things that we face and try to shed: our hesitation in speaking out, our deference so that we can be liked and our lack of confidence in our own decisions.
So how do we become brave?
Well, here's the good news.
Bravery is learned, and like anything learned, it just needs to be practiced.
So first, we have to take a deep breath and encourage our girls to skateboard, climb trees and clamber around on that playground fire pole.
This is what my own mother did.
She didn't know it then, but researchers have a name for this.
They call it risky play, and studies show that risky play is really important for kids, all kids, because it teaches hazard assessment, it teaches delayed gratification, it teaches resilience, it teaches confidence.
In other words, when kids get outside and practice bravery, they learn valuable life lessons.
Second, we have to stop cautioning our girls willy-nilly.
So notice next time you say, "Watch out, you're going to get hurt," or, "Don't do that, it's dangerous."
And remember that often what you're really telling her is that she shouldn't be pushing herself, that she's really not good enough, that she should be afraid.
Third, we women have to start practicing bravery, too.
We cannot teach our girls until we teach ourselves.
So here's another thing: fear and exhilaration feel very similar -- the shaky hands, the heightened heart rate, the nervous tension, and I'm betting that for many of you the last time you thought you were scared out of your wits, you may have been feeling mostly exhilaration, and now you've missed an opportunity.
So practice.
And while girls should be getting outside to learn to be gutsy, I get that adults don't want to get on hoverboards or climb trees, so we all should be practicing at home, in the office and even right here getting up the guts to talk to someone that you really admire.
Finally, when your girl is, let's say, on her bike on the top of the steep hill that she insists she's too scared to go down, guide her to access her bravery.
Ultimately, maybe that hill really is too steep, but she'll come to that conclusion through courage, not fear.
Because this is not about the steep hill in front of her.
This is about the life ahead of her and that she has the tools to handle and assess all the dangers that we cannot protect her from, all the challenges that we won't be there to guide her through, everything that our girls here and around the world face in their future.
So by the way, the world record for crawling today -- (Laughter) is 35.18 miles, and I would really love to see a girl go break that.
(Applause)
Hello, I'm Joy, a poet of code, on a mission to stop an unseen force that's rising, a force that I called "the coded gaze," my term for algorithmic bias.
Algorithmic bias, like human bias, results in unfairness.
However, algorithms, like viruses, can spread bias on a massive scale at a rapid pace.
Algorithmic bias can also lead to exclusionary experiences and discriminatory practices.
Let me show you what I mean.
(Video) Joy Buolamwini: Hi, camera. I've got a face.
Can you see my face?
No-glasses face?
You can see her face.
What about my face?
I've got a mask. Can you see my mask?
Joy Buolamwini: So how did this happen?
Why am I sitting in front of a computer in a white mask, trying to be detected by a cheap webcam?
Well, when I'm not fighting the coded gaze as a poet of code, I'm a graduate student at the MIT Media Lab, and there I have the opportunity to work on all sorts of whimsical projects, including the Aspire Mirror, a project I did so I could project digital masks onto my reflection.
So in the morning, if I wanted to feel powerful, I could put on a lion.
If I wanted to be uplifted, I might have a quote.
So I used generic facial recognition software to build the system, but found it was really hard to test it unless I wore a white mask.
Unfortunately, I've run into this issue before.
When I was an undergraduate at Georgia Tech studying computer science, I used to work on social robots, and one of my tasks was to get a robot to play peek-a-boo, a simple turn-taking game where partners cover their face and then uncover it saying, "Peek-a-boo!"
The problem is, peek-a-boo doesn't really work if I can't see you, and my robot couldn't see me.
But I borrowed my roommate's face to get the project done, submitted the assignment, and figured, you know what, somebody else will solve this problem.
Not too long after, I was in Hong Kong for an entrepreneurship competition.
The organizers decided to take participants on a tour of local start-ups.
One of the start-ups had a social robot, and they decided to do a demo.
The demo worked on everybody until it got to me, and you can probably guess it.
It couldn't detect my face.
I asked the developers what was going on, and it turned out we had used the same generic facial recognition software.
Halfway around the world, I learned that algorithmic bias can travel as quickly as it takes to download some files off of the internet.
So what's going on? Why isn't my face being detected?
Well, we have to look at how we give machines sight.
Computer vision uses machine learning techniques to do facial recognition.
So how this works is, you create a training set with examples of faces.
This is a face. This is a face. This is not a face.
And over time, you can teach a computer how to recognize other faces.
However, if the training sets aren't really that diverse, any face that deviates too much from the established norm will be harder to detect, which is what was happening to me.
But don't worry -- there's some good news.
Training sets don't just materialize out of nowhere.
We actually can create them.
So there's an opportunity to create full-spectrum training sets that reflect a richer portrait of humanity.
Now you've seen in my examples how social robots was how I found out about exclusion with algorithmic bias.
But algorithmic bias can also lead to discriminatory practices.
Across the US, police departments are starting to use facial recognition software in their crime-fighting arsenal.
Georgetown Law published a report showing that one in two adults in the US -- that's 117 million people -- have their faces in facial recognition networks.
Police departments can currently look at these networks unregulated, using algorithms that have not been audited for accuracy.
Yet we know facial recognition is not fail proof, and labeling faces consistently remains a challenge.
You might have seen this on Facebook.
My friends and I laugh all the time when we see other people mislabeled in our photos.
But misidentifying a suspected criminal is no laughing matter, nor is breaching civil liberties.
Machine learning is being used for facial recognition, but it's also extending beyond the realm of computer vision.
In her book, "Weapons of Math Destruction," data scientist Cathy O'Neil talks about the rising new WMDs -- widespread, mysterious and destructive algorithms that are increasingly being used to make decisions that impact more aspects of our lives.
So who gets hired or fired?
Do you get that loan? Do you get insurance?
Are you admitted into the college you wanted to get into?
Do you and I pay the same price for the same product purchased on the same platform?
Law enforcement is also starting to use machine learning for predictive policing.
Some judges use machine-generated risk scores to determine how long an individual is going to spend in prison.
So we really have to think about these decisions.
Are they fair?
And we've seen that algorithmic bias doesn't necessarily always lead to fair outcomes.
So what can we do about it?
Well, we can start thinking about how we create more inclusive code and employ inclusive coding practices.
It really starts with people.
So who codes matters.
Are we creating full-spectrum teams with diverse individuals who can check each other's blind spots?
On the technical side, how we code matters.
Are we factoring in fairness as we're developing systems?
And finally, why we code matters.
We've used tools of computational creation to unlock immense wealth.
We now have the opportunity to unlock even greater equality if we make social change a priority and not an afterthought.
And so these are the three tenets that will make up the "incoding" movement.
Who codes matters, how we code matters and why we code matters.
So to go towards incoding, we can start thinking about building platforms that can identify bias by collecting people's experiences like the ones I shared, but also auditing existing software.
We can also start to create more inclusive training sets.
Imagine a "Selfies for Inclusion" campaign where you and I can help developers test and create more inclusive training sets.
And we can also start thinking more conscientiously about the social impact of the technology that we're developing.
To get the incoding movement started, I've launched the Algorithmic Justice League, where anyone who cares about fairness can help fight the coded gaze.
On codedgaze.com, you can report bias, request audits, become a tester and join the ongoing conversation, #codedgaze.
So I invite you to join me in creating a world where technology works for all of us, not just some of us, a world where we value inclusion and center social change.
Thank you.
(Applause) But I have one question: Will you join me in the fight?
(Laughter) (Applause)
Why do we think that stories by men are deemed to be of universal importance, and stories by women are thought to be merely about women?
My grandmother left school when she was 12.
She had 14 children.
My mother left school when she was 15.
She was a secretary.
I graduated from university to become a theater director, and that progress is entirely to do with the fact that people I'll never meet fought for women to have rights, get the vote, get education, have progress.
And I'm determined to do the same, and obviously you are, too.
Why not?
(Applause) So I started a festival called WOW, Women of the World, seven years ago, and it's now in 20 countries across five continents.
And one of those countries is Somaliland in Africa.
So I traveled there last year, and part of the joy I had in going there was going to these caves.
The Laas Geel caves.
Now, these caves contain some of the oldest cave paintings in the world.
These paintings are thought to be round about 9,000 to 11,000 years old.
Art: what humanity has done ever since it evolved.
It's how we speak about ourselves, how we understand our identity, how we look at our surroundings, who we find out about each other because of the meaning of our lives.
That's what art is for.
So look at this little picture.
I think it's a little girl.
I thought it was a bit like me when I was a little girl.
And I thought, well, who painted this joyful, youthful figure?
And I asked the curator of the caves.
I said, "Tell me about the men and women who painted these."
And he looked at me absolutely askance, and he said, "Women didn't paint these pictures."
And I said, "Well, it was 11,000 years ago."
I said, "How do you know?"
(Laughter) And he said, "Women don't do these things.
Men made these marks. Women don't."
Now, I wasn't really surprised, because that's an attitude that I've seen continuously all my life as a theater maker.
We are told that divine knowledge comes down through the masculine, whether it be to the imam, the priest, the rabbi, the holy man.
Similarly, we're told that creative genius resides in the masculine, that it is the masculine that will be able to tell us about who we really are, that the masculine will tell the universal story on behalf of all of us, whereas women artists will really just talk about women's experiences, women's issues only really relevant to women and of passing interest to men -- and really only some men.
And it's that conviction, that that we are taught, that I think colors so much of whether we're prepared to believe that women's stories really matter.
And unless we're prepared to believe that women's stories really matter, then women's rights don't really matter, and then change can't really come.
I want to tell you about two examples of stories that are thought to be of universal importance: "E.T." and "Hamlet."
(Laughter) So I took my two children when they were little -- Caroline was eight and Robby was five -- to see "E.T."
And it's a fantastic story of this little alien who ends up in an American family with a mum, two brothers and a sister, but he wants to go home.
Not only that, but some really bad scientists want to do some experiments on him, and they're looking for him.
So the children have a plot.
They decide they're going to take him back to his spaceship as soon as they can, and they plop him in a bicycle basket, and off they ride.
But unfortunately, the baddies have found out, and they're catching up and they've got sirens and they've got their guns, they've got the loud-hailers, it's terribly frightening, and they're closing up on the children, and the children are never going to make it.
And then all of a sudden, magically, the bikes fly up in the air, over the clouds, over the moon, and they're going to save "E.T."
So I turn to see my children's faces, and Robby is enraptured, he's there with them, he's saving E.T., he's a happy boy.
And I turn to Caroline, and she's crying her eyes out.
And I said, "What's the matter?"
And she said, "Why can't I save E.T.? Why can't I come?"
And then all of a sudden I realized: they weren't children; they were boys -- all boys.
And Caroline, who had invested so much in E.T., well, she wasn't invited to save him, and she felt humiliated and spurned.
So I wrote to Steven Spielberg -- (Laughter) (Applause) and I said, "I don't know if you understand the psychological importance of what's happened, and are you prepared to pay for the therapy bills?"
(Laughter) Twenty years later, I haven't had a word back from him, but I'm still hopeful.
(Laughter) But I thought it was interesting, because if you read reviews of what he intended with E.T., he says very specifically, "I wanted the world to understand that we should love and embrace difference."
But somehow he didn't include the idea of girls' difference in this thinking.
He thought he was writing a story about all humanity.
Caroline thought he was marginalizing half of humanity.
He thought he was writing a story about human goodness; she thought he was writing a lad's heroic adventure.
And this is common.
Men feel they have been given the mantle for universal communication, but of course, how could they be?
They are writing from male experience through male's eyes.
We have to have a look at this ourselves.
We have to be prepared to go back through all our books and our films, all our favorite things, and say, "Actually, this is written by a male artist -- not an artist.
We have to see that so many of these stories are written through a male perspective.
Which is fine, but then females need to have 50 percent of the rights for the stage, the film, the novel, the place of creativity.
Let me talk about "Hamlet."
To be or not to be.
That is the question.
But it's not my question.
My question is: Why was I taught as a young woman that this was the quintessential example of human dilemma and human experience?
It's a marvelous story, but actually, it's about a young man fearful that he won't be able to make it as a powerful figure in a male world unless he takes revenge for his father's murder.
He talks a great deal to us about suicide being an option, but the reality is that the person who actually commits suicide, Ophelia, after she's been humiliated and abused by him, never gets a chance to talk to the audience about her feelings.
And then when he's finished with Ophelia, he turns on his mum, because basically she has the audacity to fall in love with his uncle and enjoy sex.
(Laughter) It is a great story, but it is a story about male conflict, male dilemma, male struggle.
But I was told this was the story of human beings, despite the fact that it only had two women in it.
And unless I reeducate myself, I am always going to think that women's stories matter less than men's.
A woman could have written "Hamlet," but she would have written it differently, and it wouldn't have had global recognition.
As the writer Margaret Atwood says, "When a man writes about doing the dishes, it's realism.
When a woman writes about doing it, it's an unfortunate genetic disposition."
(Laughter) Now, this is not just something that belongs to then.
I mean, when I was a young girl, wanting desperately to be a theater director, this is what my male lecturer said to me: "Well, there are three women directors in Britain," he said, "Jude."
"There's Joan Knight, who's a lesbian, there's Joan Littlewood, who's retired, and there's Buzz Goodbody, who's just killed herself.
So, which of those three would you like to be?"
(Laughter) Now, leaving aside the disgusting slur on gay women, the fact is, he wanted to humiliate me.
He thought it was silly that I wanted to be a director.
And I told my friend Marin Alsop, the conductor, and she said, "Oh yes, well, my music teacher said exactly the same.
He said, 'Women don't conduct.'" But all these years later, we've made our mark.
You think, "Well, it'll be different now."
I'm afraid it's not different now.
The current head of the Paris Conservatoire said recently, "It takes great physical strength to conduct a symphony, and women are too weak."
(Laughter) The artist George Baselitz said, "Well, the fact is women can't paint.
Well -- they can't paint very well."
The writer V.S. Naipaul said two years ago, "I can read two paragraphs and know immediately if it's written by a woman, and I just stop reading, because it's not worthy of me."
Audience: Whoa!
And it goes on.
We have to find a way of stopping young girls and women feeling not only that their story doesn't matter, but they're not allowed to be the storyteller.
Because once you feel that you can't stand in the central space and speak on behalf of the world, you will feel that you can offer your goods up to a small, select group.
You will tend to do smaller work on smaller stages, your economic power will be less, your reach of audiences will be less, and your credit will be less as an artist.
And we do finally give artists these incredible, prominent spaces in the world, because they are our storytellers.
Now, why should it matter to you if you're not an artist?
Supposing you're an accountant or an entrepreneur or a medic or a scientist: Should you care about women artists?
Absolutely, you must, because as you can see from the cave paintings, all civilizations, all of humanity have relied upon artists to tell the human story, and if the human story is finally told by men, take my word for it, it will be about men.
So let's make a change.
Let's make a change to all our institutions, and not just in the West.
Don't forget -- this message of incapability of women to hold creative genius is being told to girls and women in Nigeria, in China, in Russia, in Indonesia.
All over the world, girls and women are being told that they can't finally hold the idea of creative inspiration.
And I want to ask you: Do you believe that?
Do you believe that women can be a creative genius?
(Applause and cheers) Well then, please go forward, support women artists, buy their work, insist that their voices are heard, find platforms on which their voices will be made.
And remember this: that in a sense, if we're going to get past this moment of a world where we know that we are unequal, it's artists who have to imagine a different world.
And I'm calling on all artists, women and men, to imagine a gender-equal world.
Let's paint it. Let's draw it.
Let's write about it. Let's film it.
And if we could imagine it, then we would have the energy and the stamina to work towards it.
When I see this little girl, 11,000 years ago, I want to know that the little girl now can stand there and think she's entitled to her dreams, she's entitled to her destiny and she's entitled to speak on behalf of the whole world, be recognized for it and applauded.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I die, I would like for my body to be laid out to be eaten by animals.
Having your body laid out to be eaten by animals is not for everyone.
(Laughter) Maybe you have already had the end-of-life talk with your family and decided on, I don't know, cremation.
And in the interest of full disclosure, what I am proposing for my dead body is not strictly legal at the moment, but it's not without precedent.
We've been laying out our dead for all of human history; it's call exposure burial.
In fact, it's likely happening right now as we speak.
In the mountainous regions of Tibet, they practice "sky burial," a ritual where the body is left to be consumed by vultures.
In Mumbai, in India, those who follow the Parsi religion put their dead in structures called "Towers of Silence."
These are interesting cultural tidbits, but they just haven't really been that popular in the Western world -- they're not what you'd expect.
In America, our death traditions have come to be chemical embalming, followed by burial at your local cemetery, or, more recently, cremation.
I myself, am a recent vegetarian, which means I spent the first 30 years or so of my life frantically inhaling animals -- as many as I could get my hands on.
Why, when I die, should they not have their turn with me?
(Laughter) Am I not an animal?
Biologically speaking, are we not all, in this room, animals?
Accepting the fact that we are animals has some potentially terrifying consequences.
It means accepting that we are doomed to decay and die, just like any other creature on earth.
For the last nine years, I've worked in the funeral industry, first as a crematory operator, then as a mortician and most recently, as the owner of my own funeral home.
And I have some good news: if you're looking to avoid the whole "doomed to decay and die" thing: you will have all the help in the world in that avoidance from the funeral industry.
It's a multi-billion-dollar industry, and its economic model is based on the principle of protection, sanitation and beautification of the corpse.
Whether they mean to or not, the funeral industry promotes this idea of human exceptionalism.
It doesn't matter what it takes, how much it costs, how bad it is for the environment, we're going to do it because humans are worth it!
It ignores the fact that death can be an emotionally messy and complex affair, and that there is beauty in decay -- beauty in the natural return to the earth from whence we came.
Now, I don't want you to get me wrong -- I absolutely understand the importance of ritual, especially when it comes to the people that we love.
But we have to be able to create and practice this ritual without harming the environment, which is why we need new options.
So let's return to the idea of protection, sanitation and beautification.
We'll start with a dead body.
The funeral industry will protect your dead body by offering to sell your family a casket made of hardwood or metal with a rubber sealant.
At the cemetery, on the day of burial, that casket will be lowered into a large concrete or metal vault.
We're wasting all of these resources -- concretes, metal, hardwoods -- hiding them in vast underground fortresses.
When you choose burial at the cemetery, your dead body is not coming anywhere near the dirt that surrounds it.
Food for worms you are not.
Next, the industry will sanitize your body through embalming: the chemical preservation of the dead.
This procedure drains your blood and replaces it with a toxic, cancer-causing formaldehyde.
They say they do this for the public health because the dead body can be dangerous, but the doctors in this room will tell you that that claim would only apply if the person had died of some wildly infectious disease, like Ebola.
Even human decomposition, which, let's be honest, is a little stinky and unpleasant, is perfectly safe.
The bacteria that causes disease is not the same bacteria that causes decomposition.
Finally, the industry will beautify the corpse.
They'll tell you that the natural dead body of your mother or father is not good enough as it is.
They'll put it in makeup.
They'll put it in a suit.
They'll inject dyes so the person looks a little more alive -- just resting.
Embalming is a cheat code, providing the illusion that death and then decay are not the natural end for all organic life on this planet.
Now, if this system of beautification, sanitation, protection doesn't appeal to you, you are not alone.
There is a whole wave of people -- funeral directors, designers, environmentalists -- trying to come up with a more eco-friendly way of death.
For these people, death is not necessarily a pristine, makeup, powder-blue tuxedo kind of affair.
There's no question that our current methods of death are not particularly sustainable, what with the waste of resources and our reliance on chemicals.
Even cremation, which is usually considered the environmentally friendly option, uses, per cremation, the natural gas equivalent of a 500-mile car trip.
So where do we go from here?
Last summer, I was in the mountains of North Carolina, hauling buckets of wood chips in the summer sun.
I was at Western Carolina University at their "Body Farm," more accurately called a "human decomposition facility."
Bodies donated to science are brought here, and their decay is studied to benefit the future of forensics.
On this particular day, there were 12 bodies laid out in various stages of decomposition.
Some were skeletonized, one was wearing purple pajamas, one still had blonde facial hair visible.
The forensic aspect is really fascinating, but not actually why I was there.
I was there because a colleague of mine named Katrina Spade is attempting to create a system, not of cremating the dead, but composting the dead.
She calls the system "Recomposition," and we've been doing it with cattle and other livestock for years.
She imagines a facility where the family could come and lay their dead loved one in a nutrient-rich mixture that would, in four-to-six weeks, reduce the body -- bones and all -- to soil.
In those four-to-six weeks, your molecules become other molecules; you literally transform.
How would this fit in with the very recent desire a lot of people seem to have to be buried under a tree, or to become a tree when they die?
In a traditional cremation, the ashes that are left over -- inorganic bone fragments -- form a thick, chalky layer that, unless distributed in the soil just right, can actually hurt or kill the tree.
But if you're recomposed, if you actually become the soil, you can nourish the tree, and become the post-mortem contributor you've always wanted to be -- that you deserve to be.
So that's one option for the future of cremation.
But what about the future of cemeteries?
There are a lot of people who think we shouldn't even have cemeteries anymore because we're running out of land.
But what if we reframed it, and the corpse wasn't the land's enemy, but its potential savior?
I'm talking about conservation burial, where large swaths of land are purchased by a land trust.
The beauty of this is that once you plant a few dead bodies in that land, it can't be touched, it can't be developed on -- hence the term, "conservation burial."
It's the equivalent of chaining yourself to a tree post-mortem -- "Hell no, I won't go!
No, really -- I can't. I'm decomposing under here."
(Laughter) Any money that the family gives to the cemetery would go back into protecting and managing the land.
There are no headstones and no graves in the typical sense.
The graves are scattered about the property under elegant mounds, marked only by a rock or a small metal disk, or sometimes only locatable by GPS.
There's no embalming, no heavy, metal caskets.
My funeral home sells a few caskets made out of things like woven willow and bamboo, but honestly, most of our families just choose a simple shroud.
There are none of the big vaults that most cemeteries require just because it makes it easier for them to landscape.
Families can come here; they can luxuriate in nature; they can even plant a tree or a shrub, though only native plants to the area are allowed.
The dead then blend seamlessly in with the landscape.
There's hope in conservation cemeteries.
They offer dedicated green space in both urban and rural areas.
They offer a chance to reintroduce native plants and animals to a region.
They offer public trails, places for spiritual practice, places for classes and events -- places where nature and mourning meet.
Most importantly, they offer us, once again, a chance to just decompose in a hole in the ground.
The soil, let me tell you, has missed us.
I think for a lot of people, they're starting to get the sense that our current funeral industry isn't really working for them.
For many of us, being sanitized and beautified just doesn't reflect us.
It doesn't reflect what we stood for during our lives.
Will changing the way we bury our dead solve climate change?
No.
But it will make bold moves in how we see ourselves as citizens of this planet.
If we can die in a way that is more humble and self-aware, I believe that we stand a chance.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For several years now, we've been engaged in a national debate about sexual assault on campus.
No question -- it's crucial that young people understand the ground rules for consent, but that's where the conversation about sex is ending.
And in that vacuum of information the media and the Internet -- that new digital street corner -- are educating our kids for us.
If we truly want young people to engage safely, ethically, and yes, enjoyably, it's time to have open honest discussion about what happens after "yes," and that includes breaking the biggest taboo of all and talking to young people about women's capacity for and entitlement to sexual pleasure.
Yeah.
(Applause) Come on, ladies.
(Applause) I spent three years talking to girls ages 15 to 20 about their attitudes and experience of sex.
And what I found was that while young women may feel entitled to engage in sexual behavior, they don't necessarily feel entitled to enjoy it.
Take this sophomore at the Ivy League college who told me, "I come from a long line of smart, strong women.
My grandmother was a firecracker, my mom is a professional, my sister and I are loud, and that's our form of feminine power."
She then proceeded to describe her sex life to me: a series of one-off hookups, starting when she was 13, that were ...
not especially responsible, not especially reciprocal and not especially enjoyable.
She shrugged.
"I guess we girls are just socialized to be these docile creatures who don't express our wants or needs."
"Wait a minute," I replied.
"Didn't you just tell me what a smart, strong woman you are?"
She hemmed and hawed.
"I guess," she finally said, "no one told me that that smart, strong image applies to sex."
I should probably say right up top that despite the hype, teenagers are not engaging in intercourse more often or at a younger age than they were 25 years ago.
They are, however, engaging in other behavior.
And when we ignore that, when we label that as "not sex," that opens the door to risky behavior and disrespect.
That's particularly true of oral sex, which teenagers consider to be less intimate than intercourse.
Girls would tell me, "it's no big deal," like they'd all read the same instruction manual -- at least if boys were on the receiving end.
Young women have lots of reasons for participating.
It made them feel desired; it was a way to boost social status.
Sometimes, it was a way to get out of an uncomfortable situation.
As a freshman at a West Coast college said to me, "A girl will give a guy a blow job at the end of the night because she doesn't want to have sex with him, and he expects to be satisfied.
So, if I want him to leave and I don't want anything to happen ... " I heard so many stories of girls performing one-sided oral sex that I started asking, "What if every time you were alone with a guy, he told you to get him a glass of water from the kitchen, and he never got you a glass of water -- or if he did, it was like ...
'you want me to uh ...?'" You know, totally begrudging.
You wouldn't stand for it.
But it wasn't always that boys didn't want to.
It was that girls didn't want them to.
Girls expressed a sense of shame around their genitals.
A sense that they were simultaneously icky and sacred.
Women's feelings about their genitals have been directly linked to their enjoyment of sex.
Yet, Debby Herbenick, a researcher at Indiana University, believes that girls' genital self-image is under siege, with more pressure than ever to see them as unacceptable in their natural state.
According to research, about three-quarters of college women remove their pubic hair -- all of it -- at least on occasion, and more than half do so regularly.
Girls would tell me that hair removal made them feel cleaner, that it was a personal choice.
Though, I kind of wondered if left alone on a desert island, if this was how they would choose to spend their time.
(Laughter) And when I pushed further, a darker motivation emerged: avoiding humiliation.
"Guys act like they would be disgusted by it," one young woman told me.
"No one wants to be talked about like that."
The rising pubic hair removal reminded me of the 1920s, when women first started regularly shaving their armpits and their legs.
That's when flapper dresses came into style, and women's limbs were suddenly visible, open to public scrutiny.
There's a way that I think that this too is a sign.
That a girl's most intimate part is open to public scrutiny, open to critique, to becoming more about how it looks to someone else than how it feels to her.
The shaving trend has sparked another rise in labiaplasty.
Labiaplasty, which is the trimming of the inner and outer labia, is the fastest-growing cosmetic surgery among teenage girls.
It rose 80 percent between 2014 and 2015, and whereas girls under 18 comprise two percent of all cosmetic surgeries, they are five percent of labiaplasty.
The most sought-after look, incidentally, in which the outer labia appear fused like a clam shell, is called ...
wait for it ...
"The Barbie."
(Groan) I trust I don't have to tell you that Barbie is a) made of plastic and b) has no genitalia.
(Laughter) The labiaplasty trend has become so worrisome that the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists has issued a statement on the procedure, which is rarely medically indicated, has not been proven safe and whose side effects include scarring, numbness, pain and diminished sexual sensation.
Now, admittedly, and blessedly, the number of girls involved is still quite small, but you could see them as canaries in a coal mine, telling us something important about the way girls see their bodies.
Sara McClelland, a psychologist at the University of Michigan, coined what is my favorite phrase ever in talking about all of this: "Intimate justice."
That's the idea that sex has political, as well as personal implications, just like, who does the dishes in your house, or who vacuums the rug.
And it raises similar issues about inequality, about economic disparity, violence, physical and mental health.
Intimate justice asks us to consider who is entitled to engage in an experience.
Who is entitled to enjoy it?
Who is the primary beneficiary?
And how does each partner define "good enough"?
Honestly, I think those questions are tricky and sometimes traumatic for adult women to confront, but when we're talking about girls, I just kept coming back to the idea that their early sexual experience shouldn't have to be something that they get over.
In her work, McClelland found that young women were more likely than young men to use their partner's pleasure as a measure of their satisfaction.
So they'd say things like, "If he's sexually satisfied, then I'm sexually satisfied."
Young men were more likely to measure their satisfaction by their own orgasm.
Young women also defined bad sex differently.
In the largest ever survey ever conducted on American sexual behavior, they reported pain in their sexual encounters 30 percent of the time.
They also used words like "depressing," "humiliating," "degrading."
The young men never used that language.
So when young women report sexual satisfaction levels that are equal to or greater than young men's -- and they do in research -- that can be deceptive.
If a girl goes into an encounter hoping that it won't hurt, wanting to feel close to her partner and expecting him to have an orgasm, she'll be satisfied if those criteria are met.
And there's nothing wrong with wanting to feel close to your partner, or wanting him to be happy, and orgasm isn't the only measure of an experience ...
but absence of pain -- that's a very low bar for your own sexual fulfillment.
Listening to all of this and thinking about it, I began to realize that we performed a kind of psychological clitoridectomy on American girls.
Starting in infancy, parents of baby boys are more likely to name all their body parts, at least they'll say, "here's your pee-pee."
Parents of baby girls go right from navel to knees, and they leave this whole situation in here unnamed.
(Laughter) There's no better way to make something unspeakable than not to name it.
Then kids go into their puberty education classes and they learn that boys have erections and ejaculations, and girls have ...
periods and unwanted pregnancy.
And they see that internal diagram of a woman's reproductive system -- you know, the one that looks kind of like a steer head -- (Laughter) And it always grays out between the legs.
So we never say vulva, we certainly never say clitoris.
No surprise, fewer than half of teenage girls age 14 to 17 have ever masturbated.
And then they go into their partnered experience and we expect that somehow they'll think sex is about them, that they'll be able to articulate their needs, their desires, their limits.
It's unrealistic.
Here's something, though.
Girls' investment in their partner's pleasure remains regardless of the gender of the partner.
So in same-sex encounters, the orgasm gap disappears.
And young women climax at the same rate as men.
Lesbian and bisexual girls would tell me that they felt liberated to get off the script -- free to create an encounter that worked for them.
Gay girls also challenged the idea of first intercourse as the definition of virginity.
Not because intercourse isn't a big deal, but it's worth questioning why we consider this one act, which most girls associate with discomfort or pain, to be the line in the sand of sexual adulthood -- so much more meaningful, so much more transformative than anything else.
And it's worth considering how this is serving girls; whether it's keeping them safer from disease, coercion, betrayal, assault.
Whether it's encouraging mutuality and caring; what it means about the way they see other sex acts; whether it's giving them more control over and joy in their experience, and what it means about gay teens, who can have multiple sex partners without heterosexual intercourse.
So I asked a gay girl that I met, "How'd you know you weren't a virgin anymore?"
She said she had to Google it.
(Laughter) And Google wasn't sure.
(Laughter) She finally decided that she wasn't a virgin anymore after she'd had her first orgasm with a partner.
And I thought -- whoa.
What if just for a second we imagined that was the definition?
Again, not because intercourse isn't a big deal -- of course it is -- but it isn't the only big deal, and rather than thinking about sex as a race to a goal, this helps us reconceptualize it as a pool of experiences that include warmth, affection, arousal, desire, touch, intimacy.
And it's worth asking young people: who's really the more sexually experienced person?
The one who makes out with a partner for three hours and experiments with sensual tension and communication, or the one who gets wasted at a party and hooks up with a random in order to dump their "virginity" before they get to college?
The only way that shift in thinking can happen though is if we talk to young people more about sex -- if we normalize those discussions, integrating them into everyday life, talking about those intimate acts in a different way -- the way we mostly have changed in the way that we talk about women in the public realm.
Consider a survey of 300 randomly chosen girls from a Dutch and an American university, two similar universities, talking about their early experience of sex.
The Dutch girls embodied everything we say we want from our girls.
They had fewer negative consequences, like disease, pregnancy, regret -- more positive outcomes like being able to communicate with their partner, who they said they knew very well; preparing for the experience responsibly; enjoying themselves.
What was their secret?
The Dutch girls said that their doctors, teachers and parents talked to them candidly, from an early age, about sex, pleasure and the importance of mutual trust.
What's more, while American parents weren't necessarily less comfortable talking about sex, we tend to frame those conversations entirely in terms or risk and danger, whereas Dutch parents talk about balancing responsibility and joy.
I have to tell you, as a parent myself, that hit me hard, because I know, had I not delved into that research, I would have talked to my own child about contraception, about disease protection, about consent because I'm a modern parent, and I would have thought ...
job well done.
Now I know that's not enough.
I also know what I hope for for our girls.
I want them to see sexuality as a source of self-knowledge, creativity and communication, despite its potential risks.
I want them to be able to revel in their bodies' sensuality without being reduced to it.
I want them to be able to ask for what they want in bed, and to get it.
I want them to be safe from unwanted pregnancy, disease, cruelty, dehumanization, violence.
If they are assaulted, I want them to have recourse from their schools, their employers, the courts.
It's a lot to ask, but it's not too much.
As parents, teachers, advocates and activists, we have raised a generation of girls to have a voice, to expect egalitarian treatment in the home, in the classroom, in the workplace.
Now it's time to demand that intimate justice in their personal lives as well.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today I want to talk about the meaning of words, how we define them and how they, almost as revenge, define us.
The English language is a magnificent sponge.
I love the English language. I'm glad that I speak it.
But for all that, it has a lot of holes.
In Greek, there's a word, "lachesism" which is the hunger for disaster.
You know, when you see a thunderstorm on the horizon and you just find yourself rooting for the storm.
In Mandarin, they have a word "y y" -- I'm not pronouncing that correctly -- which means the longing to feel intensely again the way you did when you were a kid.
In Polish, they have a word "jouska" which is the kind of hypothetical conversation that you compulsively play out in your head.
And finally, in German, of course in German, they have a word called "zielschmerz" which is the dread of getting what you want.
(Laughter) Finally fulfilling a lifelong dream.
I'm German myself, so I know exactly what that feels like.
Now, I'm not sure if I would use any of these words as I go about my day, but I'm really glad they exist.
But the only reason they exist is because I made them up.
I am the author of "The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows," which I've been writing for the last seven years.
And the whole mission of the project is to find holes in the language of emotion and try to fill them so that we have a way of talking about all those human peccadilloes and quirks of the human condition that we all feel but may not think to talk about because we don't have the words to do it.
And about halfway through this project, I defined "sonder," the idea that we all think of ourselves as the main character and everyone else is just extras.
But in reality, we're all the main character, and you yourself are an extra in someone else's story.
And so as soon as I published that, I got a lot of response from people saying, "Thank you for giving voice to something I had felt all my life but there was no word for that."
So it made them feel less alone.
That's the power of words, to make us feel less alone.
And it was not long after that that I started to notice sonder being used earnestly in conversations online, and not long after I actually noticed it, I caught it next to me in an actual conversation in person.
There is no stranger feeling than making up a word and then seeing it take on a mind of its own.
I don't have a word for that yet, but I will.
(Laughter) I'm working on it.
I started to think about what makes words real, because a lot of people ask me, the most common thing I got from people is, "Well, are these words made up? I don't really understand."
And I didn't really know what to tell them because once sonder started to take off, who am I to say what words are real and what aren't.
And so I sort of felt like Steve Jobs, who described his epiphany as when he realized that most of us, as we go through the day, we just try to avoid bouncing against the walls too much and just sort of get on with things.
But once you realize that people -- that this world was built by people no smarter than you, then you can reach out and touch those walls and even put your hand through them and realize that you have the power to change it.
And when people ask me, "Are these words real?"
I had a variety of answers that I tried out.
Some of them made sense. Some of them didn't.
But one of them I tried out was, "Well, a word is real if you want it to be real."
The way that this path is real because people wanted it to be there.
(Laughter) It happens on college campuses all the time.
It's called a "desire path."
(Laughter) But then I decided, what people are really asking when they're asking if a word is real, they're really asking, "Well, how many brains will this give me access to?"
Because I think that's a lot of how we look at language.
A word is essentially a key that gets us into certain people's heads.
And if it gets us into one brain, it's not really worth it, not really worth knowing.
Two brains, eh, it depends on who it is.
A million brains, OK, now we're talking.
And so a real word is one that gets you access to as many brains as you can.
That's what makes it worth knowing.
Incidentally, the realest word of all by this measure is this.
[O.K.] That's it.
The realest word we have.
That is the closest thing we have to a master key.
That's the most commonly understood word in the world, no matter where you are.
The problem with that is, no one seems to know what those two letters stand for.
(Laughter) Which is kind of weird, right?
I mean, it could be a misspelling of "all correct," I guess, or "old kinderhook."
No one really seems to know, but the fact that it doesn't matter says something about how we add meaning to words.
The meaning is not in the words themselves.
We're the ones that pour ourselves into it.
And I think, when we're all searching for meaning in our lives, and searching for the meaning of life, I think words have something to do with that.
And I think if you're looking for the meaning of something, the dictionary is a decent place to start.
It brings a sense of order to a very chaotic universe.
Our view of things is so limited that we have to come up with patterns and shorthands and try to figure out a way to interpret it and be able to get on with our day.
We need words to contain us, to define ourselves.
I think a lot of us feel boxed in by how we use these words.
We forget that words are made up.
It's not just my words. All words are made up, but not all of them mean something.
We're all just sort of trapped in our own lexicons that don't necessarily correlate with people who aren't already like us, and so I think I feel us drifting apart a little more every year, the more seriously we take words.
Because remember, words are not real.
They don't have meaning. We do.
And I'd like to leave you with a reading from one of my favorite philosophers, Bill Watterson, who created "Calvin and Hobbes."
He said, "Creating a life that reflects your values and satisfies your soul is a rare achievement.
To invent your own life's meaning is not easy, but it is still allowed, and I think you'll be happier for the trouble."
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I'm in Chile, in the Atacama desert, sitting in a hotel lobby, because that's the only place that I can get a Wi-Fi connection, and I have this picture up on my screen, and a woman comes up behind me.
She says, "Oh, that's beautiful.
What is it? Is that Jackson Pollock?"
And unfortunately, I can be a little too honest.
I said, "No, it's -- it's penguin shit."
(Laughter) And, you know, "Excuse me!"
And I could sense that she thought I was speaking synecdochically.
(Laughter) So, I said, "No, no, really -- it's penguin shit."
(Laughter) Because I had just been in the Falkland Islands taking pictures of penguins.
This is a Gentoo penguin. And she was still skeptical.
So, literally, a few minutes before that, I downloaded this scientific paper about calculations on avian defecation, which is really quite interesting, because it turns out you can model this as something called "Poiseuille flow," and you can learn an awful lot about the physics of the avian rectum.
Actually, technically, it's not a rectum. It's called a cloaca.
At this point, she stops me, and she says, "Who are you?
Wha -- what do you do?"
And I was stuck, because I didn't have any way to describe what I do.
And so, in some sense, this talk today is my answer to that.
It's a selection of a random bunch of the stuff that I do.
And it's very hard for me to make sense of it, so I'm not sure that you can.
It's the kind of thing that I sit up late at night thinking about sometimes -- often at four in the morning.
So, some people are afraid of what I do.
Some people think I am the nerd Tony Soprano, and in response, I have ordered a bulletproof pocket protector.
I'm not sure what these people think, because I don't speak Norsk.
(Laughter) But I'm not thinking "monsteret" is a good thing.
I don't know, you know?
So, one of the things that I love to do is travel around the world and look at archaeological sites.
Because archaeology gives us an opportunity to study past civilizations, and see where they succeeded and where they failed.
Use science to, you know, work backwards and say, "Well, really, what were they thinking?"
And recently, I was in Easter Island, which is an incredibly beautiful place, and an incredibly mysterious place, because no matter where you go in Easter Island, you're struck by these statues, called the moai.
The place is 64 square miles.
They made, so far as we can tell, 900 of them.
Why on Earth? And if you haven't read Jared Diamond's book, "Collapse," I totally recommend that you do.
He's got a great chapter about it.
Basically, these people committed ecological suicide in order to make more of these.
And somewhere along the line, somebody said, "I know! Let's cut down the last tree and commit suicide, because we need more identical statues."
(Laughter) And, one thing that isn't a mystery, actually, was when I grew up -- because when I was a little kid, I'd seen these pictures -- and I thought, "Well, why that look on the face?
Why that brow?" I mean, it's such a powerful thing.
Where did they get that inspiration?
And then I met Yoyo, who is the native Rapa Nui-an guide, and if you look at Yoyo's face, you kind of figure out where they got it.
There's many mysteries, these statues.
Everyone wants to know, how did they make them, how did they transport them?
This woman in the foreground is Jo Anne Van Tilberg.
She's the leading archaeologist working Easter Island today.
And she has studied the statues for 20-some years, and she has detailed records of every single statue.
The one on the page here is the same that's up there.
One interesting problem is the stone isn't very hard.
So, this used to be completely smooth.
In fact, in many of the statues, when you excavate them, the backs are totally smooth -- almost glass smooth.
But after 1,000 years out in the weather, they look like this.
Jo Anne and I have just embarked on a project to digitize them all, and we're going to do a very high-res digitization, first because it's a way of preserving them.
Second, we have these ideas about how you can algorithmically, then, learn a few of the mysteries about them.
How long have they been standing in what positions?
And maybe, indirectly, get at some of the issues of what caused them to be the way they are.
While I was in Easter Island, comet McNaught was there also, so you get a gratuitous picture of a moai with a comet.
I also have an archaeological project going on in Egypt.
"Going on" is perhaps a little bit strong.
We're trying to get all of the permissions to get everything all set, to get it going.
So, I'll talk about it at a future TED.
But there's some amazing opportunities in Egypt as well.
Another thing I do is I invent stuff.
In fact, I design nuclear reactors.
Not a joke.
This is the conventional nuclear fuel cycle.
The red line is what is done in most nuclear reactors. It's called the open fuel cycle.
The white lines are what's called an advance fuel cycle, where you reprocess.
Now, this is the normal way it's done.
It's got the huge advantage that it does not create carbon pollution.
It has a lot of disadvantages: each one of these steps is extremely expensive, it's potentially dangerous and they have the interesting property that the step cannot be performed in anyone's backyard, which is a problem.
So, our reactor eliminates these steps, which, if we can actually make it work, is a really cool thing.
Now, it's kind of nuts to work on a new nuclear reactor.
There's -- no reactor's been even built to an old design, much less a new one, in the United States for 25 years.
It's the kind of very high-risk, but potentially very high-return thing that we do.
Changing into a totally different field, we do a lot of stuff in solid state physics, particularly in an area called metamaterials.
A metamaterial is an artificial material, which manipulates, in this case, electromagnetic radiation, in a way that you couldn't otherwise.
So, this device here is an invisibility cloak.
It may not seem that, but if you were a microwave, this is how you would view it.
Rays of light -- in this case, microwave light -- come in, and they just squish around the cell, and they come back the other side.
Now, you could do that with mirrors from one angle.
The cool thing is, this does it from all angles.
Metamaterials, unfortunately -- A, it only works on microwave, and B, it doesn't work all that well yet.
But metamaterials are an incredibly exciting field.
It's -- you know, today I'd like to say it's a zero billion dollar business, but, in fact, it's negative.
But some day, some day, maybe it's going to work.
We do a lot of work in biomedical fields.
In this case, we're working with a major medical foundation to develop inexpensive ways of diagnosing diseases in developing countries.
So, they say the eyes are the windows of the soul -- turns out they're a window to a whole lot more stuff.
And these happen to be my eyes, by the way.
Now, I'm also very interested in cooking.
While I was at Microsoft, I took a leave of absence and went to a chef school in France.
I used to work, also while at Microsoft, at a leading restaurant in Seattle, so I do a lot of cooking.
I've been on a team that won the world championship of barbecue.
But barbecue's interesting, because it's one of these cult foods like chili, or bouillabaisse.
Various parts of the world will have a cult food that people get enormously attached to -- there's tremendous traditions, there's secrecy.
And I'm trying to use a very scientific approach.
So, this is my latest cooker, and if this looks more complicated than the nuclear reactor, that's because it is.
But if you get to play with all those knobs and dials -- and of course, really the controller over there does it all on software -- you can make some terrific ribs.
(Laughter) This is a high-speed centrifuge.
You should all have one in your kitchen, beside your Turbochef.
This subjects food to a force about 50,000 times that of normal gravity, and oh boy, does it clarify chicken stock.
You would not believe it!
I perform a series of ghoulish experiments on food -- in this case, trying to calibrate a mathematical model so that one can predict exactly what the internal cooking times are.
It turns out, A, it's useful, and for a geek like me, it's fun.
Theory is red, black is experiment.
So, I'm either really good at faking it, or this particular model seems to work.
So, another random thing I do is the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, or SETI.
And you may be familiar with the movie "Contact," which sort of popularized that.
It turns out there are real people who go out and search for extraterrestrials in a very scientific way.
In fact, almost everybody in the movie is based on a real character, a real person.
So, the Jodie Foster character here is actually this woman, Jill Tarter, and Jill has dedicated her life to this.
You know, a lot of people risk their lives in a brief act of heroism, which is kind of cool, but Jill has what I call slow heroism.
She is risking her professional life on something that her own calculations show may not work for a thousand years -- may not ever.
So, I like to support people that are risking their lives.
After the movie came out, of course, there was a lot of interest in SETI.
My kids saw the movie, and afterwards they came to me and they said, "So, Dad, so -- so -- that character -- that's Jill, right?"
I said, "Oh, yeah, yeah -- absolutely."
"And that other person, that's someone -- " I said, "Yes."
They said, "Well, you know that creepy rich guy in the movie?
Is that you?"
I said, "Well, you know, it's just a movie! Come on."
(Laughter) So, the SETI Institute, with a little bit of help from me, and a lot of help from Paul Allen and a variety of other people, is building a dedicated radio telescope in Hat Creek, California, so they can do this SETI work.
Now, I travel a lot, and I change cell phones a lot, and the one person who always gets updated on all my cell phones and pagers and everything else is Jill, because I really don't want to miss "the call."
(Laughter) I mean, can you imagine? E.T.'s phoning home, and I'm not, like, there? You know, horrible!
So, I do a lot of work on dinosaurs.
I'm known to TEDsters as the guy that has sex with dinosaurs.
And I resemble that remark.
I'm going to talk about a different aspect of dinosaurs, which is the finding of them.
Now, to find dinosaurs, you hike around in horrible conditions looking for a dinosaur.
It sounds really dumb, but that's what it is.
It's horrible conditions, because wherever you have nice weather, plants grow, and you don't get any erosion, and you don't see any dinosaurs.
So, you always find dinosaurs in deserts or badlands, areas that have very little plant growth and have flash floods in the spring.
You know, skiers pray for snow?
Paleontologists pray for erosion.
So, you hike around and -- this is after you dig them up, they look like this.
You hike around, you see something like this.
Now, this is something I found, so look at it very closely here.
You've got this bentonite clay, which is -- sort of swells up and expands.
And there's some stuff poking out. So, you look at that, and you look up close, and you say, "Well, gee, that's kind of interesting. What are all of these pieces?"
Well, if you look closely, you can recognize, actually, from the shape, that these are skull fragments.
And then when you look at this, you say, "That's a tooth.
It's a big tooth."
It's about the size of a banana.
It has a big serration on the edge.
This is what Tyrannosaurus rex looks like in the ground.
And this is what it's like to find a Tyrannosaurus rex, which I was lucky enough to do a few years ago.
Now, this is what Tyrannosaurus rex looks like in my living room.
Not the same one, actually. This is a cast, which I had bought, and then, after buying the cast, I found my own, and I don't have room for two.
You know.
So, the thing that's wonderful for me about finding dinosaurs is that it is both an intellectual thing, because you're trying to reconstruct the environment of millions of years ago.
It's something that can inform all sorts of science in unexpected ways.
The study of dinosaurs led to the realization that there's a problem with asteroid impact, for example.
The study of dinosaurs may, literally, one day save the planet.
Study of the ancient climate is very important.
In fact, the Mesozoic, when dinosaurs lived, had much higher CO2 than today, was much warmer than today, and is one of the interesting proof points for the effects of CO2 on climate.
But, besides being intellectually and scientifically interesting, it's also very different than the other things I do, because you get to hike around in the badlands.
This is actually what most dinosaur research looks like.
This is one of my papers: "A pygostyle from a non-avian theropod."
It's not as gripping as dinosaur sex, so we're not going to go into it further.
Now, I'm also really big on photography.
I travel all over the world taking pictures -- some of them good, most of them not.
These days, bits are cheap. Unfortunately, that means you've got to spend more time sorting through them.
Here's a picture I took in the Falkland Islands of king penguins on a beach.
Here's a picture I took in Alaska, a few years ago, of Orcas.
I'd gone up to photograph Orcas, and we had looked for a week, and we hadn't seen a damn Orca.
And the last day, the sun comes out, the Orcas come, they're right by the boat. It's fantastic.
And I get lots of pictures like this.
Then, a little bit later, I start getting some pictures like this.
Now, to a human audience, I need to explain that if Penthouse magazine had a marine mammal edition, this would be the centerfold.
It's true.
So, there's more and more activity near the boat, and all of a sudden somebody shouts, "What's that in the water?"
I said, "Well, I think that's what you call a free willy."
(Laughter) There's a variety of things you can learn from watching whales have sex.
(Laughter) The first thing you learn is the overwhelming importance of hands.
They don't have them.
(Laughter) I think Paul Simon is in the audience, and he has -- he may not realize it, but he wrote a song all about whale sex, "Slip-Slidin' Away."
That's kind of what it's like.
The other interesting thing that I learned about whale sex: they curl their toes too.
(Laughter) So -- where do you go putting all of these disparate pieces together?
You know, there's a tremendous amount of wisdom in finding a great thing, passion in life, and focusing all your energy on it, and I've never been able to do that.
I just -- you know, because, yes, I'll focus passion on something, but then there will be something else, and then there's something else again.
And for a long time I fought this, and I thought, "Well, gee, I really ought to buckle down."
And you know, when I was at Microsoft, that was so engrossing, and the whole industry was expanding so much, that it did tend to crowd out most of the other things in my life.
But ultimately, I decided that what I really ought to do is not fight being who I am, but embrace it.
And say, "Yeah, you know, I -- this whole talk has been a mile wide and an inch deep, but that's really what works for me."
And regardless of whether it's nuclear reactors or metamaterials or whale sex, the common -- or lowest common denominator -- is me.
That's it, thank you.
(Applause)
Take a moment and think about a virus.
What comes to your mind?
An illness?
A fear?
Probably something really unpleasant.
And yet, viruses are not all the same.
It's true, some of them cause devastating disease.
But others can do the exact opposite -- they can cure disease.
These viruses are called "phages."
Now, the first time I heard about phages was back in 2013.
My father-in-law, who's a surgeon, was telling me about a woman he was treating.
The woman had a knee injury, required multiple surgeries, and over the course of these, developed a chronic bacterial infection in her leg.
Unfortunately for her, the bacteria causing the infection also did not respond to any antibiotic that was available.
So at this point, typically, the only option left is to amputate the leg to stop the infection from spreading further.
Now, my father-in-law was desperate for a different kind of solution, and he applied for an experimental, last-resort treatment using phages.
And guess what? It worked.
Within three weeks of applying the phages, the chronic infection had healed up, where before, no antibiotic was working.
I was fascinated by this weird conception: viruses curing an infection.
To this day, I am fascinated by the medical potential of phages.
And I actually quit my job last year to build a company in this space.
Now, what is a phage?
The image that you see here was taken by an electron microscope.
And that means what we see on the screen is in reality extremely tiny.
The grainy thing in the middle with the head, the long body and a number of feet -- this is the image of a prototypical phage.
It's kind of cute.
(Laughter) Now, take a look at your hand.
In our team, we've estimated that you have more than 10 billion phages on each of your hands.
What are they doing there?
(Laughter) Well, viruses are good at infecting cells.
And phages are great at infecting bacteria.
And your hand, just like so much of our body, is a hotbed of bacterial activity, making it an ideal hunting ground for phages.
Because after all, phages hunt bacteria.
It's also important to know that phages are extremely selective hunters.
Typically, a phage will only infect a single bacterial species.
So in this rendering here, the phage that you see hunts for a bacterium called Staphylococcus aureus, which is known as MRSA in its drug-resistant form.
It causes skin or wound infections.
The way the phage hunts is with its feet.
The feet are actually extremely sensitive receptors, on the lookout for the right surface on a bacterial cell.
Once it finds it, the phage will latch on to the bacterial cell wall and then inject its DNA.
DNA sits in the head of the phage and travels into the bacteria through the long body.
At this point, the phage reprograms the bacteria into producing lots of new phages.
The bacteria, in effect, becomes a phage factory.
Once around 50-100 phages have accumulated within the bacteria cell, the phages are then able to release a protein that disrupts the bacteria cell wall.
As the bacteria bursts, the phages move out and go on the hunt again for a new bacteria to infect.
Now, I'm sorry, this probably sounded like a scary virus again.
But it's exactly this ability of phages -- to multiply within the bacteria and then kill them -- that make them so interesting from a medical point of view.
The other part that I find extremely interesting is the scale at which this is going on.
Now, just five years ago, I really had no clue about phages.
And yet, today I would tell you they are part of a natural principle.
Phages and bacteria go back to the earliest days of evolution.
They have always existed in tandem, keeping each other in check.
So this is really the story of yin and yang, of the hunter and the prey, at a microscopic level.
Some scientists have even estimated that phages are the most abundant organism on our planet.
So even before we continue talking about their medical potential, I think everybody should know about phages and their role on earth: they hunt, infect and kill bacteria.
Now, how come we have something that works so well in nature, every day, everywhere around us, and yet, in most parts of the world, we do not have a single drug on the market that uses this principle to combat bacterial infections?
The simple answer is: no one has developed this kind of a drug yet, at least not one that conforms to the Western regulatory standards that set the norm for so much of the world.
To understand why, we need to move back in time.
This is a picture of Flix d'Herelle.
He is one of the two scientists credited with discovering phages.
Except, when he discovered them back in 1917, he had no clue what he had discovered.
He was interested in a disease called bacillary dysentery, which is a bacterial infection that causes severe diarrhea, and back then, was actually killing a lot of people, because after all, no cure for bacterial infections had been invented.
He was looking at samples from patients who had survived this illness.
And he found that something weird was going on.
Something in the sample was killing the bacteria that were supposed to cause the disease.
To find out what was going on, he did an ingenious experiment.
He took the sample, filtered it until he was sure that only something very small could have remained, and then took a tiny drop and added it to freshly cultivated bacteria.
And he observed that within a number of hours, the bacteria had been killed.
He then repeated this, again filtering, taking a tiny drop, adding it to the next batch of fresh bacteria.
He did this in sequence 50 times, always observing the same effect.
And at this point, he made two conclusions.
First of all, the obvious one: yes, something was killing the bacteria, and it was in that liquid.
The other one: it had to be biologic in nature, because a tiny drop was sufficient to have a huge impact.
He called the agent he had found an "invisible microbe" and gave it the name "bacteriophage," which, literally translated, means "bacteria eater."
And by the way, this is one of the most fundamental discoveries of modern microbiology.
So many modern techniques go back to our understanding of how phages work -- in genomic editing, but also in other fields.
And just today, the Nobel Prize in chemistry was announced for two scientists who work with phages and develop drugs based on that.
Now, back in the 1920s and 1930s, people also immediately saw the medical potential of phages.
After all, albeit invisible, you had something that reliably was killing bacteria.
Companies that still exist today, such as Abbott, Squibb or Lilly, sold phage preparations.
But the reality is, if you're starting with an invisible microbe, it's very difficult to get to a reliable drug.
Just imagine going to the FDA today and telling them all about that invisible virus you want to give to patients.
So when chemical antibiotics emerged in the 1940s, they completely changed the game.
And this guy played a major role.
This is Alexander Fleming.
He won the Nobel Prize in medicine for his work contributing to the development of the first antibiotic, penicillin.
And antibiotics really work very differently than phages.
For the most part, they inhibit the growth of the bacteria, and they don't care so much which kind of bacteria are present.
The ones that we call broad-spectrum will even work against a whole bunch of bacteria out there.
Compare that to phages, which work extremely narrowly against one bacterial species, and you can see the obvious advantage.
Now, back then, this must have felt like a dream come true.
You had a patient with a suspected bacterial infection, you gave him the antibiotic, and without really needing to know anything else about the bacteria causing the disease, many of the patients recovered.
And so as we developed more and more antibiotics, they, rightly so, became the first-line therapy for bacterial infections.
And by the way, they have contributed tremendously to our life expectancy.
We are only able to do complex medical interventions and medical surgeries today because we have antibiotics, and we don't risk the patient dying the very next day from the bacterial infection that he might contract during the operation.
So we started to forget about phages, especially in Western medicine.
And to a certain extent, even when I was growing up, the notion was: we have solved bacterial infections; we have antibiotics.
Of course, today, we know that this is wrong.
Today, most of you will have heard about superbugs.
Those are bacteria that have become resistant to many, if not all, of the antibiotics that we have developed to treat this infection.
How did we get here?
Well, we weren't as smart as we thought we were.
As we started using antibiotics everywhere -- in hospitals, to treat and prevent; at home, for simple colds; on farms, to keep animals healthy -- the bacteria evolved.
In the onslaught of antibiotics that were all around them, those bacteria survived that were best able to adapt.
Today, we call these "multidrug-resistant bacteria."
And let me put a scary number out there.
In a recent study commissioned by the UK government, it was estimated that by 2050, ten million people could die every year from multidrug-resistant infections.
Compare that to eight million deaths from cancer per year today, and you can see that this is a scary number.
But the good news is, phages have stuck around.
And let me tell you, they are not impressed by multidrug resistance.
(Laughter) They are just as happily killing and hunting bacteria all around us.
And they've also stayed selective, which today is really a good thing.
Today, we are able to reliably identify a bacterial pathogen that's causing an infection in many settings.
And their selectivity will help us avoid some of the side effects that are commonly associated with broad-spectrum antibiotics.
But maybe the best news of all is: they are no longer an invisible microbe.
We can look at them.
And we did so together before.
We can sequence their DNA.
We understand how they replicate.
And we understand the limitations.
We are in a great place to now develop strong and reliable phage-based pharmaceuticals.
And that's what's happening around the globe.
More than 10 biotech companies, including our own company, are developing human-phage applications to treat bacterial infections.
A number of clinical trials are getting underway in Europe and the US.
So I'm convinced that we're standing on the verge of a renaissance of phage therapy.
And to me, the correct way to depict the phage is something like this.
(Laughter) To me, phages are the superheroes that we have been waiting for in our fight against multidrug-resistant infections.
So the next time you think about a virus, keep this image in mind.
After all, a phage might one day save your life.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What if I told you there was a new technology that, when placed in the hands of doctors and nurses, improved outcomes for children and adults, patients of all ages; reduced pain and suffering, reduced time in the operating rooms, reduced anesthetic times, had the ultimate dose-response curve that the more you did it, the better it benefitted patients?
Here's a kicker: it has no side effects, and it's available no matter where care is delivered.
I can tell you as an ICU doctor at Boston Children's Hospital, this would be a game changer for me.
That technology is lifelike rehearsal.
This lifelike rehearsal is being delivered through medical simulation.
I thought I would start with a case, just to really describe the challenge ahead, and why this technology is not just going to improve health care but why it's critical to health care.
This is a child that's born, young girl.
"Day of life zero," we call it, the first day of life, just born into the world.
And just as she's being born, we notice very quickly that she is deteriorating.
Her heart rate is going up, her blood pressure is going down, she's breathing very, very fast.
And the reason for this is displayed in this chest X-ray.
That's called a babygram, a full X-ray of a child's body, a little infant's body.
As you look on the top side of this, that's where the heart and lungs are supposed to be.
As you look at the bottom end, that's where the abdomen is, and that's where the intestines are supposed to be.
And you can see how there's sort of that translucent area that made its way up into the right side of this child's chest.
And those are the intestines -- in the wrong place.
As a result, they're pushing on the lungs and making it very difficult for this poor baby to breathe.
The fix for this problem is to take this child immediately to the operating room, bring those intestines back into the abdomen, let the lungs expand and allow this child to breathe again.
But before she can go to the operating room, she must get whisked away to the ICU, where I work.
I work with surgical teams.
We gather around her, and we place this child on heart-lung bypass.
We put her to sleep, we make a tiny little incision in the neck, we place catheters into the major vessels of the neck -- and I can tell you that these vessels are about the size of a pen, the tip of a pen -- and then we have blood drawn from the body, we bring it through a machine, it gets oxygenated, and it goes back into the body.
We save her life, and get her safely to the operating room.
Here's the problem: these disorders -- what is known is congenital diaphragmatic hernia -- this hole in the diaphragm that has allowed these intestines to sneak up -- these disorders are rare.
Even in the best hands in the world, there is still a challenge to get the volume -- the natural volume of these patients -- in order to get our expertise curve at 100 percent.
They just don't present that often.
So how do you make the rare common?
Here's the other problem: in the health care system that I trained for over 20 years, what currently exists, the model of training is called the apprenticeship model.
It's been around for centuries.
It's based on this idea that you see a surgery maybe once, maybe several times, you then go do that surgery, and then ultimately you teach that surgery to the next generation.
And implicit in this model -- I don't need to tell you this -- is that we practice on the very patients that we are delivering care to.
That's a problem.
I think there's a better approach.
Medicine may very well be the last high-stakes industry that does not practice prior to game time.
I want to describe to you a better approach through medical simulation.
Well, the first thing we did is we went to other high-stakes industries that had been using this type of methodology for decades.
This is nuclear power.
Nuclear power runs scenarios on a regular basis in order to practice what they hope will never occur.
And as we're all very familiar, the airline industry -- we all get on planes now, comforted by the idea that pilots and crews have trained on simulators much like these, training on scenarios that we hope will never occur, but we know if they did, they would be prepared for the worst.
In fact, the airline industry has gone as far as to create fuselages of simulation environments, because of the importance of the team coming together.
This is an evacuation drill simulator.
So again, if that ever were to happen, these rare, rare events, they're ready to act on the drop of a dime.
I guess the most compelling for me in some ways is the sports industry -- arguably high stakes.
You think about a baseball team: baseball players practice.
I think it's a beautiful example of progressive training.
The first thing they do is go out to spring training.
They go to a spring training camp, perhaps a simulator in baseball.
They're not on the real field, but they're on a simulated field, and they're playing in the pregame season.
Then they make their way to the field during the season games, and what's the first thing they do before they start the game?
They go into the batting cage and do batting practice for hours, having different types of pitches being thrown at them, hitting ball after ball as they limber their muscles, getting ready for the game itself.
And here's the most phenomenal part of this, and for all of you who watch any sport event, you will see this phenomenon happen.
The batter gets into the batter's box, the pitcher gets ready to pitch.
Right before the pitch is thrown, what does that batter do?
The batter steps out of the box and takes a practice swing.
He wouldn't do it any other way.
I want to talk to you about how we're building practice swings like this in medicine.
We are building batting cages for the patients that we care about at Boston Children's.
I want to use this case that we recently built.
It's the case of a four-year-old who had a progressively enlarging head, and as a result, had loss of developmental milestones, neurologic milestones, and the reason for this problem is here -- it's called hydrocephalus.
So, a quick study in neurosurgery.
There's the brain, and you can see the cranium surrounding the brain.
What surrounds the brain, between the brain and cranium, is something called cerebrospinal fluid or fluid, which acts as a shock absorber.
In your heads right now, there is cerebrospinal fluid just bathing your brains and making its way around.
It's produced in one area and flows through, and then is re-exchanged.
And this beautiful flow pattern occurs for all of us.
But unfortunately in some children, there's a blockage of this flow pattern, much like a traffic jam.
As a result, the fluid accumulates, and the brain is pushed aside.
It has difficulty growing.
As a result, the child loses neurologic milestones.
This is a devastating disease in children.
The cure for this is surgery.
The traditional surgery is to take a bit of the cranium off, a bit of the skull, drain this fluid out, stick a drain in place, and then eventually bring this drain internal to the body.
Big operation.
But some great news is that advances in neurosurgical care have allowed us to develop minimally invasive approaches to this surgery.
Through a small pinhole, a camera can be inserted, led into the deep brain structure, and cause a little hole in a membrane that allows all that fluid to drain, much like it would in a sink.
All of a sudden, the brain is no longer under pressure, can re-expand and we cure the child through a single-hole incision.
But here's the problem: hydrocephalus is relatively rare.
And there are no good training methods to get really good at getting this scope to the right place.
But surgeons have been quite creative about this, even our own.
And they've come up with training models.
Here's the current training model.
(Laughter) I kid you not.
This is a red pepper, not made in Hollywood; it's real red pepper.
And what surgeons do is they stick a scope into the pepper, and they do what is called a "seedectomy."
(Laughter) They use this scope to remove seeds using a little tweezer.
And that is a way to get under their belts the rudimentary components of doing this surgery.
Then they head right into the apprenticeship model, seeing many of them as they present themselves, then doing it, and then teaching it -- waiting for these patients to arrive.
We can do a lot better.
We are manufacturing reproductions of children in order for surgeons and surgical teams to rehearse in the most relevant possible ways.
Let me show you this.
Here's my team in what's called the SIM Engineering Division of the Simulator Program.
This is an amazing team of individuals.
They are mechanical engineers; you're seeing here, illustrators.
They take primary data from CT scans and MRIs, translate it into digital information, animate it, put it together into the components of the child itself, surface-scan elements of the child that have been casted as needed, depending on the surgery itself, and then take this digital data and be able to output it on state-of-the-art, three-dimensional printing devices that allow us to print the components exactly to the micron detail of what the child's anatomy will look like.
You can see here, the skull of this child being printed in the hours before we performed this surgery.
But we could not do this work without our dear friends on the West Coast in Hollywood, California.
These are individuals that are incredibly talented at being able to recreate reality.
It was not a long leap for us.
The more we got into this field, the more it became clear to us that we are doing cinematography.
We're doing filmmaking, it's just that the actors are not actors.
They're real doctors and nurses.
So these are some photos of our dear friends at Fractured FX in Hollywood California, an Emmy-Award-winning special effects firm.
This is Justin Raleigh and his group -- this is not one of our patients -- (Laughter) but kind of the exquisite work that these individuals do.
We have now collaborated and fused our experience, bringing their group to Boston Children's Hospital, sending our group out to Hollywood, California and exchanging around this to be able to develop these type of simulators.
What I'm about to show you is a reproduction of this child.
You'll notice here that every hair on the child's head is reproduced.
And in fact, this is also that reproduced child -- and I apologize for any queasy stomachs, but that is a reproduction and simulation of the child they're about to operate on.
Here's that membrane we had talked about, the inside of this child's brain.
What you're going to be seeing here is, on one side, the actual patient, and on the other side, the simulator.
As I mentioned, a scope, a little camera, needs to make its way down, and you're seeing that here.
It needs to make a small hole in this membrane and allow this fluid to seep out.
I won't do a quiz show to see who thinks which side is which, but on the right is the simulator.
So surgeons can now produce training opportunities, do these surgeries as many times as they want, to their heart's content, until they feel comfortable.
And then, and only then, bring the child into the operating room.
But we don't stop here.
We know that a key step to this is not just the skill itself, but combining that skill with a team who's going to deliver that care.
Now we turn to Formula One.
And here is an example of a technician putting on a tire and doing that time and time again on this car.
But that is very quickly going to be incorporated within team-training experiences, now as a full team orchestrating the exchange of tires and getting this car back on the speedway.
We've done that step in health care, so now what you're about to see is a simulated operation.
We've taken the simulator I just described to you, we've brought it into the operating room at Boston Children's Hospital, and these individuals -- these native teams, operative teams -- are doing the surgery before the surgery.
Operate twice; cut once.
Let me show that to you.
(Video) Surgical team member 1: You want the head down or head up?
STM 2: Can you lower it down to 10?
STM 3: And then lower the whole table down a little bit?
STM 4: Table coming down.
STM 3: All right, this is behaving like a vessel.
Could we have the scissors back, please?
STM 5: I'm taking my gloves, 8 to 8 1/2, all right? I'll be right in.
STM 6: Great! Thank you.
Peter Weinstock: It's really amazing.
The second step to this, which is critical, is we take these teams out immediately and debrief them.
We use the same technologies that are used in Lean and Six Sigma in the military, and we bring them out and talk about what went right, but more importantly, we talk about what didn't go well, and how we're going to fix it.
Then we bring them right back in and do it again.
Deliberative batting practice in the moments when it matters most.
Let's go back to this case now.
Same child, but now let me describe how we care for this child at Boston Children's Hospital.
This child was born at three o'clock in the morning.
At two o'clock in the morning, we assembled the team, and took the reproduced anatomy that we would gain out of scans and images, and brought that team to the virtual bedside, to a simulated bedside -- the same team that's going to operate on this child in the hours ahead -- and we have them do the procedure.
Let me show you a moment of this.
This is not a real incision.
And the baby has not yet been born.
Imagine this.
So now the conversations that I have with families in the intensive care unit at Boston Children's Hospital are totally different.
Imagine this conversation: "Not only do we take care of this disorder frequently in our ICU, and not only have we done surgeries like the surgery we're going to do on your child, but we have done your child's surgery.
And we did it two hours ago.
And we did it 10 times.
And now we're prepared to take them back to the operating room."
So a new technology in health care: lifelike rehearsal.
Practicing prior to game time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We all have milestones in life that we remember so vividly.
The first one for me was when I was entering kindergarten.
My big brother was in school, and by golly, it was my time.
And I went trottin' down that hallway.
I was so excited, I almost wet myself.
And I go to the door, and there was the teacher with a warm welcome, and she took me into the classroom, showed me my little cubbyhole -- we all remember those little cubbyholes, don't we -- and we put our stuff in there.
And then she said, "Go over to the circle and play with the kids until class starts."
So I went over there and plopped down like I owned the place, and I'm playing, and all of a sudden, the boy next to me, he was wearing a white shirt with blue shorts.
I remember it like it was yesterday.
Suddenly he stopped playing and he said, "Why are you so short?"
And I just kept playing. I didn't think he was talking to me.
(Laughter) And in a louder voice, he said, "Hey, why are you so short?"
So I looked up and I said, "What are you talking about? Let's just play. We're happy.
I've been waiting for this."
And so we played, and about a minute later, the girl next to him, in a white shirt and a pink skirt, stood up, put her hands on her hips, and said, "Yeah, why do you look so different?"
And I went, "What are you talking about?
I don't look different. I'm not short. Again, let's just play."
About this time, I looked all around the circle I was in, and all the kids had stopped playing and they were all looking at me.
And I'm thinking -- in today's language, it would be "OMG" or "WTF."
(Laughter) What just happened?
So all the confidence that I went in with that morning was withering away as the morning went on and the questions kept coming.
And at the end of the morning, before I went home, the teacher had us in a circle, and I actually found myself outside of the circle.
I couldn't look at anybody.
I could not understand what just happened.
And over the next few years, I hated to go out in public.
I felt every stare, every giggle, every pointed finger, not the finger, but every pointed finger, and I hated it.
I would hide behind my parents' legs like nobody could see me.
And as a child, you can't understand another child's curiosity, nor an adult's ignorance.
It became very apparent to me that the real world was not built for someone of my size, both literally or figuratively.
And so I have no anonymity, as you can probably tell, and while you can see my size, we all go through many challenges through our lifetime.
And some you can see, like mine.
Most you can't.
You can't tell if someone's dealing with a mental illness, or they're struggling with their gender identity, they're caring for an aging parent, they're having financial difficulty.
You can't see that kind of stuff.
So while you can see one of my challenges is my size, seeing does not mean you understand what it's truly to be me on a daily basis, or what I go through.
And so I'm here to debunk a myth.
I do not believe you can walk in someone else's shoes, and because of that, we must adopt a new way of giving of ourselves.
Simply stated, I will never know what it's like to be you and you will never know what it's like to be me.
I cannot face your fears or chase your dreams, and you can't do that for me, but we can be supportive of each other.
Instead of trying to walk in each other's shoes, we must adopt a new way of giving of ourselves.
I learned at an early age that I did have to do some things different than most people, but I also learned there were things I was on equal footing with, and one of those was the classroom.
Heh, heh, heh. I was equal.
As a matter of fact, I excelled in the classroom.
This was vitally important, I discovered as I grew older and realized I wasn't going to be able to do a physical job.
I needed an education.
So I went on and got a university degree, but I felt to be one step ahead of everyone for employment, I needed to have an advanced university degree, so I went ahead and got that.
Now I'm ready for my interview.
Remember your first interview? What am I going to wear?
What questions?
And don't forget that firm handshake.
I was right there with you.
So 24 hours before my interview, a friend of mine who I've known all my life called and said, "Michele, the building you're going in has steps."
And she knew I couldn't climb steps.
So suddenly, my focus changed.
In my shoes, I was worried about how am I going to get there?
So I went early and found a loading dock and got in and had a great interview.
They had no idea what I went through for the day and that's OK.
You're probably thinking my greatest challenge that day was the interview, or getting in the building.
In reality, my biggest challenge that day was getting through the loading dock without getting run over.
I am very vulnerable in certain situations: airports, hallways, parking lots, loading docks.
And so I have to be very careful.
I have to anticipate and be flexible and move as quickly as I can sometimes.
So I got the job, and in my current role I travel quite a bit.
And travel is a challenge for all of us these days.
And so you probably get to the airport, run through security, get to the gate.
Did I get my aisle seat or my window seat? Did I get my upgrade?
Me, first of all, I don't run through anything.
(Laughter) And I especially don't run through the TSA because I get to experience the personal patdown.
I won't comment on that.
And then I make my way to the gate, and with my gift of gab that my parents said I was born with, I talk to the gate agent, and then I say, "By the way, my scooter weighs this much, I have a dry cell battery, and I can drive it down to the door of the plane."
Also, the day before, I had called the city where I'm traveling to to find out where I could rent a scooter in case mine gets broken on the way.
So in my shoes, it's a little bit different.
When I get onto the plane, I use my gift of gab to ask the lady to put my bag up, and they graciously do.
I try not to eat or drink on a plane because I don't want to have to get up and walk on the plane, but nature has its own schedule, and not long ago, it knocked and I answered.
So I walked up to the front of the plane and gabbed with the flight attendant, and said, "Can you watch the door? I can't reach the lock."
So I'm in there doing my business, and the door flies open.
And there's a gentleman there with a look of horror on his face.
I'm sure I had the same look.
As I came out, I noticed that he was sitting right across from me, and he's in total, complete embarrassment.
So I walk up to him and I quietly go, "Are you going to remember this as much as I am?"
(Laughter) And he goes, "I think so."
(Laughter) Now, while he's probably not talking about it publicly, I am.
(Laughter) But we talked for the rest of the flight, and we got to know each other, our families, sports, work, and when we landed, he said, "Michele, I noticed someone put your bag up.
Can I get that for you?"
And I said, "Of course, thank you."
And we wished each other well, and the most important thing that day was that he was not going to leave with that embarrassment, that experience of embarrassment.
He won't forget it, and neither will I, but I think he will remember more our chat and our different perspectives.
When you travel internationally, it can be even more challenging in certain ways.
A few years ago, I was in Zanzibar, and I come wheeling in, and think about that.
Short, white, blond woman in a chair.
That doesn't probably happen every day.
So I go up, and with my gift of gab, I start to talk to the agent.
So friendly, and I ask about their culture and so forth, and I notice there wasn't a jet bridge.
So I had to kind of say, "Not only do you have to lift my chair, I could use some help getting up the steps."
So we got to spend about an hour together while we waited for the flight, and it was the most magnificent hour.
Our perspective changed for both of us that day.
And once I got on the flight, he patted me on the back and wished me well, and I thanked him so much.
And again, I think he's going to remember that experience more than when I first came in, and there was a bit of hesitation.
And as you notice, I get a lot of help.
I would not be where I am today if it was not for my family, my friends, my colleagues and the many strangers that help me every single day of my life.
And it's important that we all have a support system.
Asking for help is a strength, not a weakness.
(Applause) We all need help throughout our lifetime, but it is just as important that we are part of other people's support systems.
We must adopt that way of giving back.
We all obviously have a role to play in our own successes, but think about the role we have to play in other people's successes, just like people do for me every single day.
It's vitally important that we help each other, because society is increasingly placing people in silos based on biases and ideologies.
And we must look past the surface and be confronted with the truth that none of us are what you can see.
There's more to us than that, and we're all dealing with things that you cannot see.
So living a life free of judgment allows all of us to share those experiences together and have a totally different perspective, just like the couple of people I mentioned earlier in my stories.
So remember, the only shoes you truly can walk in are your own.
I cannot walk in yours.
I know you can't walk in my size 1s -- (Laughter) but you can try.
But we can do something better than that.
With compassion, courage and understanding, we can walk side by side and support one another, and think about how society can change if we all do that instead of judging on only what you can see.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
In the last couple of years, I have produced what I call "The Dead Mall Series," 32 short films and counting about dead malls.
Now, for those of you who are not familiar with what a dead mall is, it's basically a shopping mall that has fallen into hard times.
So it either has few shops and fewer shoppers, or it's abandoned and crumbling into ruin.
No sale at Penny's.
(Laughter) I started producing this series in early 2015 after going through kind of a dark period in my life where I just didn't want to create films anymore.
I put my camera away and I just stopped.
So in 2015, I decided to make a short film about the Owings Mills Mall.
Owings Mills Mall opened in 1986.
I should know because I was there on opening day.
I was there with my family, along with every other family in Baltimore, and you had to drive around for 45 minutes just to find a parking spot.
So if you can imagine, that's not happening at the malls today.
My first mall job that I had as a teenager was at a sporting goods store called Herman's World of Sports.
Maybe you remember.
(Singing) Herman's World of Sports.
You guys remember that?
(Laughter) Yeah, so I worked in a lady's shoe store.
I worked in a leather goods store, and I also worked in a video store, and not being one who was very fond of the retail arts -- (Laughter) I got fired from every single job.
(Laughter) In between these low-paying retail jobs, I did what any normal teenager did in the 1990s.
I shoplifted.
I'm just kidding.
I hung out with my friends at the mall.
(Laughter) Everyone's like, "Oh my God, what kind of talk is this?"
(Laughter) Hanging out at the mall could be fun, but it could be really lame, too, like sharing a cigarette with a 40-year-old unemployed mall rat who has put on black lipstick for the night while you're on your break from your crappy minimum wage job.
As I stand here today, Owings Mills has been gutted and it's ready for the wrecking ball.
The last time I was there, it was in the evening, and it was about three days before they closed the mall for good.
And you kind of felt -- they never announced the mall was closing, but you had this sort of feeling, this ominous feeling, that something big was going to happen, like it was the end of the road.
It was a very creepy walk through the mall.
Let me show you.
(Music) So when I started producing "The Dead Mall Series," I put the videos up onto YouTube, and while I thought they were interesting, frankly I didn't think others would share the enthusiasm for such a drab and depressing topic.
But apparently I was wrong, because a lot of people started to comment.
And at first the comments were like -- basically like, "Oh my God, that's the mall from my childhood.
What happened?"
And then I would get comments from people who were like, "There's a dead mall in my town. You should come and film it."
So I started to travel around the mid-Atlantic region filming these dead malls.
Some were open.
Some were abandoned.
It was kind of always hard to get into the ones that were abandoned, but I somehow always found a way in.
(Laughter) The malls that are still open, they always do this weird thing -- like the dead malls.
They'll have three stores left, but they try to spruce it up to make it appear like things are on the up-and-up.
For example, you'll have an empty store and they bring the gate down.
So at Owings Mills, for example, they put this tarp over the gate.
Right?
And it's got a stock photo of a woman who is so happy and she's holding a blouse, and she's like -- (Laughter) And then there's a guy standing next to her, with, like, an espresso cup, and he's like -- (Laughter) And it says, "What brings you today?"
(Laughter) I wanted to be scared and depressed.
Thank you.
So the comments just kept pouring in on the videos, from all over the country, and then all over the world.
And I started to think, this could really be something, but I had to get creative, because I'm like, how long are people going to sit and watch me waddling through an empty mall?
(Laughter) So the original episodes I filmed with an iPhone.
So I'd walk through the mall with an iPhone, and, you know.
Like that.
(Laughter) And security -- because malls, they don't like photography -- so the security would come up and be like, "Put that away," and I'm like, "OK."
So I had to get creative and sneaky, so I started using a hidden camera and different techniques to get the footage that I needed, and basically what I wanted to do was make the video like it was a first-person experience, like you are sitting -- put your headphones on watching the screen -- it's like, you're there in the video, like a video game, basically.
I also started to use music, collaborating with artists who create music called vaporwave.
And vaporwave is a music genre that emerged in the early 2010s among internet communities.
Here's an example.
(Music) That's by an artist named Disconscious from an album he did called "Hologram Plaza."
So if you look that up, you can hear more of those tunes.
Vaporwave is more than an art form. It's like a movement.
It's nihilistic, it's angsty, but it's somehow comforting.
The whole aesthetic is a way of dealing with things you can't do anything about, like no jobs, or sitting in your parents' basement eating ramen noodles.
Vaporwave came out of this generation's desire to express their hopelessness, the same way that the pre-internet generation did sitting around in the food court.
One of my favorite malls I've been to is in Corpus Christi, and it's called the Sunrise Mall.
When I was a kid, my favorite thing to do was watch movies, and I used to watch movies over and over and over again.
And one of my favorite films was "The Legend of Billie Jean."
Now, for those of you who have seen "The Legend of Billie Jean," you'll know that it's a great film.
I love it.
And Helen Slater and Christian Slater -- and if you didn't know, they are not related.
Many people thought that they were brother and sister. They're not.
But anyway, Sunrise Mall was used in the film as a filming location.
The mall is exactly the same as it was in 1984.
We're talking 32 years later. Let me show you.
(Video) Dan Bell: And here's Billie Jean running across the fountain, being chased by Hubie Pyatt's friends.
And she jumps over here.
And you can see the shot right here is what it looks like today.
It's pretty incredible.
I mean, honestly, it's exactly the same.
And there they are falling in the fountain, and she runs up the stairs.
This is a nice shot of the whole thing here.
Dan Bell: I love that so much.
(Laughter) I always think in my head, if I owned a dead mall -- why don't they embrace their vintage look?
Put in a bar, like, put vegan food in the food court and invite millennials and hipsters to come and drink and eat, and I guarantee you within three weeks H&amp;M and Levi's will be banging on the door trying to get space.
I don't know why they don't do this, but apparently, it's only in my mind, it goes all day.
(Laughter) Anyway, in closing -- (Laughter) When they first asked me to do this talk, I said, "Do you have the right person?"
(Laughter) These talks are supposed to be kind of inspiring and -- (Laughter) I remembered something, though.
I put my camera down three or four years ago, and it took going to these malls for me to be inspired again.
And to see my audience and people from all over the world writing me and saying, "God, I love your videos," is incredible.
I don't know how to even explain it, as an artist, how fulfilling that is.
If you would have told me a year ago that I would be standing on this stage talking to all of you wonderful people, I would have never believed it.
I am humbled and so appreciative.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Well, as many of you know, the results of the recent election were as follows: Hillary Clinton, the Democratic candidate won a landslide victory with 52 percent of the overall vote.
Jill Stein, the Green candidate, came a distant second, with 19 percent.
Donald J. Trump, the Republic candidate, was hot on her heels with 14 percent, and the remainder of the vote were shared between abstainers and Gary Johnson, the Libertarian candidate.
(Laughter) Now, what parallel universe do you suppose I live in?
Well, I don't live in a parallel universe.
I live in the world, and that is how the world voted.
So let me take you back and explain what I mean by that.
In June this year, I launched something called the Global Vote.
And the Global Vote does exactly what it says on the tin.
For the first time in history, it lets anybody, anywhere in the world, vote in the elections of other people's countries.
Now, why would you do that?
What's the point?
Well, let me show you what it looks like.
You go to a website, rather a beautiful website, and then you select an election.
Here's a bunch that we've already covered.
We do about one a month, or thereabouts.
So you can see Bulgaria, the United States of America, Secretary-General of the United Nations, the Brexit referendum at the end there.
You select the election that you're interested in, and you pick the candidates.
These are the candidates from the recent presidential election in the tiny island nation of So Tom and Prncipe, 199,000 inhabitants, off the coast of West Africa.
And then you can look at the brief summary of each of those candidates which I dearly hope is very neutral, very informative and very succinct.
And when you've found the one you like, you vote.
These were the candidates in the recent Icelandic presidential election, and that's the way it goes.
So why on earth would you want to vote in another country's election?
Well, the reason that you wouldn't want to do it, let me reassure you, is in order to interfere in the democratic processes of another country.
That's not the purpose at all.
In fact, you can't, because usually what I do is I release the results after the electorate in each individual country has already voted, so there's no way that we could interfere in that process.
But more importantly, I'm not particularly interested in the domestic issues of individual countries.
That's not what we're voting on.
So what Donald J. Trump or Hillary Clinton proposed to do for the Americans is frankly none of our business.
That's something that only the Americans can vote on.
No, in the global vote, you're only considering one aspect of it, which is what are those leaders going to do for the rest of us?
And that's so very important because we live, as no doubt you're sick of hearing people tell you, in a globalized, hyperconnected, massively interdependent world where the political decisions of people in other countries can and will have an impact on our lives no matter who we are, no matter where we live.
Like the wings of the butterfly beating on one side of the Pacific that can apparently create a hurricane on the other side, so it is with the world that we live in today and the world of politics.
There is no longer a dividing line between domestic and international affairs.
Any country, no matter how small, even if it's So Tom and Prncipe, could produce the next Nelson Mandela or the next Stalin.
They could pollute the atmosphere and the oceans, which belong to all of us, or they could be responsible and they could help all of us.
And yet, the system is so strange because the system hasn't caught up with this globalized reality.
Only a small number of people are allowed to vote for those leaders, even though their impact is gigantic and almost universal.
What number was it?
140 million Americans voted for the next president of the United States, and yet, as all of us knows, in a few weeks time, somebody is going to hand over the nuclear launch codes to Donald J. Trump.
Now, if that isn't having a potential impact on all of us, I don't know what is.
Similarly, the election for the referendum on the Brexit vote, a small number of millions of British people voted on that, but the outcome of the vote, whichever way it went, would have had a significant impact on the lives of tens, hundreds of millions of people around the world.
And yet, only a tiny number could vote.
What kind of democracy is that?
Huge decisions that affect all of us being decided by relatively very small numbers of people.
And I don't know about you, but I don't think that sounds very democratic.
So I'm trying to clear it up.
But as I say, we don't ask about domestic questions.
In fact, I only ever ask two questions of all of the candidates.
I send them the same two questions every single time.
I say, one, if you get elected, what are you going to do for the rest of us, for the remainder of the seven billion who live on this planet?
Second question: What is your vision for your country's future in the world?
What role do you see it playing?
Every candidate, I send them those questions.
They don't all answer. Don't get me wrong.
I reckon if you're standing to become the next president of the United States, you're probably pretty tied up most of the time, so I'm not altogether surprised that they don't all answer, but many do.
More every time.
And some of them do much more than answer.
Some of them answer in the most enthusiastic and most exciting way you could imagine.
I just want to say a word here for Saviour Chishimba, who was one of the candidates in the recent Zambian presidential election.
His answers to those two questions were basically an 18-page dissertation on his view of Zambia's potential role in the world and in the international community.
I posted it on the website so anybody could read it.
Now, Saviour won the global vote, but he didn't win the Zambian election.
So I found myself wondering, what am I going to do with this extraordinary group of people?
I've got some wonderful people here who won the global vote.
We always get it wrong, by the way.
The one that we elect is never the person who's elected by the domestic electorate.
That may be partly because we always seem to go for the woman.
But I think it may also be a sign that the domestic electorate is still thinking very nationally.
They're still thinking very inwardly.
They're still asking themselves: What's in it for me? ...
instead of what they should be asking today, which is, what's in it for we?
But there you go.
So suggestions, please, not right now, but send me an email if you've got an idea about what we can do with this amazing team of glorious losers.
(Laughter) We've got Saviour Chishimba, who I mentioned before.
We've got Halla Tmasdttir, who was the runner up in the Icelandic presidential election.
Many of you may have seen her amazing talk at TEDWomen just a few weeks ago where she spoke about the need for more women to get into politics.
We've got Maria das Neves from So Tom and Prncipe.
We've got Hillary Clinton.
I don't know if she's available.
We've got Jill Stein.
And we covered also the election for the next Secretary-General of the United Nations.
We've got the ex-prime minister of New Zealand, who would be a wonderful member of the team.
So I think maybe those people, the glorious loser's club, could travel around the world wherever there's an election and remind people of the necessity in our modern age of thinking a little bit outwards and thinking of the international consequences.
So what comes next for the global vote?
Well, obviously, the Donald and Hillary show is a bit of a difficult one to follow, but there are some other really important elections coming up.
In fact, they seem to be multiplying.
There's something going on, I'm sure you've noticed, in the world.
And the next row of elections are all critically important.
In just a few day's time we've got the rerun of the Austrian presidential election, with the prospect of Norbert Hofer becoming what is commonly described as the first far-right head of state in Europe since the Second World War.
Next year we've got Germany, we've got France, we've got presidential elections in Iran and a dozen others.
It doesn't get less important.
It gets more and more important.
Clearly, the global vote is not a stand-alone project.
It's not just there on its own.
It has some background.
It's part of a project which I launched back in 2014, which I call the Good Country.
The idea of the Good Country is basically very simple.
It's my simple diagnosis of what's wrong with the world and how we can fix it.
What's wrong with the world I've already hinted at.
Basically, we face an enormous and growing number of gigantic, existential global challenges: climate change, human rights abuses, mass migration, terrorism, economic chaos, weapons proliferation.
All of these problems which threaten to wipe us out are by their very nature globalized problems.
No individual country has the capability of tackling them on its own.
And so very obviously we have to cooperate and we have to collaborate as nations if we're going to solve these problems.
It's so obvious, and yet we don't.
We don't do it nearly often enough.
Most of the time, countries still persist in behaving as if they were warring, selfish tribes battling against each other, much as they have done since the nation-state was invented hundreds of years ago.
And this has got to change.
This is not a change in political systems or a change in ideology.
This is a change in culture.
We, all of us, have to understand that thinking inwards is not the solution to the world's problems.
We have to learn how to cooperate and collaborate a great deal more and compete just a tiny bit less.
Otherwise things are going to carry on getting bad and they're going to get much worse, much sooner than we anticipate.
This change will only happen if we ordinary people tell our politicians that things have changed.
We have to tell them that the culture has changed.
We have to tell them that they've got a new mandate.
The old mandate was very simple and very single: if you're in a position of power or authority, you're responsible for your own people and your own tiny slice of territory, and that's it.
And if in order to do the best thing for your own people, you screw over everybody else on the planet, that's even better.
That's considered to be a bit macho.
Today, I think everybody in a position of power and responsibility has got a dual mandate, which says if you're in a position of power and responsibility, you're responsible for your own people and for every single man, woman, child and animal on the planet.
You're responsible for your own slice of territory and for every single square mile of the earth's surface and the atmosphere above it.
And if you don't like that responsibility, you should not be in power.
That for me is the rule of the modern age, and that's the message that we've got to get across to our politicians, and show them that that's the way things are done these days.
Otherwise, we're all screwed.
I don't have a problem, actually, with Donald Trump's credo of "America first."
It seems to me that that's a pretty banal statement of what politicians have always done and probably should always do.
Of course they're elected to represent the interests of their own people.
But what I find so boring and so old-fashioned and so unimaginative about his take on that is that America first means everyone else last, that making America great again means making everybody else small again, and it's just not true.
In my job as a policy advisor over the last 20 years or so, I've seen so many hundreds of examples of policies that harmonize the international and the domestic needs, and they make better policy.
I'm not asking nations to be altruistic or self-sacrificing.
That would be ridiculous.
No nation would ever do that.
I'm asking them to wake up and understand that we need a new form of governance, which is possible and which harmonizes those two needs, those good for our own people and those good for everybody else.
Since the US election and since Brexit it's become more and more obvious to me that those old distinctions of left wing and right wing no longer make sense.
They really don't fit the pattern.
What does seem to matter today is very simple, whether your view of the world is that you take comfort from looking inwards and backwards, or whether, like me, you find hope in looking forwards and outwards.
That's the new politics.
That's the new division that is splitting the world right down the middle.
Now, that may sound judgmental, but it's not meant to be.
I don't at all misunderstand why so many people find their comfort in looking inwards and backwards.
When times are difficult, when you're short of money, when you're feeling insecure and vulnerable, it's almost a natural human tendency to turn inwards, to think of your own needs and to discard everybody else's, and perhaps to start to imagine that the past was somehow better than the present or the future could ever be.
But I happen to believe that that's a dead end.
History shows us that it's a dead end.
When people turn inwards and turn backwards, human progress becomes reversed and things get worse for everybody very quickly indeed.
If you're like me and you believe in forwards and outwards, and you believe that the best thing about humanity is its diversity, and the best thing about globalization is the way that it stirs up that diversity, that cultural mixture to make something more creative, more exciting, more productive than there's ever been before in human history, then, my friends, we've got a job on our hands, because the inwards and backwards brigade are uniting as never before, and that creed of inwards and backwards, that fear, that anxiety, playing on the simplest instincts, is sweeping across the world.
Those of us who believe, as I believe, in forwards and outwards, we have to get ourselves organized, because time is running out very, very quickly.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I don't like to boast, but I am very good at finding things to be annoyed about.
It is a real specialty of mine.
I can hear 100 compliments and a single insult, and what do I remember?
The insult.
And according to the research, I'm not alone.
Unfortunately, the human brain is wired to focus on the negative.
Now, this might have been helpful when we were cave people, trying to avoid predators, but now it's a terrible way to go through life.
It is a real major component of anxiety and depression.
So how can we fight the brain's negative bias?
According to a lot of research, one of the best weapons is gratitude.
So knowing this, I started a new tradition in our house a couple of years ago.
Before a meal with my wife and kids, I would say a prayer of thanksgiving.
Prayer is not quite the right word.
I'm agnostic, so instead of thanking God, I would thank some of the people who helped make my food a reality.
I'd say, "I'd like to thank the farmer who grew these tomatoes, and the trucker who drove these tomatoes to the store, and the cashier who rang these tomatoes up."
And I thought it was going pretty well, this tradition.
Then one day, my 10-year-old son said, "You know, Dad, those people aren't in our apartment.
They can't hear you.
If you really cared, you would go and thank them in person."
And I thought, "Hmm. That's an interesting idea."
(Laughter) Now I'm a writer, and for my books I like to go on adventures.
Go on quests.
So I decided I'm going to take my son up on his challenge.
It seemed simple enough.
And to make it even simpler, I decided to focus on just one item.
An item I can't live without: my morning cup of coffee.
Well, it turned out to be not so simple at all.
(Laughter) This quest took me months.
It took me around the world.
Because I discovered that my coffee would not be possible without hundreds of people I take for granted.
So I would thank the trucker who drove the coffee beans to the coffee shop.
But he couldn't have done his job without the road.
So I would thank the people who paved the road.
(Laughter) And then I would thank the people who made the asphalt for the pavement.
And I came to realize that my coffee, like so much else in the world, requires the combined work of a shocking number of people from all walks of life.
Architects, biologists, designers, miners, goat herds, you name it.
I decided to call my project "Thanks a Thousand."
Because I ended up thanking over a thousand people.
And it was overwhelming, but it was also wonderful.
Because it allowed me to focus on the hundreds of things that go right every day, as opposed to the three or four that go wrong.
And it reminded me of the astounding interconnectedness or our world.
I learned dozens of lessons during this project, but let me just focus on five today.
The first is: look up.
I started my trail of gratitude by thanking the barista at my local coffee shop, Joe Coffee in New York.
Her name is Chung, and Chung is one of the most upbeat people you will ever meet.
Big smiler, enthusiastic hugger.
But even for Chung, being a barista is hard.
And that's because you are encountering people in a very dangerous state.
(Laughter) You know what it is -- precaffeination.
(Laughter) So, Chung has had people yell at her until she cried, including a nine-year-old girl, who didn't like the whipped cream design that Chung did on her hot chocolate.
So I thanked Chung, and she thanked me for thanking her.
I cut it off there.
I didn't want to go into an infinite thanking loop.
(Laughter) But Chung said that the hardest part is when people don't even treat her like a human being.
They treat her like a vending machine.
So, they'll hand her their credit card without even looking up from their phone.
And while she's saying this, I'm realizing I've done that.
I've been that a-hole.
And at that moment, I pledged: when dealing with people, I'm going to take those two seconds and look at them, make eye contact.
Because it reminds you, you're dealing with a human being who has family and aspirations and embarrassing high school memories.
And that little moment of connection is so important to both people's humanity and happiness.
Alright, second lesson was: smell the roses. And the dirt. And the fertilizer.
After Chung, I thanked this man.
This is Ed Kaufmann.
And Ed is the one who chooses which coffee they serve at my local coffee shop.
He goes around the world, to South America, to Africa, finding the best coffee beans.
So I thanked Ed.
And in return, Ed showed me how to taste coffee like a pro.
And it is quite a ritual.
You take your spoon and you dip it in the coffee and then you take a big, loud slurp.
Almost cartoonishly loud.
This is because you want to spray the coffee all over your mouth.
You have taste buds in the side of your cheeks, in the roof of your mouth, you've got to get them all.
So Ed would do this and he would -- his face would light up and he would say, "This coffee tastes of Honeycrisp apple and notes of soil and maple syrup."
And I would take a sip and I'd say, "I'm picking up coffee.
(Laughter) It tastes to me like coffee."
(Laughter) But inspired by Ed, I decided to really let the coffee sit on my tongue for five seconds -- we're all busy, but I could spare five seconds, and really think about the texture and the acidity and the sweetness.
And I started to do it with other foods.
And this idea of savoring is so important to gratitude.
Psychologists talk about how gratitude is about taking a moment and holding on to it as long as possible.
And slowing down time.
So that life doesn't go by in one big blur, as it often does.
Number three is: find the hidden masterpieces all around you.
Now, one of my favorite conversations during this year was with the guy who invented my coffee cup lid.
And until this point, I had given approximately zero thought to coffee cup lids.
But I loved talking to this inventor, Doug Fleming, because he was so passionate.
And the blood and sweat and tears he put into this lid, and that I had never even considered.
He says a bad lid can ruin your coffee.
That it can block the aroma, which is so important to the experience.
So he -- he's very innovative.
He's like the Elon Musk of coffee lids.
(Laughter) So he designed this lid that's got an upside-down hexagon so you can get your nose right in there and get maximum aroma.
And so I was delighted talking to him, and it made me realize there are hundreds of masterpieces all around us that we totally take for granted.
Like the on-off switch on my desk lamp has a little indentation for my thumb that perfectly fits my thumb.
And when something is done well, the process behind it is largely invisible.
But paying attention to it can tap into that sense of wonder and enrich our lives.
Number four is: fake it till you feel it.
By the end of the project, I was just in a thanking frenzy.
So I was -- I would get up and spend a couple hours, I'd write emails, send notes, make phone calls, visit people to thank them for their role in my coffee.
And some of them, quite honestly -- not that into it.
They would be like, "What is this?
Is this a pyramid scheme, what do you want, what are you selling?"
But most people were surprisingly moved.
I remember, I called the woman who does the pest control for the warehouse where my coffee is served -- I'm sorry -- where my coffee is stored.
And I said, "This may sound strange, but I want to thank you for keeping the bugs out of my coffee."
And she said, "Well, that does sound strange, but you just made my day."
And it was like an anti-crank phone call.
And it didn't just affect her, it affected me.
Because I would wake up every morning in my default mood, which is grumpiness, but I would force myself to write a thank-you note and then another and then another.
And what I found was that if you act as if you're grateful, you eventually become grateful for real.
The power of our actions to change our mind is astounding.
So, often we think that thought changes behavior, but behavior very often changes our thought.
And finally, the last lesson I want to tell you about is: practice six degrees of gratitude.
And every place, every stop on this gratitude trail would give birth to 100 other people that I could thank.
So I went down to Colombia to thank the farmers who grow my coffee beans.
And it was in a small mountain town, and I was driven there along these curvy, cliffside roads.
And every time we went around a hairpin turn the driver would do the sign of the cross.
And I was like, "Thank you for that.
(Laughter) But can you do that while keeping your hands on the wheel?
Because I am terrified."
But we made it.
And I met the farmers, the Guarnizo brothers.
It's a small farm, they make great coffee, they're paid above fair-trade prices for it.
And they showed me how the coffee is grown.
The bean is actually inside this fruit called the coffee cherry.
And I thanked them.
And they said, "Well, we couldn't do our job without 100 other people."
The machine that depulps the fruit is made in Brazil, and the pickup truck they drive around the farm, that is made from parts from all over the world.
In fact, the US exports steel to Colombia.
So I went to Indiana, and I thanked the steel makers.
And it just drove home that it doesn't take a village to make a cup of coffee.
It takes the world to make a cup of coffee.
And this global economy, this globalization, it does have downsides.
But I believe the long-term upsides are far greater, that progress is real.
We have made improvements in the last 50 years, poverty worldwide has gone down.
And that we should resist the temptation to retreat into our silos.
And we should resist this upsurge in isolationism and jingoism.
Which brings me to my final point.
Which is my hope that we use gratitude as a spark to action.
Some people worry that gratitude has a downside.
That we'll be so grateful, that we'll be complacent.
We'll be so, "Oh, everything's wonderful, I'm so grateful."
Well, it turns out, the opposite is true.
The research shows that the more grateful you are, the more likely you are to help others.
When you're in a bad state, you're often more focused on your own needs.
But gratitude makes you want to pay it forward.
And I experienced this personally.
I mean, I'm not Mother Teresa, I'm still a selfish bastard a huge amount of the time.
But I'm better than I was before this project.
And that's because it made me aware of the exploitation on the supply chain.
It reminded me that what I take for granted is not available to millions of people around the world.
Like water.
Coffee is 98.8 percent water.
So I figured I should go and thank the people at the New York reservoir, hundreds of them, who provide me water, and this miracle that I can turn a lever and get safe water.
And that millions of people around the world don't have this luxury and have to walk hours to get safe water.
It inspired me to see what I could do to help people get more access, and I did research and found a wonderful group called Dispensers for Safe Water.
And I got involved.
And I'm not expecting the Nobel Prize committee to knock down my door, but it's a baby step, it's a little something.
And it's all because of gratitude.
And it's why I encourage people, friends, family, to follow gratitude trails of their own.
Because it's a life-transforming experience.
And it doesn't have to be coffee.
It could be anything.
It could be a pair of socks, it could be a light bulb.
And you don't have to go around the world, you can just do a little gesture, like make eye contact or send a note to the designer of a logo you love.
It's more about a mindset.
Being aware of the thousands of people involved in every little thing we do.
Remembering that there's someone in a factory who made the fabric for the chairs you're sitting in right now.
That someone went into a mine and got the copper for this microphone so that I could say my final thank you, which is to thank you.
Thank you a thousand for listening to my story.
(Applause) (Cheering)
I'm going to be talking about statistics today.
If that makes you immediately feel a little bit wary, that's OK, that doesn't make you some kind of crazy conspiracy theorist, it makes you skeptical.
And when it comes to numbers, especially now, you should be skeptical.
But you should also be able to tell which numbers are reliable and which ones aren't.
So today I want to try to give you some tools to be able to do that.
But before I do, I just want to clarify which numbers I'm talking about here.
I'm not talking about claims like, "9 out of 10 women recommend this anti-aging cream."
I think a lot of us always roll our eyes at numbers like that.
What's different now is people are questioning statistics like, "The US unemployment rate is five percent."
What makes this claim different is it doesn't come from a private company, it comes from the government.
About 4 out of 10 Americans distrust the economic data that gets reported by government.
Among supporters of President Trump it's even higher; it's about 7 out of 10.
I don't need to tell anyone here that there are a lot of dividing lines in our society right now, and a lot of them start to make sense, once you understand people's relationships with these government numbers.
On the one hand, there are those who say these statistics are crucial, that we need them to make sense of society as a whole in order to move beyond emotional anecdotes and measure progress in an [objective] way.
And then there are the others, who say that these statistics are elitist, maybe even rigged; they don't make sense and they don't really reflect what's happening in people's everyday lives.
It kind of feels like that second group is winning the argument right now.
We're living in a world of alternative facts, where people don't find statistics this kind of common ground, this starting point for debate.
This is a problem.
There are actually moves in the US right now to get rid of some government statistics altogether.
Right now there's a bill in congress about measuring racial inequality.
The draft law says that government money should not be used to collect data on racial segregation.
This is a total disaster.
If we don't have this data, how can we observe discrimination, let alone fix it?
In other words: How can a government create fair policies if they can't measure current levels of unfairness?
This isn't just about discrimination, it's everything -- think about it.
How can we legislate on health care if we don't have good data on health or poverty?
How can we have public debate about immigration if we can't at least agree on how many people are entering and leaving the country?
Statistics come from the state; that's where they got their name.
The point was to better measure the population in order to better serve it.
So we need these government numbers, but we also have to move beyond either blindly accepting or blindly rejecting them.
We need to learn the skills to be able to spot bad statistics.
I started to learn some of these when I was working in a statistical department that's part of the United Nations.
Our job was to find out how many Iraqis had been forced from their homes as a result of the war, and what they needed.
It was really important work, but it was also incredibly difficult.
Every single day, we were making decisions that affected the accuracy of our numbers -- decisions like which parts of the country we should go to, who we should speak to, which questions we should ask.
And I started to feel really disillusioned with our work, because we thought we were doing a really good job, but the one group of people who could really tell us were the Iraqis, and they rarely got the chance to find our analysis, let alone question it.
So I started to feel really determined that the one way to make numbers more accurate is to have as many people as possible be able to question them.
So I became a data journalist.
My job is finding these data sets and sharing them with the public.
Anyone can do this, you don't have to be a geek or a nerd.
You can ignore those words; they're used by people trying to say they're smart while pretending they're humble.
Absolutely anyone can do this.
I want to give you guys three questions that will help you be able to spot some bad statistics.
So, question number one is: Can you see uncertainty?
One of things that's really changed people's relationship with numbers, and even their trust in the media, has been the use of political polls.
I personally have a lot of issues with political polls because I think the role of journalists is actually to report the facts and not attempt to predict them, especially when those predictions can actually damage democracy by signaling to people: don't bother to vote for that guy, he doesn't have a chance.
Let's set that aside for now and talk about the accuracy of this endeavor.
Based on national elections in the UK, Italy, Israel and of course, the most recent US presidential election, using polls to predict electoral outcomes is about as accurate as using the moon to predict hospital admissions.
No, seriously, I used actual data from an academic study to draw this.
There are a lot of reasons why polling has become so inaccurate.
Our societies have become really diverse, which makes it difficult for pollsters to get a really nice representative sample of the population for their polls.
People are really reluctant to answer their phones to pollsters, and also, shockingly enough, people might lie.
But you wouldn't necessarily know that to look at the media.
For one thing, the probability of a Hillary Clinton win was communicated with decimal places.
We don't use decimal places to describe the temperature.
How on earth can predicting the behavior of 230 million voters in this country be that precise?
And then there were those sleek charts.
See, a lot of data visualizations will overstate certainty, and it works -- these charts can numb our brains to criticism.
When you hear a statistic, you might feel skeptical.
As soon as it's buried in a chart, it feels like some kind of objective science, and it's not.
So I was trying to find ways to better communicate this to people, to show people the uncertainty in our numbers.
What I did was I started taking real data sets, and turning them into hand-drawn visualizations, so that people can see how imprecise the data is; so people can see that a human did this, a human found the data and visualized it.
For example, instead of finding out the probability of getting the flu in any given month, you can see the rough distribution of flu season.
This is -- (Laughter) a bad shot to show in February.
But it's also more responsible data visualization, because if you were to show the exact probabilities, maybe that would encourage people to get their flu jabs at the wrong time.
The point of these shaky lines is so that people remember these imprecisions, but also so they don't necessarily walk away with a specific number, but they can remember important facts.
Facts like injustice and inequality leave a huge mark on our lives.
Facts like Black Americans and Native Americans have shorter life expectancies than those of other races, and that isn't changing anytime soon.
Facts like prisoners in the US can be kept in solitary confinement cells that are smaller than the size of an average parking space.
The point of these visualizations is also to remind people of some really important statistical concepts, concepts like averages.
So let's say you hear a claim like, "The average swimming pool in the US contains 6.23 fecal accidents."
That doesn't mean every single swimming pool in the country contains exactly 6.23 turds.
So in order to show that, I went back to the original data, which comes from the CDC, who surveyed 47 swimming facilities.
And I just spent one evening redistributing poop.
So you can kind of see how misleading averages can be.
(Laughter) OK, so the second question that you guys should be asking yourselves to spot bad numbers is: Can I see myself in the data?
This question is also about averages in a way, because part of the reason why people are so frustrated with these national statistics, is they don't really tell the story of who's winning and who's losing from national policy.
It's easy to understand why people are frustrated with global averages when they don't match up with their personal experiences.
I wanted to show people the way data relates to their everyday lives.
I started this advice column called "Dear Mona," where people would write to me with questions and concerns and I'd try to answer them with data.
People asked me anything.
questions like, "Is it normal to sleep in a separate bed to my wife?"
"Do people regret their tattoos?"
"What does it mean to die of natural causes?"
All of these questions are great, because they make you think about ways to find and communicate these numbers.
If someone asks you, "How much pee is a lot of pee?"
which is a question that I got asked, you really want to make sure that the visualization makes sense to as many people as possible.
These numbers aren't unavailable.
Sometimes they're just buried in the appendix of an academic study.
And they're certainly not inscrutable; if you really wanted to test these numbers on urination volume, you could grab a bottle and try it for yourself.
(Laughter) The point of this isn't necessarily that every single data set has to relate specifically to you.
I'm interested in how many women were issued fines in France for wearing the face veil, or the niqab, even if I don't live in France or wear the face veil.
The point of asking where you fit in is to get as much context as possible.
So it's about zooming out from one data point, like the unemployment rate is five percent, and seeing how it changes over time, or seeing how it changes by educational status -- this is why your parents always wanted you to go to college -- or seeing how it varies by gender.
Nowadays, male unemployment rate is higher than the female unemployment rate.
Up until the early '80s, it was the other way around.
This is a story of one of the biggest changes that's happened in American society, and it's all there in that chart, once you look beyond the averages.
The axes are everything; once you change the scale, you can change the story.
OK, so the third and final question that I want you guys to think about when you're looking at statistics is: How was the data collected?
So far, I've only talked about the way data is communicated, but the way it's collected matters just as much.
I know this is tough, because methodologies can be opaque and actually kind of boring, but there are some simple steps you can take to check this.
I'll use one last example here.
One poll found that 41 percent of Muslims in this country support jihad, which is obviously pretty scary, and it was reported everywhere in 2015.
When I want to check a number like that, I'll start off by finding the original questionnaire.
It turns out that journalists who reported on that statistic ignored a question lower down on the survey that asked respondents how they defined "jihad."
And most of them defined it as, "Muslims' personal, peaceful struggle to be more religious."
Only 16 percent defined it as, "violent holy war against unbelievers."
This is the really important point: based on those numbers, it's totally possible that no one in the survey who defined it as violent holy war also said they support it.
Those two groups might not overlap at all.
It's also worth asking how the survey was carried out.
This was something called an opt-in poll, which means anyone could have found it on the internet and completed it.
There's no way of knowing if those people even identified as Muslim.
And finally, there were 600 respondents in that poll.
There are roughly three million Muslims in this country, according to Pew Research Center.
That means the poll spoke to roughly one in every 5,000 Muslims in this country.
This is one of the reasons why government statistics are often better than private statistics.
A poll might speak to a couple hundred people, maybe a thousand, or if you're L'Oreal, trying to sell skin care products in 2005, then you spoke to 48 women to claim that they work.
(Laughter) Private companies don't have a huge interest in getting the numbers right, they just need the right numbers.
Government statisticians aren't like that.
In theory, at least, they're totally impartial, not least because most of them do their jobs regardless of who's in power.
They're civil servants.
And to do their jobs properly, they don't just speak to a couple hundred people.
Those unemployment numbers I keep on referencing come from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and to make their estimates, they speak to over 140,000 businesses in this country.
I get it, it's frustrating.
If you want to test a statistic that comes from a private company, you can buy the face cream for you and a bunch of friends, test it out, if it doesn't work, you can say the numbers were wrong.
But how do you question government statistics?
You just keep checking everything.
Find out how they collected the numbers.
But don't give up on the numbers altogether, because if you do, we'll be making public policy decisions in the dark, using nothing but private interests to guide us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
It was just an ordinary Saturday.
My dad was outside mowing the lawn, my mom was upstairs folding laundry, my sister was in her room doing homework and I was in the basement playing video games.
And as I came upstairs to get something to drink, I looked out the window and realized that there was something that I was supposed to be doing, and this is what I saw.
No, this wasn't my family's dinner on fire.
This was my science project.
Flames were pouring out, smoke was in the air and it looked like our wooden deck was about to catch fire.
I immediately started yelling.
My mom was freaking out, my dad ran around to put out the fire and of course my sister started recording a Snapchat video.
(Laughter) This was just the beginning of my team's science project.
My team is composed of me and three other students who are here in the audience today.
We competed in FIRST LEGO League which is an international LEGO robotics competition for kids, and in addition to a robotics game, we also worked on a separate science project, and this was the project that we were working on.
So the idea for this project all started when a few months earlier, a couple of my teammates took a trip to Central America and saw beaches littered with Styrofoam, or expanded polystyrene foam.
And when they came back and told us about it, we really started thinking about the ways in which we see Styrofoam every day.
Get a new flat-screen TV?
You end up with a block of Styrofoam bigger than the TV itself.
Drink a cup of coffee?
Well, those Styrofoam coffee cups are sure going to add up.
And where do all these items go after their one-time use?
Since there aren't any good existing solutions for used Styrofoam, almost all of them end up right in the landfill, or the oceans and beaches, taking over 500 years to degrade.
And in fact, every year, the US alone produces over two billion pounds of Styrofoam, filling up a staggering 25 percent of landfills.
So why do we have these ghost accumulations of Styrofoam waste?
Why can't we just recycle them like many plastics?
Well, simply put, recycled polystyrene is too expensive and potentially contaminated, so there is very little market demand for Styrofoam that has to be recycled.
And as a result, Styrofoam is considered a nonrenewable material, because it is neither feasible nor viable to recycle polystyrene.
And in fact, many cities across the US have even passed ordinances that simply ban the production of many products containing polystyrene, which includes disposable utensils, packing peanuts, takeout containers and even plastic beach toys, all products that are very useful in today's society.
And now France has become the first country to completely ban all plastic utensils, cups and plates.
But what if we could keep using Styrofoam and keep benefiting from its cheap, lightweight, insulating and excellent packing ability, while not having to suffer from the repercussions of having to dispose of it?
What if we could turn it into something else that's actually useful?
What if we could make the impossible possible?
My team hypothesized that we could use the carbon that's already in Styrofoam to create activated carbon, which is used in almost every water filter today.
And activated carbon works by using very small micropores to filter out contaminants from water or even air.
So we started out by doing a variety of heating tests, and unfortunately, we had many failures.
Literally, nothing worked.
Besides my dad's grill catching on fire, most of our samples vaporized into nothing, or exploded inside expensive furnaces, leaving a horribly sticky mess.
In fact, we were so saddened by our failures that we almost gave up.
So why did we keep trying when all the adults said it was impossible?
Well, maybe it's because we're kids. We don't know any better.
But the truth is, we kept trying because we thought it was still possible.
We knew that if we were successful, we would be helping the environment and making the world a better place.
So we kept trying and failing and trying and failing.
We were so ready to give up.
But then it happened.
With the right temperatures, times and chemicals, we finally got that successful test result showing us that we had created activated carbon from Styrofoam waste.
And at that moment, the thing that had been impossible all of a sudden wasn't.
It showed us that although we had many failures at the beginning, we were able to persevere through them to get the test results that we wanted.
And moreover, not only were we able to create activated carbon for purifying water, but we were also able to reduce Styrofoam waste, solving two global problems with just one solution.
So from then on, we were inspired to take our project further, performing more tests to make it more effective and testing it in real world situations.
We then proceeded to receive funding from the NSTA's eCYBERMISSION STEM-in-Action program sponsored by the US Army, as well as FIRST Global Innovation Awards sponsored by XPRIZE.
And we were also honored with the Scientific American Innovator Award from Google Science Fair.
And using these funds, we plan to file a full patent on our process and to continue to work on our project.
So yes, although we started with catching my dad's grill on fire and failing so many times that we almost quit, it was well worth it when we look back at it now.
We took a problem that many people said was impossible and we made it possible, and we persevered when it looked like nothing that we did would work.
We learned that you can't have success without a little, or a lot, of failure.
So in the future, don't be afraid if your grill goes up in flames, because you never know when your idea might just catch fire.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Philosophers, dramatists, theologians have grappled with this question for centuries: what makes people go wrong?
Interestingly, I asked this question when I was a little kid.
I grew up in the South Bronx, inner-city ghetto in New York, and I was surrounded by evil, as all kids are who grew up in an inner city.
And I had friends who were really good kids, who lived out the Dr. Jekyll Mr. Hyde scenario -- Robert Louis Stevenson.
That is, they took drugs, got in trouble, went to jail.
Some got killed, and some did it without drug assistance.
So when I read Robert Louis Stevenson, that wasn't fiction.
The only question is, what was in the juice?
And more importantly, that line between good and evil -- which privileged people like to think is fixed and impermeable, with them on the good side, the others on the bad side -- I knew that line was movable, and it was permeable.
Good people could be seduced across that line, and under good and some rare circumstances, bad kids could recover with help, with reform, with rehabilitation.
So I want to begin with this wonderful illusion by [Dutch] artist M.C. Escher.
If you look at it and focus on the white, what you see is a world full of angels.
But let's look more deeply, and as we do, what appears is the demons, the devils in the world.
That tells us several things.
One, the world is, was, will always be filled with good and evil, because good and evil is the yin and yang of the human condition.
It tells me something else.
If you remember, God's favorite angel was Lucifer.
Apparently, Lucifer means "the light."
It also means "the morning star," in some scripture.
And apparently, he disobeyed God, and that's the ultimate disobedience to authority.
And when he did, Michael, the archangel, was sent to kick him out of heaven along with the other fallen angels.
And so Lucifer descends into hell, becomes Satan, becomes the devil, and the force of evil in the universe begins.
Paradoxically, it was God who created hell as a place to store evil.
He didn't do a good job of keeping it there though.
So, this arc of the cosmic transformation of God's favorite angel into the Devil, for me, sets the context for understanding human beings who are transformed from good, ordinary people into perpetrators of evil.
So the Lucifer effect, although it focuses on the negatives -- the negatives that people can become, not the negatives that people are -- leads me to a psychological definition.
And that's the key: it's about power.
To intentionally harm people psychologically, to hurt people physically, to destroy people mortally, or ideas, and to commit crimes against humanity.
If you Google "evil," a word that should surely have withered by now, you come up with 136 million hits in a third of a second.
A few years ago -- I am sure all of you were shocked, as I was, with the revelation of American soldiers abusing prisoners in a strange place in a controversial war, Abu Ghraib in Iraq.
And these were men and women who were putting prisoners through unbelievable humiliation.
I was shocked, but I wasn't surprised, because I had seen those same visual parallels when I was the prison superintendent of the Stanford Prison Study.
Immediately the Bush administration military said what?
What all administrations say when there's a scandal: "Don't blame us. It's not the system.
It's the few bad apples, the few rogue soldiers."
My hypothesis is, American soldiers are good, usually.
Maybe it was the barrel that was bad.
But how am I going to deal with that hypothesis?
I became an expert witness for one of the guards, Sergeant Chip Frederick, and in that position, I had access to the dozen investigative reports.
I had access to him.
I could study him, have him come to my home, get to know him, do psychological analysis to see, was he a good apple or bad apple.
And thirdly, I had access to all of the 1,000 pictures that these soldiers took.
These pictures are of a violent or sexual nature.
All of them come from the cameras of American soldiers.
Because everybody has a digital camera or cell phone camera, they took pictures of everything, more than 1,000.
And what I've done is I organized them into various categories.
But these are by United States military police, army reservists.
They are not soldiers prepared for this mission at all.
And it all happened in a single place, Tier 1-A, on the night shift.
Why?
It was the interrogation hold.
Interrogators from Titan Corporation, all there, and they're getting no information about the insurgency.
So they're going to put pressure on these soldiers, military police, to cross the line, give them permission to break the will of the enemy, to prepare them for interrogation, to soften them up, to take the gloves off.
Those are the euphemisms, and this is how it was interpreted.
Let's go down to that dungeon.
(Typewriting) [Abu Ghraib Iraq Prison Abuses 2008 Military Police Guards' Photos] [The following images include nudity and graphic depictions of violence] (Camera shutter sounds) (Thuds) (Camera shutter) (Camera shutter) (Breathing) (Bells) (Bells end) So, pretty horrific.
That's one of the visual illustrations of evil.
And it should not have escaped you that the reason I paired the prisoner with his arms out with Leonardo da Vinci's ode to humanity is that that prisoner was mentally ill.
That prisoner covered himself with shit every day, they had to roll him in dirt so he wouldn't stink.
But the guards ended up calling him "Shit Boy."
What was he doing in that prison rather than in some mental institution?
In any event, here's former Secretary of Defense Rumsfeld.
He comes down and says, "I want to know, who is responsible?
Who are the bad apples?"
Well, that's a bad question.
"What" could be the who of people, but it could also be the what of the situation, and obviously that's wrongheaded.
How do psychologists try to understand such transformations of human character, if you believe that they were good soldiers before they went down to that dungeon?
There are three ways. The main way is called dispositional.
We look at what's inside of the person, the bad apples.
This is the foundation of all of social science, the foundation of religion, the foundation of war.
Social psychologists like me come along and say, "Yeah, people are the actors on the stage, but you'll have to be aware of the situation.
Who are the cast of characters? What's the costume?
Is there a stage director?"
And so we're interested in what are the external factors around the individual -- the bad barrel?
Social scientists stop there and they miss the big point that I discovered when I became an expert witness for Abu Ghraib.
The power is in the system.
The system creates the situation that corrupts the individuals, and the system is the legal, political, economic, cultural background.
And this is where the power is of the bad-barrel makers.
If you want to change a person, change the situation.
And to change it, you've got to know where the power is, in the system.
So the Lucifer effect involves understanding human character transformations with these three factors.
And it's a dynamic interplay.
What do the people bring into the situation?
What does the situation bring out of them?
And what is the system that creates and maintains that situation?
My recent book, "The Lucifer Effect," is about, how do you understand how good people turn evil?
And it has a lot of detail about what I'm going to talk about today.
So Dr. Z's "Lucifer Effect," although it focuses on evil, really is a celebration of the human mind's infinite capacity to make any of us kind or cruel, caring or indifferent, creative or destructive, and it makes some of us villains.
And the good news that I'm going to hopefully come to at the end is that it makes some of us heroes.
This wonderful cartoon in the New Yorker summarizes my whole talk: "I'm neither a good cop nor a bad cop, Jerome.
Like yourself, I'm a complex amalgam of positive and negative personality traits that emerge or not, depending on the circumstances."
(Laughter) There's a study some of you think you know about, but very few people have ever read the story.
This is Stanley Milgram, little Jewish kid from the Bronx, and he asked the question, "Could the Holocaust happen here, now?"
People say, "No, that's Nazi Germany, Hitler, you know, that's 1939."
He said, "Yeah, but suppose Hitler asked you, 'Would you electrocute a stranger?' 'No way, I'm a good person.'" He said, "Why don't we put you in a situation and give you a chance to see what you would do?"
500 New Haven, Connecticut, 500 Bridgeport.
We want to improve people's memory, because it is the key to success."
OK?
We don't want college students. We want men between 20 and 50."
In the later studies, they ran women.
So, you go down, one of you will be a learner, one will be a teacher.
The learner's a genial, middle-aged guy.
He gets tied up to the shock apparatus in another room.
The learner could be middle-aged, could be as young as 20.
And one of you is told by the authority, the guy in the lab coat, "Your job as teacher is to give him material to learn.
Gets it right, reward.
Gets it wrong, you press a button on the shock box.
The first button is 15 volts. He doesn't even feel it."
That's the key.
And then the next step is another 15 volts.
The problem is, at the end of the line, it's 450 volts.
And as you go along, the guy is screaming, "I've got a heart condition! I'm out of here!"
You're a good person. You complain.
"Sir, who will be responsible if something happens to him?"
The experimenter says, "Don't worry, I will be responsible.
Continue, teacher."
You should notice here, when it gets up to 375, it says, "Danger. Severe Shock."
When it gets up to here, there's "XXX" -- the pornography of power.
So Milgram asks 40 psychiatrists, "What percent of American citizens would go to the end?"
They said only one percent.
Because that's sadistic behavior, and we know, psychiatry knows, only one percent of Americans are sadistic.
OK.
Two thirds go all the way to 450 volts.
Milgram did more than 16 studies.
And look at this.
In study 16, where you see somebody like you go all the way, 90 percent go all the way.
What about women? Study 13 -- no different than men.
So Milgram is quantifying evil as the willingness of people to blindly obey authority, to go all the way to 450 volts.
And it's like a dial on human nature.
A dial in a sense that you can make almost everybody totally obedient, down to the majority, down to none.
What's the validity in the real world?
912 American citizens committed suicide or were murdered by family and friends in Guyana jungle in 1978, because they were blindly obedient to this guy, their pastor -- not their priest -- their pastor, Reverend Jim Jones.
And so, he's the modern Lucifer effect, a man of God who becomes the Angel of Death.
Milgram's study is all about individual authority to control people.
Most of the time, we are in institutions, so the Stanford Prison Study is a study of the power of institutions to influence individual behavior.
Interestingly, Stanley Milgram and I were in the same high school class in James Monroe in the Bronx, 1954.
I did this study with my graduate students, especially Craig Haney -- and it also began work with an ad.
We had a cheap, little ad, but we wanted college students for a study of prison life.
75 people volunteered, took personality tests.
We did interviews.
Picked two dozen: the most normal, the most healthy.
Randomly assigned them to be prisoner and guard.
So on day one, we knew we had good apples.
I'm going to put them in a bad situation.
And secondly, we know there's no difference between the boys who will be guards and those who will be prisoners.
To the prisoners, we said, "Wait at home. The study will begin Sunday."
We didn't tell them that the city police were going to come and do realistic arrests.
(Video) (Music) [Day 1] Student: A police car pulls up in front, and a cop comes to the front door, and knocks, and says he's looking for me.
So they, right there, you know, they took me out the door, they put my hands against the car.
It was a real cop car, it was a real policeman, and there were real neighbors in the street, who didn't know that this was an experiment.
And there was cameras all around and neighbors all around.
They put me in the car, then they drove me around Palo Alto.
They took me to the basement of the police station.
Then they put me in a cell.
I was the first one to be picked up, so they put me in a cell, which was just like a room with a door with bars on it.
You could tell it wasn't a real jail.
They were taking this experiment too seriously.
Here are the prisoners, who are going to be dehumanized, they'll become numbers.
Here are the guards with the symbols of power and anonymity.
Guards get prisoners to clean the toilet bowls out with their bare hands, to do other humiliating tasks.
They strip them naked. They sexually taunt them.
They begin to do degrading activities, like having them simulate sodomy.
You saw simulating fellatio in soldiers in Abu Ghraib.
My guards did it in five days.
The stress reaction was so extreme that normal kids we picked because they were healthy had breakdowns within 36 hours.
The study ended after six days, because it was out of control.
Five kids had emotional breakdowns.
Does it make a difference if warriors go to battle changing their appearance or not?
If they're anonymous, how do they treat their victims?
In some cultures, they go to war without changing their appearance.
In others, they paint themselves like "Lord of the Flies."
In some, they wear masks.
So this anthropologist, John Watson, found 23 cultures that had two bits of data.
Do they change their appearance? 15.
Do they kill, torture, mutilate? 13.
If they don't change their appearance, only one of eight kills, tortures or mutilates.
The key is in the red zone.
If they change their appearance, 12 of 13 -- that's 90 percent -- kill, torture, mutilate.
And that's the power of anonymity.
So what are the seven social processes that grease the slippery slope of evil?
Mindlessly taking the first small step.
Dehumanization of others. De-individuation of self.
Diffusion of personal responsibility.
Uncritical conformity to group norms.
Passive tolerance of evil through inaction, or indifference.
And it happens when you're in a new or unfamiliar situation.
Your habitual response patterns don't work.
Your personality and morality are disengaged.
"Nothing is easier than to denounce the evildoer; nothing more difficult than understanding him," Dostoyevsky.
Understanding is not excusing. Psychology is not excuse-ology.
So social and psychological research reveals how ordinary, good people can be transformed without the drugs.
You don't need it. You just need the social-psychological processes.
Real world parallels?
James Schlesinger -- I'm going to end with this -- says, "Psychologists have attempted to understand how and why individuals and groups who usually act humanely can sometimes act otherwise in certain circumstances."
That's the Lucifer effect.
And he goes on to say, "The landmark Stanford study provides a cautionary tale for all military operations."
If you give people power without oversight, it's a prescription for abuse.
They knew that, and let that happen.
So another report, an investigative report by General Fay, says the system is guilty.
In this report, he says it was the environment that created Abu Ghraib, by leadership failures that contributed to the occurrence of such abuse, and because it remained undiscovered by higher authorities for a long period of time.
Those abuses went on for three months.
The answer is nobody, I think on purpose.
He gave the guards permission to do those things, and they knew nobody was ever going to come down to that dungeon.
So you need a paradigm shift in all of these areas.
The shift is away from the medical model that focuses only on the individual.
The shift is toward a public health model that recognizes situational and systemic vectors of disease.
Bullying is a disease. Prejudice is a disease.
Since the Inquisition, we've been dealing with problems at the individual level.
It doesn't work.
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn says, "The line between good and evil cuts through the heart of every human being."
That means that line is not out there.
That's a decision that you have to make, a personal thing.
So I want to end very quickly on a positive note.
Heroism as the antidote to evil, by promoting the heroic imagination, especially in our kids, in our educational system.
We want kids to think, "I'm a hero in waiting, waiting for the right situation to come along, and I will act heroically.
My whole life, I'm now going to focus away from evil -- that I've been in since I was a kid -- to understanding heroes.
Banality of heroism.
It's the counterpoint to Hannah Arendt's "Banality of Evil."
Our traditional societal heroes are wrong, because they are the exceptions.
They organize their life around this. That's why we know their names.
Our kids' heroes are also wrong models for them, because they have supernatural talents.
We want our kids to realize most heroes are everyday people, and the heroic act is unusual.
This is Joe Darby.
He was the one that stopped those abuses you saw, because when he saw those images, he turned them over to a senior investigating officer.
He was a low-level private, and that stopped it.
They had to put him in hiding, because people wanted to kill him, and then his mother and his wife.
For three years, they were in hiding.
When I said it got out of control, I was the prison superintendent.
I didn't know it was out of control. I was totally indifferent.
She saw that madhouse and said, "You know what, it's terrible what you're doing to those boys.
They're not prisoners nor guards, they're boys, and you are responsible."
And I ended the study the next day.
The good news is I married her the next year.
(Laughter) (Applause) I just came to my senses, obviously.
So situations have the power to do [three things].
But the point is, this is the same situation that can inflame the hostile imagination in some of us, that makes us perpetrators of evil, can inspire the heroic imagination in others.
It's the same situation and you're on one side or the other.
Most people are guilty of the evil of inaction, because your mother said, "Don't get involved. Mind your own business."
And you have to say, "Mama, humanity is my business."
So the psychology of heroism is -- we're going to end in a moment -- how do we encourage children in new hero courses, that I'm working on with Matt Langdon -- he has a hero workshop -- to develop this heroic imagination, this self-labeling, "I am a hero in waiting," and teach them skills.
To be a hero, you have to learn to be a deviant, because you're always going against the conformity of the group.
The key to heroism is two things.
B: You have to act socio-centrically, not egocentrically.
And I want to end with a known story about Wesley Autrey, New York subway hero.
Fifty-year-old African-American construction worker standing on a subway.
A white guy falls on the tracks.
The subway train is coming. There's 75 people there.
You know what? They freeze.
He's got a reason not to get involved.
He's black, the guy's white, and he's got two kids.
Instead, he gives his kids to a stranger, jumps on the tracks, puts the guy between the tracks, lays on him, the subway goes over him.
Wesley and the guy -- 20 and a half inches height.
The train clearance is 21 inches.
A half an inch would have taken his head off.
And he said, "I did what anyone could do," no big deal to jump on the tracks.
And the moral imperative is "I did what everyone should do."
And so one day, you will be in a new situation.
Take path one, you're going to be a perpetrator of evil.
Evil, meaning you're going to be Arthur Andersen.
You're going to cheat, or you're going to allow bullying.
Path two, you become guilty of the evil of passive inaction.
Path three, you become a hero.
The point is, are we ready to take the path to celebrating ordinary heroes, waiting for the right situation to come along to put heroic imagination into action?
Because it may only happen once in your life, and when you pass it by, you'll always know, I could have been a hero and I let it pass me by.
So the point is thinking it and then doing it.
Let's oppose the power of evil systems at home and abroad, and let's focus on the positive.
Advocate for respect of personal dignity, for justice and peace, which sadly our administration has not been doing.
Thanks so much.
Have you ever heard the one about how breastfeeding is free?
(Laughter) Yeah, it's pretty funny, because it's only free if we don't value women's time and energy.
Any mother can tell you how much time and energy it takes to liquify her body -- to literally dissolve herself -- (Laughter) as she feeds this precious little cannibal.
(Laughter) Milk is why mammals suck.
At Arizona State University, in the Comparative Lactation Lab, I decode mothers' milk composition to understand its complexity and how it influences infant development.
The most important thing that I've learned is that we do not do enough to support mothers and babies.
And when we fail mothers and babies, we fail everyone who loves mothers and babies: the fathers, the partners, the grandparents, the aunties, the friends and kin that make our human social networks.
It's time that we abandon simple solutions and simple slogans, and grapple with the nuance.
I was very fortunate to run smack-dab into that nuance very early, during my first interview with a journalist when she asked me, "How long should a mother breastfeed her baby?"
And it was that word "should" that brought me up short, because I will never tell a woman what she should do with her body.
Babies survive and thrive because their mother's milk is food, medicine and signal.
For young infants, mother's milk is a complete diet that provides all the building blocks for their bodies, that shapes their brain and fuels all of their activity.
Mother's milk also feeds the microbes that are colonizing the infant's intestinal tract.
Mothers aren't just eating for two, they're eating for two to the trillions.
Milk provides immunofactors that help fight pathogens and mother's milk provides hormones that signal to the infant's body.
But in recent decades, we have come to take milk for granted.
We stopped seeing something in plain sight.
We began to think of milk as standardized, homogenized, pasteurized, packaged, powdered, flavored and formulated.
We abandoned the milk of human kindness and turned our priorities elsewhere.
At the National Institutes of Health in Washington DC is the National Library of Medicine, which contains 25 million articles -- the brain trust of life science and biomedical research.
We can use keywords to search that database, and when we do that, we discover nearly a million articles about pregnancy, but far fewer about breast milk and lactation.
When we zoom in on the number of articles just investigating breast milk, we see that we know much more about coffee, wine and tomatoes.
(Laughter) We know over twice as much about erectile dysfunction.
(Laughter) I'm not saying we shouldn't know about those things -- I'm a scientist, I think we should know about everything.
But that we know so much less -- (Laughter) about breast milk -- the first fluid a young mammal is adapted to consume -- should make us angry.
Globally, nine out of 10 women will have at least one child in her lifetime.
That means that nearly 130 million babies are born each year.
These mothers and babies deserve our best science.
Recent research has shown that milk doesn't just grow the body, it fuels behavior and shapes neurodevelopment.
In 2015, researchers discovered that the mixture of breast milk and baby saliva -- specifically, baby saliva -- causes a chemical reaction that produces hydrogen peroxide that can kill staph and salmonella.
And from humans and other mammal species, we're starting to understand that the biological recipe of milk can be different when produced for sons or daughters.
When we reach for donor milk in the neonatal intensive care unit, or formula on the store shelf, it's nearly one-size-fits-all.
We aren't thinking about how sons and daughters may grow at different rates, or different ways, and that milk may be a part of that.
Mothers have gotten the message and the vast majority of mothers intend to breastfeed, but many do not reach their breastfeeding goals.
That is not their failure; it's ours.
Increasingly common medical conditions like obesity, endocrine disorders, C-section and preterm births all can disrupt the underlying biology of lactation.
And many women do not have knowledgeable clinical support.
Twenty-five years ago, the World Health Organization and UNICEF established criteria for hospitals to be considered baby friendly -- that provide the optimal level of support for mother-infant bonding and infant feeding.
Today, only one in five babies in the United States is born in a baby-friendly hospital.
This is a problem, because mothers can grapple with many problems in the minutes, hours, days and weeks of lactation.
They can have struggles with establishing latch, with pain, with milk letdown and perceptions of milk supply.
These mothers deserve knowledgeable clinical staff that understand these processes.
Mothers will call me as they're grappling with these struggles, crying with wobbly voices.
"It's not working.
This is what I'm supposed to naturally be able to do.
Why is it not working?"
And just because something is evolutionarily ancient doesn't mean that it's easy or that we're instantly good at it.
You know what else is evolutionarily ancient?
(Laughter) Sex.
And nobody expects us to start out being good at it.
(Laughter) Clinicians best deliver quality equitable care when they have continuing education about how to best support lactation and breastfeeding.
And in order to have that continuing education, we need to anchor it to cutting-edge research in both the life sciences and the social sciences, because we need to recognize that too often historical traumas and implicit biases sit in the space between a new mother and her clinician.
The body is political.
If our breastfeeding support is not intersectional, it's not good enough.
And for moms who have to return for work, because countries like the United States do not provide paid parental leave, they can have to go back in as short as just a few days after giving birth.
How do we optimize mother and infant health just by messaging about breast milk to moms without providing the institutional support that facilitates that mother-infant bonding to support breastfeeding?
The answer is: we can't.
I'm talking to you, legislators, and the voters who elect them.
I'm talking to you, job creators and collective bargaining units, and workers, and shareholders.
We all have a stake in the public health of our community, and we all have a role to play in achieving it.
Breast milk is a part of improving human health.
In the NICU, when infants are born early or sick or injured, milk or bioactive constituents in milk can be critically important.
Environments or ecologies, or communities where there's high risk of infectious disease, breast milk can be incredibly protective.
Where there are emergencies like storms and earthquakes, when the electricity goes out, when safe water is not available, breast milk can keep babies fed and hydrated.
And in the context of humanitarian crises, like Syrian mothers fleeing war zones, the smallest drops can buffer babies from the biggest global challenges.
But understanding breast milk is not just about messaging to mothers and policy makers.
It's also about understanding what is important in breast milk so that we can deliver better formulas to moms who cannot or do not breastfeed for whatever reason.
We can all do a better job of supporting the diversity of moms raising their babies in a diversity of ways.
As women around the world struggle to achieve political, social and economic equality, we must reimagine motherhood as not the central, core aspect of womanhood, but one of the many potential facets of what makes women awesome.
It's time.
(Applause)
So it all came to life in a dark bar in Madrid.
I encountered my colleague from McGill, Michael Meaney.
And we were drinking a few beers, and like scientists do, he told me about his work.
And he told me that he is interested in how mother rats lick their pups after they were born.
And I was sitting there and saying, "This is where my tax dollars are wasted -- (Laughter) on this kind of soft science."
And he started telling me that the rats, like humans, lick their pups in very different ways.
Some mothers do a lot of that, some mothers do very little, and most are in between.
But what's interesting about it is when he follows these pups when they become adults -- like, years in human life, long after their mother died.
They are completely different animals.
The animals that were licked and groomed heavily, the high-licking and grooming, are not stressed.
They have different sexual behavior.
They have a different way of living than those that were not treated as intensively by their mothers.
So then I was thinking to myself: Is this magic?
How does this work?
As geneticists would like you to think, perhaps the mother had the "bad mother" gene that caused her pups to be stressful, and then it was passed from generation to generation; it's all determined by genetics.
Or is it possible that something else is going on here?
In rats, we can ask this question and answer it.
So what we did is a cross-fostering experiment.
You essentially separate the litter, the babies of this rat, at birth, to two kinds of fostering mothers -- not the real mothers, but mothers that will take care of them: high-licking mothers and low-licking mothers.
And you can do the opposite with the low-licking pups.
And the remarkable answer was, it wasn't important what gene you got from your mother.
It was not the biological mother that defined this property of these rats.
It is the mother that took care of the pups.
So how can this work?
I am an a epigeneticist.
I am interested in how genes are marked by a chemical mark during embryogenesis, during the time we're in the womb of our mothers, and decide which gene will be expressed in what tissue.
Different genes are expressed in the brain than in the liver and the eye.
And we thought: Is it possible that the mother is somehow reprogramming the gene of her offspring through her behavior?
And we spent 10 years, and we found that there is a cascade of biochemical events by which the licking and grooming of the mother, the care of the mother, is translated to biochemical signals that go into the nucleus and into the DNA and program it differently.
So now the animal can prepare itself for life: Is life going to be harsh?
Is there going to be a lot of food?
Are there going to be a lot of cats and snakes around, or will I live in an upper-class neighborhood where all I have to do is behave well and proper, and that will gain me social acceptance?
And now one can think about how important that process can be for our lives.
We inherit our DNA from our ancestors.
The DNA is old.
It evolved during evolution.
But it doesn't tell us if you are going to be born in Stockholm, where the days are long in the summer and short in the winter, or in Ecuador, where there's an equal number of hours for day and night all year round.
And that has such an enormous [effect] on our physiology.
So what we suggest is, perhaps what happens early in life, those signals that come through the mother, tell the child what kind of social world you're going to be living in.
It will be harsh, and you'd better be anxious and be stressful, or it's going to be an easy world, and you have to be different.
Is it going to be a world with a lot of light or little light?
Is it going to be a world with a lot of food or little food?
If there's no food around, you'd better develop your brain to binge whenever you see a meal, or store every piece of food that you have as fat.
So this is good.
Evolution has selected this to allow our fixed, old DNA to function in a dynamic way in new environments.
But sometimes things can go wrong; for example, if you're born to a poor family and the signals are, "You better binge, you better eat every piece of food you're going to encounter."
But now we humans and our brain have evolved, have changed evolution even faster.
Now you can buy McDonald's for one dollar.
And therefore, the preparation that we had by our mothers is turning out to be maladaptive.
The same preparation that was supposed to protect us from hunger and famine is going to cause obesity, cardiovascular problems and metabolic disease.
So this concept that genes could be marked by our experience, and especially the early life experience, can provide us a unifying explanation of both health and disease.
But is true only for rats?
The problem is, we cannot test this in humans, because ethically, we cannot administer child adversity in a random way.
So if a poor child develops a certain property, we don't know whether this is caused by poverty or whether poor people have bad genes.
So geneticists will try to tell you that poor people are poor because their genes make them poor.
Epigeneticists will tell you poor people are in a bad environment or an impoverished environment that creates that phenotype, that property.
So we moved to look into our cousins, the monkeys.
My colleague, Stephen Suomi, has been rearing monkeys in two different ways: randomly separated the monkey from the mother and reared her with a nurse and surrogate motherhood conditions.
So these monkeys didn't have a mother; they had a nurse.
And other monkeys were reared with their normal, natural mothers.
And when they were old, they were completely different animals.
The monkeys that had a mother did not care about alcohol, they were not sexually aggressive.
The monkeys that didn't have a mother were aggressive, were stressed and were alcoholics.
So we looked at their DNA early after birth, to see: Is it possible that the mother is marking?
Is there a signature of the mother in the DNA of the offspring?
These are Day-14 monkeys, and what you see here is the modern way by which we study epigenetics.
We can now map those chemical marks, which we call methylation marks, on DNA at a single nucleotide resolution.
We can now compare the monkey that had a mother or not.
And here's a visual presentation of this.
What you see is the genes that got more methylated are red.
The genes that got less methylated are green.
You can see many genes are changing, because not having a mother is not just one thing -- it affects the whole way; it sends signals about the whole way your world is going to look when you become an adult.
And you can see the two groups of monkeys extremely well-separated from each other.
How early does this develop?
These monkeys already didn't see their mothers, so they had a social experience.
Do we sense our social status, even at the moment of birth?
So in this experiment, we took placentas of monkeys that had different social status.
What's interesting about social rank is that across all living beings, they will structure themselves by hierarchy.
Monkey number one is the boss; monkey number four is the peon.
You put four monkeys in a cage, there will always be a boss and always be a peon.
And what's interesting is that the monkey number one is much healthier than monkey number four.
And if you put them in a cage, monkey number one will not eat as much.
Monkey number four will eat [a lot].
And what you see here in this methylation mapping, a dramatic separation at birth of the animals that had a high social status versus the animals that did not have a high status.
So we are born already knowing the social information, and that social information is not bad or good, it just prepares us for life, because we have to program our biology differently if we are in the high or the low social status.
But how can you study this in humans?
We can't do experiments, we can't administer adversity to humans.
But God does experiments with humans, and it's called natural disasters.
One of the hardest natural disasters in Canadian history happened in my province of Quebec.
It's the ice storm of 1998.
We lost our entire electrical grid because of an ice storm when the temperatures were, in the dead of winter in Quebec, minus 20 to minus 30.
And there were pregnant mothers during that time.
And my colleague Suzanne King followed the children of these mothers for 15 years.
And what happened was, that as the stress increased -- and here we had objective measures of stress: How long were you without power? Where did you spend your time?
Was it in your mother-in-law's apartment or in some posh country home?
So all of these added up to a social stress scale, and you can ask the question: How did the children look?
And it appears that as stress increases, the children develop more autism, they develop more metabolic diseases and they develop more autoimmune diseases.
We would map the methylation state, and again, you see the green genes becoming red as stress increases, the red genes becoming green as stress increases, an entire rearrangement of the genome in response to stress.
So if we can program genes, if we are not just the slaves of the history of our genes, that they could be programmed, can we deprogram them?
Because epigenetic causes can cause diseases like cancer, metabolic disease and mental health diseases.
Let's talk about cocaine addiction.
Cocaine addiction is a terrible situation that can lead to death and to loss of human life.
We asked the question: Can we reprogram the addicted brain to make that animal not addicted anymore?
We used a cocaine addiction model that recapitulates what happens in humans.
In humans, you're in high school, some friends suggest you use some cocaine, you take cocaine, nothing happens.
Months pass by, something reminds you of what happened the first time, a pusher pushes cocaine, and you become addicted and your life has changed.
In rats, we do the same thing.
My colleague, Gal Yadid, he trains the animals to get used to cocaine, then for one month, no cocaine.
Then he reminds them of the party when they saw the cocaine the first time by cue, the colors of the cage when they saw cocaine.
And they go crazy.
They will press the lever to get cocaine until they die.
We first determined that the difference between these animals is that during that time when nothing happens, there's no cocaine around, their epigenome is rearranged.
Their genes are re-marked in a different way, and when the cue comes, their genome is ready to develop this addictive phenotype.
So we treated these animals with drugs that either increase DNA methylation, which was the epigenetic marker to look at, or decrease epigenetic markings.
And we found that if we increased methylation, these animals go even crazier.
They become more craving for cocaine.
But if we reduce the DNA methylation, the animals are not addicted anymore.
We have reprogrammed them.
And a fundamental difference between an epigenetic drug and any other drug is that with epigenetic drugs, we essentially remove the signs of experience, and once they're gone, they will not come back unless you have the same experience.
The animal now is reprogrammed.
So when we visited the animals 30 days, 60 days later, which is in human terms many years of life, they were still not addicted -- by a single epigenetic treatment.
So what did we learn about DNA?
DNA is not just a sequence of letters; it's not just a script.
DNA is a dynamic movie.
Our experiences are being written into this movie, which is interactive.
You're, like, watching a movie of your life, with the DNA, with your remote control.
You can remove an actor and add an actor.
And so you have, in spite of the deterministic nature of genetics, you have control of the way your genes look, and this has a tremendous optimistic message for the ability to now encounter some of the deadly diseases like cancer, mental health, with a new approach, looking at them as maladaptation.
And if we can epigenetically intervene, [we can] reverse the movie by removing an actor and setting up a new narrative.
So what I told you today is, our DNA is really combined of two components, two layers of information.
One layer of information is old, evolved from millions of years of evolution.
It is fixed and very hard to change.
The other layer of information is the epigenetic layer, which is open and dynamic and sets up a narrative that is interactive, that allows us to control, to a large extent, our destiny, to help the destiny of our children and to hopefully conquer disease and serious health challenges that have plagued humankind for a long time.
So even though we are determined by our genes, we have a degree of freedom that can set up our life to a life of responsibility.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the late 19th century, scientists were trying to solve a mystery.
They found that if they had a vacuum tube like this one and applied a high voltage across it, something strange happened.
They called them cathode rays.
But the question was: What were they made of?
In England, the 19th-century physicist J.J. Thompson conducted experiments using magnets and electricity, like this.
And he came to an incredible revelation.
These rays were made of negatively charged particles around 2,000 times lighter than the hydrogen atom, the smallest thing they knew.
So Thompson had discovered the first subatomic particle, which we now call electrons.
Now, at the time, this seemed to be a completely impractical discovery.
I mean, Thompson didn't think there were any applications of electrons.
Around his lab in Cambridge, he used to like to propose a toast: "To the electron.
(Laughter) He was strongly in favor of doing research out of sheer curiosity, to arrive at a deeper understanding of the world.
And what he found did cause a revolution in science.
But it also caused a second, unexpected revolution in technology.
Today, I'd like to make a case for curiosity-driven research, because without it, none of the technologies I'll talk about today would have been possible.
Now, what Thompson found here has actually changed our view of reality.
I mean, I think I'm standing on a stage, and you think you're sitting in a seat.
But that's just the electrons in your body pushing back against the electrons in the seat, opposing the force of gravity.
You're not even really touching the seat.
You're hovering ever so slightly above it.
But in many ways, our modern society was actually built on this discovery.
I mean, these tubes were the start of electronics.
And then for many years, most of us actually had one of these, if you remember, in your living room, in cathode-ray tube televisions.
But -- I mean, how impoverished would our lives be if the only invention that had come from here was the television?
(Laughter) Thankfully, this tube was just a start, because something else happens when the electrons here hit the piece of metal inside the tube.
Let me show you.
Pop this one back on.
So as the electrons screech to a halt inside the metal, their energy gets thrown out again in a form of high-energy light, which we call X-rays.
(Buzzing) (Buzzing) And within 15 years of discovering the electron, these X-rays were being used to make images inside the human body, helping soldiers' lives being saved by surgeons, who could then find pieces of bullets and shrapnel inside their bodies.
But there's no way we could have come up with that technology by asking scientists to build better surgical probes.
Only research done out of sheer curiosity, with no application in mind, could have given us the discovery of the electron and X-rays.
Now, this tube also threw open the gates for our understanding of the universe and the field of particle physics, because it's also the first, very simple particle accelerator.
Now, I'm an accelerator physicist, so I design particle accelerators, and I try and understand how beams behave.
And my field's a bit unusual, because it crosses between curiosity-driven research and technology with real-world applications.
But it's the combination of those two things that gets me really excited about what I do.
Now, over the last 100 years, there have been far too many examples for me to list them all.
But I want to share with you just a few.
In 1928, a physicist named Paul Dirac found something strange in his equations.
And he predicted, based purely on mathematical insight, that there ought to be a second kind of matter, the opposite to normal matter, that literally annihilates when it comes in contact: antimatter.
I mean, the idea sounded ridiculous.
But within four years, they'd found it.
And nowadays, we use it every day in hospitals, in positron emission tomography, or PET scans, used for detecting disease.
Or, take these X-rays.
If you can get these electrons up to a higher energy, so about 1,000 times higher than this tube, the X-rays that those produce can actually deliver enough ionizing radiation to kill human cells.
And if you can shape and direct those X-rays where you want them to go, that allows us to do an incredible thing: to treat cancer without drugs or surgery, which we call radiotherapy.
In countries like Australia and the UK, around half of all cancer patients are treated using radiotherapy.
And so, electron accelerators are actually standard equipment in most hospitals.
Or, a little closer to home: if you have a smartphone or a computer -- and this is TEDx, so you've got both with you right now, right?
Well, inside those devices are chips that are made by implanting single ions into silicon, in a process called ion implantation.
And that uses a particle accelerator.
Without curiosity-driven research, though, none of these things would exist at all.
So, over the years, we really learned to explore inside the atom.
And to do that, we had to learn to develop particle accelerators.
The first ones we developed let us split the atom.
And then we got to higher and higher energies; we created circular accelerators that let us delve into the nucleus and then create new elements, even.
And at that point, we were no longer just exploring inside the atom.
We'd actually learned how to control these particles.
We'd learned how to interact with our world on a scale that's too small for humans to see or touch or even sense that it's there.
And then we built larger and larger accelerators, because we were curious about the nature of the universe.
As we went deeper and deeper, new particles started popping up.
Eventually, we got to huge ring-like machines that take two beams of particles in opposite directions, squeeze them down to less than the width of a hair and smash them together.
And then, using Einstein's E=mc2, you can take all of that energy and convert it into new matter, new particles which we rip from the very fabric of the universe.
Nowadays, there are about 35,000 accelerators in the world, not including televisions.
And inside each one of these incredible machines, there are hundreds of billions of tiny particles, dancing and swirling in systems that are more complex than the formation of galaxies.
You guys, I can't even begin to explain how incredible it is that we can do this.
(Laughter) (Applause) So I want to encourage you to invest your time and energy in people that do curiosity-driven research.
It was Jonathan Swift who once said, "Vision is the art of seeing the invisible."
And over a century ago, J.J. Thompson did just that, when he pulled back the veil on the subatomic world.
And now we need to invest in curiosity-driven research, because we have so many challenges that we face.
And we need patience; we need to give scientists the time, the space and the means to continue their quest, because history tells us that if we can remain curious and open-minded about the outcomes of research, the more world-changing our discoveries will be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was 10 years old when I learned what the word "genocide" meant.
It was 2003, and my people were being brutally attacked because of their race -- hundreds of thousands murdered, millions displaced, a nation torn apart at the hands of its own government.
My mother and father immediately began speaking out against the crisis.
I didn't really understand it, except for the fact that it was destroying my parents.
One day, I walked in on my mother crying, and I asked her why we are burying so many people.
I don't remember the words that she chose to describe genocide to her 10-year-old daughter, but I remember the feeling.
We felt completely alone, as if no one could hear us, as if we were essentially invisible.
This is when I wrote my first poem about Darfur.
I wrote poetry to convince people to hear and see us, and that's how I learned the thing that changed me.
It's easy to be seen.
I mean, look at me -- I'm a young African woman with a scarf around my head, an American accent on my tongue and a story that makes even the most brutal of Monday mornings seem inviting.
But it's hard to convince people that they deserve to be seen.
I learned this in my high school classroom one day, when my teacher asked me to give a presentation about Darfur.
I was setting up the projector when a classmate of mine said, "Why do you have to talk about this?
Can't you think about us and how it will make us feel?"
(Laughter) My 14-year-old self didn't know what to say to her, or how to explain the pain that I felt in that moment, and in every moment that we were forced not to talk about "this."
Her words took me back to the days and nights on the ground in Darfur, where we were forced to remain silent; where we didn't speak over morning tea because the warplanes overhead would swallow any and all noise; back to the days when we were told not only that we don't deserve to be heard but that we do not have a right to exist.
And this is where the magic happened, in that classroom when all the students started taking their seats and I began to speak, despite this renewed feeling that I didn't deserve to be there, that I didn't belong there or have a right to break the silence.
As I talked, and my classmates listened, the fear ebbed away.
My mind became calm, and I felt safe.
It was the sound of our grieving, the feel of their arms around me, the steady walls that held us together.
It felt nothing like a vacuum.
I choose poetry because it's so visceral.
When someone is standing in front of you, mind, body and soul, saying "Witness me," it's impossible not to become keenly aware of your own humanity.
This changed everything for me.
It gave me courage.
Every day I experience the power of witness, and because of that, I am whole.
And so now I ask: Will you witness me?
They hand me the microphone as my shoulders sink under the weight of this stress.
The woman says, "The one millionth refugee just left South Sudan.
Can you comment?"
I feel my feet rock back and forth on the heels my mother bought, begging the question: Do we stay, or is it safer to choose flight?
My mind echoes the numbers: one million gone, two million displaced, 400,000 dead in Darfur.
And this lump takes over my throat, as if each of those bodies just found a grave right here in my esophagus.
Our once country, all north and south and east and west, so restless the Nile couldn't hold us together, and you ask me to summarize.
They talk about the numbers as if this isn't still happening, as if 500,000 didn't just die in Syria, as if 3,000 aren't still making their final stand at the bottom of the Mediterranean, as if there aren't entire volumes full of fact sheets about our genocides, and now they want me to write one.
Fact: we never talked over breakfast, because the warplanes would swallow our voices.
Fact: my grandfather didn't want to leave home, so he died in a war zone.
Fact: a burning bush without God is just a fire.
I measure the distance between what I know and what is safe to say on a microphone.
Do I talk about sorrow? Displacement?
Do I mention the violence, how it's never as simple as what you see on TV, how there are weeks' worth of fear before the camera is on?
Do I tell her about our bodies, how they are 60 percent water, but we still burn like driftwood, making fuel of our sacrifice?
Do I tell her the men died first, mothers forced to watch the slaughter?
That they came for our children, scattering them across the continent until our homes sank?
That even castles sink at the bite of the bomb?
Do I talk about the elderly, our heroes, too weak to run, too expensive to shoot, how they would march them, hands raised, rifles at their backs, into the fire?
How their walking sticks kept the flames alive?
It feels too harsh for a bundle of wires and an audience to swallow.
Too relentless, like the valley that filled with the putrid smoke of our deaths.
Is it better in verse?
Can a stanza become a burial shroud?
Will it sting less if I say it softly?
If you don't see me cry, will you listen better?
Will the pain leave when the microphone does?
Why does every word feel as if I'm saying my last?
Thirty seconds for the sound bite, and now three minutes for the poem.
My tongue goes dry the same way we died, becoming ash, having never been coal.
I feel my left leg go numb, and I realize that I locked my knees, bracing for impact.
I never wear shoes I can't run in.
Thank you.
(Applause) So, I wanted to leave on a positive note, because that's the paradox that this life has been: in the places where I learned to cry the most, I also learned how to smile after.
So, here goes.
"You Have a Big Imagination or 400,000 Ways to Cry."
For Zeinab.
I am a sad girl, but my face makes other plans, focusing energy on this smile, so as not to waste it on pain.
The first thing they took was my sleep, eyes heavy but wide open, thinking maybe I missed something, maybe the cavalry is still coming.
They didn't come, so I bought bigger pillows.
(Laughter) My grandmother could cure anything by talking the life out of it.
And she said that I could make a thief in a silo laugh in the middle of our raging war.
War makes a broken marriage bed out of sorrow.
You want nothing more than to disappear, but your heart can't salvage enough remnants to leave.
But joy -- joy is the armor we carried across the borders of our broken homeland.
A hasty mix of stories and faces that lasts long after the flavor is gone.
A muscle memory that overcomes even the most bitter of times, my memory is spotted with days of laughing until I cried, or crying until I laughed.
Laughter and tears are both involuntary human reactions, testaments to our capacity for expression.
So allow me to express that if I make you laugh, it's usually on purpose.
And if I make you cry, I'll still think you are beautiful.
This is for my cousin Zeinab, bedridden on a random afternoon.
I hadn't seen her since the last time we were in Sudan together, and there I was at her hospital bedside in a 400-year-old building in France.
Zeinab wanted to hear poems.
Suddenly, English, Arabic and French were not enough.
Every word I knew became empty noise, and Zeinab said, "Well, get on with it."
(Laughter) And I read her everything that I could, and we laughed, and we loved it, and it was the most important stage that I've ever stood on, surrounded by family, by remnants of a people who were given as a dowry to a relentless war but still managed to make pearls of this life; by the ones who taught me to not only laugh, but to live in the face of death; who placed their hands across the sky, measuring the distance to the sun and saying, "Smile; I'm gonna meet you there."
And for Zeinab -- Zeinab, who taught me love in a place like France, Zeinab, who wanted to he.ar poems on her deathbed -- Dilated fibromyalgia.
Her heart muscles expanded until they couldn't function.
And she held me, and she made me feel like gold.
And I said, "Zeinab, isn't it strange that your only problem is that your heart was too big?"
Thank you.
(Applause)
More than six thousand light years from the surface of the earth, a rapidly spinning neutron star called the Black Widow pulsar blasts its companion brown dwarf star with radiation as the two orbit each other every 9 hours.
Standing on our own planet, you might think youre just an observer of this violent ballet.
But in fact, both stars are pulling you towards them.
And youre pulling back, connected across trillions of kilometers by gravity.
Gravity is the attractive force between two objects with mass any two objects with mass.
Which means that every object in the universe attracts every other object: every star, black hole, human being, smartphone, and atom are all constantly pulling on each other.
So why dont we feel pulled in billions of different directions?
Two reasons: mass and distance.
The original equation describing the gravitational force between two objects was written by Isaac Newton in 1687.
Scientists understanding of gravity has evolved since then, but Newtons Law of Universal Gravitation is still a good approximation in most situations.
It goes like this: the gravitational force between two objects is equal to the mass of one times the mass of the other, multiplied by a very small number called the gravitational constant, and divided by the distance between them, squared.
If you doubled the mass of one of the objects, the force between them would double, too.
If the distance between them doubled, the force would be one-fourth as strong.
The gravitational force between you and the Earth pulls you towards its center, a force you experience as your weight.
Lets say this force is about 800 Newtons when youre standing at sea level.
If you traveled to the Dead Sea, the force would increase by a tiny fraction of a percent.
And if you climbed to the top of Mount Everest, the force would decrease but again, by a minuscule amount.
Traveling higher would make a bigger dent in gravitys influence, but you wont escape it.
Gravity is generated by variations in the curvature of spacetime the three dimensions of space plus time which bend around any object that has mass.
Gravity from Earth reaches the International Space Station, 400 kilometers above the earth, with almost its original intensity.
If the space station was stationary on top of a giant column, youd still experience ninety percent of the gravitational force there that you do on the ground.
Astronauts just experience weightlessness because the space station is constantly falling towards earth.
Fortunately, its orbiting the planet fast enough that it never hits the ground.
By the time you made it to the surface of the moon, around 400,000 kilometers away, Earths gravitational pull would be less than 0.03 percent of what you feel on earth.
The only gravity youd be aware of would be the moons, which is about one sixth as strong as the earths.
Travel farther still and Earths gravitational pull on you will continue to decrease, but never drop to zero.
Even safely tethered to the Earth, were subject to the faint tug of distant celestial bodies and nearby earthly ones.
The Sun exerts a force of about half a Newton on you.
If youre a few meters away from a smartphone, you'll experience a mutual force of a few piconewtons.
Thats about the same as the gravitational pull between you and the Andromeda Galaxy, which is 2.5 million light years away but about a trillion times as massive as the sun.
But when it comes to escaping gravity, theres a loophole.
If all the mass around us is pulling on us all the time, how would Earths gravity change if you tunneled deep below the surface, assuming you could do so without being cooked or crushed?
If you hollowed out the center of a perfectly spherical Earth which it isnt, but lets just say it were youd experience an identical pull from all sides.
And youd be suspended, weightless, only encountering the tiny pulls from other celestial bodies.
So you could escape the Earths gravity in such a thought experiment but only by heading straight into it.
In the movie "Interstellar," we get an up-close look at a supermassive black hole.
Set against a backdrop of bright gas, the black hole's massive gravitational pull bends light into a ring.
However, this isn't a real photograph, but a computer graphic rendering -- an artistic interpretation of what a black hole might look like.
A hundred years ago, Albert Einstein first published his theory of general relativity.
In the years since then, scientists have provided a lot of evidence in support of it.
But one thing predicted from this theory, black holes, still have not been directly observed.
Although we have some idea as to what a black hole might look like, we've never actually taken a picture of one before.
However, you might be surprised to know that that may soon change.
We may be seeing our first picture of a black hole in the next couple years.
Getting this first picture will come down to an international team of scientists, an Earth-sized telescope and an algorithm that puts together the final picture.
Although I won't be able to show you a real picture of a black hole today, I'd like to give you a brief glimpse into the effort involved in getting that first picture.
My name is Katie Bouman, and I'm a PhD student at MIT.
I do research in a computer science lab that works on making computers see through images and video.
But although I'm not an astronomer, today I'd like to show you how I've been able to contribute to this exciting project.
If you go out past the bright city lights tonight, you may just be lucky enough to see a stunning view of the Milky Way Galaxy.
And if you could zoom past millions of stars, 26,000 light-years toward the heart of the spiraling Milky Way, we'd eventually reach a cluster of stars right at the center.
Peering past all the galactic dust with infrared telescopes, astronomers have watched these stars for over 16 years.
But it's what they don't see that is the most spectacular.
These stars seem to orbit an invisible object.
By tracking the paths of these stars, astronomers have concluded that the only thing small and heavy enough to cause this motion is a supermassive black hole -- an object so dense that it sucks up anything that ventures too close -- even light.
But what happens if we were to zoom in even further?
Is it possible to see something that, by definition, is impossible to see?
Well, it turns out that if we were to zoom in at radio wavelengths, we'd expect to see a ring of light caused by the gravitational lensing of hot plasma zipping around the black hole.
In other words, the black hole casts a shadow on this backdrop of bright material, carving out a sphere of darkness.
This bright ring reveals the black hole's event horizon, where the gravitational pull becomes so great that not even light can escape.
Einstein's equations predict the size and shape of this ring, so taking a picture of it wouldn't only be really cool, it would also help to verify that these equations hold in the extreme conditions around the black hole.
However, this black hole is so far away from us, that from Earth, this ring appears incredibly small -- the same size to us as an orange on the surface of the moon.
That makes taking a picture of it extremely difficult.
Why is that?
Well, it all comes down to a simple equation.
Due to a phenomenon called diffraction, there are fundamental limits to the smallest objects that we can possibly see.
This governing equation says that in order to see smaller and smaller, we need to make our telescope bigger and bigger.
But even with the most powerful optical telescopes here on Earth, we can't even get close to the resolution necessary to image on the surface of the moon.
In fact, here I show one of the highest resolution images ever taken of the moon from Earth.
It contains roughly 13,000 pixels, and yet each pixel would contain over 1.5 million oranges.
So how big of a telescope do we need in order to see an orange on the surface of the moon and, by extension, our black hole?
Well, it turns out that by crunching the numbers, you can easily calculate that we would need a telescope the size of the entire Earth.
(Laughter) If we could build this Earth-sized telescope, we could just start to make out that distinctive ring of light indicative of the black hole's event horizon.
Although this picture wouldn't contain all the detail we see in computer graphic renderings, it would allow us to safely get our first glimpse of the immediate environment around a black hole.
However, as you can imagine, building a single-dish telescope the size of the Earth is impossible.
But in the famous words of Mick Jagger, "You can't always get what you want, but if you try sometimes, you just might find you get what you need."
And by connecting telescopes from around the world, an international collaboration called the Event Horizon Telescope is creating a computational telescope the size of the Earth, capable of resolving structure on the scale of a black hole's event horizon.
This network of telescopes is scheduled to take its very first picture of a black hole next year.
Each telescope in the worldwide network works together.
Linked through the precise timing of atomic clocks, teams of researchers at each of the sites freeze light by collecting thousands of terabytes of data.
This data is then processed in a lab right here in Massachusetts.
So how does this even work?
Remember if we want to see the black hole in the center of our galaxy, we need to build this impossibly large Earth-sized telescope?
For just a second, let's pretend we could build a telescope the size of the Earth.
This would be a little bit like turning the Earth into a giant spinning disco ball.
Each individual mirror would collect light that we could then combine together to make a picture.
However, now let's say we remove most of those mirrors so only a few remained.
We could still try to combine this information together, but now there are a lot of holes.
These remaining mirrors represent the locations where we have telescopes.
This is an incredibly small number of measurements to make a picture from.
But although we only collect light at a few telescope locations, as the Earth rotates, we get to see other new measurements.
In other words, as the disco ball spins, those mirrors change locations and we get to observe different parts of the image.
The imaging algorithms we develop fill in the missing gaps of the disco ball in order to reconstruct the underlying black hole image.
If we had telescopes located everywhere on the globe -- in other words, the entire disco ball -- this would be trivial.
However, we only see a few samples, and for that reason, there are an infinite number of possible images that are perfectly consistent with our telescope measurements.
However, not all images are created equal.
Some of those images look more like what we think of as images than others.
And so, my role in helping to take the first image of a black hole is to design algorithms that find the most reasonable image that also fits the telescope measurements.
Just as a forensic sketch artist uses limited descriptions to piece together a picture using their knowledge of face structure, the imaging algorithms I develop use our limited telescope data to guide us to a picture that also looks like stuff in our universe.
Using these algorithms, we're able to piece together pictures from this sparse, noisy data.
So here I show a sample reconstruction done using simulated data, when we pretend to point our telescopes to the black hole in the center of our galaxy.
Although this is just a simulation, reconstruction such as this give us hope that we'll soon be able to reliably take the first image of a black hole and from it, determine the size of its ring.
Although I'd love to go on about all the details of this algorithm, luckily for you, I don't have the time.
But I'd still like to give you a brief idea of how we define what our universe looks like, and how we use this to reconstruct and verify our results.
Since there are an infinite number of possible images that perfectly explain our telescope measurements, we have to choose between them in some way.
We do this by ranking the images based upon how likely they are to be the black hole image, and then choosing the one that's most likely.
So what do I mean by this exactly?
Let's say we were trying to make a model that told us how likely an image were to appear on Facebook.
We'd probably want the model to say it's pretty unlikely that someone would post this noise image on the left, and pretty likely that someone would post a selfie like this one on the right.
The image in the middle is blurry, so even though it's more likely we'd see it on Facebook compared to the noise image, it's probably less likely we'd see it compared to the selfie.
But when it comes to images from the black hole, we're posed with a real conundrum: we've never seen a black hole before.
In that case, what is a likely black hole image, and what should we assume about the structure of black holes?
We could try to use images from simulations we've done, like the image of the black hole from "Interstellar," but if we did this, it could cause some serious problems.
What would happen if Einstein's theories didn't hold?
We'd still want to reconstruct an accurate picture of what was going on.
If we bake Einstein's equations too much into our algorithms, we'll just end up seeing what we expect to see.
In other words, we want to leave the option open for there being a giant elephant at the center of our galaxy.
(Laughter) Different types of images have very distinct features.
We can easily tell the difference between black hole simulation images and images we take every day here on Earth.
We need a way to tell our algorithms what images look like without imposing one type of image's features too much.
One way we can try to get around this is by imposing the features of different kinds of images and seeing how the type of image we assume affects our reconstructions.
If all images' types produce a very similar-looking image, then we can start to become more confident that the image assumptions we're making are not biasing this picture that much.
This is a little bit like giving the same description to three different sketch artists from all around the world.
If they all produce a very similar-looking face, then we can start to become confident that they're not imposing their own cultural biases on the drawings.
One way we can try to impose different image features is by using pieces of existing images.
So we take a large collection of images, and we break them down into their little image patches.
We then can treat each image patch a little bit like pieces of a puzzle.
And we use commonly seen puzzle pieces to piece together an image that also fits our telescope measurements.
Different types of images have very distinctive sets of puzzle pieces.
So what happens when we take the same data but we use different sets of puzzle pieces to reconstruct the image?
Let's first start with black hole image simulation puzzle pieces.
OK, this looks reasonable.
This looks like what we expect a black hole to look like.
But did we just get it because we just fed it little pieces of black hole simulation images?
Let's try another set of puzzle pieces from astronomical, non-black hole objects.
OK, we get a similar-looking image.
And then how about pieces from everyday images, like the images you take with your own personal camera?
Great, we see the same image.
When we get the same image from all different sets of puzzle pieces, then we can start to become more confident that the image assumptions we're making aren't biasing the final image we get too much.
Another thing we can do is take the same set of puzzle pieces, such as the ones derived from everyday images, and use them to reconstruct many different kinds of source images.
So in our simulations, we pretend a black hole looks like astronomical non-black hole objects, as well as everyday images like the elephant in the center of our galaxy.
When the results of our algorithms on the bottom look very similar to the simulation's truth image on top, then we can start to become more confident in our algorithms.
And I really want to emphasize here that all of these pictures were created by piecing together little pieces of everyday photographs, like you'd take with your own personal camera.
So an image of a black hole we've never seen before may eventually be created by piecing together pictures we see all the time of people, buildings, trees, cats and dogs.
Imaging ideas like this will make it possible for us to take our very first pictures of a black hole, and hopefully, verify those famous theories on which scientists rely on a daily basis.
But of course, getting imaging ideas like this working would never have been possible without the amazing team of researchers that I have the privilege to work with.
It still amazes me that although I began this project with no background in astrophysics, what we have achieved through this unique collaboration could result in the very first images of a black hole.
But big projects like the Event Horizon Telescope are successful due to all the interdisciplinary expertise different people bring to the table.
We're a melting pot of astronomers, physicists, mathematicians and engineers.
This is what will make it soon possible to achieve something once thought impossible.
I'd like to encourage all of you to go out and help push the boundaries of science, even if it may at first seem as mysterious to you as a black hole.
Thank you.
(Applause)
No one will ever pay you what you're worth.
No one will ever pay you what you're worth.
They'll only ever pay you what they think you're worth.
And you control their thinking, not like this, although that would be cool.
(Laughter) That would be really cool.
Instead, like this: clearly defining and communicating your value are essential to being paid well for your excellence.
Anyone here want to be paid well?
OK, good, then this talk is for everyone.
It's got universal applicability.
It's true if you're a business owner, if you're an employee, if you're a job seeker.
It's true if you're a man or a woman.
Now, I approach this today through the lens of the woman business owner, because in my work I've observed that women underprice more so than men.
The gender wage gap is a well-traveled narrative in this country.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, a woman employee earns just 83 cents for every dollar a man earns.
What may surprise you is that this trend continues even into the entrepreneurial sphere.
A woman business owner earns just 80 cents for every dollar a man earns.
In my work, I've often heard women express that they're uncomfortable communicating their value, especially early on in business ownership.
They say things like, "I don't like to toot my own horn."
"I'd rather let the work speak for itself."
"I don't like to sing my own praises."
I hear very different narratives in working with male business owners, and I think this difference is costing women 20 cents on the dollar.
I'd like to tell you the story of a consulting firm that helps their clients dramatically improve their profitability.
That company is my company.
After my first year in business, I saw the profit increases that my clients were realizing in working with me, and I realized that I needed to reevaluate my pricing.
I was really underpriced relative to the value I was delivering.
It's hard for me to admit to you, because I'm a pricing consultant.
(Laughter) It's what I do.
I help companies price for value.
But nonetheless, it's what I saw, and so I sat down to evaluate my pricing, evaluate my value, and I did that by asking key value questions.
What are my clients' needs and how do I meet them?
What is my unique skill set that makes me better qualified to serve my clients?
What do I do that no one else does?
What problems do I solve for clients?
What value do I add?
I answered these questions and defined the value that my clients get from working with me, calculated their return on investment, and what I saw was that I needed to double my price, double it.
Now, I confess to you, this terrified me.
I'm supposed to be the expert in this, but I'm not cured.
I knew the value was there.
I was convinced the value was there, and I was still scared out of my wits.
What if nobody would pay me that?
What if clients said, "That's ridiculous.
You're ridiculous."
Was I really worth that?
Not my work, mind you, but me.
Was I worth that?
I'm the mother of two beautiful little girls who depend upon me.
I'm a single mom.
What if my business fails?
What if I fail?
But I know how to take my own medicine, the medicine that I prescribe to my clients.
I had done the homework.
I knew the value was there.
So when prospects came, I prepared the proposals with the new higher pricing and sent them out and communicated the value.
How's the story end?
Clients continued to hire me and refer me and recommend me, and I'm still here.
And I share this story because doubts and fears are natural and normal.
But they don't define our value, and they shouldn't limit our earning potential.
I'd like to share another story, about a woman who learned to communicate her value and found her own voice.
She runs a successful web development company and employs several people.
When she first started her firm and for several years thereafter, she would say, "I have a little web design company."
She'd actually use those words with clients.
"I have a little web design company."
In this and in many other small ways, she was diminishing her company in the eyes of prospects and clients, and diminishing herself.
It was really impacting her ability to earn what she was worth.
I believe her language and her style communicated that she didn't believe she had much value to offer.
In her own words, she was practically giving her services away.
And so she began her journey to take responsibility for communicating value to clients and changing her message.
One thing I shared with her is that it's so important to find your own voice, a voice that's authentic and true to you.
Don't try to channel your sister-in-law just because she's a great salesperson or your neighbor who tells a great joke if that's not who you are.
Give up this notion that it's tooting your own horn.
Make it about the other party.
Focus on serving and adding value, and it won't feel like bragging.
What do you love about what you do?
What excites you about the work that you do?
If you connect with that, communicating your value will come naturally.
So she embraced her natural style, found her voice and changed her message.
For one thing, she stopped calling herself a little web design company.
She really found a lot of strength and power in communicating her message.
She's now charging three times as much for web design, and her business is growing.
She told me about a recent meeting with a gruff and sometimes difficult client who had called a meeting questioning progress on search engine optimization.
She said in the old days, that would have been a really intimidating meeting for her, but her mindset was different.
She said, she prepared the information, sat down with the client, said this isn't about me, it's not personal, it's about the client.
She took them through the data, through the numbers, laid out the trends and the progress in her own voice and in her own way, but very directly said, "Here's what we've done for you."
The client sat up and took notice, and said, "OK, I got it."
And she said in describing that meeting, "I didn't feel scared or panicky or small, which is how I used to feel.
Instead I feel like, 'OK, I got this.
I know what I'm doing. I'm confident.'" Being properly valued is so important.
You can hear in this story that the implications range far beyond just finances into the realm of self-respect and self-confidence.
Today I've told two stories, one about defining our value and the other about communicating our value, and these are the two elements to realizing our full earning potential.
That's the equation.
And if you're sitting in the audience today and you're not being paid what you're worth, I'd like to welcome you into this equation.
Just imagine what life could be like, how much more we could do, how much more we could give back, how much more we could plan for the future, how validated and respected we would feel if we could earn our full potential, realize our full value.
No one will ever pay you what you're worth.
They'll only ever pay you what they think you're worth, and you control their thinking.
Thank you.
(Applause)
An article in the Yale Alumni Magazine told the story of Clyde Murphy, a black man who was a member of the Class of 1970.
Clyde was a success story.
After Yale and a law degree from Columbia, Clyde spent the next 30 years as one of America's top civil rights lawyers.
He was also a great husband and father.
But despite his success, personally and professionally, Clyde's story had a sad ending.
In 2010, at the age of 62, Clyde died from a blood clot in his lung.
Clyde's experience was not unique.
Many of his black classmates from Yale also died young.
In fact, the magazine article indicated that 41 years after graduation from Yale, the black members of the Class of 1970 had a death rate that was three times higher than that of the average class member.
It's stunning.
America has recently awakened to a steady drumbeat of unarmed black men being shot by the police.
What is even a bigger story is that every seven minutes, a black person dies prematurely in the United States.
That is over 200 black people die every single day who would not die if the health of blacks and whites were equal.
For the last 25 years, I have been on a mission to understand why does race matter so profoundly for health.
When I started my career, many believed that it was simply about racial differences in income and education.
I discovered that while economic status matters for health, there is more to the story.
So for example, if we look at life expectancy at age 25, at age 25 there's a five-year gap between blacks and whites.
And the gap by education for both whites and blacks is even larger than the racial gap.
At the same time, at every level of education, whites live longer than blacks.
So whites who are high school dropouts live 3.4 years longer than their black counterparts, and the gap is even larger among college graduates.
Most surprising of all, whites who have graduated from high school live longer than blacks with a college degree or more education.
So why does race matter so profoundly for health?
What else is it beyond education and income that might matter?
In the early 1990s, I was asked to review a new book on the health of black America.
I was struck that almost every single one of its 25 chapters said that racism was a factor that was hurting the health of blacks.
All of these researchers were stating that racism was a factor adversely impacting blacks, but they provided no evidence.
For me, that was not good enough.
A few months later, I was speaking at a conference in Washington, DC, and I said that one of the priorities for research was to document the ways in which racism affected health.
A white gentleman stood in the audience and said that while he agreed with me that racism was important, we could never measure racism.
"We measure self-esteem," I said.
"There's no reason why we can't measure racism if we put our minds to it."
And so I put my mind to it and developed three scales.
The first one captured major experiences of discrimination, like being unfairly fired or being unfairly stopped by the police.
But discrimination also occurs in more minor and subtle experiences, and so my second scale, called the Everyday Discrimination Scale, captures nine items that captures experiences like you're treated with less courtesy than others, you receive poorer service than others in restaurants or stores, or people act as if they're afraid of you.
This scale captures ways in which the dignity and the respect of people who society does not value is chipped away on a daily basis.
Research has found that higher levels of discrimination are associated with an elevated risk of a broad range of diseases from blood pressure to abdominal obesity to breast cancer to heart disease and even premature mortality.
Strikingly, some of the effects are observed at a very young age.
For example, a study of black teens found that those who reported higher levels of discrimination as teenagers had higher levels of stress hormones, of blood pressure and of weight at age 20.
However, the stress of discrimination is only one aspect.
Discrimination and racism also matters in other profound ways for health.
For example, there's discrimination in medical care.
In 1999, the National Academy of Medicine asked me to serve on a committee that found, concluded based on the scientific evidence, that blacks and other minorities receive poorer quality care than whites.
This was true for all kinds of medical treatment, from the most simple to the most technologically sophisticated.
One explanation for this pattern was a phenomenon that's called "implicit bias" or "unconscious discrimination."
Research for decades by social psychologists indicates that if you hold a negative stereotype about a group in your subconscious mind and you meet someone from that group, you will discriminate against that person.
You will treat them differently.
It's an unconscious process. It's an automatic process.
It is a subtle process, but it's normal and it occurs even among the most well-intentioned individuals.
But the deeper that I delved into the health impact of racism, the more insidious the effects became.
There is institutional discrimination, which refers to discrimination that exists in the processes of social institutions.
Residential segregation by race, which has led to blacks and whites living in very different neighborhood contexts, is a classic example of institutional racism.
One of America's best-kept secrets is how residential segregation is the secret source that creates racial inequality in the United States.
In America, where you live determines your access to opportunities in education, in employment, in housing and even in access to medical care.
One study of the 171 largest cities in the United States concluded that there is not even one city where whites live under equal conditions to blacks, and that the worst urban contexts in which whites reside is considerably better than the average context of black communities.
Another study found that if you could eliminate statistically residential segregation, you would completely erase black-white differences in income, education and unemployment, and reduce black-white differences in single motherhood by two thirds, all of that driven by segregation.
I have also learned how the negative stereotypes and images of blacks in our culture literally create and sustain both institutional and individual discrimination.
A group of researchers have put together a database that contains the books, magazines and articles that an average college-educated American would read over their lifetime.
It allows us to look within this database and see how Americans have seen words paired together as they grow up in their society.
So when the word "black" appears in American culture, what co-occurs with it?
"Poor," "violent," "religious," "lazy," "cheerful," "dangerous."
When "white" occurs, the frequently co-occurring words are "wealthy," "progressive," "conventional," "stubborn," "successful," "educated."
So when a police officer overreacts when he sees an unarmed black male and perceives him to be violent and dangerous, we are not necessarily dealing with an inherently bad cop.
We may be simply viewing a normal American who is reflecting what he has been exposed to as a result of being raised in this society.
From my own experience, I believe that your race does not have to be a determinant of your destiny.
I migrated to the United States from the Caribbean island of Saint Lucia in the late 1970s in pursuit of higher education, and in the last 40 years, I have done well.
I have had a supportive family, I have worked hard, I have done well.
But it took more for me to be successful.
I received a minority fellowship from the University of Michigan.
Yes. I am an affirmative action baby.
Without affirmative action, I would not be here.
But in the last 40 years, black America has been less successful than I have.
In 1978, black households in the United States earned 59 cents for every dollar of income whites earned.
In 2015, black families still earn 59 cents for every dollar of income that white families receive, and the racial gaps in wealth are even more stunning.
For every dollar of wealth that whites have, black families have six pennies and Latinos have seven pennies.
The fact is, racism is producing a truly rigged system that is systematically disadvantaging some racial groups in the United States.
To paraphrase Plato, there is nothing so unfair as the equal treatment of unequal people.
And that's why I am committed to working to dismantle racism.
I deeply appreciate the fact that I am standing on the shoulders of those who have sacrificed even their lives to open the doors that I have walked through.
I want to ensure that those doors remain open and that everyone can walk through those doors.
Robert Kennedy said, "Each time a man" -- or woman, I would add -- "stands up for an ideal or acts to improve the lot of others or strikes out against injustice, he sends forth a tiny ripple of hope, and those ripples can build a current that can sweep down the mightiest walls of oppression and resistance."
I am optimistic today because all across America, I have seen ripples of hope.
The Boston Medical Center has added lawyers to the medical team so that physicians can improve the health of their patients because the lawyers are addressing the nonmedical needs their patients have.
Loma Linda University has built a gateway college in nearby San Bernardino so that in addition to delivering medical care, they can provide job skills and job training to a predominantly minority, low-income community members so that they will have the skills they need to get a decent job.
In Chapel Hill, North Carolina, the Abecedarian Project has figured out how to ensure that they have lowered the risks for heart disease for blacks in their mid-30s by providing high-quality day care from birth to age five.
In after-school centers across the United States, Wintley Phipps and the US Dream Academy is breaking the cycle of incarceration by providing high-quality academic enrichment and mentoring to the children of prisoners and children who have fallen behind in school.
In Huntsville, Alabama, Oakwood University, a historically black institution, is showing how we can improve the health of black adults by including a health evaluation as a part of freshman orientation and giving those students the tools they need to make healthy choices and providing them annually a health transcript so they can monitor their progress.
And in Atlanta, Georgia, Purpose Built Communities has dismantled the negative effects of segregation by transforming a crime-ridden, drug-infested public housing project into an oasis of mixed-income housing, of academic performance, of great community wellness and of full employment.
And finally, there is the Devine solution.
Professor Patricia Devine of the University of Wisconsin has shown us how we can attack our hidden biases head on and effectively reduce them.
Each one of us can be a ripple of hope.
This work will not always be easy, but former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall has told us, "We must dissent.
We must dissent from the indifference.
We must dissent from the apathy.
We must dissent from the hatred and from the mistrust.
We must dissent because America can do better, because America has no choice but to do better."
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is what my last week looked like.
What I did, who I was with, the main sensations I had for every waking hour ...
If the feeling came as I thought of my dad who recently passed away, or if I could have just definitely avoided the worries and anxieties.
And if you think I'm a little obsessive, you're probably right.
But clearly, from this visualization, you can learn much more about me than from this other one, which are images you're probably more familiar with and which you possibly even have on your phone right now.
Bar charts for the steps you walked, pie charts for the quality of your sleep -- the path of your morning runs.
In my day job, I work with data.
I run a data visualization design company, and we design and develop ways to make information accessible through visual representations.
What my job has taught me over the years is that to really understand data and their true potential, sometimes we actually have to forget about them and see through them instead.
Because data are always just a tool we use to represent reality.
They're always used as a placeholder for something else, but they are never the real thing.
But let me step back for a moment to when I first understood this personally.
In 1994, I was 13 years old.
I was a teenager in Italy.
I was too young to be interested in politics, but I knew that a businessman, Silvio Berlusconi, was running for president for the moderate right.
We lived in a very liberal town, and my father was a politician for the Democratic Party.
And I remember that no one thought that Berlusconi could get elected -- that was totally not an option.
But it happened.
And I remember the feeling very vividly.
It was a complete surprise, as my dad promised that in my town he knew nobody who voted for him.
This was the first time when the data I had gave me a completely distorted image of reality.
My data sample was actually pretty limited and skewed, so probably it was because of that, I thought, I lived in a bubble, and I didn't have enough chances to see outside of it.
Now, fast-forward to November 8, 2016 in the United States.
The internet polls, statistical models, all the pundits agreeing on a possible outcome for the presidential election.
It looked like we had enough information this time, and many more chances to see outside the closed circle we lived in -- but we clearly didn't.
The feeling felt very familiar.
I had been there before.
I think it's fair to say the data failed us this time -- and pretty spectacularly.
We believed in data, but what happened, even with the most respected newspaper, is that the obsession to reduce everything to two simple percentage numbers to make a powerful headline made us focus on these two digits and them alone.
In an effort to simplify the message and draw a beautiful, inevitable red and blue map, we lost the point completely.
We somehow forgot that there were stories -- stories of human beings behind these numbers.
In a different context, but to a very similar point, a peculiar challenge was presented to my team by this woman.
She came to us with a lot of data, but ultimately she wanted to tell one of the most humane stories possible.
She's Samantha Cristoforetti.
She has been the first Italian woman astronaut, and she contacted us before being launched on a six-month-long expedition to the International Space Station.
She told us, "I'm going to space, and I want to do something meaningful with the data of my mission to reach out to people."
A mission to the International Space Station comes with terabytes of data about anything you can possibly imagine -- the orbits around Earth, the speed and position of the ISS and all of the other thousands of live streams from its sensors.
We had all of the hard data we could think of -- just like the pundits before the election -- but what is the point of all these numbers?
People are not interested in data for the sake of it, because numbers are never the point.
They're always the means to an end.
The story we needed to tell is that there is a human being in a teeny box flying in space above your head, and that you can actually see her with your naked eye on a clear night.
So we decided to use data to create a connection between Samantha and all of the people looking at her from below.
We designed and developed what we called "Friends in Space," a web application that simply lets you say "hello" to Samantha from where you are, and "hello" to all the people who are online at the same time from all over the world.
And all of these "hellos" left visible marks on the map as Samantha was flying by and as she was actually waving back every day at us using Twitter from the ISS.
This made people see the mission's data from a very different perspective.
It all suddenly became much more about our human nature and our curiosity, rather than technology.
So data powered the experience, but stories of human beings were the drive.
The very positive response of its thousands of users taught me a very important lesson -- that working with data means designing ways to transform the abstract and the uncountable into something that can be seen, felt and directly reconnected to our lives and to our behaviors, something that is hard to achieve if we let the obsession for the numbers and the technology around them lead us in the process.
But we can do even more to connect data to the stories they represent.
We can remove technology completely.
A few years ago, I met this other woman, Stefanie Posavec -- a London-based designer who shares with me the passion and obsession about data.
We didn't know each other, but we decided to run a very radical experiment, starting a communication using only data, no other language, and we opted for using no technology whatsoever to share our data.
In fact, our only means of communication would be through the old-fashioned post office.
For "Dear Data," every week for one year, we used our personal data to get to know each other -- personal data around weekly shared mundane topics, from our feelings to the interactions with our partners, from the compliments we received to the sounds of our surroundings.
Personal information that we would then manually hand draw on a postcard-size sheet of paper that we would every week send from London to New York, where I live, and from New York to London, where she lives.
The front of the postcard is the data drawing, and the back of the card contains the address of the other person, of course, and the legend for how to interpret our drawing.
The very first week into the project, we actually chose a pretty cold and impersonal topic.
How many times do we check the time in a week?
So here is the front of my card, and you can see that every little symbol represents all of the times that I checked the time, positioned for days and different hours chronologically -- nothing really complicated here.
But then you see in the legend how I added anecdotal details about these moments.
In fact, the different types of symbols indicate why I was checking the time -- what was I doing?
Was I bored? Was I hungry?
Was I late?
Did I check it on purpose or just casually glance at the clock?
And this is the key part -- representing the details of my days and my personality through my data collection.
Using data as a lens or a filter to discover and reveal, for example, my never-ending anxiety for being late, even though I'm absolutely always on time.
Stefanie and I spent one year collecting our data manually to force us to focus on the nuances that computers cannot gather -- or at least not yet -- using data also to explore our minds and the words we use, and not only our activities.
Like at week number three, where we tracked the "thank yous" we said and were received, and when I realized that I thank mostly people that I don't know.
Apparently I'm a compulsive thanker to waitresses and waiters, but I definitely don't thank enough the people who are close to me.
Over one year, the process of actively noticing and counting these types of actions became a ritual.
It actually changed ourselves.
We became much more in tune with ourselves, much more aware of our behaviors and our surroundings.
Over one year, Stefanie and I connected at a very deep level through our shared data diary, but we could do this only because we put ourselves in these numbers, adding the contexts of our very personal stories to them.
It was the only way to make them truly meaningful and representative of ourselves.
I am not asking you to start drawing your personal data, or to find a pen pal across the ocean.
But I'm asking you to consider data -- all kind of data -- as the beginning of the conversation and not the end.
Because data alone will never give us a solution.
And this is why data failed us so badly -- because we failed to include the right amount of context to represent reality -- a nuanced, complicated and intricate reality.
We kept looking at these two numbers, obsessing with them and pretending that our world could be reduced to a couple digits and a horse race, while the real stories, the ones that really mattered, were somewhere else.
What we missed looking at these stories only through models and algorithms is what I call "data humanism."
In the Renaissance humanism, European intellectuals placed the human nature instead of God at the center of their view of the world.
I believe something similar needs to happen with the universe of data.
Now data are apparently treated like a God -- keeper of infallible truth for our present and our future.
The experiences that I shared with you today taught me that to make data faithfully representative of our human nature and to make sure they will not mislead us anymore, we need to start designing ways to include empathy, imperfection and human qualities in how we collect, process, analyze and display them.
I do see a place where, ultimately, instead of using data only to become more efficient, we will all use data to become more humane.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I've been "futuring," which is a term I made up -- (Laughter) about three seconds ago.
I've been futuring for about 20 years, and when I first started, I would sit down with people, and say, "Hey, let's talk 10, 20 years out."
And they'd say, "Great."
And I've been seeing that time horizon get shorter and shorter and shorter, so much so that I met with a CEO two months ago and I said -- we started our initial conversation.
He goes, "I love what you do. I want to talk about the next six months."
(Laughter) We have a lot of problems that we are facing.
These are civilizational-scale problems.
The issue though is, we can't solve them using the mental models that we use right now to try and solve these problems.
Yes, a lot of great technical work is being done, but there is a problem that we need to solve for a priori, before, if we want to really move the needle on those big problems.
"Short-termism."
Right? There's no marches. There's no bracelets.
There's no petitions that you can sign to be against short-termism.
I tried to put one up, and no one signed.
It was weird.
(Laughter) But it prevents us from doing so much.
Short-termism, for many reasons, has pervaded every nook and cranny of our reality.
I just want you to take a second and just think about an issue that you're thinking, working on.
It could be personal, it could be at work or it could be move-the-needle world stuff, and think about how far out you tend to think about the solution set for that.
Because short-termism prevents the CEO from buying really expensive safety equipment.
It'll hurt the bottom line.
So we get the Deepwater Horizon.
Short-termism prevents teachers from spending quality one-on-one time with their students.
So right now in America, a high school student drops out every 26 seconds.
Short-termism prevents Congress -- sorry if there's anyone in here from Congress -- (Laughter) or not really that sorry -- (Laughter) from putting money into a real infrastructure bill.
So what we get is the I-35W bridge collapse over the Mississippi a few years ago, 13 killed.
It wasn't always like this. We did the Panama Canal.
We pretty much have eradicated global polio.
We did the transcontinental railroad, the Marshall Plan.
And it's not just big, physical infrastructure problems and issues.
Women's suffrage, the right to vote.
But in our short-termist time, where everything seems to happen right now and we can only think out past the next tweet or timeline post, we get hyper-reactionary.
So what do we do?
We take people who are fleeing their war-torn country, and we go after them.
We take low-level drug offenders, and we put them away for life.
And then we build McMansions without even thinking about how people are going to get between them and their job.
It's a quick buck.
Now, the reality is, for a lot of these problems, there are some technical fixes, a lot of them.
I call these technical fixes sandbag strategies.
So you know there's a storm coming, the levee is broken, no one's put any money into it, you surround your home with sandbags.
And guess what? It works.
Storm goes away, the water level goes down, you get rid of the sandbags, and you do this storm after storm after storm.
And here's the insidious thing.
A sandbag strategy can get you reelected.
A sandbag strategy can help you make your quarterly numbers.
Now, if we want to move forward into a different future than the one we have right now, because I don't think we've hit -- 2016 is not peak civilization.
(Laughter) There's some more we can do.
But my argument is that unless we shift our mental models and our mental maps on how we think about the short, it's not going to happen.
So what I've developed is something called "longpath," and it's a practice.
And longpath isn't a kind of one-and-done exercise.
I'm sure everyone here at some point has done an off-site with a lot of Post-It notes and whiteboards, and you do -- no offense to the consultants in here who do that -- and you do a long-term plan, and then two weeks later, everyone forgets about it.
Right? Or a week later. If you're lucky, three months.
It's a practice because it's not necessarily a thing that you do.
It's a process where you have to revisit different ways of thinking for every major decision that you're working on.
So I want to go through those three ways of thinking.
So the first: transgenerational thinking.
I love the philosophers: Plato, Socrates, Habermas, Heidegger.
I was raised on them.
But they all did one thing that didn't actually seem like a big deal until I really started kind of looking into this.
And they all took, as a unit of measure for their entire reality of what it meant to be virtuous and good, the single lifespan, from birth to death.
But here's a problem with these issues: they stack up on top of us, because the only way we know how to do something good in the world is if we do it between our birth and our death.
That's what we're programmed to do.
If you go to the self-help section in any bookstore, it's all about you.
Which is great, unless you're dealing with some of these major issues.
And so with transgenerational thinking, which is really kind of transgenerational ethics, you're able to expand how you think about these problems, what is your role in helping to solve them.
Now, this isn't something that just has to be done at the Security Council chamber.
It's something that you can do in a very kind of personal way.
So every once in a while, if I'm lucky, my wife and I like to go out to dinner, and we have three children under the age of seven.
So you can imagine it's a very peaceful, quiet meal.
(Laughter) So we sit down and literally all I want to do is just eat and chill, and my kids have a completely and totally different idea of what we're going to be doing.
And so my first idea is my sandbag strategy, right?
It's to go into my pocket and take out the iPhone and give them "Frozen" or some other bestselling game thing.
And then I stop and I have to kind of put on this transgenerational thinking cap.
I don't do this in the restaurant, because it would be bizarre, but I have to -- I did it once, and that's how I learned it was bizarre.
(Laughter) And you have to kind of think, "OK, I can do this."
But what is this teaching them?
So what does it mean if I actually bring some paper or engage with them in conversation?
It's hard. It's not easy, and I'm making this very personal.
It's actually more traumatic than some of the big issues that I work on in the world -- entertaining my kids at dinner.
But what it does is it connects them here in the present with me, but it also -- and this is the crux of transgenerational thinking ethics -- it sets them up to how they're going to interact with their kids and their kids and their kids.
Second, futures thinking.
When we think about the future, 10, 15 years out, give me a vision of what the future is.
You don't have to give it to me, but think in your head.
And what you're probably going to see is the dominant cultural lens that dominates our thinking about the future right now: technology.
So when we think about the problems, we always put it through a technological lens, a tech-centric, a techno-utopia, and there's nothing wrong with that, but it's something that we have to really think deeply about if we're going to move on these major issues, because it wasn't always like this. Right?
The ancients had their way of thinking about what the future was.
The Church definitely had their idea of what the future could be, and you could actually pay your way into that future. Right?
And luckily for humanity, we got the scientific revolution.
From there, we got the technology, but what has happened -- And by the way, this is not a critique.
I love technology.
Everything in my house talks back to me, from my children to my speakers to everything.
(Laughter) But we've abdicated the future from the high priests in Rome to the high priests of Silicon Valley.
So when we think, well, how are we going to deal with climate or with poverty or homelessness, our first reaction is to think about it through a technology lens.
And look, I'm not advocating that we go to this guy.
I love Joel, don't get me wrong, but I'm not saying we go to Joel.
What I'm saying is we have to rethink our base assumption about only looking at the future in one way, only looking at it through the dominant lens.
Because our problems are so big and so vast that we need to open ourselves up.
So that's why I do everything in my power not to talk about the future.
I talk about futures.
It opens the conversation again.
So when you're sitting and thinking about how do we move forward on this major issue -- it could be at home, it could be at work, it could be again on the global stage -- don't cut yourself off from thinking about something beyond technology as a fix because we're more concerned about technological evolution right now than we are about moral evolution.
And unless we fix for that, we're not going to be able to get out of short-termism and get to where we want to be.
The final, telos thinking. This comes from the Greek root.
Ultimate aim and ultimate purpose.
And it's really asking one question: to what end?
When was the last time you asked yourself: To what end?
And when you asked yourself that, how far out did you go?
Because long isn't long enough anymore.
Three, five years doesn't cut it.
It's 30, 40, 50, 100 years.
In Homer's epic, "The Odyssey," Odysseus had the answer to his "what end."
It was Ithaca.
It was this bold vision of what he wanted -- to return to Penelope.
And I can tell you, because of the work that I'm doing, but also you know it intuitively -- we have lost our Ithaca.
We have lost our "to what end," so we stay on this hamster wheel.
And yes, we're trying to solve these problems, but what comes after we solve the problem?
And unless you define what comes after, people aren't going to move.
The businesses -- this isn't just about business -- but the businesses that do consistently, who break out of short-termism not surprisingly are family-run businesses.
They're transgenerational. They're telos. They think about the futures.
And this is an ad for Patek Philippe. They're 175 years old, and what's amazing is that they literally embody this kind of longpathian sense in their brand, because, by the way, you never actually own a Patek Philippe, and I definitely won't -- (Laughter) unless somebody wants to just throw 25,000 dollars on the stage.
You merely look after it for the next generation.
So it's important that we remember, the future, we treat it like a noun.
It's not. It's a verb.
It requires action.
It requires us to push into it.
It's not this thing that washes over us.
It's something that we actually have total control over.
But in a short-term society, we end up feeling like we don't.
We feel like we're trapped.
We can push through that.
Now I'm getting more comfortable in the fact that at some point in the inevitable future, I will die.
But because of these new ways of thinking and doing, both in the outside world and also with my family at home, and what I'm leaving my kids, I get more comfortable in that fact.
And it's something that a lot of us are really uncomfortable with, but I'm telling you, think it through.
Apply this type of thinking and you can push yourself past what's inevitably very, very uncomfortable.
And it all begins really with yourself asking this question: What is your longpath?
But I ask you, when you ask yourself that now or tonight or behind a steering wheel or in the boardroom or the situation room: push past the longpath, quick, oh, what's my longpath the next three years or five years?
Try and push past your own life if you can because it makes you do things a little bit bigger than you thought were possible.
Yes, we have huge, huge problems out there.
With this process, with this thinking, I think we can make a difference.
I think you can make a difference, and I believe in you guys.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Last year, I got a chance to watch the new "Star Wars" movie, which was fantastic, but one thing kept bugging me.
I don't know if you noticed this or not.
In this entirely technically advanced world, I did not see a single AED anywhere, which was totally shocking -- almost as shocking as not knowing what an AED is, which you guys do know.
But for those at home, an AED is an automated external defibrillator.
It's the device you use when your heart goes into cardiac arrest to shock it back into a normal rhythm, or, as one of the guys I was teaching a class to referred to it as: "The shocky-hearty-box thing."
(Laughter) But I really can't blame the Empire, since health and safety regulations aren't really their first order of business.
Though, even if we -- I think worse than not having an AED would be if there was one there, but just, no one knew where to find it.
These devices can drastically increase your chance of survival -- almost like a tauntaun on Hoth.
(Laughter) But I'm pretty sure that stormtrooper is going to be toast, regardless if we have an AED or not, since what happens is the chest plate is going to be quite hard to get off, and like that tauntaun, the AED has a very short window of time at which it's highly effective.
In this case -- basically, we've got to use it within the first 10 minutes.
The Jedi, on the other hand, have no problems with their outfits.
Those robes open straight up, you can place the pads right onto the chest -- so upper-right-hand side of the chest, lower left, wait for the unit to determine if it's a shockable rhythm and get ready to shock.
But, the Jedi do have a problem.
They have a head appendage issue.
And so I can be totally clear, thinking I'm ready to go, but I'm accidentally touching a tentacle and inadvertently shocking myself.
(Laughter) So before you hit that button, make sure you are clear and everyone else is clear.
Going back to that stormtrooper: If I did get that chest plate off in time, what would you do if you suddenly found there was a Wookiee under there, or possibly two Ewoks?
(Laughter) Well, lucky for us, in the kit there's actually a razor, and we can use that to shave the chest on the upper right-hand side and the lower left.
Wookiees also have another problem.
They have an accessory issue.
What we want to do is remove these -- anything between the two pads we want to remove, since it can cause something called "arcing."
For those who don't know what arcing is, do you remember the Emperor, when he shoots electricity out the ends of his fingers -- (Laughter) that would be kind of like arcing.
Another thing that -- Oh! By the way, he creates that by wearing wool socks under his robes.
(Laughter) We can also get arcing if we have an extremely wet chest.
The electricity travels across the surface instead of through the heart.
We can correct this with the immortal words of Douglas Adams: "Don't panic," which most of us have done today -- and also always having a towel.
So, good words to go by.
The metal bikini -- unfortunately, this is where panic sets in -- like the modern bra, we have to make sure we remove, because this can cause severe arcing along with burns.
But unfortunately this opens up an issue that's almost as controversial as talking about the prequels.
(Laughter) The mere mention of the word "nipples," and people get into a little bit of a tizzy.
By the way, that is not a nipple, that's a cupcake.
(Laughter) Chances are, if you do have to use this, this is going to be on someone you know.
And remember, everyone has nipples, except for Jabba.
(Laughter) But he does love cupcakes.
Speaking about Jabba, if we do have to use an AED on him, remember pad placement is the same, even though he doesn't have nipples.
So it's going to be upper right-hand side, lower left.
If we were going through, we're shocking, getting ready to go -- after we've done the shock, one of the things we need to do is remember to do compression.
The preferred method is 30 compressions and two breaths in the center of the chest, between the nipples, pressing down at least two inches, no more than two and a half, at a rate of at least 100 beats a minute, no more than 120.
Unfortunately, due to the size of Jabba's mouth and also what he puts in said mouth, we may not want to actually do the mouth-to-mouth part.
So instead, we can do compression-only CPR.
The way of remembering the compression-only part is we can actually use the Imperial March.
I would sing it for you -- (Laughter) Unfortunately, that would be more something an interrogation droid would do.
Yoda.
Small little guy, like a baby.
What we do is basically treat him like a baby, in the sense that we're going to place one pad in the center of the chest and one in the back.
If we place them both in the front, they can be too close and cause severe arcing, so we want to avoid that.
Hopefully, this helped to clarify and put some light on some of the darker issues of using an AED in the Star Wars universe, or any universe in total.
I'll leave you with one point.
Remember, if you do find yourself dealing with a Wookiee, do not shave the entire Wookiee.
This takes way too much time, and it only pisses them off.
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
You know, culture was born of the imagination, and the imagination -- the imagination as we know it -- came into being when our species descended from our progenitor, Homo erectus, and, infused with consciousness, began a journey that would carry it to every corner of the habitable world.
For a time, we shared the stage with our distant cousins, Neanderthal, who clearly had some spark of awareness, but -- whether it was the increase in the size of the brain, or the development of language, or some other evolutionary catalyst -- we quickly left Neanderthal gasping for survival.
By the time the last Neanderthal disappeared in Europe, 27,000 years ago, our direct ancestors had already, and for 5,000 years, been crawling into the belly of the earth, where in the light of the flickers of tallow candles, they had brought into being the great art of the Upper Paleolithic.
And I spent two months in the caves of southwest France with the poet Clayton Eshleman, who wrote a beautiful book called "Juniper Fuse."
And you could look at this art and you could, of course, see the complex social organization of the people who brought it into being.
But more importantly, it spoke of a deeper yearning, something far more sophisticated than hunting magic.
And the way Clayton put it was this way.
He said, "You know, clearly at some point, we were all of an animal nature, and at some point, we weren't."
And he viewed proto-shamanism as a kind of original attempt, through ritual, to rekindle a connection that had been irrevocably lost.
So, he saw this art not as hunting magic, but as postcards of nostalgia.
And viewed in that light, it takes on a whole other resonance.
And the most amazing thing about the Upper Paleolithic art is that as an aesthetic expression, it lasted for almost 20,000 years.
If these were postcards of nostalgia, ours was a very long farewell indeed.
And it was also the beginning of our discontent, because if you wanted to distill all of our experience since the Paleolithic, it would come down to two words: how and why.
And these are the slivers of insight upon which cultures have been forged.
Now, all people share the same raw, adaptive imperatives.
We all have children.
We all have to deal with the mystery of death, the world that waits beyond death, the elders who fall away into their elderly years.
All of this is part of our common experience, and this shouldn't surprise us, because, after all, biologists have finally proven it to be true, something that philosophers have always dreamt to be true.
And that is the fact that we are all brothers and sisters.
We are all cut from the same genetic cloth.
All of humanity, probably, is descended from a thousand people who left Africa roughly 70,000 years ago.
But the corollary of that is that, if we all are brothers and sisters and share the same genetic material, all human populations share the same raw human genius, the same intellectual acuity.
And so whether that genius is placed into -- technological wizardry has been the great achievement of the West -- or by contrast, into unraveling the complex threads of memory inherent in a myth, is simply a matter of choice and cultural orientation.
There is no progression of affairs in human experience.
There is no trajectory of progress. There's no pyramid that conveniently places Victorian England at the apex and descends down the flanks to the so-called primitives of the world.
All peoples are simply cultural options, different visions of life itself.
But what do I mean by different visions of life making for completely different possibilities for existence?
Well, let's slip for a moment into the greatest culture sphere ever brought into being by the imagination, that of Polynesia.
10,000 square kilometers, tens of thousands of islands flung like jewels upon the southern sea.
I recently sailed on the Hokulea, named after the sacred star of Hawaii, throughout the South Pacific to make a film about the navigators.
These are men and women who, even today, can name 250 stars in the night sky.
These are men and women who can sense the presence of distant atolls of islands beyond the visible horizon, simply by watching the reverberation of waves across the hull of their vessel, knowing full well that every island group in the Pacific has its unique refractive pattern that can be read with the same perspicacity with which a forensic scientist would read a fingerprint.
These are sailors who in the darkness, in the hull of the vessel, can distinguish as many as 32 different sea swells moving through the canoe at any one point in time, distinguishing local wave disturbances from the great currents that pulsate across the ocean, that can be followed with the same ease that a terrestrial explorer would follow a river to the sea.
Indeed, if you took all of the genius that allowed us to put a man on the moon and applied it to an understanding of the ocean, what you would get is Polynesia.
And if we slip from the realm of the sea into the realm of the spirit of the imagination, you enter the realm of Tibetan Buddhism.
And I recently made a film called "The Buddhist Science of the Mind."
Why did we use that word, science?
What is science but the empirical pursuit of the truth?
What is Buddhism but 2,500 years of empirical observation as to the nature of mind?
I travelled for a month in Nepal with our good friend, Matthieu Ricard, and you'll remember Matthieu famously said to all of us here once at TED, "Western science is a major response to minor needs."
We spend all of our lifetime trying to live to be 100 without losing our teeth.
The Buddhist spends all their lifetime trying to understand the nature of existence.
Our billboards celebrate naked children in underwear.
Their billboards are manuals, prayers to the well-being of all sentient creatures.
And with the blessing of Trulshik Rinpoche, we began a pilgrimage to a curious destination, accompanied by a great doctor.
And the destination was a single room in a nunnery, where a woman had gone into lifelong retreat 55 years before.
And en route, we took darshan from Rinpoche, and he sat with us and told us about the Four Noble Truths, the essence of the Buddhist path.
All life is suffering. That doesn't mean all life is negative.
It means things happen.
The cause of suffering is ignorance.
By that, the Buddha did not mean stupidity; he meant clinging to the illusion that life is static and predictable.
The third noble truth said that ignorance can be overcome.
And the fourth and most important, of course, was the delineation of a contemplative practice that not only had the possibility of a transformation of the human heart, but had 2,500 years of empirical evidence that such a transformation was a certainty.
And so, when this door opened onto the face of a woman who had not been out of that room in 55 years, you did not see a mad woman.
You saw a woman who was more clear than a pool of water in a mountain stream.
And of course, this is what the Tibetan monks told us.
They said, at one point, you know, we don't really believe you went to the moon, but you did.
You may not believe that we achieve enlightenment in one lifetime, but we do.
And if we move from the realm of the spirit to the realm of the physical, to the sacred geography of Peru -- I've always been interested in the relationships of indigenous people that literally believe that the Earth is alive, responsive to all of their aspirations, all of their needs.
And, of course, the human population has its own reciprocal obligations.
I spent 30 years living amongst the people of Chinchero and I always heard about an event that I always wanted to participate in.
Once each year, the fastest young boy in each hamlet is given the honor of becoming a woman.
And for one day, he wears the clothing of his sister and he becomes a transvestite, a waylaka. And for that day, he leads all able-bodied men on a run, but it's not your ordinary run.
You start off at 11,500 feet.
You run down to the base of the sacred mountain, Antakillqa.
You run up to 15,000 feet, descend 3,000 feet.
Climb again over the course of 24 hours.
And of course, the waylakama spin, the trajectory of the route, is marked by holy mounds of Earth, where coke is given to the Earth, libations of alcohol to the wind, the vortex of the feminine is brought to the mountaintop.
And the metaphor is clear: you go into the mountain as an individual, but through exhaustion, through sacrifice, you emerge as a community that has once again reaffirmed its sense of place in the planet.
And at 48, I was the only outsider ever to go through this, only one to finish it.
I only managed to do it by chewing more coca leaves in one day than anyone in the 4,000-year history of the plant.
But these localized rituals become pan-Andean, and these fantastic festivals, like that of the Qoyllur Rit'i, which occurs when the Pleiades reappear in the winter sky.
It's kind of like an Andean Woodstock: 60,000 Indians on pilgrimage to the end of a dirt road that leads to the sacred valley, called the Sinakara, which is dominated by three tongues of the great glacier.
The metaphor is so clear. You bring the crosses from your community, in this wonderful fusion of Christian and pre-Columbian ideas.
You place the cross into the ice, in the shadow of Ausangate, the most sacred of all Apus, or sacred mountains of the Inca.
And then you do the ritual dances that empower the crosses.
Now, these ideas and these events allow us even to deconstruct iconic places that many of you have been to, like Machu Picchu.
Machu Picchu was never a lost city.
On the contrary, it was completely linked in to the 14,000 kilometers of royal roads the Inca made in less than a century.
But more importantly, it was linked in to the Andean notions of sacred geography.
The intiwatana, the hitching post to the sun, is actually an obelisk that constantly reflects the light that falls on the sacred Apu of Machu Picchu, which is Sugarloaf Mountain, called Huayna Picchu.
If you come to the south of the intiwatana, you find an altar.
Climb Huayna Picchu, find another altar.
Take a direct north-south bearing, you find to your astonishment that it bisects the intiwatana stone, goes to the skyline, hits the heart of Salcantay, the second of the most important mountains of the Incan empire.
And then beyond Salcantay, of course, when the southern cross reaches the southernmost point in the sky, directly in that same alignment, the Milky Way overhead.
But what is enveloping Machu Picchu from below?
The sacred river, the Urubamba, or the Vilcanota, which is itself the Earthly equivalent of the Milky Way, but it's also the trajectory that Viracocha walked at the dawn of time when he brought the universe into being.
And where does the river rise?
Right on the slopes of the Koariti.
So, 500 years after Columbus, these ancient rhythms of landscape are played out in ritual.
Now, when I was here at the first TED, I showed this photograph: two men of the Elder Brothers, the descendants, survivors of El Dorado.
These, of course, are the descendants of the ancient Tairona civilization.
If those of you who are here remember that I mentioned that they remain ruled by a ritual priesthood, but the training for the priesthood is extraordinary.
Taken from their families, sequestered in a shadowy world of darkness for 18 years -- two nine-year periods deliberately chosen to evoke the nine months they spend in the natural mother's womb.
All that time, the world only exists as an abstraction, as they are taught the values of their society.
Values that maintain the proposition that their prayers, and their prayers alone, maintain the cosmic balance.
Now, the measure of a society is not only what it does, but the quality of its aspirations.
And I always wanted to go back into these mountains, to see if this could possibly be true, as indeed had been reported by the great anthropologist, Reichel-Dolmatoff.
So, literally two weeks ago, I returned from having spent six weeks with the Elder Brothers on what was clearly the most extraordinary trip of my life.
These really are a people who live and breathe the realm of the sacred, a baroque religiosity that is simply awesome.
They consume more coca leaves than any human population, half a pound per man, per day.
The gourd you see here is -- everything in their lives is symbolic.
Their central metaphor is a loom.
They say, "Upon this loom, I weave my life."
They refer to the movements as they exploit the ecological niches of the gradient as "threads."
When they pray for the dead, they make these gestures with their hands, spinning their thoughts into the heavens.
You can see the calcium buildup on the head of the poporo gourd.
The gourd is a feminine aspect; the stick is a male.
You put the stick in the powder to take the sacred ashes -- well, they're not ashes, they're burnt limestone -- to empower the coca leaf, to change the pH of the mouth to facilitate the absorption of cocaine hydrochloride.
But if you break a gourd, you cannot simply throw it away, because every stroke of that stick that has built up that calcium, the measure of a man's life, has a thought behind it.
Fields are planted in such an extraordinary way, that the one side of the field is planted like that by the women.
The other side is planted like that by the men. Metaphorically, you turn it on the side, and you have a piece of cloth.
And they are the descendants of the ancient Tairona civilization, the greatest goldsmiths of South America, who in the wake of the conquest, retreated into this isolated volcanic massif that soars to 20,000 feet above the Caribbean coastal plain.
There are four societies: the Kogi, the Wiwa, the Kankwano and the Arhuacos.
I traveled with the Arhuacos, and the wonderful thing about this story was that this man, Danilo Villafane -- if we just jump back here for a second.
When I first met Danilo, in the Colombian embassy in Washington, I couldn't help but say, "You know, you look a lot like an old friend of mine."
Well, it turns out he was the son of my friend, Adalberto, from 1974, who had been killed by the FARC.
And I said, "Danilo, you won't remember this, but when you were an infant, I carried you on my back, up and down the mountains."
And because of that, Danilo invited us to go to the very heart of the world, a place where no journalist had ever been permitted.
Not simply to the flanks of the mountains, but to the very iced peaks which are the destiny of the pilgrims.
And this man sitting cross-legged is now a grown-up Eugenio, a man who I've known since 1974.
And this is one of those initiates.
No, it's not true that they're kept in the darkness for 18 years, but they are kept within the confines of the ceremonial men's circle for 18 years.
This little boy will never step outside of the sacred fields that surround the men's hut for all that time, until he begins his journey of initiation.
For that entire time, the world only exists as an abstraction, as he is taught the values of society, including this notion that their prayers alone maintain the cosmic balance.
Before we could begin our journey, we had to be cleansed at the portal of the Earth.
And it was extraordinary to be taken by a priest.
And you see that the priest never wears shoes because holy feet -- there must be nothing between the feet and the Earth for a mamo.
And this is actually the place where the Great Mother sent the spindle into the world that elevated the mountains and created the homeland that they call the heart of the world.
We traveled high into the paramo, and as we crested the hills, we realized that the men were interpreting every single bump on the landscape in terms of their own intense religiosity.
And then of course, as we reached our final destination, a place called Mamancana, we were in for a surprise, because the FARC were waiting to kidnap us.
And so we ended up being taken aside into these huts, hidden away until the darkness.
And then, abandoning all our gear, we were forced to ride out in the middle of the night, in a quite dramatic scene.
It's going to look like a John Ford Western.
And we ran into a FARC patrol at dawn, so it was quite harrowing.
It will be a very interesting film. But what was fascinating is that the minute there was a sense of dangers, the mamos went into a circle of divination.
And of course, this is a photograph literally taken the night we were in hiding, as they divine their route to take us out of the mountains.
We were able to, because we had trained people in filmmaking, continue with our work, and send our Wiwa and Arhuaco filmmakers to the final sacred lakes to get the last shots for the film, and we followed the rest of the Arhuaco back to the sea, taking the elements from the highlands to the sea.
And here you see how their sacred landscape has been covered by brothels and hotels and casinos, and yet, still they pray.
And it's an amazing thing to think that this close to Miami, two hours from Miami, there is an entire civilization of people praying every day for your well-being.
They call themselves the Elder Brothers.
They dismiss the rest of us who have ruined the world as the Younger Brothers. They cannot understand why it is that we do what we do to the Earth.
Now, if we slip to another end of the world, I was up in the high Arctic to tell a story about global warming, inspired in part by the former Vice President's wonderful book.
And what struck me so extraordinary was to be again with the Inuit -- a people who don't fear the cold, but take advantage of it.
A people who find a way, with their imagination, to carve life out of that very frozen.
A people for whom blood on ice is not a sign of death, but an affirmation of life.
And yet tragically, when you now go to those northern communities, you find to your astonishment that whereas the sea ice used to come in in September and stay till July, in a place like Kanak in northern Greenland, it literally comes in now in November and stays until March.
So, their entire year has been cut in half.
Now, I want to stress that none of these peoples that I've been quickly talking about here are disappearing worlds.
These are not dying peoples.
On the contrary, you know, if you have the heart to feel and the eyes to see, you discover that the world is not flat.
The world remains a rich tapestry.
It remains a rich topography of the spirit.
These myriad voices of humanity are not failed attempts at being new, failed attempts at being modern.
They're unique facets of the human imagination.
They're unique answers to a fundamental question: what does it mean to be human and alive?
And when asked that question, they respond with 6,000 different voices.
And collectively, those voices become our human repertoire for dealing with the challenges that will confront us in the ensuing millennia.
Our industrial society is scarcely 300 years old.
That shallow history shouldn't suggest to anyone that we have all of the answers for all of the questions that will confront us in the ensuing millennia.
The myriad voices of humanity are not failed attempts at being us.
They are unique answers to that fundamental question: what does it mean to be human and alive?
And there is indeed a fire burning over the Earth, taking with it not only plants and animals, but the legacy of humanity's brilliance.
Right now, as we sit here in this room, of those 6,000 languages spoken the day that you were born, fully half aren't being taught to children.
So, you're living through a time when virtually half of humanity's intellectual, social and spiritual legacy is being allowed to slip away.
This does not have to happen.
These peoples are not failed attempts at being modern -- quaint and colorful and destined to fade away as if by natural law.
In every case, these are dynamic, living peoples being driven out of existence by identifiable forces.
That's actually an optimistic observation, because it suggests that if human beings are the agents of cultural destruction, we can also be, and must be, the facilitators of cultural survival.
Thank you very much.
Twenty years ago, when I was a barrister and human rights lawyer in full-time legal practice in London, and the highest court in the land still convened, some would say by an accident of history, in this building here, I met a young man who had just quit his job in the British Foreign Office.
When I asked him, "Why did you leave," he told me this story.
He had gone to his boss one morning and said, "Let's do something about human rights abuses in China."
And his boss had replied, "We can't do anything about human rights abuses in China because we have trade relations with China."
So my friend went away with his tail between his legs, and six months later, he returned again to his boss, and he said this time, "Let's do something about human rights in Burma," as it was then called.
His boss once again paused and said, "Oh, but we can't do anything about human rights in Burma because we don't have any trade relations with Burma."
(Laughter) This was the moment he knew he had to leave.
It wasn't just the hypocrisy that got to him.
It was the unwillingness of his government to engage in conflict with other governments, in tense discussions, all the while, innocent people were being harmed.
We are constantly told that conflict is bad that compromise is good; that conflict is bad but consensus is good; that conflict is bad and collaboration is good.
But in my view, that's far too simple a vision of the world.
We cannot know whether conflict is bad unless we know who is fighting, why they are fighting and how they are fighting.
And compromises can be thoroughly rotten if they harm people who are not at the table, people who are vulnerable, disempowered, people whom we have an obligation to protect.
Now, you might be somewhat skeptical of a lawyer arguing about the benefits of conflict and creating problems for compromise, but I did also qualify as a mediator, and these days, I spend my time giving talks about ethics for free.
So as my bank manager likes to remind me, I'm downwardly mobile.
But if you accept my argument, it should change not just the way we lead our personal lives, which I wish to put to one side for the moment, but it will change the way we think about major problems of public health and the environment.
Let me explain.
Every middle schooler in the United States, my 12-year-old daughter included, learns that there are three branches of government, the legislative, the executive and the judicial branch.
James Madison wrote, "If there is any principle more sacred in our Constitution, and indeed in any free constitution, than any other, it is that which separates the legislative, the executive and the judicial powers."
Now, the framers were not just concerned about the concentration and exercise of power.
They also understood the perils of influence.
Judges cannot determine the constitutionality of laws if they participate in making those laws, nor can they hold the other branches of government accountable if they collaborate with them or enter into close relationships with them.
The Constitution is, as one famous scholar put it, "an invitation to struggle."
And we the people are served when those branches do, indeed, struggle with each other.
Now, we recognize the importance of struggle not just in the public sector between our branches of government.
We also know it too in the private sector, in relationships among corporations.
Let's imagine that two American airlines get together and agree that they will not drop the price of their economy class airfares below 250 dollars a ticket.
That is collaboration, some would say collusion, not competition, and we the people are harmed because we pay more for our tickets.
Imagine similarly two airlines were to say, "Look, Airline A, we'll take the route from LA to Chicago," and Airline B says, "We'll take the route from Chicago to DC, and we won't compete."
Once again, that's collaboration or collusion instead of competition, and we the people are harmed.
So we understand the importance of struggle when it comes to relationships between branches of government, the public sector.
We also understand the importance of conflict when it comes to relationships among corporations, the private sector.
But where we have forgotten it is in the relationships between the public and the private.
And governments all over the world are collaborating with industry to solve problems of public health and the environment, often collaborating with the very corporations that are creating or exacerbating the problems they are trying to solve.
We are told that these relationships are a win-win.
But what if someone is losing out?
Let me give you some examples.
A United Nations agency decided to address a serious problem: poor sanitation in schools in rural India.
They did so not just in collaboration with national and local governments but also with a television company and with a major multinational soda company.
In exchange for less than one million dollars, that corporation received the benefits of a months-long promotional campaign including a 12-hour telethon all using the company's logo and color scheme.
This was an arrangement which was totally understandable from the corporation's point of view.
It enhances the reputation of the company and it creates brand loyalty for its products.
But in my view, this is profoundly problematic for the intergovernmental agency, an agency that has a mission to promote sustainable living.
By increasing consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages made from scarce local water supplies and drunk out of plastic bottles in a country that is already grappling with obesity, this is neither sustainable from a public health nor an environmental point of view.
And in order to solve one public health problem, the agency is sowing the seeds of another.
This is just one example of dozens I discovered in researching a book on the relationships between government and industry.
I could also have told you about the initiatives in parks in London and throughout Britain, involving the same company, promoting exercise, or indeed of the British government creating voluntary pledges in partnership with industry instead of regulating industry.
These collaborations or partnerships have become the paradigm in public health, and once again, they make sense from the point of view of industry.
It allows them to frame public health problems and their solutions in ways that are least threatening to, most consonant with their commercial interests.
So obesity becomes a problem of individual decision-making, of personal behavior, personal responsibility and lack of physical activity.
It is not a problem, when framed this way, of a multinational food system involving major corporations.
And again, I don't blame industry.
Industry naturally engages in strategies of influence to promote its commercial interests.
But governments have a responsibility to develop counterstrategies to protect us and the common good.
The mistake that governments are making when they collaborate in this way with industry is that they conflate the common good with common ground.
When you collaborate with industry, you necessarily put off the table things that might promote the common good to which industry will not agree.
Industry will not agree to increased regulation unless it believes this will stave off even more regulation or perhaps knock some competitors out of the market.
Nor can companies agree to do certain things, for example raise the prices of their unhealthy products, because that would violate competition law, as we've established.
So our governments should not confound the common good and common ground, especially when common ground means reaching agreement with industry.
I want to give you another example, moving from high-profile collaboration to something that is below ground both literally and figuratively: the hydraulic fracturing of natural gas.
Imagine that you purchase a plot of land not knowing the mineral rights have been sold.
This is before the fracking boom.
You build your dream home on that plot, and shortly afterwards, you discover that a gas company is building a well pad on your land.
That was the plight of the Hallowich family.
Within a very short period of time, they began to complain of headaches, of sore throats, of itchy eyes, in addition to the interference of the noise, vibration and the bright lights from the flaring of natural gas.
They were very vocal in their criticisms, and then they fell silent.
And thanks to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, where this image appeared, and one other newspaper, we discovered why they fell silent.
The newspapers went to the court and said, "What happened to the Hallowiches?"
And it turned out the Hallowiches had made a secret settlement with the gas operators, and it was a take-it-or-leave-it settlement.
The gas company said, you can have a six-figure sum to move elsewhere and start your lives again, but in return you must promise not to speak of your experience with our company, not to speak of your experience with fracking, not to speak about the health consequences that might have been revealed by a medical examination.
Now, I do not blame the Hallowiches for accepting a take-it-or-leave-it settlement and starting their lives elsewhere.
And one can understand why the company would wish to silence a squeaky wheel.
What I want to point the finger at is the legal and regulatory system, a system in which there are networks of agreements just like this one which serve to silence people and seal off data points from public health experts and epidemiologists, a system in which regulators will even refrain from issuing a violation notice in the event of pollution if the landowner and the gas company agree to settle.
This is a system which isn't just bad from a public health point of view; it exposes hazards to local families who remain in the dark.
Now, I have given you two examples not because they are isolated examples.
They are examples of a systemic problem.
I could share some counterexamples, the case for example of the public official who sues the pharmaceutical company for concealing the fact that its antidepressant increases suicidal thoughts in adolescents.
I can tell you about the regulator who went after the food company for exaggerating the purported health benefits of its yogurt.
And I can tell you about the legislator who despite heavy lobbying directed at both sides of the aisle pushes for environmental protections.
These are isolated examples, but they are beacons of light in the darkness, and they can show us the way.
I began by suggesting that sometimes we need to engage in conflict.
Governments should tussle with, struggle with, at times engage in direct conflict with corporations.
This is not because governments are inherently good and corporations are inherently evil.
Each is capable of good or ill.
But corporations understandably act to promote their commercial interests, and they do so either sometimes undermining or promoting the common good.
But it is the responsibility of governments to protect and promote the common good.
And we should insist that they fight to do so.
This is because governments are the guardians of public health; governments are the guardians of the environment; and it is governments that are guardians of these essential parts of our common good.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the next six minutes that you will listen to me, the world will have lost three mothers while delivering their babies: one, because of a severe complication; second, because she will be a teenager and her body will not be prepared for birth; but the third, only because of lack of access to basic clean tools at the time of childbirth.
She will not be alone.
Over one million mothers and babies die every single year in the developing world, only because of lack of access to basic cleanliness while giving birth to their babies.
My journey began on a hot summer afternoon in India in 2008, when after a day of meeting women and listening to their needs, I landed in a thatched hut with a midwife.
As a mother, I was very curious on how she delivered babies in her house.
After a deep and engaging conversation with her on how she considered it a profound calling to do what she was doing, I asked her a parting question: Do you have the tools that you need to deliver the babies?
I got to see her tool.
"This is what I use to separate the mother and the baby," she said.
Unsure of how to react, I held this agricultural tool in my hand in shock.
I took a picture of this, hugged her and walked away.
My mind was flooded with reflections of my own infection that I had to struggle with for a year past childbirth despite having access to the best medical care, and memories of my conversation with my father, who had lost his mom to childbirth, on how he thought his life would be so different if she would have been just next to him growing up.
As a product developer, I started my process of research.
I was very excited to find that there was a product out there called the Clean Birth Kit.
But I just couldn't buy one for months.
They were only assembled based on availability of funding.
Finally, when I got my hands on one, I was in shock again.
I would never use these tools to deliver my baby, I thought.
But to confirm my instincts, I went back to the women, some of whom had the experience of using this product.
Lo and behold, they had the same reaction and more.
The women said they would rather deliver on a floor than on a plastic sheet that smeared blood all over.
They were absolutely right -- it would cause more infection.
The thread provided was a highway to bacterial infection through the baby's umbilical cord, and the blade used was the kind that men used for shaving, and they did not want it anywhere close to them.
There was no incentive for anybody to redesign this product, because it was based on charity.
The women were never consulted in this process.
And to my surprise, the need was not only in homes but also in institutional settings with high-volume births.
Situations in remote areas were even more daunting.
This had to change.
I made this my area of focus.
I started the design process by collecting feedback, developing prototypes and engaging with various stakeholders researching global protocols.
With every single prototype, we went back to the women to ensure that we had a product for them.
What I learned through this process was that these women, despite their extreme poverty, placed great value on their health and well-being.
They were absolutely not poor in mind.
As with all of us, they would appreciate a well-designed product developed for their needs.
After many iterations working with experts, medical health professionals and the women themselves, I should say it was not an easy process at all, but we had a simple and beautiful design.
For a dollar more than what the existing product was offered for, at three dollars, we were able to deliver "janma," a clean birth kit in a purse.
Janma, meaning "birth," contained a blood-absorbing sheet for the woman to give birth on, a surgical scalpel, a cord clamp, a bar of soap, a pair of gloves and the first cloth to wipe the baby clean.
All this came packaged in a beautiful purse that was given to the mother as a gift after all her hard work, that she carried home with pride as a symbol of prosperity.
One woman reacted to this gift.
She said, "Is this really mine? Can I keep it?"
The other one said, "Will you give me a different color when I have my next baby?"
(Laughter) Better yet, a woman expressed that this was the first purse that she had ever owned in her life.
The kit, aside from its symbolism and its simplicity, is designed to follow globally recommended medical protocol and serves as a behavior-change tool to follow steps one after the other.
It can not only be used in homes, but also in institutional settings.
To date, our kit has impacted over 600,000 mothers and babies around the world.
It's a humbling experience to watch these numbers grow, and I cannot wait until we reach a hundred million.
But women's health issues do not end here.
There are thousands of simple issues that require low-cost interventions.
We have facts to prove that if we invest in women and girls and provide them with better health and well-being, they will deliver healthier and wealthier and prosperous communities.
We have to start by bringing simplicity and dignity to women's health issues: from reducing maternal mortality, to breaking taboos, to empowering women to take control of their own lives.
This is my dream.
But it is not possible to achieve it without engaging men and women alike from around the world -- yes, all of you.
I recently heard this lyric by Leonard Cohen: "Ring the bells that still can ring.
Forget your perfect offering.
There is a crack in everything.
That's how the light gets in."
This is my bit of light.
But we need more light.
In fact, we need huge spotlights placed in the world of women's health if we need a better tomorrow.
We should never forget that women are at the center of a sustainable world, and we do not exist without them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I would like to start by telling you about one of my greatest friends, Okoloma Maduewesi.
Okoloma lived on my street and looked after me like a big brother.
If I liked a boy, I would ask Okoloma's opinion.
Okoloma died in the notorious Sosoliso plane crash in Nigeria in December of 2005.
Almost exactly seven years ago.
Okoloma was a person I could argue with, laugh with and truly talk to.
He was also the first person to call me a feminist.
I was about fourteen, we were at his house, arguing.
Both of us bristling with half bit knowledge from books that we had read.
I don't remember what this particular argument was about, but I remember that as I argued and argued, Okoloma looked at me and said, "You know, you're a feminist."
It was not a compliment.
(Laughter) I could tell from his tone, the same tone that you would use to say something like, "You're a supporter of terrorism."
(Laughter) I did not know exactly what this word "feminist" meant, and I did not want Okoloma to know that I did not know.
So I brushed it aside, and I continued to argue.
And the first thing I planned to do when I got home was to look up the word "feminist" in the dictionary.
Now fast forward to some years later, I wrote a novel about a man who among other things beats his wife and whose story doesn't end very well.
While I was promoting the novel in Nigeria, a journalist, a nice, well-meaning man, told me he wanted to advise me.
And for the Nigerians here, I'm sure we're all familiar with how quick our people are to give unsolicited advice.
He told me that people were saying that my novel was feminist and his advice to me -- and he was shaking his head sadly as he spoke -- was that I should never call myself a feminist because feminists are women who are unhappy because they cannot find husbands.
(Laughter) So I decided to call myself "a happy feminist."
Then an academic, a Nigerian woman told me that feminism was not our culture and that feminism wasn't African, and that I was calling myself a feminist because I had been corrupted by "Western books."
Which amused me, because a lot of my early readings were decidedly unfeminist.
I think I must have read every single Mills &amp; Boon romance published before I was sixteen.
And each time I tried to read those books called "the feminist classics," I'd get bored, and I really struggled to finish them.
But anyway, since feminism was un-African, I decided that I would now call myself "a happy African feminist."
At some point I was a happy African feminist who does not hate men and who likes lip gloss and who wears high heels for herself but not for men.
(Laughter) Of course a lot of this was tongue-in-cheek, but that word feminist is so heavy with baggage, negative baggage.
You hate men, you hate bras, you hate African culture, that sort of thing.
Now here's a story from my childhood.
When I was in primary school, my teacher said at the beginning of term that she would give the class a test and whoever got the highest score would be the class monitor.
Now, class monitor was a big deal.
If you were a class monitor, you got to write down the names of noisemakers -- (Laughter) which was having enough power of its own.
But my teacher would also give you a cane to hold in your hand while you walk around and patrol the class for noisemakers.
Now, of course you were not actually allowed to use the cane.
But it was an exciting prospect for the nine-year-old me.
I very much wanted to be the class monitor.
And I got the highest score on the test.
Then, to my surprise, my teacher said that the monitor had to be a boy.
She had forgotten to make that clear earlier because she assumed it was ... obvious.
(Laughter) A boy had the second highest score on the test, and he would be monitor.
Now, what was even more interesting about this is that the boy was a sweet, gentle soul who had no interest in patrolling the class with the cane, while I was full of ambition to do so.
But I was female and he was male, and so he became the class monitor.
And I've never forgotten that incident.
I often make the mistake of thinking that something that is obvious to me is just as obvious to everyone else.
Now, take my dear friend Louis for example.
Louis is a brilliant, progressive man, and we would have conversations and he would tell me, "I don't know what you mean by things being different or harder for women.
Maybe in the past, but not now."
And I didn't understand how Louis could not see what seems so self-evident.
Then one evening, in Lagos, Louis and I went out with friends.
And for people here who are not familiar with Lagos, there's that wonderful Lagos' fixture, the sprinkling of energetic men who hang around outside establishments and very dramatically "help" you park your car.
I was impressed with the particular theatrics of the man who found us a parking spot that evening.
And so as we were leaving, I decided to leave him a tip.
I opened my bag, put my hand inside my bag, brought out my money that I had earned from doing my work, and I gave it to the man.
And he, this man who was very grateful and very happy, took the money from me, looked across at Louis and said, "Thank you, sir!"
(Laughter) Louis looked at me, surprised, and asked, "Why is he thanking me? I didn't give him the money."
Then I saw realization dawn on Louis' face.
The man believed that whatever money I had had ultimately come from Louis.
Because Louis is a man.
Men and women are different.
We have different hormones, we have different sexual organs, we have different biological abilities.
Women can have babies, men can't.
At least not yet.
(Laughter) Men have testosterone and are in general physically stronger than women.
There's slightly more women than men in the world, about 52 percent of the world's population is female.
But most of the positions of power and prestige are occupied by men.
The late Kenyan Nobel Peace laureate, Wangari Maathai, put it simply and well when she said: "The higher you go, the fewer women there are."
In the recent US elections we kept hearing of the Lilly Ledbetter law, and if we go beyond the nicely alliterative name of that law, it was really about a man and a woman doing the same job, being equally qualified, and the man being paid more because he's a man.
So in the literal way, men rule the world, and this made sense a thousand years ago because human beings lived then in a world in which physical strength was the most important attribute for survival.
The physically stronger person was more likely to lead, and men, in general, are physically stronger.
Of course there are many exceptions.
(Laughter) But today we live in a vastly different world.
The person more likely to lead is not the physically stronger person; it is the more creative person, the more intelligent person, the more innovative person, and there are no hormones for those attributes.
A man is as likely as a woman to be intelligent, to be creative, to be innovative.
We have evolved; but it seems to me that our ideas of gender had not evolved.
Some weeks ago, I walked into a lobby of one of the best Nigerian hotels.
I thought about naming the hotel, but I thought I probably shouldn't.
And a guard at the entrance stopped me and asked me annoying questions, because their automatic assumption is that a Nigerian female walking into a hotel alone is a sex worker.
And by the way, why do these hotels focus on the ostensible supply rather than the demand for sex workers?
In Lagos I cannot go alone into many "reputable" bars and clubs.
They just don't let you in if you're a woman alone, you have to be accompanied by a man.
Each time I walk into a Nigerian restaurant with a man, the waiter greets the man and ignores me.
The waiters are products -- (Laughter) At this some women felt like, "Yes! I thought that!"
The waiters are products of a society that has taught them that men are more important than women.
And I know that waiters don't intend any harm.
But it's one thing to know intellectually and quite another to feel it emotionally.
Each time they ignore me, I feel invisible.
I feel upset.
I want to tell them that I am just as human as the man, that I'm just as worthy of acknowledgment.
These are little things, but sometimes it's the little things that sting the most.
And not long ago, I wrote an article about what it means to be young and female in Lagos, and the printers told me, "It was so angry."
Of course it was angry!
(Laughter) I am angry.
Gender as it functions today is a grave injustice.
We should all be angry.
Anger has a long history of bringing about positive change; but, in addition to being angry, I'm also hopeful.
Because I believe deeply in the ability of human beings to make and remake themselves for the better.
Gender matters everywhere in the world, but I want to focus on Nigeria and on Africa in general, because it is where I know, and because it is where my heart is.
And I would like today to ask that we begin to dream about and plan for a different world, a fairer world, a world of happier men and happier women who are truer to themselves.
And this is how to start: we must raise our daughters differently.
We must also raise our sons differently.
We do a great disservice to boys on how we raise them; we stifle the humanity of boys.
We define masculinity in a very narrow way, masculinity becomes this hard, small cage and we put boys inside the cage.
We teach boys to be afraid of fear.
We teach boys to be afraid of weakness, of vulnerability.
We teach them to mask their true selves, because they have to be, in Nigerian speak, "hard man!"
In secondary school, a boy and a girl, both of them teenagers, both of them with the same amount of pocket money, would go out and then the boy would be expected always to pay, to prove his masculinity.
And yet we wonder why boys are more likely to steal money from their parents.
What if both boys and girls were raised not to link masculinity with money?
What if the attitude was not "the boy has to pay" but rather "whoever has more should pay?"
Now, of course because of that historical advantage, it is mostly men who will have more today, but if we start raising children differently, then in fifty years, in a hundred years, boys will no longer have the pressure of having to prove this masculinity.
But by far the worst thing we do to males, by making them feel that they have to be hard, is that we leave them with very fragile egos.
The more "hard man" the man feels compelled to be, the weaker his ego is.
And then we do a much greater disservice to girls because we raise them to cater to the fragile egos of men.
We teach girls to shrink themselves, to make themselves smaller, we say to girls, "You can have ambition, but not too much."
(Laughter) "You should aim to be successful, but not too successful, otherwise you would threaten the man."
If you are the breadwinner in your relationship with a man, you have to pretend that you're not, especially in public, otherwise you will emasculate him.
But what if we question the premise itself?
Why should a woman's success be a threat to a man?
What if we decide to simply dispose of that word, and I don't think there's an English word I dislike more than "emasculation."
A Nigerian acquaintance once asked me if I was worried that men would be intimidated by me.
I was not worried at all.
In fact, it had not occurred to me to be worried because a man who would be intimidated by me is exactly the kind of man I would have no interest in.
(Laughter) (Applause) But still I was really struck by this.
Because I'm female, I'm expected to aspire to marriage; I'm expected to make my life choices always keeping in mind that marriage is the most important.
A marriage can be a good thing; it can be a source of joy and love and mutual support.
But why do we teach girls to aspire to marriage and we don't teach boys the same?
I know a woman who decided to sell her house because she didn't want to intimidate a man who might marry her.
I know an unmarried woman in Nigeria who, when she goes to conferences, wears a wedding ring because according to her, she wants the other participants in the conference to "give her respect."
I know young women who are under so much pressure from family, from friends, even from work to get married, and they're pushed to make terrible choices.
A woman at a certain age who is unmarried, our society teaches her to see it as a deep, personal failure.
And a man at a certain age who is unmarried, we just think he hasn't come around to making his pick.
(Laughter) It's easy for us to say, "Oh, but women can just say no to all of this."
But the reality is more difficult and more complex.
We're all social beings.
We internalize ideas from our socialization.
Even the language we use in talking about marriage and relationships illustrates this.
The language of marriage is often the language of ownership rather than the language of partnership.
We use the word "respect" to mean something a woman shows a man but often not something a man shows a woman.
Both men and women in Nigeria will say -- this is an expression I'm very amused by -- "I did it for peace in my marriage."
Now, when men say it, it is usually about something that they should not be doing anyway.
(Laughter) Sometimes they say it to their friends, it's something to say to their friends in a kind of fondly exasperated way, you know, something that ultimately proves how masculine they are, how needed, how loved.
"Oh, my wife said I can't go to the club every night, so for peace in my marriage, I do it only on weekends."
(Laughter) Now, when a woman says, "I did it for peace in my marriage," she's usually talking about giving up a job, a dream, a career.
We teach females that in relationships, compromise is what women do.
We raise girls to see each other as competitors -- not for jobs or for accomplishments, which I think can be a good thing, but for attention of men.
We teach girls that they cannot be sexual beings in the way that boys are.
If we have sons, we don't mind knowing about our sons' girlfriends.
But our daughters' boyfriends? God forbid.
(Laughter) But of course when the time is right, we expect those girls to bring back the perfect man to be their husbands.
We police girls, we praise girls for virginity, but we don't praise boys for virginity, and it's always made me wonder how exactly this is supposed to work out because ...
(Laughter) (Applause) I mean, the loss of virginity is usually a process that involves ...
Recently a young woman was gang raped in a university in Nigeria, I think some of us know about that.
And the response of many young Nigerians, both male and female, was something along the lines of this: "Yes, rape is wrong.
But what is a girl doing in a room with four boys?"
Now, if we can forget the horrible inhumanity of that response, these Nigerians have been raised to think of women as inherently guilty, and they have been raised to expect so little of men that the idea of men as savage beings without any control is somehow acceptable.
We teach girls shame.
"Close your legs." "Cover yourself."
We make them feel as though by being born female they're already guilty of something.
And so, girls grow up to be women who cannot see they have desire.
They grow up to be women who silence themselves.
They grow up to be women who cannot say what they truly think, and they grow up -- and this is the worst thing we did to girls -- they grow up to be women who have turned pretense into an art form.
(Applause) I know a woman who hates domestic work, she just hates it, but she pretends that she likes it, because she's been taught that to be "good wife material" she has to be -- to use that Nigerian word -- very "homely."
And then she got married, and after a while her husband's family began to complain that she had changed.
(Laughter) Actually, she had not changed, she just got tired of pretending.
The problem with gender, is that it prescribes how we should be rather than recognizing how we are.
Now imagine how much happier we would be, how much freer to be our true individual selves, if we didn't have the weight of gender expectations.
Boys and girls are undeniably different biologically, but socialization exaggerates the differences and then it becomes a self-fulfilling process.
Now, take cooking for example.
Today women in general are more likely to do the housework than men, the cooking and cleaning.
But why is that?
Is it because women are born with a cooking gene?
(Laughter) Or because over years they have been socialized to see cooking as their role?
Actually, I was going to say that maybe women are born with a cooking gene, until I remember that the majority of the famous cooks in the world, whom we give the fancy title of "chefs," are men.
I used to look up to my grandmother who was a brilliant, brilliant woman, and wonder how she would have been if she had the same opportunities as men when she was growing up.
Now today, there are many more opportunities for women than there were during my grandmother's time because of changes in policy, changes in law, all of which are very important.
But what matters even more is our attitude, our mindset, what we believe and what we value about gender.
What if in raising children we focus on ability instead of gender?
What if in raising children we focus on interest instead of gender?
I know a family who have a son and a daughter, both of whom are brilliant at school, who are wonderful, lovely children.
When the boy is hungry, the parents say to the girl, "Go and cook Indomie noodles for your brother."
(Laughter) Now, the daughter doesn't particularly like to cook Indomie noodles, but she's a girl, and so she has to.
Now, what if the parents, from the beginning, taught both the boy and the girl to cook Indomie?
Cooking, by the way, is a very useful skill for boys to have.
I've never thought it made sense to leave such a crucial thing, the ability to nourish oneself -- (Laughter) in the hands of others.
(Applause) I know a woman who has the same degree and the same job as her husband.
When they get back from work, she does most of the housework, which I think is true for many marriages.
But what struck me about them was that whenever her husband changed the baby's diaper, she said "thank you" to him.
Now, what if she saw this as perfectly normal and natural that he should, in fact, care for his child?
(Laughter) I'm trying to unlearn many of the lessons of gender that I internalized when I was growing up.
But I sometimes still feel very vulnerable in the face of gender expectations.
The first time I taught a writing class in graduate school, I was worried.
I wasn't worried about the material I would teach because I was well-prepared, and I was going to teach what I enjoy teaching.
Instead, I was worried about what to wear.
I wanted to be taken seriously.
I knew that because I was female I will automatically have to prove my worth.
And I was worried that if I looked too feminine, I would not be taken seriously.
I really wanted to wear my shiny lip gloss and my girly skirt, but I decided not to.
Instead, I wore a very serious, very manly and very ugly suit.
(Laughter) Because the sad truth is that when it comes to appearance we start off with men as the standard, as the norm.
If a man is getting ready for a business meeting, he doesn't worry about looking too masculine and therefore not being taken for granted.
If a woman has to get ready for business meeting, she has to worry about looking too feminine and what it says and whether or not she will be taken seriously.
I wish I had not worn that ugly suit that day.
I've actually banished it from my closet, by the way.
Had I then the confidence that I have now to be myself, my students would have benefited even more from my teaching, because I would have been more comfortable and more fully and more truly myself.
I have chosen to no longer be apologetic for my femaleness and for my femininity.
(Applause) And I want to be respected in all of my femaleness because I deserve to be.
Gender is not an easy conversation to have.
For both men and women, to bring up gender is sometimes to encounter almost immediate resistance.
I can imagine some people here are actually thinking, "Women too do sef."
Some of the men here might be thinking, "OK, all of this is interesting, but I don't think like that."
And that is part of the problem.
That many men do not actively think about gender or notice gender is part of the problem of gender.
That many men, say, like my friend Louis, that everything is fine now.
And that many men do nothing to change it.
If you are a man and you walk into a restaurant with a woman and the waiter greets only you, does it occur to you to ask the waiter, "Why haven't you greeted her?"
Because gender can be -- (Laughter) Actually, we may repose part of a longer version of this talk.
So, because gender can be a very uncomfortable conversation to have, there are very easy ways to close it, to close the conversation.
So some people will bring up evolutionary biology and apes, how, you know, female apes bow down to male apes and that sort of thing.
But the point is we're not apes.
(Laughter) (Applause) Apes also live on trees and have earthworms for breakfast, and we don't.
Some people will say, "Well, poor men also have a hard time."
And this is true.
But that is not what this -- (Laughter) But this is not what this conversation is about.
Gender and class are different forms of oppression.
I actually learned quite a bit about systems of oppression and how they can be blind to one another by talking to black men.
I was once talking to a black man about gender and he said to me, "Why do you have to say 'my experience as a woman'?
Why can't it be 'your experience as a human being'?"
Now, this was the same man who would often talk about his experience as a black man.
Gender matters.
Men and women experience the world differently.
Gender colors the way we experience the world.
But we can change that.
Some people will say, "Oh, but women have the real power, bottom power."
And for non-Nigerians, bottom power is an expression which I suppose means something like a woman who uses her sexuality to get favors from men.
But bottom power is not power at all.
Bottom power means that a woman simply has a good root to tap into, from time to time -- somebody else's power.
And then, of course, we have to wonder what happens when that somebody else is in a bad mood, or sick or impotent.
(Laughter) Some people will say that a woman being subordinate to a man is our culture.
But culture is constantly changing.
I have beautiful twin nieces who are fifteen and live in Lagos.
If they had been born a hundred years ago they would have been taken away and killed.
Because it was our culture, it was our culture to kill twins.
So what is the point of culture?
I mean there's the decorative, the dancing ...
but also, culture really is about preservation and continuity of a people.
In my family, I am the child who is most interested in the story of who we are, in our traditions, in the knowledge about ancestral lands.
My brothers are not as interested as I am.
But I cannot participate, I cannot go to umunna meetings, I cannot have a say.
Because I'm female.
Culture does not make people, people make culture.
So if it is in fact true -- (Applause) So if it is in fact true that the full humanity of women is not our culture, then we must make it our culture.
I think very often of my dear friend, Okoloma Maduewesi.
May he and all the others who passed away in that Sosoliso crash continue to rest in peace.
He will always be remembered by those of us who loved him.
And he was right that day many years ago when he called me a feminist.
I am a feminist.
And when I looked up the word in the dictionary that day, this is what it said: "Feminist: a person who believes in the social, political and economic equality of the sexes."
My great grandmother, from the stories I've heard, was a feminist.
She ran away from the house of the man she did not want to marry and ended up marrying the man of her choice.
She refused, she protested, she spoke up whenever she felt she was being deprived of access, of land, that sort of thing.
My great grandmother did not know that word "feminist," but it doesn't mean that she wasn't one.
More of us should reclaim that word.
My own definition of feminist is: "A feminist is a man or a woman who says -- (Laughter) (Applause) A feminist is a man or a woman who says, "Yes, there's a problem with gender as it is today, and we must fix it.
The best feminist I know is my brother Kene.
He's also a kind, good-looking, lovely man, and he's very masculine.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Two months ago, my kids and I huddled around a cell phone watching the live stream of the Game Awards, one of the video game industry's biggest nights.
They announced the nominees for the Game for Impact, an award that's given to a thought-provoking video game with a profound prosocial message or meaning.
They opened the envelope and they read the title of our video game.
An award ...
for impact.
It was almost funny, actually, because I always thought that winning an award like that would have this huge impact on my life, but I found that the opposite is true.
The big nights, the accomplishments -- they fade.
But the hardest nights of my life have stuck with me, impacting who I am and what I do.
In 2010, my third son, Joel, was diagnosed with a rare and aggressive brain tumor.
And before that year was finished, doctors sat my husband and I down and let us know that his tumor had returned despite the most aggressive chemotherapy and radiation that they could offer him.
On that terrible night, after learning that Joel had perhaps four months to live, I cuddled up with my two older sons in bed -- they were five and three at the time -- and I never really knew how much they understood, so I started telling them a bedtime story.
I told them about this very brave knight named Joel and his adventure fighting a terrible dragon called cancer.
Every night, I told them more of the story, but I never let the story end.
I was just building up a context that they could understand and hoping that our prayers would be answered and I would never have to tell them that that knight, who had fought so bravely, was done fighting and could rest now, forever.
Fortunately, I never did have to finish that bedtime story.
My children outgrew it.
Joel responded better than anyone expected to palliative treatment, and so instead of months, we spent years learning how to love our dying child with all of our hearts.
Learning to recognize that shameful feeling of holding back just a little love to try to spare ourselves just a little pain somewhere further down the road.
We pushed past that self-preservation because Joel was worth loving even if that love could crush us.
And that lesson of intense vulnerability has changed me ...
more than any award ever could.
We started living like Joel could live, and we began developing a video game called "That Dragon, Cancer."
It was the story of Joel.
It was the story of hope in the shadow of death.
It was the story of faith and doubt, and the realization that a wrestle with doubt is a part of faith -- maybe the biggest part of it.
It was a story that began as a miracle and ended as a memorial.
(Music) (Giggle) (Clapping) (Music) (Video) Dad: Bouncing around, do you like that?
(Giggle) I love your giggle.
(Music) (Giggle) [A Journey of Hope In the Shadow of Death] [That Dragon, Cancer] (Music) When you play "That Dragon, Cancer," you're transformed into a witness of Joel's life, exploring an emotional landscape, clicking to discover more of what we as a family felt and experienced.
It feels a little bit like analyzing interactive poetry because every game mechanic is a metaphor, and so the more the player asks themselves what we as designers were trying to express and why, the richer the experience becomes.
We took that vulnerability that Joel taught us, and we encoded the game with it.
Players expect their video games to offer them branching narrative so that every decision that they make feels important and can change the outcome of the game.
We subverted that principle of game design, collapsing the choices in on the player so that they discover for themselves that there is nothing that they can do that will change the outcome for Joel.
And they feel that discovery as deeply and desperately as we felt it on nights when we held Joel in our arms praying for hours, stubbornly holding out hope for a grace that we could not create for ourselves.
We'd all prefer to win, but when you discover that you can't win, what do you value instead?
I never planned to write video games, but these moments that really change our lives, they often come as the result of our hardship -- and not our glory.
When we thought that Joel could live, I left the game designing to my husband.
I chimed in here and there with a scene or two and some suggestions.
But after the night that Joel died, the passion, the possibility of sharing Joel's life through our video game -- it was something that I couldn't resist.
I started writing more, I sat in on our team's design meetings, I added more ideas and I helped direct scenes.
And I discovered that creating a video game is telling a story, but with an entirely new vocabulary.
All the same elements of imagination and symbolism are there, but they're just partnered with player agency and system responsiveness.
It's challenging work.
I have to think in a totally new way to do it, but I love it.
And I wouldn't have known that without Joel.
Maybe you're a little surprised by our choice to share our story of terminal cancer through a video game.
Perhaps you're even thinking like so many people before you: cancer is not a game.
Well, tell that to any pediatric cancer parent that's ever taken an exam glove and blown it up into a balloon, or transformed a syringe into a rocket ship, or let their child ride their IV pole through the hospital halls like it was a race car.
Because when you have children, everything is a game.
And when your young child experiences something traumatic, you work even harder to make sure that their life feels like a game because children naturally explore their worlds through play.
While cancer can steal many things from a family, it shouldn't steal play.
If you're listening to me and you're trying to imagine this family that revolves entirely around a dying child, and you can't imagine joy as part of that picture, then we were right to share our story with you, because that season of our life was hard.
Unspeakably hard at times, but it was also pure hope, deep love and joy like I have never experienced since.
Our video game was our attempt to share that world with people who hadn't experienced it before, because we never could imagine that world until it became ours.
We made a video game that's hard to play.
It will never be a blockbuster.
People have to prepare themselves to invest emotionally in a story that they know will break their hearts.
But when our hearts break, they heal a little differently.
My broken heart has been healing with a new and a deeper compassion -- a desire to sit with people in their pain, to hear their stories and try to help tell them so that they know that they're seen.
On the night when "That Dragon, Cancer" won the Game for Impact Award, we cheered, we smiled and we talked about Joel and the impact he had on our life -- on all of those hard and hopeful nights that we shared with him when he changed our hearts and taught us so much more about life and love and faith and purpose.
That award will never mean as much to me as even a single photograph of my son, but it does represent all of the people who his life has impacted, people I'll never meet.
They write me emails sometimes.
They tell me that they miss Joel, even though they never met him.
They describe the tears that they've shed for my son, and it makes my burden of grief just a little bit lighter knowing that it's shared with a 10-year-old watching a YouTube playthrough, or a doctor playing on his airplane with a smartphone, or a professor introducing Joel to her first-year philosophy students.
We made a video game that's hard to play.
But that feels just right to me, because the hardest moments of our lives change us more than any goal we could ever accomplish.
Tragedy has shifted my heart more than any dream I could ever see come true.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The school of architecture that I studied at some 30 years ago happened to be across the street from the wonderful art gallery designed by the great architect Louis Kahn.
I love the building, and I used to visit it quite often.
One day, I saw the security guard run his hand across the concrete wall.
And it was the way he did it, the expression on his face -- something touched me.
I could see that the security guard was moved by the building and that architecture has that capacity to move you.
I could see it, and I remember thinking, "Wow. How does architecture do that?"
At school, I was learning to design, but here -- here was a reaction of the heart.
And it touched me to the core.
You know, you aspire for beauty, for sensuousness, for atmosphere, the emotional response.
That's the realm of the ineffable and the immeasurable.
And that's what you live for: a chance to try.
So in 2003, there was an open call for designs for the Bah' Temple for South America.
This was the first temple in all of South America.
It's a continental temple, a hugely important milestone for the Bah' community, because this would be the last of the continental temples and would open the door for national and local temples to be built around the world.
And the brief was deceptively simple and unique in the annals of religion: a circular room, nine sides, nine entrances, nine paths, allowing you to come to the temple from all directions, nine symbolizing completeness, perfection.
No pulpit, no sermons, as there are no clergy in the Bah' faith.
And in a world which is putting up walls, the design needed to express in form the very opposite.
It had to be open, welcoming to people of all faiths, walks of life, backgrounds, or no faith at all; a new form of sacred space with no pattern or models to draw from.
It was like designing one of the first churches for Christianity or one of the first mosques for Islam.
So we live in a secular world.
How do you design sacred space today?
And how do you even define what's sacred today?
I stumbled across this beautiful quote from the Bah' writings, and it speaks to prayer.
It says that if you reach out in prayer, and if your prayer is answered -- which is already very interesting -- that the pillars of your heart will become ashine.
And I loved this idea of the inner and the outer, like when you see someone and you say, "That person is radiant."
And I was thinking, "My gosh, how could we make something architectural out of that, where you create a building and it becomes alive with light?
Like alabaster, if you kiss it with light, it becomes alive.
And I drew this sketch, something with two layers, translucent with structure in between capturing light.
Maybe a pure form, a single form of emanation that you could imagine would be all dome and everything we kept making was looking too much like an egg.
(Laughter) A blob.
You all know this crazy search, letting the process take you, and you live for the surprises.
And I remember quite by accident I saw this little video of a plant moving in light, and it made me think of movement, reach, this idea that the temple could have reach, like this reach for the divine.
You can imagine also that movement within a circle could mean movement and stillness, like the cosmos, something you see in many places.
(Laughter) But rotation was not enough, because we needed a form.
In the Bah' writings, it talks about the temples being as perfect as is humanly possible, and we kept thinking, well, what is perfection?
And I remember I stumbled into this image of this Japanese basket and thinking our Western notions of perfection need to be challenged, that this wonderful silhouette of this basket, this wonkiness, and that it has the kind of dimple of what you might imagine a shoulder or the cheekbone, and that kind of organic form.
And so we drew and made models, these lines that merge at the top, soft lines, which became like drapery and translucent veils and folding, and the idea of not only folding but torquing -- you remember the plant and the way it was reaching.
And this started to become an interesting form, carving the base, making the entrances.
And then we ended up with this.
This is this temple with two layers, nine luminous veils, embodied light, soft-flowing lines like luminescent drapery.
180 submissions were received from 80 countries, and this was selected.
So we went to the next stage of how to build it.
We had submitted alabaster.
But alabaster was too soft, and we were experimenting, many experiments with materials, trying to think how we could have this kind of shimmer, and we ended up with borosilicate.
And borosilicate glass, as you know, is very strong, and if you break borosilicate rods just so and melt them at just the right temperature, we ended up with this new material, this new cast glass which took us about two years to make.
And it had this quality that we loved, this idea of the embodied light, but on the inside, we wanted something with a soft light, like the inner lining of a jacket.
On the outside you have protection, but on the inside you touch it.
So we found this tiny vein in a huge quarry in Portugal with this beautiful stone, which the owner had kept for seven generations in his family, waiting for the right project, if you can believe it.
Look at this material, it's beautiful.
And the way it lights up; it has that translucent quality.
So here you see the structure.
It lets the light through.
And looking down, the nine wings are bound, structurally but symbolically strong, a great symbol of unity: pure geometry, a perfect circle, 30 meters in section and in plan, perfectly symmetrical, like the idea of sacredness and geometry.
And here you see the building going up, 2,000 steel nodes, 9,000 pieces of steel, 7,800 stone pieces, 10,000 cast glass pieces, all individual shapes, the entire superstructure all described, engineered, fabricated with aerospace technology, prefabricated machine to machine, robotically, a huge team effort, you can imagine, of literally hundreds, and within three percent of our $30 million budget set in 2006.
(Applause) Nine wings bound together forming a nine-pointed star, and the star shape moving in space, tracking the sun.
So here it is.
Audience: Wow!
(Applause) Hopefully, a befitting response to that beautiful quote, "a prayer answered," open in all directions, capturing the blue light of dawn, tent-like white light of day, the gold light of the afternoon, and of course, at night, the reversal: sensuous, catching the light in all kinds of mysterious ways.
And the site: it's interesting; 14 years ago when we made the submission, we showed the temple set against the Andes.
We didn't have the Andes as our site, but after nine years, that's exactly where we ended up, the lines of the temple set against nothing but pure nature, and you turn around and you get nothing but the city below you, and inside, a view in all directions, radiating gardens from each of the alcoves, radiating paths.
Last October, the opening ceremonies -- a beautiful, sacred event, 5,000 people from 80 countries, a continuous river of visitors, indigenous people from all over South America, some who had never left their villages.
And of course, that this temple belongs to people, the collective, of many cultures and walks of life, many beliefs, and for me, what's most important is what it feels like on the inside; that it feel intimate, sacred, and that everyone is welcome.
And if even a few who come have the same reaction as that security guard, then it truly would be their temple.
And I would love that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I would like to tell you about the most embarrassing thing that has ever happened to me in my years of working as a palliative care physician.
This happened a couple of years ago.
I was asked as a consultant to see a woman in her 70s -- retired English professor who had pancreatic cancer.
I was asked to see her because she had pain, nausea, vomiting ...
When I went to see her, we talked about those symptoms and in the course of that consultation, she asked me whether I thought that medical marijuana might help her.
I thought back to everything that I had learned in medical school about medical marijuana, which didn't take very long because I had learned absolutely nothing.
And so I told her that as far as I knew, medical marijuana had no benefits whatsoever.
And she smiled and nodded and reached into the handbag next to the bed, and pulled out a stack of about a dozen randomized controlled trials showing that medical marijuana has benefits for symptoms like nausea and pain and anxiety.
She handed me those articles and said, "Maybe you should read these before offering an opinion ...
doctor."
(Laughter) So I did.
That night I read all of those articles and found a bunch more.
When I came to see her the next morning, I had to admit that it looks like there is some evidence that marijuana can offer medical benefits and I suggested that if she really was interested, she should try it.
You know what she said?
This 73-year-old, retired English professor?
She said, "I did try it about six months ago.
It was amazing.
I've been using it every day since.
It's the best drug I've discovered.
I don't know why it took me 73 years to discover this stuff. It's amazing."
(Laughter) That was the moment at which I realized I needed to learn something about medical marijuana because what I was prepared for in medical school bore no relationship to reality.
So I started reading more articles, I started talking to researchers, I started talking to doctors, and most importantly, I started listening to patients.
I ended up writing a book based on those conversations, and that book really revolved around three surprises -- surprises to me, anyway.
One I already alluded to -- that there really are some benefits to medical marijuana.
Those benefits may not be as huge or as stunning as some of the most avid proponents of medical marijuana would have us believe, but they are real.
Surprise number two: medical marijuana does have some risks.
Those risks may not be as huge and as scary as some of the opponents of medical marijuana would have us believe, but they are real risks, nonetheless.
But it was the third surprise that was most ...
And that is that a lot of the patients I talked with who've turned to medical marijuana for help, weren't turning to medical marijuana because of its benefits or the balance of risks and benefits, or because they thought it was a wonder drug, but because it gave them control over their illness.
It let them manage their health in a way that was productive and efficient and effective and comfortable for them.
To show you what I mean, let me tell you about another patient.
Robin was in her early 40s when I met her.
She looked though like she was in her late 60s.
She had suffered from rheumatoid arthritis for the last 20 years, her hands were gnarled by arthritis, her spine was crooked, she had to rely on a wheelchair to get around.
She looked weak and frail, and I guess physically she probably was, but emotionally, cognitively, psychologically, she was among the toughest people I've ever met.
And when I sat down next to her in a medical marijuana dispensary in Northern California to ask her about why she turned to medical marijuana, what it did for her and how it helped her, she started out by telling me things that I had heard from many patients before.
It helped with her anxiety; it helped with her pain; when her pain was better, she slept better.
And I'd heard all that before.
But then she said something that I'd never heard before, and that is that it gave her control over her life and over her health.
She could use it when she wanted, in the way that she wanted, at the dose and frequency that worked for her.
And if it didn't work for her, then she could make changes.
Everything was up to her.
The most important thing she said was she didn't need anybody else's permission -- not a clinic appointment, not a doctor's prescription, not a pharmacist's order.
It was all up to her.
She was in control.
And if that seems like a little thing for somebody with chronic illness, it's not -- not at all.
When we face a chronic serious illness, whether it's rheumatoid arthritis or lupus or cancer or diabetes, or cirrhosis, we lose control.
And note what I said: "when," not "if."
All of us at some point in our lives will face a chronic serious illness that causes us to lose control.
We'll see our function decline, some of us will see our cognition decline, we'll be no longer able to care for ourselves, to do the things that we want to do.
Our bodies will betray us, and in that process, we'll lose control.
And that's scary.
Not just scary -- that's frightening, it's terrifying.
When I talk to my patients, my palliative care patients, many of whom are facing illnesses that will end their lives, they have a lot of be frightened of -- pain, nausea, vomiting, constipation, fatigue, their impending mortality.
But what scares them more than anything else is this possibility that at some point, tomorrow or a month from now, they're going to lose control of their health, of their lives, of their healthcare, and they're going to become dependent on others, and that's terrifying.
So it's no wonder really that patients like Robin, who I just told you about, who I met in that clinic, turn to medical marijuana to try to claw back some semblance of control.
How do they do it though?
How do these medical marijuana dispensaries -- like the one where I met Robin -- how do they give patients like Robin back the sort of control that they need?
And how do they do it in a way that mainstream medical hospitals and clinics, at least for Robin, weren't able to?
What's their secret?
So I decided to find out.
I went to a seedy clinic in Venice Beach in California and got a recommendation that would allow me to be a medical marijuana patient.
I got a letter of recommendation that would let me buy medical marijuana.
I got that recommendation illegally, because I'm not a resident of California -- I should note that.
I should also note, for the record, that I never used that letter of recommendation to make a purchase, and to all of you DEA agents out there -- (Laughter) love the work that you're doing, keep it up.
(Laughter) Even though it didn't let me make a purchase though, that letter was priceless because it let me be a patient.
It let me experience what patients like Robin experience when they go to a medical marijuana dispensary.
And what I experienced -- what they experience every day, hundreds of thousands of people like Robin -- was really amazing.
I walked into the clinic, and from the moment that I entered many of these clinics and dispensaries, I felt like that dispensary, that clinic, was there for me.
There were questions at the outset about who I am, what kind of work I do, what my goals are in looking for a medical marijuana prescription, or product, what my goals are, what my preferences are, what my hopes are, how do I think, how do I hope this might help me, what am I afraid of.
These are the sorts of questions that patients like Robin get asked all the time.
These are the sorts of questions that make me confident that the person I'm talking with really has my best interests at heart and wants to get to know me.
The second thing I learned in those clinics is the availability of education.
Education from the folks behind the counter, but also education from folks in the waiting room.
People I met were more than happy, as I was sitting next to them -- people like Robin -- to tell me about who they are, why they use medical marijuana, what helps them, how it helps them, and to give me advice and suggestions.
Those waiting rooms really are a hive of interaction, advice and support.
And third, the folks behind the counter.
I was amazed at how willing those people were to spend sometimes an hour or more talking me through the nuances of this strain versus that strain, smoking versus vaporizing, edibles versus tinctures -- all, remember, without me making any purchase whatsoever.
Think about the last time you went to any hospital or clinic and the last time anybody spent an hour explaining those sorts of things to you.
The fact that patients like Robin are going to these clinics, are going to these dispensaries and getting that sort of personalized attention and education and service, really should be a wake-up call to the healthcare system.
People like Robin are turning away from mainstream medicine, turning to medical marijuana dispensaries because those dispensaries are giving them what they need.
If that's a wake-up call to the medical establishment, it's a wake-up call that many of my colleagues are either not hearing or not wanting to hear.
When I talk to my colleagues, physicians in particular, about medical marijuana, they say, "Oh, we need more evidence.
We need more research into benefits, we need more evidence about risks."
And you know what? They're right.
They're absolutely right.
We do need much more evidence about the benefits of medical marijuana.
We also need to ask the federal government to reschedule marijuana to Schedule II, or to deschedule it entirely to make that research possible.
We also need more research into medical marijuana's risks.
Medical marijuana's risks -- we know a lot about the risks of recreational use, we know next to nothing about the risks of medical marijuana.
So we absolutely do need research, but to say that we need research and not that we need to make any changes now is to miss the point entirely.
People like Robin aren't seeking out medical marijuana because they think it's a wonder drug, or because they think it's entirely risk-free.
They seek it out because the context in which it's delivered and administered and used, gives them the sort of control they need over their lives.
And that's a wake-up call we really need to pay attention to.
The good news though is that there are lessons we can learn today from those medical marijuana dispensaries.
And those are lessons we really should learn.
These are often small, mom-and-pop operations run by people with no medical training.
And while it's embarrassing to think that many of these clinics and dispensaries are providing services and support and meeting patients' needs in ways that billion-dollar healthcare systems aren't -- we should be embarrassed by that -- but we can also learn from that.
And there are probably three lessons at least that we can learn from those small dispensaries.
One: we need to find ways to give patients more control in small but important ways.
How to interact with healthcare providers, when to interact with healthcare providers, how to use medications in ways that work for them.
In my own practice, I've gotten much more creative and flexible in supporting my patients in using drugs safely to manage their symptoms -- with the emphasis on safely.
Many of the drugs I prescribe are drugs like opioids or benzodiazepines which can be dangerous if overused.
But here's the point.
They can be dangerous if they're overused, but they can also be ineffective if they're not used in a way that's consistent with what patients want and need.
So that flexibility, if it's delivered safely, can be extraordinarily valuable for patients and their families.
That's number one.
Number two: education.
Huge opportunities to learn from some of the tricks of those medical marijuana dispensaries to provide more education that doesn't require a lot of physician time necessarily, or any physician time, but opportunities to learn about what medications we're using and why, prognoses, trajectories of illness, and most importantly, opportunities for patients to learn from each other.
How can we replicate what goes on in those clinic and medical dispensary waiting rooms?
How patients learn from each other, how people share with each other.
And last but not least, putting patients first the way those medical marijuana dispensaries do, making patients feel legitimately like what they want, what they need, is why, as healthcare providers, we're here.
Asking patients about their hopes, their fears, their goals and preferences.
As a palliative care provider, I ask all my patients what they're hoping for and what they're afraid of.
But here's the thing.
Patients shouldn't have to wait until they're chronically seriously ill, often near the end of life, they shouldn't have to wait until they're seeing a physician like me before somebody asks them, "What are you hoping for?"
"What are you afraid of?"
That should be baked into the way that healthcare is delivered.
We can do this -- we really can.
Medical marijuana dispensaries and clinics all across the country are figuring this out.
They're figuring this out in ways that larger, more mainstream health systems are years behind.
But we can learn from them, and we have to learn from them.
All we have to do is swallow our pride -- put aside the thought for a minute that because we have lots of letters after our name, because we're experts, because we're chief medical officers of a large healthcare system, we know all there is to know about how to meet patients' needs.
We need to swallow our pride.
We need to go visit a few medical marijuana dispensaries.
We need to figure out what they're doing.
We need to figure out why so many patients like Robin are leaving our mainstream medical clinics and going to these medical marijuana dispensaries instead.
We need to figure out what their tricks are, what their tools are, and we need to learn from them.
If we do, and I think we can, and I absolutely think we have to, we can guarantee all of our patients will have a much better experience.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Space, the final frontier.
I first heard these words when I was just six years old, and I was completely inspired.
I wanted to explore strange new worlds.
I wanted to seek out new life.
I wanted to see everything that the universe had to offer.
And those dreams, those words, they took me on a journey, a journey of discovery, through school, through university, to do a PhD and finally to become a professional astronomer.
Now, I learned two amazing things, one slightly unfortunate, when I was doing my PhD.
I learned that the reality was I wouldn't be piloting a starship anytime soon.
But I also learned that the universe is strange, wonderful and vast, actually too vast to be explored by spaceship.
And so I turned my attention to astronomy, to using telescopes.
Now, I show you before you an image of the night sky.
You might see it anywhere in the world.
And all of these stars are part of our local galaxy, the Milky Way.
Now, if you were to go to a darker part of the sky, a nice dark site, perhaps in the desert, you might see the center of our Milky Way galaxy spread out before you, hundreds of billions of stars.
And it's a very beautiful image.
It's colorful.
And again, this is just a local corner of our universe.
You can see there's a sort of strange dark dust across it.
Now, that is local dust that's obscuring the light of the stars.
But we can do a pretty good job.
Just with our own eyes, we can explore our little corner of the universe.
It's possible to do better.
You can use wonderful telescopes like the Hubble Space Telescope.
Now, astronomers have put together this image.
It's called the Hubble Deep Field, and they've spent hundreds of hours observing just a tiny patch of the sky no larger than your thumbnail held at arm's length.
And in this image you can see thousands of galaxies, and we know that there must be hundreds of millions, billions of galaxies in the entire universe, some like our own and some very different.
So you think, OK, well, I can continue this journey.
This is easy. I can just use a very powerful telescope and just look at the sky, no problem.
It's actually really missing out if we just do that.
Now, that's because everything I've talked about so far is just using the visible spectrum, just the thing that your eyes can see, and that's a tiny slice, a tiny, tiny slice of what the universe has to offer us.
Now, there's also two very important problems with using visible light.
Not only are we missing out on all the other processes that are emitting other kinds of light, but there's two issues.
Now, the first is that dust that I mentioned earlier.
The dust stops the visible light from getting to us.
So as we look deeper into the universe, we see less light.
The dust stops it getting to us.
But there's a really strange problem with using visible light in order to try and explore the universe.
Now take a break for a minute.
Say you're standing on a corner, a busy street corner.
There's cars going by.
An ambulance approaches.
It has a high-pitched siren.
(Imitates a siren passing by) The siren appeared to change in pitch as it moved towards and away from you.
The ambulance driver did not change the siren just to mess with you.
That was a product of your perception.
The sound waves, as the ambulance approached, were compressed, and they changed higher in pitch.
As the ambulance receded, the sound waves were stretched, and they sounded lower in pitch.
The same thing happens with light.
Objects moving towards us, their light waves are compressed and they appear bluer.
Objects moving away from us, their light waves are stretched, and they appear redder.
So we call these effects blueshift and redshift.
Now, our universe is expanding, so everything is moving away from everything else, and that means everything appears to be red.
And oddly enough, as you look more deeply into the universe, more distant objects are moving away further and faster, so they appear more red.
So if I come back to the Hubble Deep Field and we were to continue to peer deeply into the universe just using the Hubble, as we get to a certain distance away, everything becomes red, and that presents something of a problem.
Eventually, we get so far away everything is shifted into the infrared and we can't see anything at all.
So there must be a way around this.
Otherwise, I'm limited in my journey.
I wanted to explore the whole universe, not just whatever I can see, you know, before the redshift kicks in.
There is a technique.
It's called radio astronomy.
Astronomers have been using this for decades.
It's a fantastic technique.
I show you the Parkes Radio Telescope, affectionately known as "The Dish."
You may have seen the movie.
And radio is really brilliant.
It allows us to peer much more deeply.
It doesn't get stopped by dust, so you can see everything in the universe, and redshift is less of a problem because we can build receivers that receive across a large band.
So what does Parkes see when we turn it to the center of the Milky Way?
We should see something fantastic, right?
Well, we do see something interesting.
All that dust has gone.
As I mentioned, radio goes straight through dust, so not a problem.
But the view is very different.
We can see that the center of the Milky Way is aglow, and this isn't starlight.
This is a light called synchrotron radiation, and it's formed from electrons spiraling around cosmic magnetic fields.
So the plane is aglow with this light.
And we can also see strange tufts coming off of it, and objects which don't appear to line up with anything that we can see with our own eyes.
But it's hard to really interpret this image, because as you can see, it's very low resolution.
Radio waves have a wavelength that's long, and that makes their resolution poorer.
This image is also black and white, so we don't really know what is the color of everything in here.
Well, fast-forward to today.
We can build telescopes which can get over these problems.
Now, I'm showing you here an image of the Murchison Radio Observatory, a fantastic place to build radio telescopes.
It's flat, it's dry, and most importantly, it's radio quiet: no mobile phones, no Wi-Fi, nothing, just very, very radio quiet, so a perfect place to build a radio telescope.
Now, the telescope that I've been working on for a few years is called the Murchison Widefield Array, and I'm going to show you a little time lapse of it being built.
This is a group of undergraduate and postgraduate students located in Perth.
We call them the Student Army, and they volunteered their time to build a radio telescope.
There's no course credit for this.
And they're putting together these radio dipoles.
They just receive at low frequencies, a bit like your FM radio or your TV.
And here we are deploying them across the desert.
The final telescope covers 10 square kilometers of the Western Australian desert.
And the interesting thing is, there's no moving parts.
We just deploy these little antennas essentially on chicken mesh.
It's fairly cheap.
Cables take the signals from the antennas and bring them to central processing units.
And it's the size of this telescope, the fact that we've built it over the entire desert that gives us a better resolution than Parkes.
Now, eventually all those cables bring them to a unit which sends it off to a supercomputer here in Perth, and that's where I come in.
(Sighs) Radio data.
I have spent the last five years working with very difficult, very interesting data that no one had really looked at before.
I've spent a long time calibrating it, running millions of CPU hours on supercomputers and really trying to understand that data.
And with this telescope, with this data, we've performed a survey of the entire southern sky, the GaLactic and Extragalactic All-sky MWA Survey, or GLEAM, as I call it.
And I'm very excited.
This survey is just about to be published, but it hasn't been shown yet, so you are literally the first people to see this southern survey of the entire sky.
So I'm delighted to share with you some images from this survey.
Now, imagine you went to the Murchison, you camped out underneath the stars and you looked towards the south.
You saw the south's celestial pole, the galaxy rising.
If I fade in the radio light, this is what we observe with our survey.
You can see that the galactic plane is no longer dark with dust.
It's alight with synchrotron radiation, and thousands of dots are in the sky.
Our large Magellanic Cloud, our nearest galactic neighbor, is orange instead of its more familiar blue-white.
So there's a lot going on in this. Let's take a closer look.
If we look back towards the galactic center, where we originally saw the Parkes image that I showed you earlier, low resolution, black and white, and we fade to the GLEAM view, you can see the resolution has gone up by a factor of a hundred.
We now have a color view of the sky, a technicolor view.
Now, it's not a false color view.
These are real radio colors.
What I've done is I've colored the lowest frequencies red and the highest frequencies blue, and the middle ones green.
And that gives us this rainbow view.
And this isn't just false color.
The colors in this image tell us about the physical processes going on in the universe.
So for instance, if you look along the plane of the galaxy, it's alight with synchrotron, which is mostly reddish orange, but if we look very closely, we see little blue dots.
Now, if we zoom in, these blue dots are ionized plasma around very bright stars, and what happens is that they block the red light, so they appear blue.
And these can tell us about these star-forming regions in our galaxy.
And we just see them immediately.
We look at the galaxy, and the color tells us that they're there.
You can see little soap bubbles, little circular images around the galactic plane, and these are supernova remnants.
When a star explodes, its outer shell is cast off and it travels outward into space gathering up material, and it produces a little shell.
It's been a long-standing mystery to astronomers where all the supernova remnants are.
We know that there must be a lot of high-energy electrons in the plane to produce the synchrotron radiation that we see, and we think they're produced by supernova remnants, but there don't seem to be enough.
Fortunately, GLEAM is really, really good at detecting supernova remnants, so we're hoping to have a new paper out on that soon.
Now, that's fine.
We've explored our little local universe, but I wanted to go deeper, I wanted to go further.
I wanted to go beyond the Milky Way.
Well, as it happens, we can see a very interesting object in the top right, and this is a local radio galaxy, Centaurus A.
If we zoom in on this, we can see that there are two huge plumes going out into space.
And if you look right in the center between those two plumes, you'll see a galaxy just like our own.
It's a spiral. It has a dust lane.
It's a normal galaxy.
But these jets are only visible in the radio.
If we looked in the visible, we wouldn't even know they were there, and they're thousands of times larger than the host galaxy.
What's going on? What's producing these jets?
At the center of every galaxy that we know about is a supermassive black hole.
Now, black holes are invisible. That's why they're called that.
All you can see is the deflection of the light around them, and occasionally, when a star or a cloud of gas comes into their orbit, it is ripped apart by tidal forces, forming what we call an accretion disk.
The accretion disk glows brightly in the x-rays, and huge magnetic fields can launch the material into space at nearly the speed of light.
So these jets are visible in the radio and this is what we pick up in our survey.
Well, very well, so we've seen one radio galaxy. That's nice.
But if you just look at the top of that image, you'll see another radio galaxy.
It's a little bit smaller, and that's just because it's further away.
OK. Two radio galaxies.
We can see this. This is fine.
Well, what about all the other dots?
Presumably those are just stars.
They're not.
They're all radio galaxies.
Every single one of the dots in this image is a distant galaxy, millions to billions of light-years away with a supermassive black hole at its center pushing material into space at nearly the speed of light.
It is mind-blowing.
And this survey is even larger than what I've shown here.
If we zoom out to the full extent of the survey, you can see I found 300,000 of these radio galaxies.
So it's truly an epic journey.
We've discovered all of these galaxies right back to the very first supermassive black holes.
I'm very proud of this, and it will be published next week.
Now, that's not all.
I've explored the furthest reaches of the galaxy with this survey, but there's something even more in this image.
Now, I'll take you right back to the dawn of time.
When the universe formed, it was a big bang, which left the universe as a sea of hydrogen, neutral hydrogen.
And when the very first stars and galaxies switched on, they ionized that hydrogen.
So the universe went from neutral to ionized.
That imprinted a signal all around us.
Everywhere, it pervades us, like the Force.
Now, because that happened so long ago, the signal was redshifted, so now that signal is at very low frequencies.
It's at the same frequency as my survey, but it's so faint.
It's a billionth the size of any of the objects in my survey.
So our telescope may not be quite sensitive enough to pick up this signal.
However, there's a new radio telescope.
So I can't have a starship, but I can hopefully have one of the biggest radio telescopes in the world.
We're building the Square Kilometre Array, a new radio telescope, and it's going to be a thousand times bigger than the MWA, a thousand times more sensitive, and have an even better resolution.
So we should find tens of millions of galaxies.
And perhaps, deep in that signal, I will get to look upon the very first stars and galaxies switching on, the beginning of time itself.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to tell you a story about a girl.
But I can't tell you her real name.
So let's just call her Hadiza.
Hadiza is 20.
She's shy, but she has a beautiful smile that lights up her face.
But she's in constant pain.
And she will likely be on medication for the rest of her life.
Do you want to know why?
Hadiza is a Chibok girl, and on April 14, 2014, she was kidnapped by Boko Haram terrorists.
She managed to escape, though, by jumping off the truck that was carrying the girls.
But when she landed, she broke both her legs, and she had to crawl on her tummy to hide in the bushes.
She told me she was terrified that Boko Haram would come back for her.
She was one of 57 girls who would escape by jumping off trucks that day.
This story, quite rightly, caused ripples around the world.
People like Michelle Obama, Malala and others lent their voices in protest, and at about the same time -- I was living in London at the time -- I was sent from London to Abuja to cover the World Economic Forum that Nigeria was hosting for the first time.
But when we arrived, it was clear that there was only one story in town.
We put the government under pressure.
We asked tough questions about what they were doing to bring these girls back.
Understandably, they weren't too happy with our line of questioning, and let's just say we received our fair share of "alternative facts."
(Laughter) Influential Nigerians were telling us at the time that we were nave, we didn't understand the political situation in Nigeria.
But they also told us that the story of the Chibok girls was a hoax.
Sadly, this hoax narrative has persisted, and there are still people in Nigeria today who believe that the Chibok girls were never kidnapped.
Yet I was talking to people like these -- devastated parents, who told us that on the day Boko Haram kidnapped their daughters, they ran into the Sambisa Forest after the trucks carrying their daughters.
They were armed with machetes, but they were forced to turn back because Boko Haram had guns.
For two years, inevitably, the news agenda moved on, and for two years, we didn't hear much about the Chibok girls.
Everyone presumed they were dead.
But in April last year, I was able to obtain this video.
This is a still from the video that Boko Haram filmed as a proof of life, and through a source, I obtained this video.
But before I could publish it, I had to travel to the northeast of Nigeria to talk to the parents, to verify it.
I didn't have to wait too long for confirmation.
One of the mothers, when she watched the video, told me that if she could have reached into the laptop and pulled our her child from the laptop, she would have done so.
For those of you who are parents, like myself, in the audience, you can only imagine the anguish that that mother felt.
This video would go on to kick-start negotiation talks with Boko Haram.
And a Nigerian senator told me that because of this video they entered into those talks, because they had long presumed that the Chibok girls were dead.
Twenty-one girls were freed in October last year.
Sadly, nearly 200 of them still remain missing.
I must confess that I have not been a dispassionate observer covering this story.
I am furious when I think about the wasted opportunities to rescue these girls.
I am furious when I think about what the parents have told me, that if these were daughters of the rich and the powerful, they would have been found much earlier.
And I am furious that the hoax narrative, I firmly believe, caused a delay; it was part of the reason for the delay in their return.
This illustrates to me the deadly danger of fake news.
So what can we do about it?
There are some very smart people, smart engineers at Google and Facebook, who are trying to use technology to stop the spread of fake news.
But beyond that, I think everybody here -- you and I -- we have a role to play in that.
We are the ones who share the content.
We are the ones who share the stories online.
In this day and age, we're all publishers, and we have responsibility.
In my job as a journalist, I check, I verify.
I trust my gut, but I ask tough questions.
Why is this person telling me this story?
What do they have to gain by sharing this information?
Do they have a hidden agenda?
I really believe that we must all start to ask tougher questions of information that we discover online.
Research shows that some of us don't even read beyond headlines before we share stories.
Who here has done that?
I know I have.
But what if we stopped taking information that we discover at face value?
What if we stop to think about the consequence of the information that we pass on and its potential to incite violence or hatred?
What if we stop to think about the real-life consequences of the information that we share?
Thank you very much for listening.
(Applause)
Fresh out of college, I went to work for a consulting firm.
During orientation, the leaders dished out advice.
Amongst them was one pithy counsel I will never forget.
He told us, "Be easy to manage."
Considering how nave I really was at the time, I took his advice to heart.
I told myself, "Yes, I will be the ultimate team player.
I will do everything I'm told.
I will be easy to manage."
It wasn't until I arrived in graduate school and witnessed firsthand the criminal actions of scientists and engineers in the water crisis in Flint, Michigan that I realized how dangerous and yet surprisingly common this line of thinking really is.
Make no mistake: the Flint water crisis is one of the most egregious environmental injustices of our time.
For over 18 months, 100,000 residents, including thousands of young children, were exposed to contaminated drinking water with high levels of lead.
Lead is a potent neurotoxin which causes cognitive and developmental disabilities and is especially harmful to growing fetuses and young children.
We've known about its dangers since the Roman Empire.
Amongst a whole host of health issues, 12 people died by contracting Legionnaires' disease.
Flint's water infrastructure -- the complex network of underground pipes -- has been severely damaged.
And while the water quality is slowly improving and the pipes are being replaced now, more than two years later, the water is still not safe to drink.
So, people are still in shock.
They ask themselves, "How could this have happened?"
The short answer is: the crisis began when an emergency manager, appointed by Michigan's governor, decided to switch their water source to a local river to save money.
But it continued for so long because scientists and engineers at government agencies in the state of Michigan and in the federal government did not follow federal regulations for treating the water right.
What was more, they actively cheated on the law and orchestrated cover-ups.
They ridiculed residents asking for help, while publicly insisting that the brown, smelly water coming out of the tap was safe to drink.
The system at the local, state and federal levels completely failed to protect our most vulnerable, and an entire population was left to fend for itself.
Now, amidst this injustice, Flint residents were rallying together.
Amongst them were some amazing women of Flint -- mothers concerned about their kids -- who came together forming many grassroots coalitions, and these groups started protesting and demanding change.
The group also reached out to outside scientists for help, and a few responded.
Amongst them was a guy named Miguel Del Toral, a water expert at the US EPA -- the Environmental Protection Agency -- who actually wrote this scientific memo and sent it to the state of Michigan and the federal government to bring their attention to this problem.
He was characterized a "rogue employee," and silenced.
In collaboration with Flint residents, our research team here at Tech, of students and scientists led by professor Marc Edwards, conducted citywide testing to prove that Flint's water was indeed contaminated, even toxic in some homes.
We substantiated what Flint had been screaming for months, and put it on the Internet for the world to see.
Now, when I was getting involved, when I said yes to this, I had no idea what I was getting into.
But every second of this journey has been totally worth it.
This was science in service to the public.
This is what I came to graduate school for, and this is how I would rather spend my life.
And so this coalition -- this unlikely coalition of citizens, pastors, journalists and scientists -- came together to uncover the truth using science, advocacy and activism.
A local pediatrician figured out that the instances of childhood lead poisoning had indeed doubled in Flint during the crisis.
And the state of Michigan was forced to acknowledge the problem and take steps to correct it.
This group and many others got Flint's kids protected.
A few months later, President Obama came in and declared a federal emergency, and now Flint is getting more than 600 million dollars in healthcare, nutrition, education and overhauling their water infrastructure.
However, the arrogance and the callous disregard for public health shown by scientists and engineers at these government agencies is beyond belief.
These unhealthy cultures that are festering in these groups, where the focus is on meeting regulations and checking boxes as opposed to protecting public health, is just appalling.
Just consider this email that an EPA employee wrote, where she goes, "I'm not so sure Flint is a community we want to go out on a limb for."
The dehumanization of an entire population could not be more obvious.
Now, contrast that to the first canon of engineering, which, in my opinion, should be the first law of humanity: "To hold paramount the health, safety and welfare of the public," above all else.
This is the Hippocratic Oath we've rarely acknowledged, let alone embraced.
And so when scientists and engineers, very much like medical doctors, screw up, people can get hurt -- even die.
If our professionals and even students fail to get that, society pays a huge price.
Buried deep in history lies a character I deeply admire -- an engineer named Peter Palchinsky.
He lived in the time of the Soviet Union.
And Palchinsky repeatedly got in trouble for his radical honesty and willingness to point out major flaws in the Soviets' mindless pursuit of rapid industrialization.
Everyone was expected to follow orders coming from the top.
Anyone asking questions or offering feedback was unwelcome.
The Soviets had created the largest army of engineers the world had ever seen, and yet most of them were mere cogs in a gigantic machine heading for doom.
Palchinsky, on the other hand, implored engineers to look at the economic, political and social consequences of their actions; in other words, be more public-focused.
His fearless voice of reason was seen as a threat to the political establishment, and Joseph Stalin had him executed in 1929.
Palchinsky's view on technocrats is very different from one that is still very popular, still very common -- that of a dispassionate researcher working in his ivory tower lab, or a nerdy engineer working in his cubicle.
Brilliant, no doubt, yet somehow cut off from the world, shows little emotion -- kind of like Spock from "Star Trek," you know?
This guy.
(Laughter) Let's try and do the Spock salute.
I don't think I'll succeed ...
See, I can't be Spock.
Thank goodness I can't be Spock.
(Laughter) I was reminded of this distinction because a recent article came out in a very reputed scientific journal, which kind of characterized our Flint work as driven by "youthful idealism," and "Hollywood's dramatic sensibilities."
It asks scientists to protect their research funding and institutions at all costs, no matter how just the cause.
And if you think you have to get involved in something, even if it's an emergency, try finding an activist group or an NGO, and obtain the full support of the academic community -- whatever that means -- before you get involved.
Not one mention of our moral and professional obligation of preventing harm to the public, or the fact that we have all this expertise, resources and, for some, even tenure to, you know, accomplish this task.
I'm not saying every scientist should be an activist.
There are real and sometimes very painful consequences of speaking up.
But to denounce this idea, this possibility so completely so that you can protect research funding, simply screams of self-serving cowardice, and these are not the ideals we would want to pass to our students.
And so you may think, "OK, all this sounds great, but you'll never completely change organizational cultures, or imbibe mindsets in students and professionals to look at their work as a public good -- science in service to the public."
Maybe so.
But could a big reason for that be that we are not training our students right?
Because if you look closely, our education system today is focused more on creating what ex-Yale professor Bill Deresiewicz calls "excellent sheep" -- young people who are smart and ambitious, and yet somehow risk-averse, timid, directionless and, sometimes, full of themselves.
Now, kids ... you know, we fell in love with science when we were kids, and yet we somehow spend most of our time during high school and college just jumping through hoops and doing things so that we can polish our rsum instead of sitting down and reflecting on what we want to do and who we want to be.
And so, the markers of empathy in our college graduates have been dropping dramatically in the past two decades, while those of narcissism are on the rise.
There is also a growing culture of disengagement between engineering students and the public.
We are trained to build bridges and solve complex problems but not how to think or live or be a citizen of this world.
My undergraduate years were explicit job preparation, and I cannot tell you how suffocating and painful it was at times.
And so, some people think the solution to great engineers, to great scientists, is more technical training.
Maybe so.
But where are the discussions on ethical decision-making, or building character, or discerning right from wrong?
Consider this project that I deeply love and admire.
It's called, "Heroic Imagination Project."
A brainchild of Dr. Phil Zimbardo, famous for the Stanford Prison Experiment, this program seeks to train school-going children around the world to look at themselves as heroes-in-waiting, or heroes-in-training.
So, these young minds work over time to develop skills and virtues so that when the opportunity comes, no matter what that opportunity be, to stand up and do the right thing.
In other words, anyone can be a hero.
Think about that idea for a second.
Why don't we teach science and engineering like that -- where heroism and public service are seen as key values, because indeed, it's often heroism that is not only the antidote to public indifference, but also to systemic evil like we saw in Flint.
And so, dream with me what a 21st-century scientist slash engineer could look like: individuals who are driven to master the sciences so that they can serve society, and are also aware of the tremendous power their knowledge and decisions have; folks who are developing their moral courage at all times, and who realize that conflict and controversy are not necessarily bad things if our ultimate loyalty is to the public and the planet.
These are the people who will stand up like we did in Flint -- not to be saviors or heroes in the media, but altruistic and fundamentally good actors that you and I can trust.
Imagine fostering such a public-focused mindset in classes, on service trips and during activities during college or even high school, so that these young minds will hold onto those ideals when they actually enter the real world, whether that be consulting, academia, policy making -- or even becoming the president of a country.
Some of mankind's greatest challenges lie ahead of us; contaminated drinking water is just one example.
We could definitely use more -- nay, we desperately need more -- compassionate upstanders and public-focused scientists and engineers who will strive to the do right thing, and not be easy to manage.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Last year ...
was hell.
(Laughter) It was my first time eating Nigerian "jollof."
(Laughter) Actually, in all seriousness, I was going through a lot of personal turmoil.
Faced with enormous stress, I suffered an anxiety attack.
On some days, I could do no work.
On other days, I just wanted to lay in my bed and cry.
My doctor asked if I'd like to speak with a mental health professional about my stress and anxiety.
Mental health?
I clammed up and violently shook my head in protest.
I felt a profound sense of a shame.
I felt the weight of stigma.
I have a loving, supportive family and incredibly loyal friends, yet I could not entertain the idea of speaking to anyone about my feeling of pain.
I felt suffocated by the rigid architecture of our African masculinity.
"People have real problems, Sangu.
Get over yourself!"
The first time I heard "mental health," I was a boarding school student fresh off the boat from Ghana, at the Peddie School in New Jersey.
I had just gone through the brutal experience of losing seven loved ones in the same month.
The school nurse, concerned about what I'd gone through -- God bless her soul -- she inquired about my mental health.
"Is she mental?" I thought.
Does she not know I'm an African man?
(Laughter) Like Okonkwo in "Things Fall Apart," we African men neither process nor express our emotions.
We deal with our problems.
(Applause) We deal with our problems.
I called my brother and laughed about "Oyibo" people -- white people -- and their strange diseases -- depression, ADD and those "weird things."
Growing up in West Africa, when people used the term "mental," what came to mind was a madman with dirty, dread-locked hair, bumbling around half-naked on the streets.
We all know this man.
Our parents warned us about him.
"Mommy, mommy, why is he mad?"
"Drugs!
If you even look at drugs, you end up like him."
(Laughter) Come down with pneumonia, and your mother will rush you to the nearest hospital for medical treatment.
But dare to declare depression, and your local pastor will be driving out demons and blaming witches in your village.
According to the World Health Organization, mental health is about being able to cope with the normal stressors of life; to work productively and fruitfully; and to be able to make a contribution to your community.
Mental health includes our emotional, psychological and social well-being.
Globally, 75 percent of all mental illness cases can be found in low-income countries.
Yet most African governments invest less than one percent of their health care budget in mental health.
Even worse, we have a severe shortage of psychiatrists in Africa.
Nigeria, for example, is estimated to have 200 -- in a country of almost 200 million.
In all of Africa, 90 percent of our people lack access to treatment.
As a result, we suffer in solitude, silenced by stigma.
We as Africans often respond to mental health with distance, ignorance, guilt, fear and anger.
In a study conducted by Arboleda-Flrez, directly asking, "What is the cause of mental illness?"
34 percent of Nigerian respondents cited drug misuse; 19 percent said divine wrath and the will of God -- (Laughter) 12 percent, witchcraft and spiritual possession.
But few cited other known causes of mental illness, like genetics, socioeconomic status, war, conflict or the loss of a loved one.
The stigmatization against mental illness often results in the ostracizing and demonizing of sufferers.
Photojournalist Robin Hammond has documented some of these abuses ...
in Uganda, in Somalia, and here in Nigeria.
For me, the stigma is personal.
In 2009, I received a frantic call in the middle of the night.
My best friend in the world -- a brilliant, philosophical, charming, hip young man -- was diagnosed with schizophrenia.
I witnessed some of the friends we'd grown up with recoil.
I heard the snickers.
I heard the whispers.
"Did you hear he has gone mad?"
(Kru English) "He has gone crazy!"
Derogatory, demeaning commentary about his condition -- words we would never say about someone with cancer or someone with malaria.
Somehow, when it comes to mental illness, our ignorance eviscerates all empathy.
I stood by his side as his community isolated him, but our love never wavered.
Tacitly, I became passionate about mental health.
Inspired by his plight, I helped found the mental health special interest alumni group at my college.
And during my tenure as a resident tutor in graduate school, I supported many undergraduates with their mental health challenges.
I saw African students struggle and unable to speak to anyone.
Even with this knowledge and with their stories in tow, I, in turn, struggled, and could not speak to anyone when I faced my own anxiety, so deep is our fear of being the madman.
All of us -- but we Africans especially -- need to realize that our mental struggles do not detract from our virility, nor does our trauma taint our strength.
We need to see mental health as important as physical health.
We need to stop suffering in silence.
We must stop stigmatizing disease and traumatizing the afflicted.
Talk to your friends.
Talk to your loved ones.
Talk to health professionals.
Be vulnerable.
Do so with the confidence that you are not alone.
Speak up if you're struggling.
Being honest about how we feel does not make us weak; it makes us human.
It is time to end the stigma associated with mental illness.
So the next time your hear "mental," do not just think of the madman.
Think of me.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
How do groups get anything done? Right?
How do you organize a group of individuals so that the output of the group is something coherent and of lasting value, instead of just being chaos?
And the economic framing of that problem is called coordination costs.
And a coordination cost is essentially all of the financial or institutional difficulties in arranging group output.
And we've had a classic answer for coordination costs, which is, if you want to coordinate the work of a group of people, you start an institution, right? You raise some resources.
You found something. It can be private or public.
It can be for profit or not profit. It can be large or small.
But you get these resources together.
You found an institution, and you use the institution to coordinate the activities of the group.
More recently, because the cost of letting groups communicate with each other has fallen through the floor -- and communication costs are one of the big inputs to coordination -- there has been a second answer, which is to put the cooperation into the infrastructure, to design systems that coordinate the output of the group as a by-product of the operating of the system, without regard to institutional models.
So, that's what I want to talk about today.
I'm going to illustrate it with some fairly concrete examples, but always pointing to the broader themes.
So, I'm going to start by trying to answer a question that I know each of you will have asked yourself at some point or other, and which the Internet is purpose-built to answer, which is, where can I get a picture of a roller-skating mermaid?
So, in New York City, on the first Saturday of every summer, Coney Island, our local, charmingly run-down amusement park, hosts the Mermaid Parade. It's an amateur parade; people come from all over the city; people get all dressed up.
Some people get less dressed up.
Young and old, dancing in the streets.
Colorful characters, and a good time is had by all.
And what I want to call your attention to is not the Mermaid Parade itself, charming though it is, but rather to these photos.
I didn't take them. How did I get them?
And the answer is: I got them from Flickr.
Flickr is a photo-sharing service that allows people to take photos, upload them, share them over the Web and so forth.
Recently, Flickr has added an additional function called tagging.
Tagging was pioneered by Delicious and Joshua Schachter.
Delicious is a social bookmarking service.
Tagging is a cooperative infrastructure answer to classification.
Right? If I had given this talk last year, I couldn't do what I just did, because I couldn't have found those photos.
But instead of saying, we need to hire a professional class of librarians to organize these photos once they're uploaded, Flickr simply turned over to the users the ability to characterize the photos.
So, I was able to go in and draw down photos that had been tagged "Mermaid Parade." There were 3,100 photos taken by 118 photographers, all aggregated and then put under this nice, neat name, shown in reverse chronological order.
And I was then able to go and retrieve them to give you that little slideshow.
Now, what hard problem is being solved here?
And it's -- in the most schematic possible view, it's a coordination problem, right?
There are a large number of people on the Internet, a very small fraction of them have photos of the Mermaid Parade.
How do we get those people together to contribute that work?
The classic answer is to form an institution, right?
To draw those people into some prearranged structure that has explicit goals.
And I want to call your attention to some of the side effects of going the institutional route.
First of all, when you form an institution, you take on a management problem, right?
No good just hiring employees, you also have to hire other employees to manage those employees and to enforce the goals of the institution and so forth.
Secondly, you have to bring structure into place.
Right? You have to have economic structure.
You have to have legal structure.
You have to have physical structure.
And that creates additional costs.
Third, forming an institution is inherently exclusionary.
You notice we haven't got everybody who has a photo.
You can't hire everyone in a company, right?
You can't recruit everyone into a governmental organization.
You have to exclude some people.
And fourth, as a result of that exclusion, you end up with a professional class. Look at the change here.
We've gone from people with photos to photographers.
Right? We've created a professional class of photographers whose goal is to go out and photograph the Mermaid Parade, or whatever else they're sent out to photograph.
When you build cooperation into the infrastructure, which is the Flickr answer, you can leave the people where they are and you take the problem to the individuals, rather than moving the individuals to the problem.
You arrange the coordination in the group, and by doing that you get the same outcome, without the institutional difficulties.
You lose the institutional imperative.
You lose the right to shape people's work when it's volunteer effort, but you also shed the institutional cost, which gives you greater flexibility.
What Flickr does is it replaces planning with coordination.
And this is a general aspect of these cooperative systems.
Right. You'll have experienced this in your life whenever you bought your first mobile phone, and you stopped making plans.
You just said, "I'll call you when I get there."
"Call me when you get off work." Right?
That is a point-to-point replacement of coordination with planning.
Right. We're now able to do that kind of thing with groups.
To say instead of, we must make an advance plan, we must have a five-year projection of where the Wikipedia is going to be, or whatever, you can just say, let's coordinate the group effort, and let's deal with it as we go, because we're now well-enough coordinated that we don't have to take on the problems of deciding in advance what to do.
So here's another example. This one's somewhat more somber.
These are photos on Flickr tagged "Iraq."
And everything that was hard about the coordination cost with the Mermaid Parade is even harder here.
There are more pictures. There are more photographers.
It's taken over a wider geographic area.
The photos are spread out over a longer period of time.
And worst of all, that figure at the bottom, approximately ten photos per photographer, is a lie.
It's mathematically true, but it doesn't really talk about anything important -- because in these systems, the average isn't really what matters.
What matters is this.
This is a graph of photographs tagged Iraq as taken by the 529 photographers who contributed the 5,445 photos.
And it's ranked in order of number of photos taken per photographer.
You can see here, over at the end, our most prolific photographer has taken around 350 photos, and you can see there's a few people who have taken hundreds of photos.
Then there's dozens of people who've taken dozens of photos.
And by the time we get around here, we get ten or fewer photos, and then there's this long, flat tail.
And by the time you get to the middle, you've got hundreds of people who have contributed only one photo each.
This is called a power-law distribution.
It appears often in unconstrained social systems where people are allowed to contribute as much or as little as they like -- this is often what you get. Right?
The math behind the power-law distribution is that whatever's in the nth position is doing about one-nth of whatever's being measured, relative to the person in the first position.
So, we'd expect the tenth most prolific photographer to have contributed about a tenth of the photos, and the hundredth most prolific photographer to have contributed only about a hundred as many photos as the most prolific photographer did.
So, the head of the curve can be sharper or flatter.
But that basic math accounts both for the steep slope and for the long, flat tail.
And curiously, in these systems, as they grow larger, the systems don't converge; they diverge more.
In bigger systems, the head gets bigger and the tail gets longer, so the imbalance increases.
You can see the curve is obviously heavily left-weighted. Here's how heavily: if you take the top 10 percent of photographers contributing to this system, they account for three quarters of the photos taken -- just the top 10 percent most prolific photographers.
If you go down to five percent, you're still accounting for 60 percent of the photos.
If you go down to one percent, exclude 99 percent of the group effort, you're still accounting for almost a quarter of the photos.
And because of this left weighting, the average is actually here, way to the left.
And that sounds strange to our ears, but what ends up happening is that 80 percent of the contributors have contributed a below-average amount.
That sounds strange because we expect average and middle to be about the same, but they're not at all.
This is the math underlying the 80/20 rule. Right?
Whenever you hear anybody talking about the 80/20 rule, this is what's going on. Right?
20 percent of the merchandise accounts for 80 percent of the revenue, 20 percent of the users use 80 percent of the resources -- this is the shape people are talking about when that happens.
Institutions only have two tools: carrots and sticks.
And the 80 percent zone is a no-carrot and no-stick zone.
The costs of running the institution mean that you cannot take on the work of those people easily in an institutional frame.
The institutional model always pushes leftwards, treating these people as employees.
The institutional response is, I can get 75 percent of the value for 10 percent of the hires -- great, that's what I'll do.
The cooperative infrastructure model says, why do you want to give up a quarter of the value?
If your system is designed so that you have to give up a quarter of the value, re-engineer the system.
Don't take on the cost that prevents you from getting to the contributions of these people.
Build the system so that anybody can contribute at any amount.
So the coordination response asks not, how are these people as employees, but rather, what is their contribution like? Right?
We have over here Psycho Milt, a Flickr user, who has contributed one, and only one, photo titled "Iraq."
And here's the photo. Right. Labeled, "Bad Day at Work."
Right? So the question is, do you want that photo? Yes or no.
The question is not, is Psycho Milt a good employee?
And the tension here is between institution as enabler and institution as obstacle.
When you're dealing with the left-hand edge of one of these distributions, when you're dealing with the people who spend a lot of time producing a lot of the material you want, that's an institution-as-enabler world.
You can hire those people as employees, you can coordinate their work and you can get some output.
But when you're down here, where the Psycho Milts of the world are adding one photo at a time, that's institution as obstacle.
Institutions hate being told they're obstacles.
One of the first things that happens when you institutionalize a problem is that the first goal of the institution immediately shifts from whatever the nominal goal was to self-preservation.
And the actual goal of the institution goes to two through n.
Right? So, when institutions are told they are obstacles, and that there are other ways of coordinating the value, they go through something a little bit like the Kubler-Ross stages -- (Laughter) -- of reaction, being told you have a fatal illness: denial, anger, bargaining, acceptance.
Most of the cooperative systems we've seen haven't been around long enough to have gotten to the acceptance phase.
Many, many institutions are still in denial, but we're seeing recently a lot of both anger and bargaining.
There's a wonderful, small example going on right now.
In France, a bus company is suing people for forming a carpool, right, because the fact that they have coordinated themselves to create cooperative value is depriving them of revenue.
You can follow this in the Guardian.
It's actually quite entertaining.
The bigger question is, what do you do about the value down here?
Right? How do you capture that?
And institutions, as I've said, are prevented from capturing that.
Steve Ballmer, now CEO of Microsoft, was criticizing Linux a couple of years ago, and he said, "Oh, this business of thousands of programmers contributing to Linux, this is a myth.
We've looked at who's contributed to Linux, and most of the patches have been produced by programmers who've only done one thing." Right?
You can hear this distribution under that complaint.
And you can see why, from Ballmer's point of view, that's a bad idea, right?
We hired this programmer, he came in, he drank our Cokes and played Foosball for three years and he had one idea.
(Laughter) Right? Bad hire. Right?
(Laughter) The Psycho Milt question is, was it a good idea?
What if it was a security patch?
What if it was a security patch for a buffer overflow exploit, of which Windows has not some, [but] several?
Do you want that patch, right?
The fact that a single programmer can, without having to move into a professional relation to an institution, improve Linux once and never be seen from again, should terrify Ballmer.
Because this kind of value is unreachable in classic institutional frameworks, but is part of cooperative systems of open-source software, of file sharing, of the Wikipedia. I've used a lot of examples from Flickr, but there are actually stories about this from all over.
Meetup, a service founded so that users could find people in their local area who share their interests and affinities and actually have a real-world meeting offline in a cafe or a pub or what have you.
When Scott Heiferman founded Meetup, he thought it would be used for, you know, train spotters and cat fanciers -- classic affinity groups.
The inventors don't know what the invention is.
Number one group on Meetup right now, most chapters in most cities with most members, most active?
Stay-at-home moms. Right?
In the suburbanized, dual-income United States, stay-at-home moms are actually missing the social infrastructure that comes from extended family and local, small-scale neighborhoods.
So they're reinventing it, using these tools.
Meetup is the platform, but the value here is in social infrastructure.
If you want to know what technology is going to change the world, don't pay attention to 13-year-old boys -- pay attention to young mothers, because they have got not an ounce of support for technology that doesn't materially make their lives better.
This is so much more important than Xbox, but it's a lot less glitzy.
I think this is a revolution.
I think that this is a really profound change in the way human affairs are arranged.
And I use that word advisedly.
It's a revolution in that it's a change in equilibrium.
It's a whole new way of doing things, which includes new downsides.
In the United States right now, a woman named Judith Miller is in jail for not having given to a Federal Grand Jury her sources -- she's a reporter for the New York Times -- her sources, in a very abstract and hard-to-follow case.
And journalists are in the street rallying to improve the shield laws.
The shield laws are our laws -- pretty much a patchwork of state laws -- that prevent a journalist from having to betray a source.
This is happening, however, against the background of the rise of Web logging.
Web logging is a classic example of mass amateurization.
It has de-professionalized publishing.
Want to publish globally anything you think today?
It is a one-button operation that you can do for free.
That has sent the professional class of publishing down into the ranks of mass amateurization.
And so the shield law, as much as we want it -- we want a professional class of truth-tellers -- it is becoming increasingly incoherent, because the institution is becoming incoherent.
There are people in the States right now tying themselves into knots, trying to figure out whether or not bloggers are journalists.
And the answer to that question is, it doesn't matter, because that's not the right question.
Journalism was an answer to an even more important question, which is, how will society be informed?
How will they share ideas and opinions?
And if there is an answer to that that happens outside the professional framework of journalism, it makes no sense to take a professional metaphor and apply it to this distributed class.
So as much as we want the shield laws, the background -- the institution to which they were attached -- is becoming incoherent.
Here's another example.
Pro-ana, the pro-ana groups.
These are groups of teenage girls who have taken on Web logs, bulletin boards, other kinds of cooperative infrastructure, and have used it to set up support groups for remaining anorexic by choice.
They post pictures of thin models, which they call "thinspiration."
They have little slogans, like "Salvation through Starvation."
They even have Lance Armstrong-style bracelets, these red bracelets, which signify, in the small group, I am trying to maintain my eating disorder.
They trade tips, like, if you feel like eating something, clean a toilet or the litter box. The feeling will pass.
We're used to support groups being beneficial.
We have an attitude that support groups are inherently beneficial.
But it turns out that the logic of the support group is value neutral.
A support group is simply a small group that wants to maintain a way of living in the context of a larger group.
Now, when the larger group is a bunch of drunks, and the small group wants to stay sober, then we think, that's a great support group.
But when the small group is teenage girls who want to stay anorexic by choice, then we're horrified.
What's happened is that the normative goals of the support groups that we're used to, came from the institutions that were framing them, and not from the infrastructure.
Once the infrastructure becomes generically available, the logic of the support group has been revealed to be accessible to anyone, including people pursuing these kinds of goals.
So, there are significant downsides to these changes as well as upsides. And of course, in the current environment, one need allude only lightly to the work of non-state actors trying to influence global affairs, and taking advantage of these.
This is a social map of the hijackers and their associates who perpetrated the 9/11 attack.
It was produced by analyzing their communications patterns using a lot of these tools. And doubtless the intelligence communities of the world are doing the same work today for the attacks of last week.
Now, this is the part of the talk where I tell you what's going to come as a result of all of this, but I'm running out of time, which is good, because I don't know.
(Laughter) Right. As with the printing press, if it's really a revolution, it doesn't take us from Point A to Point B.
It takes us from Point A to chaos.
The printing press precipitated 200 years of chaos, moving from a world where the Catholic Church was the sort of organizing political force to the Treaty of Westphalia, when we finally knew what the new unit was: the nation state.
Now, I'm not predicting 200 years of chaos as a result of this. 50.
50 years in which loosely coordinated groups are going to be given increasingly high leverage, and the more those groups forego traditional institutional imperatives -- like deciding in advance what's going to happen, or the profit motive -- the more leverage they'll get.
And institutions are going to come under an increasing degree of pressure, and the more rigidly managed, and the more they rely on information monopolies, the greater the pressure is going to be.
And that's going to happen one arena at a time, one institution at a time. The forces are general, but the results are going to be specific.
And so the point here is not, "This is wonderful," or "We're going to see a transition from only institutions to only cooperative framework."
It's going to be much more complicated than that.
But the point is that it's going to be a massive readjustment.
And since we can see it in advance and know it's coming, my argument is essentially: we might as well get good at it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
"Look at me!"
That phrase turned me into an eye-contact coach.
I'm the mother of Ivan; he's 15 years old.
Ivan has autism, he doesn't speak, and he communicates through an iPad, where his whole universe of words exists in images.
He was diagnosed when he was two and a half.
I still remember that day painfully.
My husband and I felt really lost; we didn't know where to begin.
There was no internet, you couldn't Google information, so we made those first steps out of sheer intuition.
Ivan would not maintain eye contact, he had lost the words that he did know, and he didn't respond to his name or to anything we asked him, as if words were noise.
The only way I could know what was going on with him, what he felt, was looking him in the eye.
But that bridge was broken.
How could I teach him about life?
When I did things he liked, he would look at me, and we were connected.
So I dedicated myself to working with him on those things, so we would have more and more eye-contact moments.
We would spend hours and hours playing tag with his older sister, Alexia, and when we said: "I caught you!"
he would look around for us, and at that moment, I could feel he was alive.
We also hold a record for hours spent in a swimming pool.
Ivan always had a passion for water.
I remember when he was two and a half, on a rainy winter day, I was taking him to an indoor pool, because even on rainy days we'd go swimming.
We were on the highway, and I took the wrong exit.
He burst into tears and cried inconsolably, nonstop, until I turned back.
Only then did he calm down.
How was it possible that a two and a half year old didn't respond to his own name, yet in the middle of the rain and fog, where I couldn't see anything, he knew the exact route?
That's when I realized that Ivan had an exceptional visual memory, and that that would be my way in.
So I started taking pictures of everything, and teaching him what life was like, showing it to him, picture by picture.
Even now, it's the way Ivan communicates what he wants, what he needs and also what he feels.
But it wasn't just Ivan's eye contact that mattered.
Everyone else's did, too.
How could I make people see not only his autism, but see him the person and everything he can give; everything he can do; the things he likes and doesn't like, just like any one of us?
But for that, I also had to give of myself.
I had to have the strength to let him go, which was extremely difficult.
Ivan was 11 years old, and he went for treatment in a neighborhood near our house.
One afternoon, while I was waiting for him, I went into a greengrocer, a typical neighborhood store with a little bit of everything.
While doing the shopping, I started talking to Jose, the owner.
I told him about Ivan, that he had autism, and that I wanted him to learn to walk down the street by himself, without anyone holding his hand.
So I decided to ask Jose if Thursdays around 2pm, Ivan could come and help him arrange the water bottles on the shelves, because he loved to organize things.
And as a reward, he could buy some chocolate cookies, which were his favorite.
He said "yes" right away.
So that's how it went for a year: Ivan would go to Jose's greengrocer, help him arrange the shelves of water bottles with the labels perfectly lined up on the same side, and he would leave happy with his chocolate cookies.
Jose is not an expert in autism.
There is no need to be an expert nor do anything heroic to include someone.
We just need to be there -- (Applause) (Applause ends) Really, no heroic deed -- we simply need to be close.
And if we are afraid of something or we don't understand something, we need to ask.
Let's be curious but never indifferent.
Let's have the courage to look each other in the eye, because by looking, we can open a whole world to someone else.
(Applause) (Cheers)
I was 14 years old inside of a bowling alley, burglarizing an arcade game, and upon exiting the building a security guard grabbed my arm, so I ran.
I ran down the street, and I jumped on top of a fence.
And when I got to the top, the weight of 3,000 quarters in my book bag pulled me back down to the ground.
So when I came to, the security guard was standing on top of me, and he said, "Next time you little punks steal something you can carry."
(Laughter) I was taken to juvenile hall and when I was released into the custody of my mother, the first words my uncle said was, "How'd you get caught?"
I said, "Man, the book bag was too heavy."
He said, "Man, you weren't supposed to take all the quarters."
I said, "Man, they were small. What am I supposed to do?"
And 10 minutes later, he took me to burglarize another arcade game.
We needed gas money to get home.
That was my life.
I grew up in Oakland, California, with my mother and members of my immediate family addicted to crack cocaine.
My environment consisted of living with family, friends, and homeless shelters.
Oftentimes, dinner was served in breadlines and soup kitchens.
The big homey told me this: money rules the world and everything in it.
And in these streets, money is king.
And if you follow the money, it'll lead you to the bad guy or the good guy.
Soon after, I committed my first crime, and it was the first time that I was told that I had potential and felt like somebody believed in me.
Nobody ever told me that I could be a lawyer, doctor or engineer.
I mean, how was I supposed to do that? I couldn't read, write or spell.
I was illiterate.
So I always thought crime was my way to go.
And then one day I was talking to somebody and he was telling me about this robbery that we could do.
And we did it.
The reality was that I was growing up in the strongest financial nation in the world, the United States of America, while I watched my mother stand in line at a blood bank to sell her blood for 40 dollars just to try to feed her kids.
She still has the needle marks on her arms to day to show for that.
So I never cared about my community.
They didn't care about my life.
Everybody there was doing what they were doing to take what they wanted, the drug dealers, the robbers, the blood bank.
Everybody was taking blood money.
So I got mine by any means necessary.
Financial literacy really did rule the world, and I was a child slave to it following the bad guy.
At 17 years old, I was arrested for robbery and murder and I soon learned that finances in prison rule more than they did on the streets, so I wanted in.
One day, I rushed to grab the sports page of the newspaper so my cellie could read it to me, and I accidentally picked up the business section.
And this old man said, "Hey youngster, you pick stocks?"
And I said, "What's that?"
He said, "That's the place where white folks keep all their money."
(Laughter) And it was the first time that I saw a glimpse of hope, a future.
He gave me this brief description of what stocks were, but it was just a glimpse.
I mean, how was I supposed to do it?
I couldn't read, write or spell.
The skills that I had developed to hide my illiteracy no longer worked in this environment.
I was trapped in a cage, prey among predators, fighting for freedom I never had.
I was lost, tired, and I was out of options.
So at 20 years old, I did the hardest thing I'd ever done in my life.
I picked up a book, and it was the most agonizing time of my life, trying to learn how to read, the ostracizing from my family, the homeys.
It was rough, man.
It was a struggle.
But little did I know I was receiving the greatest gifts I had ever dreamed of: self-worth, knowledge, discipline.
I was so excited to be reading that I read everything I could get my hands on: candy wrappers, clothing logos, street signs, everything.
I was just reading stuff!
(Applause) Just reading stuff.
I was so excited to know how to read and know how to spell.
The homey came up, said, "Man, what you eating?"
I said, "C-A-N-D-Y, candy."
(Laughter) He said, "Let me get some." I said, "N-O. No."
(Laughter) It was awesome.
I mean, I can actually now for the first time in my life read.
The feeling that I got from it was amazing.
And then at 22, feeling myself, feeling confident, I remembered what the OG told me.
So I picked up the business section of the newspaper.
I wanted to find these rich white folks.
(Laughter) So I looked for that glimpse.
As I furthered my career in teaching others how to financially manage money and invest, I soon learned that I had to take responsibility for my own actions.
True, I grew up in a very complex environment, but I chose to commit crimes, and I had to own up to that.
I had to take responsibility for that, and I did.
I was building a curriculum that could teach incarcerated men how to manage money through prison employments.
Properly managing our lifestyle would provide transferrable tools that we can use to manage money when we reenter society, like the majority of people did who didn't commit crimes.
Then I discovered that according to MarketWatch, over 60 percent of the American population has under 1,000 dollars in savings.
Sports Illustrated said that over 60 percent of NBA players and NFL players go broke.
40 percent of marital problems derive from financial issues.
What the hell?
(Laughter) You mean to tell me that people worked their whole lives, buying cars, clothes, homes and material stuff but were living check to check?
How in the world were members of society going to help incarcerated individuals back into society if they couldn't manage they own stuff?
We screwed.
(Laughter) I needed a better plan.
This is not going to work out too well.
So ...
I thought.
I now had an obligation to meet those on the path and help, and it was crazy because I now cared about my community.
Wow, imagine that. I cared about my community.
Financial illiteracy is a disease that has crippled minorities and the lower class in our society for generations and generations, and we should be furious about that.
Ask yourselves this: How can 50 percent of the American population be financially illiterate in a nation driven by financial prosperity?
Our access to justice, our social status, living conditions, transportation and food are all dependent on money that most people can't manage.
It's crazy!
It's an epidemic and a bigger danger to public safety than any other issue.
According to the California Department of Corrections, over 70 percent of those incarcerated have committed or have been charged with money-related crimes: robberies, burglaries, fraud, larceny, extortion -- and the list goes on.
Check this out: a typical incarcerated person would enter the California prison system with no financial education, earn 30 cents an hour, over 800 dollars a year, with no real expenses and save no money.
Upon his parole, he will be given 200 dollars gate money and told, "Hey, good luck, stay out of trouble. Don't come back to prison."
With no meaningful preparation or long-term financial plan, what does he do ... ?
At 60?
Get a good job, or go back to the very criminal behavior that led him to prison in the first place?
You taxpayers, you choose.
Well, his education already chose for him, probably.
So how do we cure this disease?
I cofounded a program that we call Financial Empowerment Emotional Literacy.
We call it FEEL, and it teaches how do you separate your emotional decisions from your financial decisions, and the four timeless rules to personal finance: the proper way to save, control your cost of living, borrow money effectively and diversify your finances by allowing your money to work for you instead of you working for it.
Incarcerated people need these life skills before we reenter society.
You can't have full rehabilitation without these life skills.
This idea that only professionals can invest and manage money is absolutely ridiculous, and whoever told you that is lying.
(Applause) A professional is a person who knows his craft better than most, and nobody knows how much money you need, have or want better than you, which means you are the professional.
Financial literacy is not a skill, ladies and gentlemen.
It's a lifestyle.
Financial stability is a byproduct of a proper lifestyle.
A financially sound incarcerated person can become a taxpaying citizen, and a financially sound taxpaying citizen can remain one.
This allows us to create a bridge between those people who we influence: family, friends and those young people who still believe that crime and money are related.
So let's lose the fear and anxiety of all the big financial words and all that other nonsense that you've been out there hearing.
And let's get to the heart of what's been crippling our society from taking care of your responsibility to be better life managers.
And let's provide a simple and easy to use curriculum that gets to the heart, the heart of what financial empowerment and emotional literacy really is.
Now, if you're sitting out here in the audience and you said, "Oh yeah, well, that ain't me and I don't buy it," then come take my class -- (Laughter) so I can show you how much money it costs you every time you get emotional.
(Applause) Thank you very much. Thank you.
(Applause)
As patients, we usually remember the names of our doctors, but often we forget the names of our nurses.
I remember one.
I had breast cancer a few years ago, and somehow I managed to get through the surgeries and the beginning of the treatment just fine.
I could hide what was going on.
Everybody didn't really have to know.
I could walk my daughter to school, I could go out to dinner with my husband; I could fool people.
But then my chemo was scheduled to begin and that terrified me because I knew that I was going to lose every single hair on my body because of the kind of chemo that I was going to have.
I wasn't going to be able to pretend anymore as though everything was normal.
I was scared.
I knew what it felt like to have everybody treating me with kid gloves, and I just wanted to feel normal.
I had a port installed in my chest.
I went to my first day of chemotherapy, and I was an emotional wreck.
My nurse, Joanne, walked in the door, and every bone in my body was telling me to get up out of that chair and take for the hills.
But Joanne looked at me and talked to me like we were old friends.
And then she asked me, "Where'd you get your highlights done?"
(Laughter) And I was like, are you kidding me?
You're going to talk to me about my hair when I'm on the verge of losing it?
I was kind of angry, and I said, "Really? Hair?"
And with a shrug of her shoulders she said, "It's gonna grow back."
And in that moment she said the one thing I had overlooked, and that was that at some point, my life would get back to normal.
She really believed that.
And so I believed it, too.
Now, worrying about losing your hair when you're fighting cancer may seem silly at first, but it's not just that you're worried about how you're going to look.
It's that you're worried that everybody's going to treat you so carefully.
Joanne made me feel normal for the first time in six months.
We talked about her boyfriends, we talked about looking for apartments in New York City, and we talked about my reaction to the chemotherapy -- all kind of mixed in together.
And I always wondered, how did she so instinctively know just how to talk to me?
Joanne Staha and my admiration for her marked the beginning of my journey into the world of nurses.
A few years later, I was asked to do a project that would celebrate the work that nurses do.
I started with Joanne, and I met over 100 nurses across the country.
I spent five years interviewing, photographing and filming nurses for a book and a documentary film.
With my team, we mapped a trip across America that would take us to places dealing with some of the biggest public health issues facing our nation -- aging, war, poverty, prisons.
And then we went places where we would find the largest concentration of patients dealing with those issues.
Then we asked hospitals and facilities to nominate nurses who would best represent them.
One of the first nurses I met was Bridget Kumbella.
Bridget was born in Cameroon, the oldest of four children.
Her father was at work when he had fallen from the fourth floor and really hurt his back.
And he talked a lot about what it was like to be flat on your back and not get the kind of care that you need.
And that propelled Bridget to go into the profession of nursing.
Now, as a nurse in the Bronx, she has a really diverse group of patients that she cares for, from all walks of life, and from all different religions.
And she's devoted her career to understanding the impact of our cultural differences when it comes to our health.
She spoke of a patient -- a Native American patient that she had -- that wanted to bring a bunch of feathers into the ICU.
That's how he found spiritual comfort.
And she spoke of advocating for him and said that patients come from all different religions and use all different kinds of objects for comfort; whether it's a holy rosary or a symbolic feather, it all needs to be supported.
This is Jason Short.
Jason is a home health nurse in the Appalachian mountains, and his dad had a gas station and a repair shop when he was growing up.
So he worked on cars in the community that he now serves as a nurse.
When he was in college, it was just not macho at all to become a nurse, so he avoided it for years.
He drove trucks for a little while, but his life path was always pulling him back to nursing.
As a nurse in the Appalachian mountains, Jason goes places that an ambulance can't even get to.
In this photograph, he's standing in what used to be a road.
Top of the mountain mining flooded that road, and now the only way for Jason to get to the patient living in that house with black lung disease is to drive his SUV against the current up that creek.
The day I was with him, we ripped the front fender off the car.
The next morning he got up, put the car on the lift, fixed the fender, and then headed out to meet his next patient.
I witnessed Jason caring for this gentleman with such enormous compassion, and I was struck again by how intimate the work of nursing really is.
When I met Brian McMillion, he was raw.
He had just come back from a deployment and he hadn't really settled back in to life in San Diego yet.
He talked about his experience of being a nurse in Germany and taking care of the soldiers coming right off the battlefield.
Very often, he would be the first person they would see when they opened their eyes in the hospital.
And they would look at him as they were lying there, missing limbs, and the first thing they would say is, "When can I go back? I left my brothers out there."
And Brian would have to say, "You're not going anywhere.
You've already given enough, brother."
Brian is both a nurse and a soldier who's seen combat.
So that puts him in a unique position to be able to relate to and help heal the veterans in his care.
This is Sister Stephen, and she runs a nursing home in Wisconsin called Villa Loretto.
And the entire circle of life can be found under her roof.
She grew up wishing they lived on a farm, so given the opportunity to adopt local farm animals, she enthusiastically brings them in.
And in the springtime, those animals have babies.
And Sister Stephen uses those baby ducks, goats and lambs as animal therapy for the residents at Villa Loretto who sometimes can't remember their own name, but they do rejoice in the holding of a baby lamb.
The day I was with Sister Stephen, I needed to take her away from Villa Loretto to film part of her story.
And before we left, she went into the room of a dying patient.
And she leaned over and she said, "I have to go away for the day, but if Jesus calls you, you go.
You go straight home to Jesus."
I was standing there and thinking it was the first time in my life I witnessed that you could show someone you love them completely by letting go.
We don't have to hold on so tightly.
I saw more life rolled up at Villa Loretto than I have ever seen at any other time at any other place in my life.
We live in a complicated time when it comes to our health care.
It's easy to lose sight of the need for quality of life, not just quantity of life.
As new life-saving technologies are created, we're going to have really complicated decisions to make.
These technologies often save lives, but they can also prolong pain and the dying process.
How in the world are we supposed to navigate these waters?
We're going to need all the help we can get.
Nurses have a really unique relationship with us because of the time spent at bedside.
During that time, a kind of emotional intimacy develops.
This past summer, on August 9, my father died of a heart attack.
My mother was devastated, and she couldn't imagine her world without him in it.
Four days later she fell, she broke her hip, she needed surgery and she found herself fighting for her own life.
Once again I found myself on the receiving end of the care of nurses -- this time for my mom.
My brother and my sister and I stayed by her side for the next three days in the ICU.
And as we tried to make the right decisions and follow my mother's wishes, we found that we were depending upon the guidance of nurses.
And once again, they didn't let us down.
They had an amazing insight in terms of how to care for my mom in the last four days of her life.
They brought her comfort and relief from pain.
They knew to encourage my sister and I to put a pretty nightgown on my mom, long after it mattered to her, but it sure meant a lot to us.
And they knew to come and wake me up just in time for my mom's last breath.
And then they knew how long to leave me in the room with my mother after she died.
I have no idea how they know these things, but I do know that I am eternally grateful that they've guided me once again.
Thank you so very much.
(Applause)
So there's this thing called the law of unintended consequences.
I thought it was just like a saying, but it actually exists, I guess.
There's, like, academic papers about it.
And I'm a designer.
I don't like unintended consequences.
People hire me because they have consequences that they really intend, and what they intend is for me to help them achieve those consequences.
So I live in fear of unintended consequences.
And so this is a story about consequences intended and unintended.
I got called by an organization called Robin Hood to do a favor for them.
Robin Hood is based in New York, a wonderful philanthropic organization that does what it says in the name.
They take from rich people, give it to poor people.
In this case, what they wanted to benefit was the New York City school system, a huge enterprise that educates more than a million students at a time, and in buildings that are like this one, old buildings, big buildings, drafty buildings, sometimes buildings that are in disrepair, certainly buildings that could use a renovation.
Robin Hood had this ambition to improve these buildings in some way, but what they realized was to fix the buildings would be too expensive and impractical.
So instead they tried to figure out what one room they could go into in each of these buildings, in as many buildings that they could, and fix that one room so that they could improve the lives of the children inside as they were studying.
And what they came up with was the school library, and they came up with this idea called the Library Initiative.
All the students have to pass through the library.
That's where the books are.
That's where the heart and soul of the school is.
So let's fix these libraries.
So they did this wonderful thing where they brought in first 10, then 20, then more architects, each one of whom was assigned a library to rethink what a library was.
They trained special librarians.
So they started this mighty enterprise to reform public schools by improving these libraries.
Then they called me up and they said, "Could you make a little contribution?"
I said, "Sure, what do you want me to do?"
And they said, "Well, we want you to be the graphic designer in charge of the whole thing."
And so I thought, I know what that means. That means I get to design a logo.
I know how to design that. I design logos.
That's what people come to me for.
So OK, let's design a logo for this thing.
Easy to do, actually, compared with architecture and being a librarian.
Just do a logo, make a contribution, and then you're out, and you feel really good about yourself.
And I'm a great guy and I like to feel good about myself when I do these favors.
So I thought, let's overdeliver.
I'm going to give you three logos, all based on this one idea.
So you have three options, pick any of the three.
They're all great, I said.
So the basic idea was these would be new school libraries for New York schools, and so the idea is that it's a new thing, a new idea that needs a new name.
What I wanted to do was dispel the idea that these were musty old libraries, the kind of places that everyone is bored with, you know, not your grandparents' library.
Don't worry about that at all.
This is going to this new, exciting thing, not a boring library.
So option number one: so instead of thinking of it as a library, think of it as a place where it is like: do talk, do make loud noises.
Right? So no shushing, it's like a shush-free zone.
We're going to call it the Reading Room.
That was option number one. OK, option number two.
Option number two was, wait for it, OWL.
I'll meet you at OWL.
I'm getting my book from the OWL. Meet you after school down at OWL.
I like that, right? Now, what does OWL stand for?
Well, it could be One World Library, or it could be Open. Wonder. Learn.
Or it could be -- and I figure librarians could figure out other things it could be because they know about words.
So other things, right?
And then look at this. It's like the eye of the owl.
This is irresistible in my opinion.
But there's even another idea.
Option number three.
Option number three was based actually on language.
It's the idea that "read" is the past tense of "read," and they're both spelled the same way.
So why don't we call this place The Red Zone?
I'll meet you at the Red Zone.
Are you Red? Get Red.
I'm well Red.
(Laughter) I really loved this idea, and I somehow was not focused on the idea that librarians as a class are sort of interested in spelling and I don't know.
(Laughter) But sometimes cleverness is more important than spelling, and I thought this would be one of those instances.
So usually when I make these presentations I say there's just one question and the question should be, "How can I thank you, Mike?"
But in this case, the question was more like, "Um, are you kidding?"
Because, they said, the premise of all this work was that kids were bored with old libraries, musty old libraries.
They were tired of them.
And instead, they said, these kids have never really seen a library.
The school libraries in these schools are really so dilapidated, if they're there at all, that they haven't bored anyone.
They haven't even been there to bore anyone at all.
So the idea was, just forget about giving it a new name.
Just call it, one last try, a library.
Right? OK.
So I thought, OK, give it a little oomph?
Exclamation point?
Then -- this is because I'm clever -- move that into the "i," make it red, and there you have it, the Library Initiative.
So I thought, mission accomplished, there's your logo.
So what's interesting about this logo, an unintended consequence, was that it turned out that they didn't really even need my design because you could type it any font, you could write it by hand, and when they started sending emails around, they just would use Shift and 1, they'd get their own logo just right out of the thing.
And I thought, well, that's fine.
Feel free to use that logo.
And then I embarked on the real rollout of this thing -- working with every one of the architects to put this logo on the front door of their own library. Right?
So here's the big rollout.
Basically I'd work with different architects.
First Robin Hood was my client. Now these architects were my client.
I'd say, "Here's your logo. Put it on the door."
"Here's your logo. Put it on both doors."
"Here's your logo. Put it off to the side."
"Here's your logo repeated all over to the top."
So everything was going swimmingly.
Then I got a call from one of the architects, a guy named Richard Lewis, and he says, "I've got a problem.
You're the graphics guy. Can you solve it?"
And I said, OK, sure."
And he said, "The problem is that there's a space between the shelf and the ceiling."
So that sounds like an architectural issue to me, not a graphic design issue, so I'm, "Go on."
And Richard says, "Well, the top shelf has to be low enough for the kid to reach it, but I'm in a big old building, and the ceilings are really high, so actually I've got all this space up there and I need something like a mural."
And I'm like, "Whoa, you know, I'm a logo designer.
I'm not Diego Rivera or something.
I'm not a muralist."
And so he said, "But can't you think of anything?"
So I said, "OK, what if we just took pictures of the kids in the school and just put them around the top of the thing, and maybe that could work."
And my wife is a photographer, and I said, "Dorothy, there's no budget, can you come to this school in east New York, take these pictures?"
And she did, and if you go in Richard's library, which is one of the first that opened, it has this glorious frieze of, like, the heroes of the school, oversized, looking down into the little dollhouse of the real library, right?
And the kids were great, hand-selected by the principals and the librarian.
It just kind of created this heroic atmosphere in this library, this very dignified setting below and the joy of the children above.
So naturally all the other librarians in the other schools see this and they said, well, we want murals too.
And I'm like, OK.
So then I think, well, it can't be the same mural every time, so Dorothy did another one, and then she did another one, but then we needed more help, so I called an illustrator I knew named Lynn Pauley, and Lynn did these beautiful paintings of the kids.
Then I called a guy named Charles Wilkin at a place called Automatic Design.
He did these amazing collages.
We had Rafael Esquer do these great silhouettes.
He would work with the kids, asking for words, and then based on those prompts, come up with this little, delirious kind of constellation of silhouettes of things that are in books.
Peter Arkle interviewed the kids and had them talk about their favorite books and he put their testimony as a frieze up there.
Stefan Sagmeister worked with Yuko Shimizu and they did this amazing manga-style statement, "Everyone who is honest is interesting," that goes all the way around.
Christoph Niemann, brilliant illustrator, did a whole series of things where he embedded books into the faces and characters and images and places that you find in the books.
And then even Maira Kalman did this amazing cryptic installation of objects and words that kind of go all around and will fascinate students for as long as it's up there.
So this was really satisfying, and basically my role here was reading a series of dimensions to these artists, and I would say, "Three feet by 15 feet, whatever you want.
Let me know if you have any problem with that."
And they would go and install these. It just was the greatest thing.
But the greatest thing, actually, was -- Every once in a while, I'd get, like, an invitation in the mail made of construction paper, and it would say, "You are invited to the opening of our new library."
So you'd go to the library, say, you'd go to PS10, and you'd go inside.
There'd be balloons, there'd be a student ambassador, there'd be speeches that were read, poetry that was written specifically for the opening, dignitaries would present people with certificates, and the whole thing was just a delirious, fun party.
So I loved going to these things.
I would stand there dressed like this, obviously not belonging, and someone would say, "What are you doing here, mister?"
And I'd say, "Well, I'm part of the team that designed this place."
And they'd said, "You do these shelves?"
And I said, "No." "You took the pictures up above."
"No."
"Well, what did you do?"
"You know when you came in? The sign over the door?"
"The sign that says library?"
(Laughter) "Yeah, I did that!"
And then they'd sort of go, "OK. Nice work if you can get it."
So it was so satisfying going to these little openings despite the fact that I was kind of largely ignored or humiliated, but it was actually fun going to the openings, so I decided that I wanted to get the people in my office who had worked on these projects, get the illustrators and photographers, and I said, why don't we rent a van and drive around the five boroughs of New York and see how many we could hit at one time.
And eventually there were going to be 60 of these libraries, so we probably got to see maybe half a dozen in one long day.
And the best thing of all was meeting these librarians who kind of were running these, took possession of these places like their private stage upon which they were invited to mesmerize their students and bring the books to life, and it was just this really exciting experience for all of us to actually see these things in action.
So we spent a long day doing this and we were in the very last library.
It was still winter, because it got dark early, and the librarian says, "I'm about to close down. So really nice having you here.
Hey, wait a second, do you want to see how I turn off the lights?"
I'm like, "OK."
And she said, "I have this special way that I do it."
And then she showed me.
What she did was she turned out every light one by one by one by one, and the last light she left on was the light that illuminated the kids' faces, and she said, "That's the last light I turn off every night, because I like to remind myself why I come to work."
So when I started this whole thing, remember, it was just about designing that logo and being clever, come up with a new name?
The unintended consequence here, which I would like to take credit for and like to think I can think through the experience to that extent, but I can't.
Instead, way off in the distance was a librarian who was going to find the chain of consequences that we had set in motion, a source of inspiration so that she in this case could do her work really well.
40,000 kids a year are affected by these libraries.
They've been happening for more than 10 years now, so those librarians have kind of turned on a generation of children to books and so it's been a thrill to find out that sometimes unintended consequences are the best consequences.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
[His Holiness Pope Francis Filmed in Vatican City First shown at TED2017] Good evening  or, good morning, I am not sure what time it is there.
Regardless of the hour, I am thrilled to be participating in your conference.
I very much like its title  "The Future You"  because, while looking at tomorrow, it invites us to open a dialogue today, to look at the future through a "you."
"The Future You:" the future is made of yous, it is made of encounters, because life flows through our relations with others.
Quite a few years of life have strengthened my conviction that each and everyone's existence is deeply tied to that of others: life is not time merely passing by, life is about interactions.
As I meet, or lend an ear to those who are sick, to the migrants who face terrible hardships in search of a brighter future, to prison inmates who carry a hell of pain inside their hearts, and to those, many of them young, who cannot find a job, I often find myself wondering: "Why them and not me?"
I, myself, was born in a family of migrants; my father, my grandparents, like many other Italians, left for Argentina and met the fate of those who are left with nothing.
I could have very well ended up among today's "discarded" people.
And that's why I always ask myself, deep in my heart: "Why them and not me?"
First and foremost, I would love it if this meeting could help to remind us that we all need each other, none of us is an island, an autonomous and independent "I," separated from the other, and we can only build the future by standing together, including everyone.
We dont think about it often, but everything is connected, and we need to restore our connections to a healthy state.
Even the harsh judgment I hold in my heart against my brother or my sister, the open wound that was never cured, the offense that was never forgiven, the rancor that is only going to hurt me, are all instances of a fight that I carry within me, a flare deep in my heart that needs to be extinguished before it goes up in flames, leaving only ashes behind.
Many of us, nowadays, seem to believe that a happy future is something impossible to achieve.
While such concerns must be taken very seriously, they are not invincible.
They can be overcome when we don't lock our door to the outside world.
Happiness can only be discovered as a gift of harmony between the whole and each single component.
Even science  and you know it better than I do  points to an understanding of reality as a place where every element connects and interacts with everything else.
And this brings me to my second message.
How wonderful would it be if the growth of scientific and technological innovation would come along with more equality and social inclusion.
How wonderful would it be, while we discover faraway planets, to rediscover the needs of the brothers and sisters orbiting around us.
How wonderful would it be if solidarity, this beautiful and, at times, inconvenient word, were not simply reduced to social work, and became, instead, the default attitude in political, economic and scientific choices, as well as in the relationships among individuals, peoples and countries.
Only by educating people to a true solidarity will we be able to overcome the "culture of waste," which doesn't concern only food and goods but, first and foremost, the people who are cast aside by our techno-economic systems which, without even realizing it, are now putting products at their core, instead of people.
Solidarity is a term that many wish to erase from the dictionary.
Solidarity, however, is not an automatic mechanism.
It cannot be programmed or controlled.
It is a free response born from the heart of each and everyone.
Yes, a free response!
When one realizes that life, even in the middle of so many contradictions, is a gift, that love is the source and the meaning of life, how can they withhold their urge to do good to another fellow being?
In order to do good, we need memory, we need courage and we need creativity.
And I know that TED gathers many creative minds.
Yes, love does require a creative, concrete and ingenious attitude.
Good intentions and conventional formulas, so often used to appease our conscience, are not enough.
Let us help each other, all together, to remember that the other is not a statistic or a number.
The other has a face.
The "you" is always a real presence, a person to take care of.
There is a parable Jesus told to help us understand the difference between those who'd rather not be bothered and those who take care of the other.
I am sure you have heard it before. It is the Parable of the Good Samaritan.
When Jesus was asked: "Who is my neighbor?" - namely, "Who should I take care of?" - he told this story, the story of a man who had been assaulted, robbed, beaten and abandoned along a dirt road.
Upon seeing him, a priest and a Levite, two very influential people of the time, walked past him without stopping to help.
After a while, a Samaritan, a very much despised ethnicity at the time, walked by.
Seeing the injured man lying on the ground, he did not ignore him as if he weren't even there.
Instead, he felt compassion for this man, which compelled him to act in a very concrete manner.
He poured oil and wine on the wounds of the helpless man, brought him to a hostel and paid out of his pocket for him to be assisted.
The story of the Good Samaritan is the story of todays humanity.
People's paths are riddled with suffering, as everything is centered around money, and things, instead of people.
And often there is this habit, by people who call themselves "respectable," of not taking care of the others, thus leaving behind thousands of human beings, or entire populations, on the side of the road.
Fortunately, there are also those who are creating a new world by taking care of the other, even out of their own pockets.
Mother Teresa actually said: "One cannot love, unless it is at their own expense."
We have so much to do, and we must do it together.
But how can we do that with all the evil we breathe every day?
Thank God, no system can nullify our desire to open up to the good, to compassion and to our capacity to react against evil, all of which stem from deep within our hearts.
Now you might tell me, "Sure, these are beautiful words, but I am not the Good Samaritan, nor Mother Teresa of Calcutta."
On the contrary: we are precious, each and every one of us.
Each and every one of us is irreplaceable in the eyes of God.
Through the darkness of today's conflicts, each and every one of us can become a bright candle, a reminder that light will overcome darkness, and never the other way around.
To Christians, the future does have a name, and its name is Hope.
Feeling hopeful does not mean to be optimistically nave and ignore the tragedy humanity is facing.
Hope is the virtue of a heart that doesn't lock itself into darkness, that doesn't dwell on the past, does not simply get by in the present, but is able to see a tomorrow.
Hope is the door that opens onto the future.
Hope is a humble, hidden seed of life that, with time, will develop into a large tree.
It is like some invisible yeast that allows the whole dough to grow, that brings flavor to all aspects of life.
And it can do so much, because a tiny flicker of light that feeds on hope is enough to shatter the shield of darkness.
A single individual is enough for hope to exist, and that individual can be you.
And then there will be another "you," and another "you," and it turns into an "us."
And so, does hope begin when we have an "us?"
No.
Hope began with one "you."
When there is an "us," there begins a revolution.
The third message I would like to share today is, indeed, about revolution: the revolution of tenderness.
And what is tenderness?
It is the love that comes close and becomes real.
It is a movement that starts from our heart and reaches the eyes, the ears and the hands.
Tenderness means to use our eyes to see the other, our ears to hear the other, to listen to the children, the poor, those who are afraid of the future.
To listen also to the silent cry of our common home, of our sick and polluted earth.
Tenderness means to use our hands and our heart to comfort the other, to take care of those in need.
Tenderness is the language of the young children, of those who need the other.
A childs love for mom and dad grows through their touch, their gaze, their voice, their tenderness.
I like when I hear parents talk to their babies, adapting to the little child, sharing the same level of communication.
This is tenderness: being on the same level as the other.
God himself descended into Jesus to be on our level.
This is the same path the Good Samaritan took.
This is the path that Jesus himself took.
He lowered himself, he lived his entire human existence practicing the real, concrete language of love.
Yes, tenderness is the path of choice for the strongest, most courageous men and women.
Tenderness is not weakness; it is fortitude.
It is the path of solidarity, the path of humility.
Please, allow me to say it loud and clear: the more powerful you are, the more your actions will have an impact on people, the more responsible you are to act humbly.
If you dont, your power will ruin you, and you will ruin the other.
There is a saying in Argentina: "Power is like drinking gin on an empty stomach."
You feel dizzy, you get drunk, you lose your balance, and you will end up hurting yourself and those around you, if you dont connect your power with humility and tenderness.
Through humility and concrete love, on the other hand, power  the highest, the strongest one  becomes a service, a force for good.
The future of humankind isn't exclusively in the hands of politicians, of great leaders, of big companies.
Yes, they do hold an enormous responsibility.
But the future is, most of all, in the hands of those people who recognize the other as a "you" and themselves as part of an "us."
We all need each other.
And so, please, think of me as well with tenderness, so that I can fulfill the task I have been given for the good of the other, of each and every one, of all of you, of all of us.
Thank you.
What do Harry Potter, Katniss Everdeen, and Frodo all have in common with the heroes of ancient myths?
(Roar) What if I told you they are all variants of the same hero?
Do you believe that?
Joseph Campbell did.
He studied myths from all over the world and published a book called "The Hero with a Thousand Faces," retelling dozens of stories and explaining how each represents the mono-myth, or Hero's Journey.
So, what is the "hero's journey"?
Think of it as a cycle.
The journey begins and ends in a hero's ordinary world, but the quest passes through an unfamiliar, special world.
Along the way, there are some key events.
Think about your favorite book or movie.
Does it follow this pattern?
Status quo, that's where we start.
1:00: Call to Adventure.
The hero receives a mysterious message.
An invitation, a challenge?
2:00: Assistance The hero needs some help, probably from someone older, wiser.
3:00: Departure The hero crosses the threshold from his normal, safe home, and enters the special world and adventure.
We're not in Kansas anymore.
4:00: Trials Being a hero is hard work: our hero solves a riddle, slays a monster, escapes from a trap.
5:00: Approach It's time to face the biggest ordeal, the hero's worst fear.
(Roar) 6:00: Crisis This is the hero's darkest hour.
He faces death and possibly even dies, only to be reborn.
7:00: Treasure (Roar) As a result, the hero claims some treasure, special recognition, or power.
8:00: Result This can vary between stories.
Do the monsters bow down before the hero, or do they chase him as he flees from the special world?
9:00: Return After all that adventure, the hero returns to his ordinary world.
10:00: New Life This quest has changed the hero; he has outgrown his old life.
11:00: Resolution All the tangled plot lines get straightened out.
12:00: Status Quo, but upgraded to a new level.
Nothing is quite the same once you are a hero.
Many popular books and movies follow this ancient formula pretty closely.
But let's see how well "The Hunger Games" fits the hero's journey template.
When does Katniss Everdeen hear her call to adventure that gets the story moving?
When her sister's name is called from the lottery.
How about assistance?
Is anyone going to help her on her adventure?
Haymitch.
What about departure?
Does she leave her ordinary world?
She gets on a train to the capital.
OK, so you get the idea.
What do you have in common with Harry Potter, Katniss Everdeen, and Frodo?
Well, you're human, just like them.
The Hero's Journey myth exists in all human cultures and keeps getting updated, because we humans reflect on our world through symbolic stories of our own lives.
You leave your comfort zone, have an experience that transforms you, and then you recover and do it again.
You don't literally slay dragons or fight Voldemort, but you face problems just as scary.
Joseph Campbell said, "In the cave you fear to enter lies the treasure you seek."
What is the symbolic cave you fear to enter?
Auditions for the school play?
Baseball tryouts?
Love?
Watch for this formula in books, movies, and TV shows you come across.
You will certainly see it again.
But also be sensitive to it in your own life.
Listen for your call to adventure.
Accept the challenge.
Conquer your fear and claim the treasure you seek.
And then, do it all over again.
Palms sweaty, heart racing, stomach in knots.
You can't cry for help.
Not only is your throat too tight to breathe, but it'd be so embarrassing.
No, you aren't being stalked by a monster, you're speaking in public, a fate some deem worse than death.
See, when you're dead, you feel nothing; at a podium, you feel stage fright.
But at some point we've all had to communicate in front of people, so you have to try and overcome it.
To start, understand what stage fright is.
Humans, social animals that we are, are wired to worry about reputation.
Public speaking can threaten it.
Before a speech, you fret, "What if people think I'm awful and I'm an idiot?"
That fear of being seen as an awful idiot is a threat reaction from a primitive part of your brain that's very hard to control.
It's the fight or flight response, a self-protective process seen in a range of animals, most of which don't give speeches.
But we have a wise partner in the study of freaking out.
Charles Darwin tested fight or flight at the London Zoo snake exhibit.
He wrote in his diary, "My will and reason were powerless against the imagination of a danger which had never been experienced."
He concluded that his response was an ancient reaction unaffected by the nuances of modern civilization.
So, to your conscious modern mind, it's a speech.
To the rest of your brain, built up to code with the law of the jungle, when you perceive the possible consequences of blowing a speech, it's time to run for your life or fight to the death.
Your hypothalamus, common to all vertebrates, triggers your pituitary gland to secrete the hormone ACTH, making your adrenal gland shoot adrenaline into your blood.
Your neck and back tense up, you slouch.
Your legs and hand shake as your muscles prepare for attack.
You sweat.
Your blood pressure jumps.
Your digestion shuts down to maximize the delivery of nutrients and oxygen to muscles and vital organs, so you get dry mouth, butterflies.
Your pupils dilate, it's hard to read anything up close, like your notes, but long range is easy.
That's how stage fright works.
How do we fight it?
First, perspective.
This isn't all in your head.
It's a natural, hormonal, full body reaction by an autonomic nervous system on autopilot.
And genetics play a huge role in social anxiety.
John Lennon played live thousands of times.
Each time he vomited beforehand.
Some people are just wired to feel more scared performing in public.
Since stage fright is natural and inevitable, focus on what you can control.
Practice a lot, starting long before in an environment similar to the real performance.
Practicing any task increases your familiarity and reduces anxiety, so when it's time to speak in public, you're confident in yourself and the task at hand.
Steve Jobs rehearsed his epic speeches for hundreds of hours, starting weeks in advance.
If you know what you're saying, you'll feed off the crowd's energy instead of letting your hypothalamus convince your body it's about to be lunch for a pack of predators.
But hey, the vertebrate hypothalamus has had millions of years more practice than you.
Just before you go on stage, it's time to fight dirty and trick your brain.
This makes your hypothalamus trigger a relaxation response.
Stage fright usually hits hardest right before a presentation, so take that last minute to stretch and breathe.
You approach the Mic, voice clear, body relaxed.
Your well-prepared speech convinces the wild crowd you're a charismatic genius.
How?
You didn't overcome stage fright, you adapted to it.
And to the fact that no matter how civilized you may seem, in part of your brain, you're still a wild animal, a profound, well-spoken wild animal.
Picture warm, gooey cookies, crunchy candies, velvety cakes, waffle cones piled high with ice cream.
Is your mouth watering?
Are you craving dessert?
Why?
What happens in the brain that makes sugary foods so hard to resist?
Sugar is a general term used to describe a class of molecules called carbohydrates, and it's found in a wide variety of food and drink.
Just check the labels on sweet products you buy.
Glucose, fructose, sucrose, maltose, lactose, dextrose, and starch are all forms of sugar.
So are high-fructose corn syrup, fruit juice, raw sugar, and honey.
And sugar isn't just in candies and desserts, it's also added to tomato sauce, yogurt, dried fruit, flavored waters, or granola bars.
Since sugar is everywhere, it's important to understand how it affects the brain.
What happens when sugar hits your tongue?
And does eating a little bit of sugar make you crave more?
You take a bite of cereal.
The sugars it contains activate the sweet-taste receptors, part of the taste buds on the tongue.
These receptors send a signal up to the brain stem, and from there, it forks off into many areas of the forebrain, one of which is the cerebral cortex.
Different sections of the cerebral cortex process different tastes: bitter, salty, umami, and, in our case, sweet.
From here, the signal activates the brain's reward system.
This reward system is a series of electrical and chemical pathways across several different regions of the brain.
It's a complicated network, but it helps answer a single, subconscious question: should I do that again?
That warm, fuzzy feeling you get when you taste Grandma's chocolate cake?
That's your reward system saying, "Mmm, yes!"
And it's not just activated by food.
Socializing, sexual behavior, and drugs are just a few examples of things and experiences that also activate the reward system.
But overactivating this reward system kickstarts a series of unfortunate events: loss of control, craving, and increased tolerance to sugar.
Let's get back to our bite of cereal.
It travels down into your stomach and eventually into your gut.
And guess what?
There are sugar receptors here, too.
They are not taste buds, but they do send signals telling your brain that you're full or that your body should produce more insulin to deal with the extra sugar you're eating.
The major currency of our reward system is dopamine, an important chemical or neurotransmitter.
There are many dopamine receptors in the forebrain, but they're not evenly distributed.
Certain areas contain dense clusters of receptors, and these dopamine hot spots are a part of our reward system.
Drugs like alcohol, nicotine, or heroin send dopamine into overdrive, leading some people to constantly seek that high, in other words, to be addicted.
Sugar also causes dopamine to be released, though not as violently as drugs.
And sugar is rare among dopamine-inducing foods.
Broccoli, for example, has no effect, which probably explains why it's so hard to get kids to eat their veggies.
Speaking of healthy foods, let's say you're hungry and decide to eat a balanced meal.
You do, and dopamine levels spike in the reward system hot spots.
But if you eat that same dish many days in a row, dopamine levels will spike less and less, eventually leveling out.
That's because when it comes to food, the brain evolved to pay special attention to new or different tastes.
Why?
Two reasons: first, to detect food that's gone bad.
And second, because the more variety we have in our diet, the more likely we are to get all the nutrients we need.
To keep that variety up, we need to be able to recognize a new food, and more importantly, we need to want to keep eating new foods.
And that's why the dopamine levels off when a food becomes boring.
Now, back to that meal.
What happens if in place of the healthy, balanced dish, you eat sugar-rich food instead?
If you rarely eat sugar or don't eat much at a time, the effect is similar to that of the balanced meal.
But if you eat too much, the dopamine response does not level out.
In other words, eating lots of sugar will continue to feel rewarding.
In this way, sugar behaves a little bit like a drug.
It's one reason people seem to be hooked on sugary foods.
So, think back to all those different kinds of sugar.
Each one is unique, but every time any sugar is consumed, it kickstarts a domino effect in the brain that sparks a rewarding feeling.
Too much, too often, and things can go into overdrive.
So, yes, overconsumption of sugar can have addictive effects on the brain, but a wedge of cake once in a while won't hurt you.
If you tried to pay for something with a piece of paper, you might run into some trouble.
Unless, of course, the piece of paper was a hundred dollar bill.
But what is it that makes that bill so much more interesting and valuable than other pieces of paper?
After all, there's not much you can do with it.
You can't eat it.
You can't build things with it.
And burning it is actually illegal.
So what's the big deal?
Of course, you probably know the answer.
A hundred dollar bill is printed by the government and designated as official currency, while other pieces of paper are not.
But that's just what makes them legal.
What makes a hundred dollar bill valuable, on the other hand, is how many or few of them are around.
Throughout history, most currency, including the US dollar, was linked to valuable commodities and the amount of it in circulation depended on a government's gold or silver reserves.
But after the US abolished this system in 1971, the dollar became what is known as fiat money, meaning not linked to any external resource but relying instead solely on government policy to decide how much currency to print.
Which branch of our government sets this policy?
The Executive, the Legislative, or the Judicial?
The surprising answer is: none of the above!
In fact, monetary policy is set by an independent Federal Reserve System, or the Fed, made up of 12 regional banks in major cities around the country.
Its board of governors, which is appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate, reports to Congress, and all the Fed's profit goes into the US Treasury.
But to keep the Fed from being influenced by the day-to-day vicissitudes of politics, it is not under the direct control of any branch of government.
Why doesn't the Fed just decide to print infinite hundred dollar bills to make everyone happy and rich?
Well, because then the bills wouldn't be worth anything.
Think about the purpose of currency, which is to be exchanged for goods and services.
If the total amount of currency in circulation increases faster than the total value of goods and services in the economy, then each individual piece will be able to buy a smaller portion of those things than before.
This is called inflation.
On the other hand, if the money supply remains the same, while more goods and services are produced, each dollar's value would increase in a process known as deflation.
So which is worse?
Too much inflation means that the money in your wallet today will be worth less tomorrow, making you want to spend it right away.
While this would stimulate business, it would also encourage overconsumption, or hoarding commodities, like food and fuel, raising their prices and leading to consumer shortages and even more inflation.
But deflation would make people want to hold onto their money, and a decrease in consumer spending would reduce business profits, leading to more unemployment and a further decrease in spending, causing the economy to keep shrinking.
So most economists believe that while too much of either is dangerous, a small, consistent amount of inflation is necessary to encourage economic growth.
The Fed uses vast amounts of economic data to determine how much currency should be in circulation, including previous rates of inflation, international trends, and the unemployment rate.
Like in the story of Goldilocks, they need to get the numbers just right in order to stimulate growth and keep people employed, without letting inflation reach disruptive levels.
The Fed not only determines how much that paper in your wallet is worth but also your chances of getting or keeping the job where you earn it.
Did you know that every time musicians pick up their instruments, there are fireworks going off all over their brain?
On the outside, they may look calm and focused, reading the music and making the precise and practiced movements required.
But inside their brains, there's a party going on.
How do we know this?
Well, in the last few decades, neuroscientists have made enormous breakthroughs in understanding how our brains work by monitoring them in real time with instruments like fMRI and PET scanners.
When people are hooked up to these machines, tasks, such as reading or doing math problems, each have corresponding areas of the brain where activity can be observed.
But when researchers got the participants to listen to music, they saw fireworks.
Multiple areas of their brains were lighting up at once, as they processed the sound, took it apart to understand elements like melody and rhythm, and then put it all back together into unified musical experience.
And our brains do all this work in the split second between when we first hear the music and when our foot starts to tap along.
But when scientists turned from observing the brains of music listeners to those of musicians, the little backyard fireworks became a jubilee.
It turns out that while listening to music engages the brain in some pretty interesting activities, playing music is the brain's equivalent of a full-body workout.
The neuroscientists saw multiple areas of the brain light up, simultaneously processing different information in intricate, interrelated, and astonishingly fast sequences.
But what is it about making music that sets the brain alight?
The research is still fairly new, but neuroscientists have a pretty good idea.
Playing a musical instrument engages practically every area of the brain at once, especially the visual, auditory, and motor cortices.
As with any other workout, disciplined, structured practice in playing music strengthens those brain functions, allowing us to apply that strength to other activities.
The most obvious difference between listening to music and playing it is that the latter requires fine motor skills, which are controlled in both hemispheres of the brain.
It also combines the linguistic and mathematical precision, in which the left hemisphere is more involved, with the novel and creative content that the right excels in.
For these reasons, playing music has been found to increase the volume and activity in the brain's corpus callosum, the bridge between the two hemispheres, allowing messages to get across the brain faster and through more diverse routes.
This may allow musicians to solve problems more effectively and creatively, in both academic and social settings.
Because making music also involves crafting and understanding its emotional content and message, musicians often have higher levels of executive function, a category of interlinked tasks that includes planning, strategizing, and attention to detail and requires simultaneous analysis of both cognitive and emotional aspects.
This ability also has an impact on how our memory systems work.
And, indeed, musicians exhibit enhanced memory functions, creating, storing, and retrieving memories more quickly and efficiently.
Studies have found that musicians appear to use their highly connected brains to give each memory multiple tags, such as a conceptual tag, an emotional tag, an audio tag, and a contextual tag, like a good Internet search engine.
How do we know that all these benefits are unique to music, as opposed to, say, sports or painting?
Or could it be that people who go into music were already smarter to begin with?
Neuroscientists have explored these issues, but so far, they have found that the artistic and aesthetic aspects of learning to play a musical instrument are different from any other activity studied, including other arts.
And several randomized studies of participants, who showed the same levels of cognitive function and neural processing at the start, found that those who were exposed to a period of music learning showed enhancement in multiple brain areas, compared to the others.
This recent research about the mental benefits of playing music has advanced our understanding of mental function, revealing the inner rhythms and complex interplay that make up the amazing orchestra of our brain.
One of the most remarkable aspects of the human brain is its ability to recognize patterns and describe them.
Among the hardest patterns we've tried to understand is the concept of turbulent flow in fluid dynamics.
The German physicist Werner Heisenberg said, "When I meet God, I'm going to ask him two questions: why relativity and why turbulence?
I really believe he will have an answer for the first."
As difficult as turbulence is to understand mathematically, we can use art to depict the way it looks.
In June 1889, Vincent van Gogh painted the view just before sunrise from the window of his room at the Saint-Paul-de-Mausole asylum in Saint-Rmy-de-Provence, where he'd admitted himself after mutilating his own ear in a psychotic episode.
In "The Starry Night," his circular brushstrokes create a night sky filled with swirling clouds and eddies of stars.
Van Gogh and other Impressionists represented light in a different way than their predecessors, seeming to capture its motion, for instance, across sun-dappled waters, or here in star light that twinkles and melts through milky waves of blue night sky.
The effect is caused by luminance, the intensity of the light in the colors on the canvas.
The more primitive part of our visual cortex, which sees light contrast and motion, but not color, will blend two differently colored areas together if they have the same luminance.
But our brains' primate subdivision will see the contrasting colors without blending.
With these two interpretations happening at once, the light in many Impressionist works seems to pulse, flicker and radiate oddly.
That's how this and other Impressionist works use quickly executed prominent brushstrokes to capture something strikingly real about how light moves.
Sixty years later, Russian mathematician Andrey Kolmogorov furthered our mathematical understanding of turbulence when he proposed that energy in a turbulent fluid at length R varies in proportion to the 5/3rds power of R.
Experimental measurements show Kolmogorov was remarkably close to the way turbulent flow works, although a complete description of turbulence remains one of the unsolved problems in physics.
A turbulent flow is self-similar if there is an energy cascade.
In other words, big eddies transfer their energy to smaller eddies, which do likewise at other scales.
Examples of this include Jupiter's Great Red Spot, cloud formations and interstellar dust particles.
In 2004, using the Hubble Space Telescope, scientists saw the eddies of a distant cloud of dust and gas around a star, and it reminded them of Van Gogh's "Starry Night."
This motivated scientists from Mexico, Spain and England to study the luminance in Van Gogh's paintings in detail.
They discovered that there is a distinct pattern of turbulent fluid structures close to Kolmogorov's equation hidden in many of Van Gogh's paintings.
The researchers digitized the paintings, and measured how brightness varies between any two pixels.
From the curves measured for pixel separations, they concluded that paintings from Van Gogh's period of psychotic agitation behave remarkably similar to fluid turbulence.
His self-portrait with a pipe, from a calmer period in Van Gogh's life, showed no sign of this correspondence.
And neither did other artists' work that seemed equally turbulent at first glance, like Munch's "The Scream."
While it's too easy to say Van Gogh's turbulent genius enabled him to depict turbulence, it's also far too difficult to accurately express the rousing beauty of the fact that in a period of intense suffering, Van Gogh was somehow able to perceive and represent one of the most supremely difficult concepts nature has ever brought before mankind, and to unite his unique mind's eye with the deepest mysteries of movement, fluid and light.
Every day of your life, you move through systems of power that other people made.
Do you sense them?
Do you understand power?
Do you realize why it matters?
Power is something we are often uncomfortable talking about.
That's especially true in civic life, how we live together in community.
In a democracy, power is supposed to reside with the people, period.
Any further talk about power and who really has it seems a little dirty, maybe even evil.
But power is no more inherently good or evil than fire or physics.
It just is.
It governs how any form of government works.
It determines who gets to determine the rules of the game.
So learning how power operates is key to being effective, being taken seriously, and not being taken advantage of.
In this lesson, we'll look at where power comes from, how it's exercised and what you can do to become more powerful in public life.
Let's start with a basic definition.
Power is the ability to make others do what you would have them do.
Of course, this plays out in all arenas of life, from family to the workplace to our relationships.
Our focus is on the civic arena, where power means getting a community to make the choices and to take the actions that you want.
There are six main sources of civic power.
First, there's physical force and a capacity for violence.
Control of the means of force, whether in the police or a militia, is power at its most primal.
A second core source of power is wealth.
Money creates the ability to buy results and to buy almost any other kind of power.
The third form of power is state action, government.
This is the use of law and bureaucracy to compel people to do or not do certain things.
In a democracy, for example, we the people, theoretically, give government its power through elections.
In a dictatorship, state power emerges from the threat of force, not the consent of the governed.
The fourth type of power is social norms or what other people think is okay.
Norms don't have the centralized machinery of government.
They operate in a softer way, peer to peer.
They can certainly make people change behavior and even change laws.
Think about how norms around marriage equality today are evolving.
The fifth form of power is ideas.
An idea, individual liberties, say, or racial equality, can generate boundless amounts of power if it motivates enough people to change their thinking and actions.
And so the sixth source of power is numbers, lots of humans.
A vocal mass of people creates power by expressing collective intensity of interest and by asserting legitimacy.
Think of the Arab Spring or the rise of the Tea Party.
Crowds count.
These are the six main sources of power, what power is.
So now, let's think about how power operates.
There are three laws of power worth examining.
Law number one: power is never static.
It's always either accumulating or decaying in a civic arena.
So if you aren't taking action, you're being acted upon.
Law number two: power is like water.
It flows like a current through everyday life.
Politics is the work of harnessing that flow in a direction you prefer.
Policymaking is an effort to freeze and perpetuate a particular flow of power.
Policy is power frozen.
Law number three: power compounds.
Power begets more power, and so does powerlessness.
The only thing that keeps law number three from leading to a situation where only one person has all the power is how we apply laws one and two.
What rules do we set up so that a few people don't accumulate too much power, and so that they can't enshrine their privilege in policy?
That's the question of democracy, and you can see each of these laws at work in any news story.
Low wage workers organize to get higher pay.
Oil companies push to get a big pipeline approved.
Gay and lesbian couples seek the legal right to marry.
Urban parents demand school vouchers.
You may support these efforts or not.
Whether you get what you want depends on how adept you are with power, which brings us finally to what you can do to become more powerful in public life.
Here, it's useful to think in terms of literacy.
Your challenge is to learn how to read power and write power.
To read power means to pay attention to as many texts of power as you can.
I don't mean books only.
I mean seeing society as a set of texts.
Don't like how things are in your campus or city or country?
Map out who has what kind of power, arrayed in what systems.
Understand why it turned out this way, who's made it so, and who wants to keep it so.
Study the strategies others in such situations used: frontal attack or indirection, coalitions or charismatic authority.
Read so you may write.
To write power requires first that you believe you have the right to write, to be an author of change.
You do.
As with any kind of writing, you learn to express yourself, speak up in a voice that's authentic.
Organize your ideas, then organize other people.
Practice consensus building.
Practice conflict.
As with writing, it's all about practice.
Every day you have a chance to practice, in your neighborhood and beyond.
Set objectives, then bigger ones.
Watch the patterns, see what works.
Adapt, repeat.
This is citizenship.
In this short lesson, we've explored where civic power comes from, how it works and what you can do to exercise it.
One big question remaining is the "why" of power.
Do you want power to benefit everyone or only you?
Are your purposes pro-social or anti-social?
This question isn't about strategy.
It's about character, and that's another set of lessons.
But remember this: Power plus character equals a great citizen, and you have the power to be one.
It's a common saying that elephants never forget, but these magnificent animals are more than giant walking hard drives.
The more we learn about elephants, the more it appears that their impressive memory is only one aspect of an incredible intelligence that makes them some of the most social, creative, and benevolent creatures on Earth.
Unlike many proverbs, the one about elephant memory is scientifically accurate.
Elephants know every member in their herd, able to recognize as many as 30 companions by sight or smell.
This is a great help when migrating or encountering other potentially hostile elephants.
They also remember and distinguish particular cues that signal danger and can recall important locations long after their last visit.
But it's the memories unrelated to survival that are the most fascinating.
Elephants remember not only their herd companions but other creatures who have made a strong impression on them.
In one case, two circus elephants that had briefly performed together rejoiced when crossing paths 23 years later.
This recognition isn't limited to others of their species.
Elephants have also recognized humans they've bonded with after decades apart.
All of this shows that elephant memory goes beyond responses to stimuli.
Looking inside their heads, we can see why.
The elephant boasts the largest brain of any land mammal, as well as an impressive encephalization quotient.
This is the size of the brain relative to what we'd expect for an animal's body size, and the elephant's EQ is nearly as high as a chimpanzee's.
And despite the distant relation, convergent evolution has made it remarkably similar to the human brain, with as many neurons and synapses and a highly developed hippocampus and cerebral cortex.
It is the hippocampus, strongly associated with emotion, that aids recollection by encoding important experiences into long-term memories.
The ability to distinguish this importance makes elephant memory a complex and adaptable faculty beyond rote memorization.
It's what allows elephants who survived a drought in their youth to recognize its warning signs in adulthood, which is why clans with older matriarchs have higher survival rates.
Unfortunately, it's also what makes elephants one of the few non-human animals to suffer from post-traumatic stress disorder.
The cerebral cortex, on the other hand, enables problem solving, which elephants display in many creative ways.
They also tackle problems cooperatively, sometimes even outwitting the researchers and manipulating their partners.
And they've grasped basic arithmetic, keeping track of the relative amounts of fruit in two baskets after multiple changes.
The rare combination of memory and problem solving can explain some of elephants' most clever behaviors, but it doesn't explain some of the things we're just beginning to learn about their mental lives.
Elephants communicate using everything from body signals and vocalizations, to infrasound rumbles that can be heard kilometers away.
And their understanding of syntax suggests that they have their own language and grammar.
This sense of language may even go beyond simple communication.
Elephants create art by carefully choosing and combining different colors and elements.
They can also recognize twelve distinct tones of music and recreate melodies.
And yes, there is an elephant band.
But perhaps the most amazing thing about elephants is a capacity even more important than cleverness: their sense of empathy, altruism, and justice.
Elephants are the only non-human animals to mourn their dead, performing burial rituals and returning to visit graves.
They have shown concern for other species, as well.
One working elephant refused to set a log down into a hole where a dog was sleeping, while elephants encountering injured humans have sometimes stood guard and gently comforted them with their trunk.
On the other hand, elephant attacks on human villages have usually occurred right after massive poachings or cullings, suggesting deliberate revenge.
When we consider all this evidence, along with the fact that elephants are one of the few species who can recognize themselves in a mirror, it's hard to escape the conclusion that they are conscious, intelligent, and emotional beings.
Unfortunately, humanity's treatment of elephants does not reflect this, as they continue to suffer from habitat destruction in Asia, ivory poaching in Africa, and mistreatment in captivity worldwide.
Given what we now know about elephants and what they continue to teach us about animal intelligence, it is more important than ever to ensure that what the English poet John Donne described as "nature's great masterpiece" does not vanish from the world's canvas.
It's 4 a.m., and the big test is in eight hours, followed by a piano recital.
You've been studying and playing for days, but you still don't feel ready for either.
So, what can you do?
Well, you can drink another cup of coffee and spend the next few hours cramming and practicing, but believe it or not, you might be better off closing the books, putting away the music, and going to sleep.
Sleep occupies nearly a third of our lives, but many of us give surprisingly little attention and care to it.
This neglect is often the result of a major misunderstanding.
Sleep isn't lost time, or just a way to rest when all our important work is done.
Instead, it's a critical function, during which your body balances and regulates its vital systems, affecting respiration and regulating everything from circulation to growth and immune response.
That's great, but you can worry about all those things after this test, right?
Well, not so fast.
It turns out that sleep is also crucial for your brain, with a fifth of your body's circulatory blood being channeled to it as you drift off.
And what goes on in your brain while you sleep is an intensely active period of restructuring that's crucial for how our memory works.
At first glance, our ability to remember things doesn't seem very impressive at all.
19th century psychologist Herman Ebbinghaus demonstrated that we normally forget 40% of new material within the first twenty minutes, a phenomenon known as the forgetting curve.
But this loss can be prevented through memory consolidation, the process by which information is moved from our fleeting short-term memory to our more durable long-term memory.
This consolidation occurs with the help of a major part of the brain, known as the hippocampus.
Its role in long-term memory formation was demonstrated in the 1950s by Brenda Milner in her research with a patient known as H.M.
After having his hippocampus removed, H.M.'s ability to form new short-term memories was damaged, but he was able to learn physical tasks through repetition.
Due to the removal of his hippocampus, H.M.'s ability to form long-term memories was also damaged.
What this case revealed, among other things, was that the hippocampus was specifically involved in the consolidation of long-term declarative memory, such as the facts and concepts you need to remember for that test, rather than procedural memory, such as the finger movements you need to master for that recital.
Milner's findings, along with work by Eric Kandel in the 90's, have given us our current model of how this consolidation process works.
Sensory data is initially transcribed and temporarily recorded in the neurons as short-term memory.
From there, it travels to the hippocampus, which strengthens and enhances the neurons in that cortical area.
Thanks to the phenomenon of neuroplasticity, new synaptic buds are formed, allowing new connections between neurons, and strengthening the neural network where the information will be returned as long-term memory.
