We all know trust is fundamental, but when it comes to trusting people, something profound is happening.
Please raise your hand if you have ever been a host or a guest on Airbnb.
Wow. That's a lot of you.
Who owns Bitcoin?
Still a lot of you. OK.
And please raise your hand if you've ever used Tinder to help you find a mate.
(Laughter) This one's really hard to count because you're kind of going like this.
(Laughter) These are all examples of how technology is creating new mechanisms that are enabling us to trust unknown people, companies and ideas.
And yet at the same time, trust in institutions -- banks, governments and even churches -- is collapsing.
So what's happening here, and who do you trust?
Let's start in France with a platform -- with a company, I should say -- with a rather funny-sounding name, BlaBlaCar.
It's a platform that matches drivers and passengers who want to share long-distance journeys together.
The average ride taken is 320 kilometers.
So it's a good idea to choose your fellow travelers wisely.
Social profiles and reviews help people make a choice.
You can see if someone's a smoker, you can see what kind of music they like, you can see if they're going to bring their dog along for the ride.
But it turns out that the key social identifier is how much you're going to talk in the car.
(Laughter) Bla, not a lot, bla bla, you want a nice bit of chitchat, and bla bla bla, you're not going to stop talking the entire way from London to Paris.
(Laughter) It's remarkable, right, that this idea works at all, because it's counter to the lesson most of us were taught as a child: never get in a car with a stranger.
And yet, BlaBlaCar transports more than four million people every single month.
To put that in context, that's more passengers than the Eurostar or JetBlue airlines carry.
BlaBlaCar is a beautiful illustration of how technology is enabling millions of people across the world to take a trust leap.
A trust leap happens when we take the risk to do something new or different to the way that we've always done it.
Let's try to visualize this together.
OK. I want you to close your eyes.
There is a man staring at me with his eyes wide open.
I'm on this big red circle. I can see.
So close your eyes.
(Laughter) (Applause) I'll do it with you.
And I want you to imagine there exists a gap between you and something unknown.
That unknown can be someone you've just met.
It can be a place you've never been to.
It can be something you've never tried before.
You got it?
OK. You can open your eyes now.
For you to leap from a place of certainty, to take a chance on that someone or something unknown, you need a force to pull you over the gap, and that remarkable force is trust.
Trust is an elusive concept, and yet we depend on it for our lives to function.
I trust my children when they say they're going to turn the lights out at night.
I trusted the pilot who flew me here to keep me safe.
It's a word we use a lot, without always thinking about what it really means and how it works in different contexts of our lives.
There are, in fact, hundreds of definitions of trust, and most can be reduced to some kind of risk assessment of how likely it is that things will go right.
But I don't like this definition of trust, because it makes trust sound rational and predictable, and it doesn't really get to the human essence of what it enables us to do and how it empowers us to connect with other people.
So I define trust a little differently.
I define trust as a confident relationship to the unknown.
Now, when you view trust through this lens, it starts to explain why it has the unique capacity to enable us to cope with uncertainty, to place our faith in strangers, to keep moving forward.
Human beings are remarkable at taking trust leaps.
Do you remember the first time you put your credit card details into a website?
That's a trust leap.
I distinctly remember telling my dad that I wanted to buy a navy blue secondhand Peugeot on eBay, and he rightfully pointed out that the seller's name was "Invisible Wizard" and that this probably was not such a good idea.
(Laughter) So my work, my research focuses on how technology is transforming the social glue of society, trust between people, and it's a fascinating area to study, because there's still so much we do not know.
For instance, do men and women trust differently in digital environments?
Does the way we build trust face-to-face translate online?
Does trust transfer?
So if you trust finding a mate on Tinder, are you more likely to trust finding a ride on BlaBlaCar?
But from studying hundreds of networks and marketplaces, there is a common pattern that people follow, and I call it "climbing the trust stack."
Let me use BlaBlaCar as an example to bring it to life.
On the first level, you have to trust the idea.
So you have to trust the idea of ride-sharing is safe and worth trying.
The second level is about having confidence in the platform, that BlaBlaCar will help you if something goes wrong.
And the third level is about using little bits of information to decide whether the other person is trustworthy.
Now, the first time we climb the trust stack, it feels weird, even risky, but we get to a point where these ideas seem totally normal.
Our behaviors transform, often relatively quickly.
In other words, trust enables change and innovation.
So an idea that intrigued me, and I'd like you to consider, is whether we can better understand major waves of disruption and change in individuals in society through the lens of trust.
Well, it turns out that trust has only evolved in three significant chapters throughout the course of human history: local, institutional and what we're now entering, distributed.
So for a long time, until the mid-1800s, trust was built around tight-knit relationships.
So say I lived in a village with the first five rows of this audience, and we all knew one another, and say I wanted to borrow money.
The man who had his eyes wide open, he might lend it to me, and if I didn't pay him back, you'd all know I was dodgy.
I would get a bad reputation, and you would refuse to do business with me in the future.
Trust was mostly local and accountability-based.
In the mid-19th century, society went through a tremendous amount of change.
People moved to fast-growing cities such as London and San Francisco, and a local banker here was replaced by large corporations that didn't know us as individuals.
We started to place our trust into black box systems of authority, things like legal contracts and regulation and insurance, and less trust directly in other people.
Trust became institutional and commission-based.
It's widely talked about how trust in institutions and many corporate brands has been steadily declining and continues to do so.
I am constantly stunned by major breaches of trust: the News Corp phone hacking, the Volkswagen emissions scandal, the widespread abuse in the Catholic Church, the fact that only one measly banker went to jail after the great financial crisis, or more recently the Panama Papers that revealed how the rich can exploit offshore tax regimes.
And the thing that really surprises me is why do leaders find it so hard to apologize, I mean sincerely apologize, when our trust is broken?
It would be easy to conclude that institutional trust isn't working because we are fed up with the sheer audacity of dishonest elites, but what's happening now runs deeper than the rampant questioning of the size and structure of institutions.
We're starting to realize that institutional trust wasn't designed for the digital age.
Conventions of how trust is built, managed, lost and repaired -- in brands, leaders and entire systems -- is being turned upside down.
Now, this is exciting, but it's frightening, because it forces many of us to have to rethink how trust is built and destroyed with our customers, with our employees, even our loved ones.
The other day, I was talking to the CEO of a leading international hotel brand, and as is often the case, we got onto the topic of Airbnb.
And he admitted to me that he was perplexed by their success.
He was perplexed at how a company that depends on the willingness of strangers to trust one another could work so well across 191 countries.
So I said to him that I had a confession to make, and he looked at me a bit strangely, and I said -- and I'm sure many of you do this as well -- I don't always bother to hang my towels up when I'm finished in the hotel, but I would never do this as a guest on Airbnb.
And the reason why I would never do this as a guest on Airbnb is because guests know that they'll be rated by hosts, and that those ratings are likely to impact their ability to transact in the future.
It's a simple illustration of how online trust will change our behaviors in the real world, make us more accountable in ways we cannot yet even imagine.
I am not saying we do not need hotels or traditional forms of authority.
But what we cannot deny is that the way trust flows through society is changing, and it's creating this big shift away from the 20th century that was defined by institutional trust towards the 21st century that will be fueled by distributed trust.
Trust is no longer top-down.
It's being unbundled and inverted.
It's no longer opaque and linear.
A new recipe for trust is emerging that once again is distributed amongst people and is accountability-based.
And this shift is only going to accelerate with the emergence of the blockchain, the innovative ledger technology underpinning Bitcoin.
Now let's be honest, getting our heads around the way blockchain works is mind-blowing.
And one of the reasons why is it involves processing some pretty complicated concepts with terrible names.
I mean, cryptographic algorithms and hash functions, and people called miners, who verify transactions -- all that was created by this mysterious person or persons called Satoshi Nakamoto.
Now, that is a massive trust leap that hasn't happened yet.
(Applause) But let's try to imagine this.
So "The Economist" eloquently described the blockchain as the great chain of being sure about things.
The easiest way I can describe it is imagine the blocks as spreadsheets, and they are filled with assets.
So that could be a property title.
It could be a stock trade.
It could be a creative asset, such as the rights to a song.
Every time something moves from one place on the register to somewhere else, that asset transfer is time-stamped and publicly recorded on the blockchain.
It's that simple. Right.
So the real implication of the blockchain is that it removes the need for any kind of third party, such as a lawyer, or a trusted intermediary, or maybe not a government intermediary to facilitate the exchange.
So if we go back to the trust stack, you still have to trust the idea, you have to trust the platform, but you don't have to trust the other person in the traditional sense.
The implications are huge.
In the same way the internet blew open the doors to an age of information available to everyone, the blockchain will revolutionize trust on a global scale.
Now, I've waited to the end intentionally to mention Uber, because I recognize that it is a contentious and widely overused example, but in the context of a new era of trust, it's a great case study.
Now, we will see cases of abuse of distributed trust.
We've already seen this, and it can go horribly wrong.
I am not surprised that we are seeing protests from taxi associations all around the world trying to get governments to ban Uber based on claims that it is unsafe.
I happened to be in London the day that these protests took place, and I happened to notice a tweet from Matt Hancock, who is a British minister for business.
And he wrote, "Does anyone have details of this #Uber app everyone's talking about?
(Laughter) I'd never heard of it until today."
Now, the taxi associations, they legitimized the first layer of the trust stack.
They legitimized the idea that they were trying to eliminate, and sign-ups increased by 850 percent in 24 hours.
Now, this is a really strong illustration of how once a trust shift has happened around a behavior or an entire sector, you cannot reverse the story.
Every day, five million people will take a trust leap and ride with Uber.
In China, on Didi, the ride-sharing platform, 11 million rides taken every day.
That's 127 rides per second, showing that this is a cross-cultural phenomenon.
And the fascinating thing is that both drivers and passengers report that seeing a name and seeing someone's photo and their rating makes them feel safer, and as you may have experienced, even behave a little more nicely in the taxi cab.
Uber and Didi are early but powerful examples of how technology is creating trust between people in ways and on a scale never possible before.
Today, many of us are comfortable getting into cars driven by strangers.
We meet up with someone we swiped right to be matched with.
We share our homes with people we do not know.
This is just the beginning, because the real disruption happening isn't technological.
It's the trust shift it creates, and for my part, I want to help people understand this new era of trust so that we can get it right and we can embrace the opportunities to redesign systems that are more transparent, inclusive and accountable.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
Please meet Jane.
She has a high-risk pregnancy.
Within 24 weeks, she's on bed rest at the hospital, being monitored for her preterm contractions.
She doesn't look the happiest.
That's in part because it requires technicians and experts to apply these clunky belts on her to monitor her uterine contractions.
Another reason Jane is not so happy is because she's worried.
In particular, she's worried about what happens after her 10-day stay on bed rest at the hospital.
What happens when she's home?
If she were to give birth this early it would be devastating.
As an African-American woman, she's twice as likely to have a premature birth or to have a stillbirth.
So Jane basically has one of two options: stay at the hospital on bed rest, a prisoner to the technology until she gives birth, and then spend the rest of her life paying for the bill; or head home after her 10-day stay and hope for the best.
Neither of these two options seems appealing.
As I began to think about stories like this and hear about stories like this, I began to ask myself and imagine: Is there an alternative?
Is there a way we could have the benefits of high-fidelity monitoring that we get with our trusted partners in the hospital while someone is at home living their daily life?
With that in mind, I encouraged people in my research group to partner with some clever material scientists, and all of us came together and brainstormed.
And after a long process, we came up with a vision, an idea, of a wearable system that perhaps you could wear like a piece of jewelry or you could apply to yourself like a Band-Aid.
And after many trials and tribulations and years of endeavors, we were able to come up with this flexible electronic patch that was manufactured using the same processes that they use to build computer chips, except the electronics are transferred from a semiconductor wafer onto a flexible material that can interface with the human body.
These systems are about the thickness of a human hair.
They can measure the types of information that we want, things such as: bodily movement, bodily temperature, electrical rhythms of the body and so forth.
We can also engineer these systems, so they can integrate energy sources, and can have wireless transmission capabilities.
So as we began to build these types of systems, we began to test them on ourselves in our research group.
But in addition, we began to reach out to some of our clinical partners in San Diego, and test these on different patients in different clinical conditions, including moms-to-be like Jane.
Here is a picture of a pregnant woman in labor at our university hospital being monitored for her uterine contractions with the conventional belt.
In addition, our flexible electronic patches are there.
This picture demonstrates waveforms pertaining to the fetal heart rate, where the red corresponds to what was acquired with the conventional belts, and the blue corresponds to our estimates using our flexible electronic systems and our algorithms.
At this moment, we gave ourselves a big mental high five.
Some of the things we had imagined were beginning to come to fruition, and we were actually seeing this in a clinical context.
But there was still a problem.
The problem was, the way we manufactured these systems was very inefficient, had low yield and was very error-prone.
In addition, as we talked to some of the nurses in the hospital, they encouraged us to make sure that our electronics worked with typical medical adhesives that are used in a hospital.
We had an epiphany and said, "Wait a minute.
Rather than just making them work with adhesives, let's integrate them into adhesives, and that could solve our manufacturing problem."
This picture that you see here is our ability to embed these censors inside of a piece of Scotch tape by simply peeling it off of a wafer.
Ongoing work in our research group allows us to, in addition, embed integrated circuits into the flexible adhesives to do things like amplifying signals and digitizing them, processing them and encoding for wireless transmission.
All of this integrated into the same medical adhesives that are used in the hospital.
So when we reached this point, we had some other challenges, from both an engineering as well as a usability perspective, to make sure that we could make it used practically.
In many digital health discussions, people believe in and embrace the idea that we can simply digitize the data, wirelessly transmit it, send it to the cloud, and in the cloud, we can extract meaningful information for interpretation.
And indeed, you can do all of that, if you're not worried about some of the energy challenges.
Think about Jane for a moment.
She doesn't live in Palo Alto, nor does she live in Beverly Hills.
What that means is, we have to be mindful about her data plan and how much it would cost for her to be sending out a continuous stream of data.
There's another challenge that not everyone in the medical profession is comfortable talking about.
And that is, that Jane does not have the most trust in the medical establishment.
She, people like her, her ancestors, have not had the best experiences at the hands of doctors and the hospital or insurance companies.
That means that we have to be mindful of questions of privacy.
Jane might not feel that happy about all that data being processed into the cloud.
And Jane cannot be fooled; she reads the news.
She knows that if the federal government can be hacked, if the Fortune 500 can be hacked, so can her doctor.
And so with that in mind, we had an epiphany.
We cannot outsmart all the hackers in the world, but perhaps we can present them a smaller target.
What if we could actually, rather than have those algorithms that do data interpretation run in the cloud, what if we have those algorithms run on those small integrated circuits embedded into those adhesives?
And so when we integrate these things together, what this means is that now we can think about the future where someone like Jane can still go about living her normal daily life, she can be monitored, it can be done in a way where she doesn't have to get another job to pay her data plan, and we can also address some of her concerns about privacy.
So at this point, we're feeling very good about ourselves.
We've accomplished this, we've begun to address some of these questions about privacy and we feel like, pretty much the chapter is closed now.
Everyone lived happily ever after, right?
Well, not so fast.
(Laughter) One of the things we have to remember, as I mentioned earlier, is that Jane does not have the most trust in the medical establishment.
We have to remember that there are increasing and widening health disparities, and there's inequity in terms of proper care management.
And so what that means is that this simple picture of Jane and her data -- even with her being comfortable being wirelessly transmitted to the cloud, letting a doctor intervene if necessary -- is not the whole story.
So what we're beginning to do is to think about ways to have trusted parties serve as intermediaries between people like Jane and her health care providers.
For example, we've begun to partner with churches and to think about nurses that are church members, that come from that trusted community, as patient advocates and health coaches to people like Jane.
Another thing we have going for us is that insurance companies, increasingly, are attracted to some of these ideas.
They're increasingly realizing that perhaps it's better to pay one dollar now for a wearable device and a health coach, rather than paying 10 dollars later, when that baby is born prematurely and ends up in the neonatal intensive care unit -- one of the most expensive parts of a hospital.
This has been a long learning process for us.
This iterative process of breaking through and attacking one problem and not feeling totally comfortable, and identifying the next problem, has helped us go along this path of actually trying to not only innovate with this technology but make sure it can be used for people who perhaps need it the most.
Another learning lesson we've taken from this process that is very humbling, is that as technology progresses and advances at an accelerating rate, we have to remember that human beings are using this technology, and we have to be mindful that these human beings -- they have a face, they have a name and a life.
And in the case of Jane, hopefully, two.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So, I started my first job as a computer programmer in my very first year of college -- basically, as a teenager.
Soon after I started working, writing software in a company, a manager who worked at the company came down to where I was, and he whispered to me, "Can he tell if I'm lying?"
There was nobody else in the room.
"Can who tell if you're lying? And why are we whispering?"
The manager pointed at the computer in the room.
"Can he tell if I'm lying?"
Well, that manager was having an affair with the receptionist.
(Laughter) And I was still a teenager.
So I whisper-shouted back to him, "Yes, the computer can tell if you're lying."
(Laughter) Well, I laughed, but actually, the laugh's on me.
Nowadays, there are computational systems that can suss out emotional states and even lying from processing human faces.
Advertisers and even governments are very interested.
I had become a computer programmer because I was one of those kids crazy about math and science.
But somewhere along the line I'd learned about nuclear weapons, and I'd gotten really concerned with the ethics of science.
I was troubled.
However, because of family circumstances, I also needed to start working as soon as possible.
So I thought to myself, hey, let me pick a technical field where I can get a job easily and where I don't have to deal with any troublesome questions of ethics.
So I picked computers.
(Laughter) Well, ha, ha, ha! All the laughs are on me.
Nowadays, computer scientists are building platforms that control what a billion people see every day.
They're developing cars that could decide who to run over.
They're even building machines, weapons, that might kill human beings in war.
It's ethics all the way down.
Machine intelligence is here.
We're now using computation to make all sort of decisions, but also new kinds of decisions.
We're asking questions to computation that have no single right answers, that are subjective and open-ended and value-laden.
We're asking questions like, "Who should the company hire?"
"Which update from which friend should you be shown?"
"Which convict is more likely to reoffend?"
"Which news item or movie should be recommended to people?"
Look, yes, we've been using computers for a while, but this is different.
This is a historical twist, because we cannot anchor computation for such subjective decisions the way we can anchor computation for flying airplanes, building bridges, going to the moon.
Are airplanes safer? Did the bridge sway and fall?
There, we have agreed-upon, fairly clear benchmarks, and we have laws of nature to guide us.
We have no such anchors and benchmarks for decisions in messy human affairs.
To make things more complicated, our software is getting more powerful, but it's also getting less transparent and more complex.
Recently, in the past decade, complex algorithms have made great strides.
They can recognize human faces.
They can decipher handwriting.
They can detect credit card fraud and block spam and they can translate between languages.
They can detect tumors in medical imaging.
They can beat humans in chess and Go.
Much of this progress comes from a method called "machine learning."
Machine learning is different than traditional programming, where you give the computer detailed, exact, painstaking instructions.
It's more like you take the system and you feed it lots of data, including unstructured data, like the kind we generate in our digital lives.
And the system learns by churning through this data.
And also, crucially, these systems don't operate under a single-answer logic.
They don't produce a simple answer; it's more probabilistic: "This one is probably more like what you're looking for."
Now, the upside is: this method is really powerful.
The head of Google's AI systems called it, "the unreasonable effectiveness of data."
The downside is, we don't really understand what the system learned.
In fact, that's its power.
This is less like giving instructions to a computer; it's more like training a puppy-machine-creature we don't really understand or control.
So this is our problem.
It's a problem when this artificial intelligence system gets things wrong.
It's also a problem when it gets things right, because we don't even know which is which when it's a subjective problem.
We don't know what this thing is thinking.
So, consider a hiring algorithm -- a system used to hire people, using machine-learning systems.
Such a system would have been trained on previous employees' data and instructed to find and hire people like the existing high performers in the company.
Sounds good.
I once attended a conference that brought together human resources managers and executives, high-level people, using such systems in hiring.
They were super excited.
They thought that this would make hiring more objective, less biased, and give women and minorities a better shot against biased human managers.
And look -- human hiring is biased.
I know.
I mean, in one of my early jobs as a programmer, my immediate manager would sometimes come down to where I was really early in the morning or really late in the afternoon, and she'd say, "Zeynep, let's go to lunch!"
I'd be puzzled by the weird timing.
It's 4pm. Lunch?
I was broke, so free lunch. I always went.
I later realized what was happening.
My immediate managers had not confessed to their higher-ups that the programmer they hired for a serious job was a teen girl who wore jeans and sneakers to work.
I was doing a good job, I just looked wrong and was the wrong age and gender.
So hiring in a gender- and race-blind way certainly sounds good to me.
But with these systems, it is more complicated, and here's why: Currently, computational systems can infer all sorts of things about you from your digital crumbs, even if you have not disclosed those things.
They can infer your sexual orientation, your personality traits, your political leanings.
They have predictive power with high levels of accuracy.
Remember -- for things you haven't even disclosed.
This is inference.
I have a friend who developed such computational systems to predict the likelihood of clinical or postpartum depression from social media data.
The results are impressive.
Her system can predict the likelihood of depression months before the onset of any symptoms -- months before.
No symptoms, there's prediction.
She hopes it will be used for early intervention. Great!
But now put this in the context of hiring.
So at this human resources managers conference, I approached a high-level manager in a very large company, and I said to her, "Look, what if, unbeknownst to you, your system is weeding out people with high future likelihood of depression?
They're not depressed now, just maybe in the future, more likely.
What if it's weeding out women more likely to be pregnant in the next year or two but aren't pregnant now?
What if it's hiring aggressive people because that's your workplace culture?"
You can't tell this by looking at gender breakdowns.
Those may be balanced.
And since this is machine learning, not traditional coding, there is no variable there labeled "higher risk of depression," "higher risk of pregnancy," "aggressive guy scale."
Not only do you not know what your system is selecting on, you don't even know where to begin to look.
It's a black box.
It has predictive power, but you don't understand it.
"What safeguards," I asked, "do you have to make sure that your black box isn't doing something shady?"
She looked at me as if I had just stepped on 10 puppy tails.
(Laughter) She stared at me and she said, "I don't want to hear another word about this."
And she turned around and walked away.
Mind you -- she wasn't rude.
It was clearly: what I don't know isn't my problem, go away, death stare.
(Laughter) Look, such a system may even be less biased than human managers in some ways.
And it could make monetary sense.
But it could also lead to a steady but stealthy shutting out of the job market of people with higher risk of depression.
Is this the kind of society we want to build, without even knowing we've done this, because we turned decision-making to machines we don't totally understand?
Another problem is this: these systems are often trained on data generated by our actions, human imprints.
Well, they could just be reflecting our biases, and these systems could be picking up on our biases and amplifying them and showing them back to us, while we're telling ourselves, "We're just doing objective, neutral computation."
Researchers found that on Google, women are less likely than men to be shown job ads for high-paying jobs.
And searching for African-American names is more likely to bring up ads suggesting criminal history, even when there is none.
Such hidden biases and black-box algorithms that researchers uncover sometimes but sometimes we don't know, can have life-altering consequences.
In Wisconsin, a defendant was sentenced to six years in prison for evading the police.
You may not know this, but algorithms are increasingly used in parole and sentencing decisions.
He wanted to know: How is this score calculated?
It's a commercial black box.
The company refused to have its algorithm be challenged in open court.
But ProPublica, an investigative nonprofit, audited that very algorithm with what public data they could find, and found that its outcomes were biased and its predictive power was dismal, barely better than chance, and it was wrongly labeling black defendants as future criminals at twice the rate of white defendants.
So, consider this case: This woman was late picking up her godsister from a school in Broward County, Florida, running down the street with a friend of hers.
They spotted an unlocked kid's bike and a scooter on a porch and foolishly jumped on it.
As they were speeding off, a woman came out and said, "Hey! That's my kid's bike!"
They dropped it, they walked away, but they were arrested.
She was wrong, she was foolish, but she was also just 18.
She had a couple of juvenile misdemeanors.
Meanwhile, that man had been arrested for shoplifting in Home Depot -- 85 dollars' worth of stuff, a similar petty crime.
But he had two prior armed robbery convictions.
But the algorithm scored her as high risk, and not him.
Two years later, ProPublica found that she had not reoffended.
It was just hard to get a job for her with her record.
He, on the other hand, did reoffend and is now serving an eight-year prison term for a later crime.
Clearly, we need to audit our black boxes and not have them have this kind of unchecked power.
(Applause) Audits are great and important, but they don't solve all our problems.
Take Facebook's powerful news feed algorithm -- you know, the one that ranks everything and decides what to show you from all the friends and pages you follow.
Should you be shown another baby picture?
(Laughter) A sullen note from an acquaintance?
An important but difficult news item?
There's no right answer.
Facebook optimizes for engagement on the site: likes, shares, comments.
In August of 2014, protests broke out in Ferguson, Missouri, after the killing of an African-American teenager by a white police officer, under murky circumstances.
The news of the protests was all over my algorithmically unfiltered Twitter feed, but nowhere on my Facebook.
Was it my Facebook friends?
I disabled Facebook's algorithm, which is hard because Facebook keeps wanting to make you come under the algorithm's control, and saw that my friends were talking about it.
It's just that the algorithm wasn't showing it to me.
I researched this and found this was a widespread problem.
The story of Ferguson wasn't algorithm-friendly.
It's not "likable."
Who's going to click on "like?"
It's not even easy to comment on.
Without likes and comments, the algorithm was likely showing it to even fewer people, so we didn't get to see this.
Instead, that week, Facebook's algorithm highlighted this, which is the ALS Ice Bucket Challenge.
Worthy cause; dump ice water, donate to charity, fine.
But it was super algorithm-friendly.
The machine made this decision for us.
A very important but difficult conversation might have been smothered, had Facebook been the only channel.
Now, finally, these systems can also be wrong in ways that don't resemble human systems.
Do you guys remember Watson, IBM's machine-intelligence system that wiped the floor with human contestants on Jeopardy?
It was a great player.
But then, for Final Jeopardy, Watson was asked this question: "Its largest airport is named for a World War II hero, its second-largest for a World War II battle."
(Hums Final Jeopardy music) Chicago.
The two humans got it right.
Watson, on the other hand, answered "Toronto" -- for a US city category!
The impressive system also made an error that a human would never make, a second-grader wouldn't make.
Our machine intelligence can fail in ways that don't fit error patterns of humans, in ways we won't expect and be prepared for.
It'd be lousy not to get a job one is qualified for, but it would triple suck if it was because of stack overflow in some subroutine.
(Laughter) In May of 2010, a flash crash on Wall Street fueled by a feedback loop in Wall Street's "sell" algorithm wiped a trillion dollars of value in 36 minutes.
I don't even want to think what "error" means in the context of lethal autonomous weapons.
So yes, humans have always made biases.
Decision makers and gatekeepers, in courts, in news, in war ...
they make mistakes; but that's exactly my point.
We cannot escape these difficult questions.
We cannot outsource our responsibilities to machines.
(Applause) Artificial intelligence does not give us a "Get out of ethics free" card.
Data scientist Fred Benenson calls this math-washing.
We need the opposite.
We need to cultivate algorithm suspicion, scrutiny and investigation.
We need to make sure we have algorithmic accountability, auditing and meaningful transparency.
We need to accept that bringing math and computation to messy, value-laden human affairs does not bring objectivity; rather, the complexity of human affairs invades the algorithms.
Yes, we can and we should use computation to help us make better decisions.
But we have to own up to our moral responsibility to judgment, and use algorithms within that framework, not as a means to abdicate and outsource our responsibilities to one another as human to human.
Machine intelligence is here.
That means we must hold on ever tighter to human values and human ethics.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Today I stand before you as a man who lives life to the full in the here and now.
But for a long time, I lived for death.
I was a young man who believed that jihad is to be understood in the language of force and violence.
I tried to right wrongs through power and aggression.
I had deep concerns for the suffering of others and a strong desire to help and bring relief to them.
I thought violent jihad was noble, chivalrous and the best way to help.
At a time when so many of our people -- young people especially -- are at risk of radicalization through groups like al-Qaeda, Islamic State and others, when these groups are claiming that their horrific brutality and violence are true jihad, I want to say that their idea of jihad is wrong -- completely wrong -- as was mine, then.
Jihad means to strive to one's utmost.
It includes exertion and spirituality, self-purification and devotion.
It refers to positive transformation through learning, wisdom and remembrance of God.
The word jihad stands for all those meanings as a whole.
Jihad may at times take the form of fighting, but only sometimes, under strict conditions, within rules and limits.
In Islam, the benefit of an act must outweigh the harm or hardship it entails.
More importantly, the verses in the Koran that are connected to jihad or fighting do not cancel out the verses that talk about forgiveness, benevolence or patience.
But now I believe that there are no circumstances on earth where violent jihad is permissible, because it will lead to greater harm.
But now the idea of jihad has been hijacked.
It has been perverted to mean violent struggle wherever Muslims are undergoing difficulties, and turned into terrorism by fascistic Islamists like al-Qaeda, Islamic State and others.
But I have come to understand that true jihad means striving to the utmost to strengthen and live those qualities which God loves: honesty, trustworthiness, compassion, benevolence, reliability, respect, truthfulness -- human values that so many of us share.
I was born in Bangladesh, but grew up mostly in England.
And I went to school here.
My father was an academic, and we were in the UK through his work.
In 1971 we were in Bangladesh when everything changed.
The War of Independence impacted upon us terribly, pitting family against family, neighbor against neighbor.
And at the age of 12 I experienced war, destitution in my family, the deaths of 22 of my relatives in horrible ways, as well as the murder of my elder brother.
I witnessed killing ...
animals feeding on corpses in the streets, starvation all around me, wanton, horrific violence -- senseless violence.
I was a young man, teenager, fascinated by ideas.
I wanted to learn, but I could not go to school for four years.
After the War of Independence, my father was put in prison for two and a half years, and I used to visit him every week in prison, and homeschooled myself.
My father was released in 1973 and he fled to England as a refugee, and we soon followed him.
I was 17.
So these experiences gave me a sharp awareness of the atrocities and injustices in the world.
And I had a strong desire -- a very keen, deep desire -- to right wrongs and help the victims of oppression.
While studying at college in the UK, I met others who showed me how I could channel that desire and help through my religion.
And I was radicalized -- enough to consider violence correct, even a virtue under certain circumstances.
So I became involved in the jihad in Afghanistan.
I wanted to protect the Muslim Afghan population against the Soviet army.
And I thought that was jihad: my sacred duty, which would be rewarded by God.
I became a preacher.
I was one of the pioneers of violent jihad in the UK.
I recruited, I raised funds, I trained.
I confused true jihad with this perversion as presented by the fascist Islamists -- these people who use the idea of jihad to justify their lust for power, authority and control on earth: a perversion perpetuated today by fascist Islamist groups like al-Qaeda, Islamic State and others.
For a period of around 15 years, I fought for short periods of time in Kashmir and Burma, besides Afghanistan.
Our aim was to remove the invaders, to bring relief to the oppressed victims and of course to establish an Islamic state, a caliphate for God's rule.
And I did this openly.
I didn't break any laws.
I was proud and grateful to be British -- I still am.
And I bore no hostility against this, my country, nor enmity towards the non-Muslim citizens, and I still don't.
During one battle in Afghanistan, some British men and I formed a special bond with a 15-year-old Afghani boy, Abdullah, an innocent, loving and lovable kid who was always eager to please.
He was poor.
And boys like him did menial tasks in the camp.
And he seemed happy enough, but I couldn't help wonder -- his parents must have missed him dearly.
And they must have dreamt about a better future for him.
A victim of circumstance caught up in a war, cruelly thrust upon him by the cruel circumstances of the time.
One day I picked up this unexploded mortar shell in a trench, and I had it deposited in a makeshift mud hut lab.
And I went out on a short, pointless skirmish -- always pointless, And I came back a few hours later to discover he was dead.
He had tried to recover explosives from that shell.
It exploded, and he died a violent death, blown to bits by the very same device that had proved harmless to me.
So I started to question.
How did his death serve any purpose?
Why did he die and I lived?
I carried on.
I fought in Kashmir.
I also recruited for the Philippines, Bosnia and Chechnya.
And the questions grew.
Later in Burma, I came across Rohingya fighters, who were barely teenagers, born and brought up in the jungle, carrying machine guns and grenade launchers.
I met two 13-year-olds with soft manners and gentle voices.
Looking at me, they begged me to take them away to England.
They simply wanted to go to school -- that was their dream.
My family -- my children of the same age -- were living at home in the UK, going to school, living a safe life.
And I couldn't help wonder how much these young boys must have spoken to one another about their dreams for such a life.
Victims of circumstances: these two young boys, sleeping rough on the ground, looking up at the stars, cynically exploited by their leaders for their personal lust for glory and power.
I soon witnessed boys like them killing one another in conflicts between rival groups.
And it was the same everywhere ...
Afghanistan, Kashmir, Burma, Philippines, Chechnya; petty warlords got the young and vulnerable to kill one another in the name of jihad.
Muslims against Muslims.
Not protecting anyone against invaders or occupiers; not bringing relief to the oppressed.
Children being used, cynically exploited; people dying in conflicts which I was supporting in the name of jihad.
And it still carries on today.
Realizing that the violent jihad I had engaged in abroad was so different -- such a chasm between what I had experienced and what I thought was sacred duty -- I had to reflect on my activities here in the UK.
I had to consider my preaching, recruiting, fund-raising, training, but most importantly, radicalizing -- sending young people to fight and die as I was doing -- all totally wrong.
So I got involved in violent jihad in the mid '80s, starting with Afghanistan.
And by the time I finished it was in the year 2000.
I was completely immersed in it.
All around me people supported, applauded, even celebrated what we were doing in their name.
But by the time I learned to get out, completely disillusioned in the year 2000, 15 years had passed.
So what goes wrong?
We were so busy talking about virtue, and we were blinded by a cause.
And we did not give ourselves a chance to develop a virtuous character.
We told ourselves we were fighting for the oppressed, but these were unwinnable wars.
We became the very instrument through which more deaths occurred, complicit in causing further misery for the selfish benefit of the cruel few.
So over time, a very long time, I opened my eyes.
I began to dare to face the truth, to think, to face the hard questions.
I got in touch with my soul.
What have I learned?
That people who engage in violent jihadism, that people who are drawn to these types of extremisms, are not that different to everyone else.
But I believe such people can change.
They can regain their hearts and restore them by filling them with human values that heal.
When we ignore the realities, we discover that we accept what we are told without critical reflection.
And we ignore the gifts and advantages that many of us would cherish even for a single moment in their lives.
I engaged in actions I thought were correct.
But now I began to question how I knew what I knew.
I endlessly told others to accept the truth, but I failed to give doubt its rightful place.
This conviction that people can change is rooted in my experience, my own journey.
Through wide reading, reflecting, contemplation, self-knowledge, I discovered, I realized that Islamists' world of us and them is false and unjust.
Through considering the uncertainties in all that we had asserted, to the inviolable truths, incontestable truths, I developed a more nuanced understanding.
I realized that in a world crowded with variation and contradiction, foolish preachers, only foolish preachers like I used to be, see no paradox in the myths and fictions they use to assert authenticity.
So I understood the vital importance of self-knowledge, political awareness and the necessity for a deep and wide understanding of our commitments and our actions, how they affect others.
So my plea today to everyone, especially those who sincerely believe in Islamist jihadism ...
refuse dogmatic authority; let go of anger, hatred and violence; learn to right wrongs without even attempting to justify cruel, unjust and futile behavior.
Instead create a few beautiful and useful things that outlive us.
Approach the world, life, with love.
Learn to develop or cultivate your hearts to see goodness, beauty and truth in others and in the world.
That way we do matter more to ourselves ...
to each other, to our communities and, for me, to God.
This is jihad -- my true jihad.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 2015, we saw two fantastic, hopeful breakthroughs for humanity.
First, the adoption of the Sustainable Development Goals, the collective, universal plan for humanity to eradicate hunger, [promote] good economic development and good health, within global environmental targets.
Secondly, after 21 years of negotiations, we adopted the legally binding Paris Agreement, all nations in the world keeping global warming under two degrees Celsius, aiming at 1.5 degrees Celsius.
Today, three years down the line, we're still in the hand-waving business.
Now, I think it's time to step back one step and recognize that I wonder if the world leaders really knew what they signed at the General Assembly three years ago.
These are universal, aspirational, transformational goals for inclusive, prosperous humanity on a stable earth system.
But there are underlying problems.
We have inherent contradictions between these goals, where there's the risk of pursuing one favored goal at the expense of others.
Take, for example, Goal 8, on decent work and economic growth.
If we continue doing that by exploiting natural resources and burning fossil fuels, it will be impossible to reach Goal 13.
Three years down the line, we simply must admit we're seeing limited action to really, really address this as an inclusive, collective, universal package.
Now, this requires us to step back one step.
I think we have to ask ourselves some hard questions: Do we have any chance of accomplishing the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030?
Are there actually inherent trade-offs that are not compatible with our current development paradigm?
But are there, perhaps, synergies where we can really accelerate change?
And is it really a people-planet agenda, really taking seriously the social and economic aspirational goals within the life-support systems on earth?
Now, citizens across the world have started to recognize that we're facing global rising environmental risks; in fact, that a stable planet is a prerequisite to have good human well-being on earth.
We need to define a safe operating space on a stable earth system, and the planetary boundary framework was introduced by the scientific community in 2009 to do exactly that.
It has now been widely embraced across the world in policy, business and communities as a framework for sustainable development in the Anthropocene.
This slide really shows the framework with the nine environmental processes that regulate the stability of the earth system, providing a safe operating space, where we'll have a high chance of having good human well-being and prosperity and equity.
If we move into the yellow zone, we enter a dangerous uncertainty zone; and into the red, we have a high likelihood of crossing tipping points that could take us irreversibly away from the ability of the earth system to provide social and economic well-being for humanity.
Now, we can today, scientifically, quantify these boundaries, providing us a stable earth system for humanity.
But we have to go beyond this and recognize the Sustainable Development Goals -- if we really want to seriously accomplish them -- must now occur within this safe operating space.
We need to achieve SDGs within PBs.
But dear friends, not even this is enough.
We need to recognize that the Sustainable Development Goals is 12 years away.
It's only a milestone.
It is the bull's-eye that we need to go through and zoom ourselves towards transformations where we can have a good future for all co-citizens on earth, nine billion plus, within a stable earth system in 2050 and beyond.
This is a quest, and in order to really explore this and not have only opinions about it, we gathered the scientific community, the best thinkers and modelers and started to develop a completely new complex systems dynamic model, the Earth-3 model, building on models that have been around for the last 50 years.
And here it is.
This is a fantastic piece of work.
This has a climate module, a biosphere module, a global economic model; it has algorithms, it has the whole room of fantastic accomplishments.
This is what turns us scientists on.
(Laughter) I mean, this is just a beautiful piece of work?
And I'd just love to spend the whole evening walking this through with you, but I'll make you disappointed.
I cannot do that.
In fact, the only thing I can do with you is just to assure you that this is the first time it's done.
Nobody has ever tried to really analytically combine the Sustainable Development Goals with planetary boundaries.
And we were able to find patterns and really convergent trends that gives us a lot of confidence in our ability to now project economic development, resources use from water, food and energy, population growth, income per person, yet along these consistent and systemic pathways.
So, it's the first time we have a robust opportunity to really explore the futures of ability of attaining the SDGs within PBs.
Now, how do we do this?
Well, look at this.
Here, you have the data coming from the real world, calibrated from 1970-2015: 100,000 data points around the world, building on seven regions' ability, of really picking on all these Sustainable Development Goals.
Now, one example of how we calibrated this, here you have [data] for Sustainable Development Goals on eradicating poverty, health, education and food.
And here you have in the bubbles the seven regions of the world, how they move up until 2015 in our empirical observations in relation to GDP per capita, giving these universal convergent trends, which enabled us to create regressions that could make us able to do simulations into the future, all the way until 2050, showing the ability along the lines here to attain the SDGs.
Now, this gave us the opportunity of doing several scenarios, testing different possible futures: business as usual, global transformations, investment schemes in business, different governance options, policies, finance -- really, to explore what the future can look like in our ability to attain the SDGs within PBs.
And the results, I can tell you, really surprised us.
And this will be the first time it's shown.
It should actually not even be referenced outside of this room.
Now, it actually is presented along two axes.
The y-axis here shows our ability to stay within planetary boundaries.
The higher up, the closer you are to the safe operating space.
On the x-axis are the Sustainable Development Goals; the further to the right, the more of the SDGs we fulfill.
We all want to be in the upper right-hand corner, the safe and just world for the future.
Now, the point you see there is 1980.
We were in a situation where we actually were in a safe operating space but not meeting so many of the SDGs.
Here's the trend up until 2015.
So this is the conventional world, which is actually delivering on an increasing number of SDGs, lifting millions of people out of poverty, but doing it at the expense of the safe operating space on earth.
Now, this is the scenario business as usual, into the future.
If we just move on as today, we will be able to deliver on some of the SDGs, but we'll do it at the expense of the stability of the earth system.
Now, what if we go faster on economic growth and really ally on one percent increase per year of income and an even tripling of the world economy by 2050?
That would give us the following trajectory.
We would, yes, go a little bit further on SDG accomplishments, but still at the expense of the risk of destabilizing the planet.
But what if we really go harder?
What if we increase our ability to deliver on our promises by 30 percent across all sectors in society, from climate to our trade agreements?
A harder scenario would take us a little bit better, but still, we're failing on the SDGs, and we are not accomplishing a safe operating space for humanity.
So this really led us to a quite disappointing conclusion, that we will actually, even if we go conventional futures, fail on the SDGs and transgress planetary boundaries.
We need some radical thinking.
We need to go into a transformative, disruptive future, where we start thinking outside of the box.
The modeling and engagement and dialogues enable us to identify five transformations that could actually potentially take us there.
The first one is to cut emissions by half every decade along the scientific pathway to Paris, doubling investments in renewable energy, creating a global energy democracy, allowing us to meet several of the SDGs.
The second is a rapid shift towards sustainable food systems, investing one percent per year in sustainable intensification and really moving towards implementing and investing in solutions that we already have available today.
The third is really to shift our development paradigm and learn from many of the developing countries that have moved very fast.
What if we could have an economic growth such as in China, while doing it within the environmental parameters of an ecological civilization?
Fourth, a redistribution of wealth.
What if we could [agree] that the richest 10 percent could not allow themselves to amass more than 40 percent, maximum, of national incomes -- a drastic redistribution of wealth, reforming the ability of equity across regions?
And finally, fifth, a radical increase in more education, health, access to work, contraception, investing largely in women across the world, allowing us to deliver on SDGs on gender, inequality, economics and urban development.
Now, if we would push ourselves across all these five -- we tested this, and it would give us an amazing journey towards the safe and just operating space on earth.
It shows us that even with a conservative, empirically based, complex system dynamics model, we are at a state where we can actually think of transformations over the next 12 years and beyond that can take us up into the safe operating space and deliver on aspirational social and economic goals.
This is actually quite uplifting, despite the fact that we're not moving along this trajectory.
So, in summary: we now, three years into the operational delivery on the SDGs, must draw a line and conclude that we're not delivering on our promises, and not only that, we're running the risks of future generations having an even tougher ability, because of the risk of pushing the earth system beyond tipping points.
In fact, we are facing even a risk of a hothouse earth, where we will undermine and create geopolitical instabilities that could actually make life even more tough for billions of people on earth.
This, in all honesty, really, really scares me.
But that's also why I'm standing here tonight, because the window of success is still open.
The earth system is still resilient.
She is still providing us with ecosystem services and functions that can allow us a transition back into a safe operating space.
But we need radically different thinking.
We need to see this as an incredible wake-up call but also an opportunity for transformative change, where we shift gears and really start thinking of the SDGs as a transformative agenda within a safe operating space on earth.
In other words, we can build a safe and just world.
We just have to really, really get on with it.
And let's do it. Thank you.
(Applause)
There was a day, about 10 years ago, when I asked a friend to hold a baby dinosaur robot upside down.
It was this toy called a Pleo that I had ordered, and I was really excited about it because I've always loved robots.
And this one has really cool technical features.
It had motors and touch sensors and it had an infrared camera.
And one of the things it had was a tilt sensor, so it knew what direction it was facing.
And when you held it upside down, it would start to cry.
And I thought this was super cool, so I was showing it off to my friend, and I said, "Oh, hold it up by the tail. See what it does."
So we're watching the theatrics of this robot struggle and cry out.
And after a few seconds, it starts to bother me a little, and I said, "OK, that's enough now.
And then I pet the robot to make it stop crying.
And that was kind of a weird experience for me.
For one thing, I wasn't the most maternal person at the time.
Although since then I've become a mother, nine months ago, and I've learned that babies also squirm when you hold them upside down.
(Laughter) But my response to this robot was also interesting because I knew exactly how this machine worked, and yet I still felt compelled to be kind to it.
And that observation sparked a curiosity that I've spent the past decade pursuing.
Why did I comfort this robot?
And one of the things I discovered was that my treatment of this machine was more than just an awkward moment in my living room, that in a world where we're increasingly integrating robots into our lives, an instinct like that might actually have consequences, because the first thing that I discovered is that it's not just me.
In 2007, the Washington Post reported that the United States military was testing this robot that defused land mines.
And the way it worked was it was shaped like a stick insect and it would walk around a minefield on its legs, and every time it stepped on a mine, one of the legs would blow up, and it would continue on the other legs to blow up more mines.
And the colonel who was in charge of this testing exercise ends up calling it off, because, he says, it's too inhumane to watch this damaged robot drag itself along the minefield.
Now, what would cause a hardened military officer and someone like myself to have this response to robots?
Well, of course, we're primed by science fiction and pop culture to really want to personify these things, but it goes a little bit deeper than that.
It turns out that we're biologically hardwired to project intent and life onto any movement in our physical space that seems autonomous to us.
So people will treat all sorts of robots like they're alive.
These bomb-disposal units get names.
They get medals of honor.
They've had funerals for them with gun salutes.
And research shows that we do this even with very simple household robots, like the Roomba vacuum cleaner.
(Laughter) It's just a disc that roams around your floor to clean it, but just the fact it's moving around on its own will cause people to name the Roomba and feel bad for the Roomba when it gets stuck under the couch.
(Laughter) And we can design robots specifically to evoke this response, using eyes and faces or movements that people automatically, subconsciously associate with states of mind.
And there's an entire body of research called human-robot interaction that really shows how well this works.
So for example, researchers at Stanford University found out that it makes people really uncomfortable when you ask them to touch a robot's private parts.
(Laughter) So from this, but from many other studies, we know, we know that people respond to the cues given to them by these lifelike machines, even if they know that they're not real.
Now, we're headed towards a world where robots are everywhere.
Robotic technology is moving out from behind factory walls.
It's entering workplaces, households.
And as these machines that can sense and make autonomous decisions and learn enter into these shared spaces, I think that maybe the best analogy we have for this is our relationship with animals.
Thousands of years ago, we started to domesticate animals, and we trained them for work and weaponry and companionship.
And throughout history, we've treated some animals like tools or like products, and other animals, we've treated with kindness and we've given a place in society as our companions.
I think it's plausible we might start to integrate robots in similar ways.
And sure, animals are alive.
Robots are not.
And I can tell you, from working with roboticists, that we're pretty far away from developing robots that can feel anything.
But we feel for them, and that matters, because if we're trying to integrate robots into these shared spaces, we need to understand that people will treat them differently than other devices, and that in some cases, for example, the case of a soldier who becomes emotionally attached to the robot that they work with, that can be anything from inefficient to dangerous.
But in other cases, it can actually be useful to foster this emotional connection to robots.
We're already seeing some great use cases, for example, robots working with autistic children to engage them in ways that we haven't seen previously, or robots working with teachers to engage kids in learning with new results.
And it's not just for kids.
Early studies show that robots can help doctors and patients in health care settings.
This is the PARO baby seal robot.
It's used in nursing homes and with dementia patients.
It's been around for a while.
And I remember, years ago, being at a party and telling someone about this robot, and her response was, "Oh my gosh.
That's horrible.
And this is a really common response, and I think it's absolutely correct, because that would be terrible.
But in this case, it's not what this robot replaces.
What this robot replaces is animal therapy in contexts where we can't use real animals but we can use robots, because people will consistently treat them more like an animal than a device.
Acknowledging this emotional connection to robots can also help us anticipate challenges as these devices move into more intimate areas of people's lives.
For example, is it OK if your child's teddy bear robot records private conversations?
Is it OK if your sex robot has compelling in-app purchases?
(Laughter) Because robots plus capitalism equals questions around consumer protection and privacy.
And those aren't the only reasons that our behavior around these machines could matter.
A few years after that first initial experience I had with this baby dinosaur robot, I did a workshop with my friend Hannes Gassert.
And we took five of these baby dinosaur robots and we gave them to five teams of people.
And we had them name them and play with them and interact with them for about an hour.
And then we unveiled a hammer and a hatchet and we told them to torture and kill the robots.
(Laughter) And this turned out to be a little more dramatic than we expected it to be, because none of the participants would even so much as strike these baby dinosaur robots, so we had to improvise a little, and at some point, we said, "OK, you can save your team's robot if you destroy another team's robot."
(Laughter) And even that didn't work. They couldn't do it.
So finally, we said, "We're going to destroy all of the robots unless someone takes a hatchet to one of them."
And this guy stood up, and he took the hatchet, and the whole room winced as he brought the hatchet down on the robot's neck, and there was this half-joking, half-serious moment of silence in the room for this fallen robot.
(Laughter) So that was a really interesting experience.
Now, it wasn't a controlled study, obviously, but it did lead to some later research that I did at MIT with Palash Nandy and Cynthia Breazeal, where we had people come into the lab and smash these HEXBUGs that move around in a really lifelike way, like insects.
So instead of choosing something cute that people are drawn to, we chose something more basic, and what we found was that high-empathy people would hesitate more to hit the HEXBUGS.
Now this is just a little study, but it's part of a larger body of research that is starting to indicate that there may be a connection between people's tendencies for empathy and their behavior around robots.
But my question for the coming era of human-robot interaction is not: "Do we empathize with robots?"
It's: "Can robots change people's empathy?"
Is there reason to, for example, prevent your child from kicking a robotic dog, not just out of respect for property, but because the child might be more likely to kick a real dog?
And again, it's not just kids.
This is the violent video games question, but it's on a completely new level because of this visceral physicality that we respond more intensely to than to images on a screen.
When we behave violently towards robots, specifically robots that are designed to mimic life, is that a healthy outlet for violent behavior or is that training our cruelty muscles?
We don't know ...
But the answer to this question has the potential to impact human behavior, it has the potential to impact social norms, it has the potential to inspire rules around what we can and can't do with certain robots, similar to our animal cruelty laws.
Because even if robots can't feel, our behavior towards them might matter for us.
And regardless of whether we end up changing our rules, robots might be able to help us come to a new understanding of ourselves.
Most of what I've learned over the past 10 years has not been about technology at all.
It's been about human psychology and empathy and how we relate to others.
Because when a child is kind to a Roomba, when a soldier tries to save a robot on the battlefield, or when a group of people refuses to harm a robotic baby dinosaur, those robots aren't just motors and gears and algorithms.
They're reflections of our own humanity.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'd like you all to close your eyes, please ...
and imagine yourself sitting in the middle of a large, open field with the sun setting on your right.
And as the sun sets, imagine that tonight you don't just see the stars appear, but you're able to hear the stars appear with the brightest stars being the loudest notes and the hotter, bluer stars producing the higher-pitched notes.
(Music) And since each constellation is made up of different types of stars, they'll each produce their own unique melody, such as Aries, the ram.
(Music) Or Orion, the hunter.
(Music) Or even Taurus, the bull.
(Music) We live in a musical universe, and we can use that to experience it from a new perspective, and to share that perspective with a wider range of people.
Let me show you what I mean.
(Music ends) Now, when I tell people I'm an astrophysicist, they're usually pretty impressed.
And then I say I'm also a musician -- they're like, "Yeah, we know."
(Laughter) So everyone seems to know that there's this deep connection between music and astronomy.
And it's actually a very old idea; it goes back over 2,000 years to Pythagoras.
You might remember Pythagoras from such theorems as the Pythagorean theorem -- (Laughter) And he said: "There is geometry in the humming of the strings, there is music in the spacing of the spheres."
And so he literally thought that the motions of the planets along the celestial sphere created harmonious music.
And if you asked him, "Why don't we hear anything?"
he'd say you can't hear it because you don't know what it's like to not hear it; you don't know what true silence is.
It's like how you have to wait for your power to go out to hear how annoying your refrigerator was.
Maybe you buy that, but not everybody else was buying it, including such names as Aristotle.
(Laughter) Exact words.
(Laughter) So I'll paraphrase his exact words.
He said it's a nice idea, but if something as large and vast as the heavens themselves were moving and making sounds, it wouldn't just be audible, it would be earth-shatteringly loud.
We exist, therefore there is no music of the spheres.
He also thought that the brain's only purpose was to cool down the blood, so there's that ...
(Laughter) But I'd like to show you that in some way they were actually both right.
And we're going to start by understanding what makes music musical.
It may sound like a silly question, but have you ever wondered why it is that certain notes, when played together, sound relatively pleasing or consonant, such as these two -- (Music) while others are a lot more tense or dissonant, such as these two.
(Music) Right?
Why is that? Why are there notes at all?
Why can you be in or out of tune?
Well, the answer to that question was actually solved by Pythagoras himself.
Take a look at the string on the far left.
If you bow that string, it will produce a note as it oscillates very fast back and forth.
(Musical note) But now if you cut the string in half, you'll get two strings, each oscillating twice as fast.
And that will produce a related note.
Or three times as fast, or four times -- (Musical notes) And so the secret to musical harmony really is simple ratios: the simpler the ratio, the more pleasing or consonant those two notes will sound together.
And the more complex the ratio, the more dissonant they will sound.
And it's this interplay between tension and release, or consonance and dissonance, that makes what we call music.
(Music) (Music ends) (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) But there's more.
(Laughter) So the two features of music we like to think of as pitch and rhythms, they're actually two versions of the same thing, and I can show you.
(Slow rhythm) That's a rhythm right?
Watch what happens when we speed it up.
(Rhythm gets gradually faster) (High pitch) (Lowering pitch) (Slow Rhythm) So once a rhythm starts happening more than about 20 times per second, your brain flips.
It stops hearing it as a rhythm and starts hearing it as a pitch.
So what does this have to do with astronomy?
Well, that's when we get to the TRAPPIST-1 system.
This is an exoplanetary system discovered last February of 2017, and it got everyone excited because it is seven Earth-sized planets all orbiting a very near red dwarf star.
And we think that three of the planets have the right temperature for liquid water.
It's also so close that in the next few years, we should be able to detect elements in their atmospheres such as oxygen and methane -- potential signs of life.
But one thing about the TRAPPIST system is that it is tiny.
So here we have the orbits of the inner rocky planets in our solar system: Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars, and all seven Earth-sized planets of TRAPPIST-1 are tucked well inside the orbit of Mercury.
I have to expand this by 25 times for you to see the orbits of the TRAPPIST-1 planets.
It's actually much more similar in size to our planet Jupiter and its moons, even though it's seven Earth-size planets orbiting a star.
Another reason this got everyone excited was artist renderings like this.
You got some liquid water, some ice, maybe some land, maybe you can go for a dive in this amazing orange sunset.
It got everyone excited, and then a few months later, some other papers came out that said, actually, it probably looks more like this.
(Laughter) So there were signs that some of the surfaces might actually be molten lava and that there were very damaging X-rays coming from the central star -- X-rays that will sterilize the surface of life and even strip off atmospheres.
Luckily, just a few months ago in 2018, some new papers came out with more refined measurements, and they found actually it does look something like that.
(Laughter) So we now know that several of them have huge supplies of water -- global oceans -- and several of them have thick atmospheres, so it's the right place to look for potential life.
But there's something even more exciting about this system, especially for me.
And that's that TRAPPIST-1 is a resonant chain.
And so that means for every two orbits of the outer planet, the next one in orbits three times, and the next one in four, and then six, nine, 15 and 24.
So you see a lot of very simple ratios among the orbits of these planets.
Clearly, if you speed up their motion, you can get rhythms, right?
One beat, say, for every time a planet goes around.
But now we know if you speed that motion up even more, you'll actually produce musical pitches, and in this case alone, those pitches will work together, making harmonious, even human-like harmony.
So let's hear TRAPPIST-1.
The first thing you'll hear will be a note for every orbit of each planet, and just keep in mind, this music is coming from the system itself.
I'm not creating the pitches or rhythms, I'm just bringing them into the human hearing range.
And after all seven planets have entered, you're going to see -- well, you're going to hear a drum for every time two planets align.
That's when they kind of get close to each other and give each other a gravitational tug.
(Tone) (Two tones) (Three tones) (Four tones) (Five tones) (Six tones) (Seven tones) (Drum beats) (Music ends) And that's the sound of the star itself -- its light converted into sound.
So you may wonder how this is even possible.
And it's good to think of the analogy of an orchestra.
When everyone gets together to start playing in an orchestra, they can't just dive into it, right?
They have to all get in tune; they have to make sure their instruments resonate with their neighbors' instruments, and something very similar happened to TRAPPIST-1 early in its existence.
When the planets were first forming, they were orbiting within a disc of gas, and while inside that disc, they can actually slide around and adjust their orbits to their neighbors until they're perfectly in tune.
And it's a good thing they did because this system is so compact -- a lot of mass in a tight space -- if every aspect of their orbits wasn't very finely tuned, they would very quickly disrupt each other's orbits, destroying the whole system.
So it's really music that is keeping this system alive -- and any of its potential inhabitants.
But what does our solar system sound like?
I hate to be the one to show you this, but it's not pretty.
(Laughter) So for one thing, our solar system is on a much, much larger scale, and so to hear all eight planets, we have to start with Neptune near the bottom of our hearing range, and then Mercury's going to be all the way up near the very top of our hearing range.
But also, since our planets are not very compact -- they're very spread out -- they didn't have to adjust their orbits to each other, so they're kind of just all playing their own random note at random times.
So, I'm sorry, but here it is.
(Tone) That's Neptune.
(Two tones) Uranus.
(Three tones) Saturn.
(Four tones) Jupiter.
And then tucked in, that's Mars.
(Five tones) (Six tones) Earth.
(Seven tones) Venus.
(Eight tones) And that's Mercury -- OK, OK, I'll stop.
(Laughter) So this was actually Kepler's dream.
Johannes Kepler is the person that figured out the laws of planetary motion.
He was completely fascinated by this idea that there's a connection between music, astronomy and geometry.
And so he actually spent an entire book just searching for any kind of musical harmony amongst the solar system's planets and it was really, really hard.
It would have been much easier had he lived on TRAPPIST-1, or for that matter ...
K2-138.
This is a new system discovered in January of 2018 with five planets, and just like TRAPPIST, early on in their existence, they were all finely tuned.
They were actually tuned into a tuning structure proposed by Pythagoras himself, over 2,000 years before.
But the system's actually named after Kepler, discovered by the Kepler space telescope.
And so, in the last few billion years, they've actually lost their tuning, quite a bit more than TRAPPIST has, and so what we're going to do is go back in time and imagine what they would've sounded like just as they were forming.
(Music) (Music ends) (Applause) Thank you.
Now, you may be wondering: How far does this go?
How much music actually is out there?
And that's what I was wondering last fall when I was working at U of T's planetarium, and I was contacted by an artist named Robyn Rennie and her daughter Erin.
Robyn loves the night sky, but she hasn't been able to fully see it for 13 years because of vision loss.
And so they wondered if there was anything I could do.
So I collected all the sounds I could think of from the universe and packaged them into what became "Our Musical Universe."
This is a sound-based planetarium show exploring the rhythm and harmony of the cosmos.
And Robyn was so moved by this presentation that when she went home, she painted this gorgeous representation of her experience.
And then I defaced it by putting Jupiter on it for the poster.
(Laughter) So ...
in this show, I take people of all vision levels and bring them on an audio tour of the universe, from the night sky all the way out to the edge of the observable universe.
But even this is just the start of a musical odyssey to experience the universe with new eyes and with new ears, and I hope you'll join me.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the lush rainforests of Australia, birds roost in the low branches and amble across the forest floor, enjoying the shade and tropical fruits.
But the jungle isnt theirs alone.
A dingo is prowling in the shadows, and fruit wont satisfy his appetite.
The birds flee to safety all but the cassowary, who cant clear the ground on her puny wings.
Instead, she attacks, sending the dingo running for cover with one swipe of her razor-sharp toe claws.
The cassowary is one of approximately 60 living species of flightless birds.
These earthbound avians live all over the world, from the Australian outback to the African savanna to Antarctic shores.
They include some species of duck and all species of penguin, secretive swamp dwellers and speedy ostriches, giant emus, and tiny kiwis.
Though the common ancestor of all modern birds could fly, many different bird species have independently lost their flight.
Flight can have incredible benefits, especially for escaping predators, hunting, and traveling long distances.
But it also has high costs: it consumes huge amounts of energy and limits body size and weight.
A bird that doesnt fly conserves energy, so it may be able to survive on a scarcer or less nutrient-rich food source than one that flies.
The Takahe of New Zealand, for example, lives almost entirely on the soft base of alpine grasses.
For birds that nest or feed on the ground, this predisposition to flightlessness can be even stronger.
When a bird species doesnt face specific pressures to fly, it can stop flying in as quickly as a few generations.
Then, over thousands or millions of years, the birds bodies change to match this new behavior.
Their bones, once hollow to minimize weight, become dense.
Their sturdy feathers turn to fluff.
Their wings shrink, and in some cases disappear entirely.
And the keel-like protrusion on their sternums, where the flight muscles attach, shrinks or disappears, except in penguins, who repurpose their flight muscles and keels for swimming.
Most often, flightlessness evolves after a bird species flies to an island where there are no predators.
As long as these predator-free circumstances last, the birds thrive, but they are vulnerable to changes in their environment.
For instance, human settlers bring dogs, cats, and stowaway rodents to islands.
These animals often prey on flightless birds and can drive them to extinction.
In New Zealand, stoats introduced by European settlers have threatened many native species of flightless bird.
Some have gone extinct while others are endangered.
So in spite of the energy-saving advantages of flightlessness, many flightless bird species have only a short run before going the way of the dodo.
But a few flightless birds have survived on mainlands alongside predators aplenty.
Unlike most small flightless species that come and go quickly, these giants have been flightless for tens of millions of years.
Their ancestors appeared around the same time as the first small mammals, and they were probably able to survive because they were evolving and growingat the same time as their mammalian predators.
Most of these birds, like emus and ostriches, ballooned in size, weighing hundreds of pounds more than wings can lift.
Their legs grew thick, their feet sturdy, and newly developed thigh muscles turned them into formidable runners.
Though they no longer use them to fly, many of these birds repurpose their wings for other means.
They can be spotted tucking their heads beneath them for warmth, flashing them at prospective mates, sheltering eggs with them, or even using them to steer as they charge across the plains.
They may be flightless, but theyre still winging it.
What does it mean to be normal?
And what does it mean to be sick?
I've asked myself this question from the time I was about seven, when I was diagnosed with Tourette syndrome.
Tourette's is a neurological disorder characterized by stereotyped movements I perform against my will, called tics.
Now, tics are technically involuntary, in the sense that they occur without any conscious attention or intention on my part.
But there's a funny thing about how I experience tics.
They feel more unvoluntary than involuntary, because I still feel like it's me moving my shoulder, not some external force.
Also, I get this uncomfortable sensation, called premonitory urge, right before tics happen, and particularly when I'm trying to resist them.
Now, I imagine most of you out there understand what I'm saying, but unless you have Tourette's, you probably think you can't relate.
But I bet you can.
So, let's try a little experiment here and see if I can give you a taste of what my experience feels like.
Alright, ready?
Don't blink.
No, really, don't blink.
And besides dry eyes, what do you feel?
Phantom pressure?
Eyelids tingling?
A need?
Are you holding your breath?
(Laughter) Aha.
(Laughter) That's approximately what my tics feels like.
Now, tics and blinking, neurologically speaking, are not the same, but my point is that you don't have to have Tourette's to be able to relate to my experience of my premonitory urges, because your brain can give you similar experiences and feelings.
So, let's shift the conversation from what it means to be normal versus sick to what it means that a majority of us are both normal and sick.
Because in the final analysis, we're all humans whose brains provide for a spectrum of experiences.
And everything on that spectrum of human experiences is ultimately produced by brain systems that assume a spectrum of different states.
So again, what does it mean to be normal, and what does it mean to be sick, when sickness exists on the extreme end of a spectrum of normal?
As both a researcher who studies differences in how individuals' brains wire and rewire themselves, and as a Touretter with other related diagnoses, I have long been fascinated by failures of self-regulation on the impulsive and compulsive behavioral spectrums.
Because so much of my own experience of my own body and my own behavior has existed all over that map.
So with the spotlight on the opioid crisis, I've really found myself wondering lately: Where on the spectrum of unvoluntary behavior do we put something like abusing opioid painkillers or heroin?
By now, we all know that the opioid crisis and epidemic is out of control.
Ninety-one people die every day in this country from overdose.
And between 2002 and 2015, the number of deaths from heroin increased by a factor of six.
And something about the way that we treat addiction isn't working, at least not for everyone.
It is a fact that people suffering from addiction have lost free will when it comes to their behavior around drugs, alcohol, food or other reward-system stimulating behaviors.
That addiction is a brain-based disease state is a medical, neurobiological reality.
But how we relate to that disease -- indeed, how we relate to the concept of disease when it comes to addiction -- makes an enormous difference for how we treat people with addictions.
So, we tend to think of pretty much everything we do as entirely voluntary.
But it turns out that the brain's default state is really more like a car idling in drive than a car in park.
Some of what we think we choose to do is actually things that we have become programmed to do when the brakes are released.
Have you ever joked that your brain was running on autopilot?
Guess what?
It probably was.
OK?
And the brain's autopilot is in a structure called the striatum.
So the striatum detects emotional and sensory motor conditions and it knows to trigger whatever behavior you have done most often in the past under those same conditions.
Do you know why I became a neuroscientist?
Because I wanted to learn what made me tick.
(Laughter) Thank you, thank you.
(Laughter) I've been wanting to use that one in front of an audience for years.
(Applause) So in graduate school, I studied genetic factors that orchestrate wiring to the striatum during development.
And yes, that is my former license plate.
(Laughter) And for the record, I don't recommend any PhD student get a license plate with their thesis topic printed on it, unless they're prepared for their experiments not to work for the next two years.
(Laughter) I eventually did figure it out.
So, my experiments were exploring how miswiring in the striatum relates to compulsive behaviors.
Meaning, behaviors that are coerced by uncomfortable urges you can't consciously resist.
So I was really excited when my mice developed this compulsive behavior, where they were rubbing their faces and they couldn't seem to stop, even when they were wounding themselves.
OK, excited is the wrong word, I actually felt terrible for them.
I thought that they had tics, evidence of striatal miswiring.
And they were compulsive, but it turned out, on further testing, that these mice showed an aversion to interacting and getting to know other unfamiliar mice.
Which was unusual, it was unexpected.
The results implied that the striatum, which, for sure, is involved in compulsive-spectrum disorders, is also involved in human social connection and our ability to -- not human social connection, but our ability to connect.
So I delved deeper, into a field called social neuroscience.
And that is a newer, interdisciplinary field, and there I found reports that linked the striatum not just to social anomalies in mice, but also in people.
As it turns out, the social neurochemistry in the striatum is linked to things you've probably already heard of.
Like oxytocin, which is that hormone that makes cuddling feel all warm and fuzzy.
But it also implicates signaling at opioid receptors.
There are naturally occurring opioids in your brain that are deeply linked to social processes.
Experiments with naloxone, which blocks opioid receptors, show us just how essential this opioid-receptor signaling is to social interaction.
When people are given naloxone -- it's an ingredient in Narcan, that reverses opioid overdoses to save lives.
But when it's given to healthy people, it actually interfered with their ability to feel connected to people they already knew and cared about.
So, something about not having opioid-receptor binding makes it difficult for us to feel the rewards of social interaction.
Now, for the interest of time, I've necessarily gotten rid of some of the scientific details, but briefly, here's where we're at.
The effects of social disconnection through opioid receptors, the effects of addictive drugs and the effects of abnormal neurotransmission on involuntary movements and compulsive behaviors all converge in the striatum.
And the striatum and opioid signaling in it has been deeply linked with loneliness.
When we don't have enough signaling at opioid receptors, we can feel alone in a room full of people we care about and love, who love us.
Social neuroscientists, like Dr. Cacioppo at the University of Chicago, have discovered that loneliness is very dangerous.
And it predisposes people to entire spectrums of physical and mental illnesses.
Think of it like this: when you're at your hungriest, pretty much any food tastes amazing, right?
So similarly, loneliness creates a hunger in the brain which neurochemically hypersensitizes our reward system.
And social isolation acts through receptors for these naturally occurring opioids and other social neurotransmitters to leave the striatum in a state where its response to things that signal reward and pleasure is completely, completely over the top.
And in this state of hypersensitivity, our brains signal deep dissatisfaction.
We become restless, irritable and impulsive.
And that's pretty much when I want you to keep the bowl of Halloween chocolate entirely across the room for me, because I will eat it all.
I will.
And that brings up another thing that makes social disconnection so dangerous.
If we don't have the ability to connect socially, we are so ravenous for our social neurochemistry to be rebalanced, we're likely to seek relief from anywhere.
And if that anywhere is opioid painkillers or heroin, it is going to be a heat-seeking missile for our social reward system.
Is it any wonder people in today's world are becoming addicted so easily?
Social isolation -- excuse me -- contributes to relapse.
Studies have shown that people who tend to avoid relapse tend to be people who have broad, reciprocal social relationships where they can be of service to each other, where they can be helpful.
So -- if we don't have the ability to authentically connect, our society increasingly lacks this ability to authentically connect and experience things that are transcendent and beyond ourselves.
We used to get this transcendence from a feeling of belonging to our families and our communities.
But everywhere, communities are changing.
And social and economic disintegration is making this harder and harder.
I'm not the only person to point out that the areas in the country most economically hard hit, where people feel most desolate about their life's meaning, are also the places where there have been communities most ravaged by opioids.
Social isolation acts through the brain's reward system to make this state of affairs literally painful.
So perhaps it's this pain, this loneliness, this despondence that's driving so many of us to connect with whatever we can.
Like food.
Like handheld electronics.
And for too many people, to drugs like heroin and fentanyl.
I know someone who overdosed, who was revived by Narcan, and she was mostly angry that she wasn't simply allowed to die.
Imagine for a second how that feels, that state of hopelessness, OK?
But the striatum is also a source of hope.
Because the striatum gives us a clue of how to bring people back.
So, remember that the striatum is our autopilot, running our behaviors on habit, and it's possible to rewire, to reprogram that autopilot, but it involves neuroplasticity.
So, neuroplasticity is the ability of brains to reprogram themselves, and rewire themselves, so we can learn new things.
And maybe you've heard the classic adage of plasticity: neurons that fire together, wire together.
Right?
So we need to practice social connective behaviors instead of compulsive behaviors, when we're lonely, when we are cued to remember our drug.
We need neuronally firing repeated experiences in order for the striatum to undergo that necessary neuroplasticity that allows it to take that "go find heroin" autopilot offline.
And what the convergence of social neuroscience, addiction and compulsive-spectrum disorders in the striatum suggests is that it's not simply enough to teach the striatum healthier responses to compulsive urges.
We need social impulses to replace drug-cued compulsive behaviors, because we need to rebalance, neurochemically, our social reward system.
And unless that happens, we're going to be left in a state of craving.
No matter what besides our drug we repeatedly practice doing.
I believe that the solution to the opioid crisis is to explore how social and psychospiritual interventions can act as neurotechnologies in circuits that process social and drug-induced rewards.
One possibility is to create and study scalable tools for people to connect with one another over a mutual interest in recovery through psychospiritual practices.
And as such, psychospiritual practice could involve anything from people getting together as megafans of touring jam bands, or parkour jams, featuring shared experiences of vulnerability and personal growth, or more conventional things, like recovery yoga meetups, or meetings centered around more traditional conceptions of spiritual experiences.
But whatever it is, it needs to activate all of the neurotransmitter systems in the striatum that are involved in processing social connection.
Social media can't go deep enough for this.
Social media doesn't so much encourage us to share, as it does to compare.
It's the difference between having superficial small talk with someone and authentic, deeply connected conversation with eye contact.
And stigma also keeps us separate.
There's a lot of evidence that it keeps us sick.
And stigma often makes it safer for addicts to connect with other addicts.
But recovery groups centered around reestablishing social connections could certainly be inclusive of people who are seeking recovery for a range of mental health problems.
My point is, when we connect around what's broken, we connect as human beings.
We heal ourselves from the compulsive self-destruction that was our response to the pain of disconnection.
When we think of neuropsychiatric illnesses as a spectrum of phenomenon that are part of what make us human, then we remove the otherness of people who struggle with self-destruction.
We remove the stigma between doctors and patients and caregivers.
We put the question of what it means to be normal versus sick back on the spectrum of the human condition.
And it is on that spectrum where we can all connect and seek healing together, for all of our struggles with humanness.
Thank you for letting me share.
(Applause)
The great philosopher Aristotle said if something doesn't exist, there's no word for it, and if there's no word for something, that something doesn't exist.
So when we talk about elections, we in established democracies, we know what we're talking about.
We've got the words. We have the vocabulary.
We know what a polling station is.
We know what a ballot paper is.
But what about countries where democracy doesn't exist, countries where there are no words to describe the concepts that underpin a democratic society?
I work in the field of electoral assistance, so that's to say we assist emerging democracies to organize what is often their first elections.
When people ask me what I do, quite often I get this answer.
"Oh, so you're one of these people who goes around the world imposing Western democracy on countries that can't handle it."
Well, the United Nations does not impose anything on anybody.
It really doesn't, and also, what we do is firmly anchored in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 21, that says that everybody should have the right to choose who governs them.
So that's the basis of the work.
I specialize in public outreach.
What does that mean? Another jargon.
It actually means designing information campaigns so that candidates and voters who have never had the opportunity to participate or to vote understand where, when, how to register; where, when, how to vote; why, why it is important to take part.
So I'll probably devise a specific campaign to reach out to women to make sure that they can take part, that they can be part of the process.
Young people as well.
All sorts of people.
Handicapped people.
We try to reach everybody.
And it's not always easy, because very often in this work, I've noticed now over the years that I've been doing it that words are lacking, and so what do you do?
Afghanistan.
It's a country with high levels of illiteracy, and the thing about that was, it was in 2005, and we organized two elections on the same day.
The reason was because the logistics are so incredibly difficult, it seemed to be more efficient to do that.
It was, but on the other hand, explaining two elections instead of one was even more complicated.
So we used a lot of images, and when it came to the actual ballot, we had problems, because so many people wanted to take part, we had 300 candidates for 52 seats in the Wolesi Jirga, which is the parliamentary elections.
And for the Provincial Council, we had even more candidates.
We had 330 for 54 seats.
So talking about ballot design, this is what the ballot looked like.
It's the size of a newspaper.
This was the Wolesi Jirga ballot -- (Laughter) Yeah, and -- this was the Provincial Council ballot.
Even more.
So you see, we did use a lot of symbols and things like that.
And we had other problems in Southern Sudan.
Southern Sudan was a very different story.
We had so many people who had never, of course, voted, but we had extremely, extremely high levels of illiteracy, very, very poor infrastructure.
For example -- I mean, it's a country the size of Texas, more or less.
We had seven kilometers of paved roads, seven kilometers in the whole country, and that includes the tarmac where we landed the planes in Juba Airport.
So transporting electoral materials, etc., is exceedingly difficult.
People had no idea about what a box looked like.
It was very complicated, so using verbal communication was obviously the way to go, but there were 132 languages.
So that was extremely challenging.
Then I arrived in Tunisia in 2011.
It was the Arab Spring.
A huge amount of hope was generated by that enormous movement that was going on in the region.
There was Libya, there was Egypt, there was Yemen.
It was an enormous, enormous historical moment.
And I was sitting with the election commission, and we were talking about various aspects of the election, and I was hearing them using words that I hadn't actually heard before, and I'd worked with Iraqis, I'd worked with Jordanians, Egyptians, and suddenly they were using these words, and I just thought, "This is strange."
And what really gave rise to it was this word "observer."
We were discussing election observers, and the election commissioner was talking about "mulahiz" in Arabic.
This means "to notice" in a passive sort of sense, as in, "I noticed he was wearing a light blue shirt."
Did I go and check whether the shirt was light blue or not?
That is the role of an election observer.
It's very active, it's governed by all kinds of treaties, and it has got that control function in it.
And then I got wind of the fact that in Egypt, they were using this term "mutabi," which means "to follow."
So we were now having followers of an election.
So that's not quite right either, because there is a term that's already accepted and in use, which was the word "muraqib" which means "a controller."
It's got that notion of control.
So I thought, three words for one concept. This is not good.
And with our colleagues, we thought perhaps it's our role to actually help make sure that the words are understood and actually create a work of reference that could be used across the Arab region.
And that's what we did.
So together with these colleagues, we launched the "Arabic Lexicon of Electoral Terminology," and we worked in eight different countries.
It meant actually defining 481 terms which formed the basis of everything you need to know if you're going to organize a democratic election.
And we defined these terms, and we worked with the Arab colleagues and came to an agreement about what would be the appropriate word to use in Arabic.
Because the Arabic language is very rich, and that's part of the problem.
But there are 22 countries that speak Arabic, and they use modern standard Arabic, which is the Arabic that is used across the whole region in newspapers and broadcasts, but of course, then from one country to the next in day to day language and use it varies -- dialect, colloquialisms, etc.
So that was another added layer of complication.
So in one sense you had the problem that language wasn't fully ripe, if you like, neologisms were coming up, new expressions.
And so we defined all these terms, and then we had eight correspondents in the region.
We submitted the draft to them, they responded back to us.
"Yes, we understand the definition.
We agree with it, but this is what we say in our country."
Because we were not going to harmonize or force harmonization.
We were trying to facilitate understanding among people.
So in yellow, you see the different expressions in use in the various countries.
So this, I'm happy to say, it took three years to produce this because we also finalized the draft and took it actually into the field, sat with the election commissions in all these different countries, debated and defined and refined the draft, and finally published it in November 2014 in Cairo.
And it's gone a long way. We published 10,000 copies.
To date, there's about 3,000 downloads off the internet in PDF form.
I heard just recently from a colleague that they've taken it up in Somalia.
They're going to produce a version of this in Somalia, because there's nothing in Somalia at all.
So that's very good to know.
And this newly formed Arab Organization for Electoral Management Bodies, which is trying to professionalize how elections are run in the region, they're using it as well.
And the Arab League have now built up a pan-Arab observation unit, and they're using it.
So that's all really good.
However, this work of reference is quite high-pitched.
It's complex, and a lot of the terms are quite technical, so the average person probably doesn't need to know at least a third of it.
But the people of the Middle East have been deprived of any form of what we know as civic education.
It's part of our curriculum at school.
It doesn't really exist in that part of the world, and I feel it's really the right of everybody to know how these things work.
And it's a good thing to think about producing a work of reference for the average person, and bearing in mind that now we have a basis to work with, but also we have technology, so we can reach out using telephone apps, video, animation.
There's all sorts of tools that can be used now to communicate these ideas to people for the first time in their own language.
We hear a lot of misery about the Middle East.
We hear the chaos of war. We hear terrorism.
We hear about sectarianism and all this horrible negative news that comes to us all the time.
What we're not hearing is what are the people, the everyday people, thinking?
What are they aspiring to?
Let's give them the means, let's give them the words.
The silent majority is silent because they don't have the words.
The silent majority needs to know.
It is time to provide people with the knowledge tools that they can inform themselves with.
The silent majority does not need to be silent.
Let's help them have a voice.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Some people are obsessed by French wines.
Others love playing golf or devouring literature.
One of my greatest pleasures in life is, I have to admit, a bit special.
I cannot tell you how much I enjoy watching cities from the sky, from an airplane window.
Some cities are calmly industrious, like Dusseldorf or Louisville.
Others project an energy that they can hardly contain, like New York or Hong Kong.
And then you have Paris or Istanbul, and their patina full of history.
I see cities as living beings.
And when I discover them from far above, I like to find those main streets and highways that structure their space.
Especially at night, when commuters make these arteries look dramatically red and golden: the city's vascular system performing its vital function right before your eyes.
But when I'm sitting in my car after an hour and a half of commute every day, that reality looks very different.
(Laughter) Nothing -- not public radio, no podcast -- (Laughter) Not even mindfulness meditation makes this time worth living.
(Laughter) Isn't it absurd that we created cars that can reach 130 miles per hour and we now drive them at the same speed as 19th-century horse carriages?
(Laughter) In the US alone, we spent 29.6 billion hours commuting in 2014.
With that amount of time, ancient Egyptians could have built 26 Pyramids of Giza.
(Laughter) We do that in one year.
A monumental waste of time, energy and human potential.
For decades, our remedy for congestion was simple: build new roads or enlarge existing ones.
And it worked.
It worked admirably for Paris, when the city tore down hundreds of historical buildings to create 85 miles of transportation-friendly boulevards.
And it still works today in fast-growing emerging cities.
But in more established urban centers, significant network expansions are almost impossible: habitat is just too dense, real estate, too expensive and public finances, too fragile.
Our city's vascular system is getting clogged, it's getting sick, and we should pay attention.
Our current way of thinking is not working.
For our transportation to flow, we need a new source of inspiration.
So after 16 years working in transportation, my "aha moment" happened when speaking with a biotech customer.
She was telling me how her treatment was leveraging specific properties of our vascular system.
"Wow," I thought, "Our vascular system -- all the veins and arteries in our body making miracles of logistics every day."
This is the moment I realized that biology has been in the transportation business for billions of years.
It has been testing countless solutions to move nutrients, gases and proteins.
It really is the world's most sophisticated transportation laboratory.
So, what if the solution to our traffic challenges was inside us?
I wanted to know: Why is it that blood flows in our veins most of our lives, when our big cities get clogged on a daily basis?
And the reality is that you're looking at two very different networks.
I don't know if you realize, but each of us has 60,000 miles of blood vessels in our bodies -- 60,000 miles.
That's two-and-a-half times the Earth's circumference, inside you.
What it means is that blood vessels are everywhere inside us, not just under the surface of our skin.
But if you look at our cities, yes, we have some underground subway systems and some tunnels and bridges, and also some helicopters in the sky.
But the vast majority of our traffic is focused on the ground, on the surface.
So in other words, while our vascular system uses the three dimensions inside us, our urban transportation is mostly two-dimensional.
And so what we need is to embrace that verticality.
If our surface grid is saturated, well, let's elevate our traffic.
This Chinese concept of a bus that can straddle traffic jams -- that was an eye-opener on new ways to think about space and movement inside our cities.
And we can go higher, and suspend our transportation like we did with our electrical grid.
Tel Aviv and Abu Dhabi are talking about testing these futuristic networks of suspended magnetic pods.
And we can keep climbing, and fly.
The fact that a company like Airbus is now seriously working on flying urban taxis is telling us something.
Flying cars are finally moving from science-fiction dj vu to attractive business-case territory.
And that's an exciting moment.
So building this 3-D transportation network is one of the ways we can mitigate and solve traffic jams.
But it's not the only one.
We have to question other fundamental choices that we made, like the vehicles we use.
Just imagine a very familiar scene: You've been driving for 42 minutes.
The two kids behind you are getting restless.
And you're late.
Do you see that slow car in front of you?
Always comes when you're late, right?
(Laughter) That driver is looking for parking.
There is no parking spot available in the area, but how would he know?
It is estimated that up to 30 percent of urban traffic is generated by drivers looking for parking.
Do you see the 100 cars around you?
Eighty-five of them only have one passenger.
Those 85 drivers could all fit in one Londonian red bus.
So the question is: Why are we wasting so much space if it is what we need the most?
Why are we doing this to ourselves?
Biology would never do this.
Space inside our arteries is fully utilized.
At every heartbeat, a higher blood pressure literally compacts millions of red blood cells into massive trains of oxygen that quickly flow throughout our body.
And the tiny space inside our red blood cells is not wasted, either.
In healthy conditions, more than 95 percent of their oxygen capacity is utilized.
Can you imagine if the vehicles we used in our cities were 95 percent full, all the additional space you would have to walk, to bike and to enjoy our cities?
The reason blood is so incredibly efficient is that our red blood cells are not dedicated to specific organs or tissues; otherwise, we would probably have traffic jams in our veins.
No, they're shared.
They're shared by all the cells of our body.
And because our network is so extensive, each one of our 37 trillion cells gets its own deliveries of oxygen precisely when it needs them.
Blood is both a collective and individual form of transportation.
But for our cities, we've been stuck.
We've been stuck in an endless debate between creating a car-centric society or extensive mass-transit systems.
I think we should transcend this.
I think we can create vehicles that combine the convenience of cars and the efficiencies of trains and buses.
Just imagine.
You're comfortably sitting in a fast and smooth urban train, along with 1,200 passengers.
The problem with urban trains is that sometimes you have to stop five, ten, fifteen times before your final destination.
What if in this train you didn't have to stop?
In this train, wagons can detach dynamically while you're moving and become express, driverless buses that move on a secondary road network.
And so without a single stop, nor a lengthy transfer, you are now sitting in a bus that is headed toward your suburb.
And when you get close, the section you're sitting in detaches and self-drives you right to your doorstep.
It is collective and individual at the same time.
This could be one of the shared, modular, driverless vehicles of tomorrow.
Now ...
as if walking in a city buzzing with drones, flying taxis, modular buses and suspended magnetic pods was not exotic enough, I think there is another force in action that will make urban traffic mesmerizing.
If you think about it, the current generation of driverless cars is just trying to earn its way into a traffic grid made by and for humans.
They're trying to learn traffic rules, which is relatively simple, and coping with human unpredictability, which is more challenging.
But what would happen when whole cities become driverless?
Would we need traffic lights?
Would we need lanes?
How about speed limits?
Red blood cells are not flowing in lanes.
They never stop at red lights.
In the first driverless cities, you would have no red lights and no lanes.
And when all the cars are driverless and connected, everything is predictable and reaction time, minimum.
They can drive much faster and can take any rational initiative that can speed them up or the cars around them.
So instead of rigid traffic rules, flow will be regulated by a mesh of dynamic and constantly self-improving algorithms.
The result: a strange traffic that mixes the fast and smooth rigor of German autobahns and the creative vitality of the intersections of Mumbai.
(Laughter) Traffic will be functionally exuberant.
It will be liquid like our blood.
And by a strange paradox, the more robotized our traffic grid will be, the more organic and alive its movement will feel.
So yes, biology has all the attributes of a transportation genius today.
But this process has taken billions of years, and went through all sorts of iterations and mutations.
We can't wait billions of years to evolve our transportation system.
We now have the dreams, the concepts and the technology to create 3-D transportation networks, invent new vehicles and change the flow in our cities.
Let's do it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How many of you have seen the Alfred Hitchcock film "The Birds"?
Any of you get really freaked out by that?
You might want to leave now.
(Laughter) So this is a vending machine for crows.
Over the past few days, many of you have been asking, "How did you come to this? How did you get started doing this?"
It started, as with many great ideas, or many ideas you can't get rid of, anyway, at a cocktail party.
We were sitting there, and he was complaining about the crows that were all over his yard and making a big mess.
And he was telling me we ought to eradicate these things, kill them, because they're making a mess.
I said that was stupid, maybe we should just train them to do something useful.
And I'm sure I'm in good company in finding that tremendously annoying, when someone tells you it's impossible.
(Laughter) And after 10 years of this, my wife said, "You've got to do this thing you've been talking about, and build the vending machine."
So I did.
But part of the reason I found this interesting is, I started noticing that we're very aware of all the species that are going extinct on the planet as a result of human habitation expansion, and no one seems to be paying attention to all the species that are actually living; they're surviving.
And I'm talking specifically about synanthropic species, which have adapted specifically for human ecologies, species like rats and cockroaches and crows.
And as I started looking at them, I was finding that they had hyper-adapted.
They'd become extremely adept at living with us.
And in return, we just tried to kill them all the time.
(Laughter) And in doing so, we were breeding them for parasitism.
We were giving them all sorts of reasons to adapt new ways.
So, for example, rats are incredibly responsive breeders.
And cockroaches, as anyone who's tried to get rid of them knows, have become really immune to the poisons that we're using.
So I thought, let's build something that's mutually beneficial; something that we can both benefit from, and find some way to make a new relationship with these species.
So I built the vending machine.
But the story of the vending machine is a little more interesting if you know more about crows.
It turns out, crows aren't just surviving with human beings; they're actually thriving.
They're found everywhere on the planet except for the Arctic and the southern tip of South America.
And in all that area, they're only rarely found breeding more than five kilometers away from human beings.
So we may not think about them, but they're always around.
And not surprisingly, given the human population growth, more than half of the human population is living in cities now.
And out of those, nine-tenths of the human growth population is occurring in cities.
So bird counts are indicating that we might be seeing up to exponential growth in their numbers.
So that's no great surprise.
But what was really interesting to me was to find out that the birds were adapting in a pretty unusual way.
And I'll give you an example of that.
This is Betty. She's a New Caledonian crow.
And these crows use sticks in the wild to get insects and whatnot out of pieces of wood.
Here, she's trying to get a piece of meat out of a tube.
But the researchers had a problem.
They messed up and left just a stick of wire in there.
You see, it wasn't working very well.
So she adapted.
Now, this is completely unprompted; she had never seen this done before.
No one taught her to bend this into a hook or had shown her how it could happen.
So keep in mind -- she's never seen this done.
(Laughter) Right.
(Laughter) Yeah. All right.
(Applause) So that's the part where the researchers freak out.
(Laughter) It turns out, we've been finding more and more that crows are really intelligent.
Their brains are in the same proportion as chimpanzee brains are.
There's all kinds of anecdotes for the different kinds of intelligence they have.
For example, in Sweden, crows will wait for fishermen to drop lines through holes in the ice.
And when the fishermen move off, the crows fly down, reel up the lines, and eat the fish or the bait.
It's pretty annoying for the fishermen.
On an entirely different tack, at University of Washington a few years ago, they were doing an experiment where they captured some crows on campus.
Some students went out, netted some crows, brought them in, weighed and measured them, and let them back out again.
And they were entertained to discover that for the rest of the week, whenever these particular students walked around campus, these crows would caw at them and run around, and make their life kind of miserable.
(Laughter) They were significantly less entertained when this went on for the next week.
Until they finally graduated and left campus, and -- glad to get away, I'm sure -- came back sometime later, and found the crows still remembered them.
(Laughter) So, the moral being: don't piss off crows.
So now, students at the University of Washington that are studying these crows, do so with a giant wig and a big mask.
(Laughter) It's fairly interesting.
(Laughter) So we know these crows are really smart, but the more I dug into this, the more I found that they actually have an even more significant adaptation.
Video: Crows have become highly skilled at making a living in these new urban environments.
In this Japanese city, they have devised a way of eating a food that normally they can't manage: drop it among the traffic.
The problem now is collecting the bits, without getting run over.
Wait for the light to stop the traffic.
Then, collect your cracked nut in safety.
(Laughter) (Applause) Joshua Klein: Yeah, pretty interesting.
What's significant about this isn't that crows are using cars to crack nuts.
In fact, that's old hat for crows.
This happened about 10 years ago in a place called Sendai City, at a driving school in the suburbs of Tokyo.
And since that time, all the crows in the neighborhood are picking up this behavior.
Now every crow within five kilometers is standing by a sidewalk, waiting to collect its lunch.
So they're learning from each other. And research bears this out.
Parents seem to be teaching their young.
If I have a little extra time, I'll tell you about a case of crow infidelity that illustrates that nicely.
And as we heard yesterday, that's the Pandora's box that's getting human beings in trouble, and we're starting to see it with them.
They're able to very quickly and very flexibly adapt to new challenges and new resources in their environment, which is really useful if you live in a city.
So we know that there's lots of crows.
We found out they're really smart and they can teach each other.
When all this became clear, I realized the only obvious thing to do is build a vending machine.
So that's what we did.
And it uses Skinnerian training to shape their behavior over four stages.
It's pretty simple.
Basically, what happens is that we put this out in a field or someplace where there's lots of crows.
We put coins and peanuts all around the base of the machine.
Crows eventually come by, eat the peanuts, and get used to the machine being there.
Eventually, they eat all the peanuts.
Then they see peanuts here on the feeder tray, and hop up and help themselves.
Then they leave, the machine spits up more coins and peanuts, and life is dandy if you're a crow -- you can come back anytime and get yourself a peanut.
So when they get really used to that, we move on to the crows coming back.
Now they're used to the sound of the machine; they keep coming back and digging out peanuts from the pile of coins that's there.
When they get really happy about this, we stymie them.
We move to the third stage, where we only give them a coin.
Now, like most of us who have gotten used to a good thing, this really pisses them off.
So they do what they do in nature when they're looking for something: sweep things out of the way with their beak.
They do that here, and that knocks the coins down the slot.
When that happens, they get a peanut.
This goes on for some time.
The crows learn that all they have to do is show up, wait for the coin to come out, put it in the slot, then get their peanut.
When they're good and comfortable with that, we move to the final stage, where they show up and nothing happens.
This is where we see the difference between crows and other animals.
Come back, look for the peanut, go away.
They do this maybe half a dozen times before they get bored, and then they go off and play in traffic.
Crows, on the other hand, show up and they try and figure it out.
They know this machine has been messing with them through three different stages of behavior.
(Laughter) They figure there must be more to it.
So they poke at it and peck at it.
And eventually some crow gets a bright idea: "Hey, there's lots of coins lying around from the first stage, hops down, picks it up, drops it in the slot, and we're off to the races.
That crow enjoys a temporary monopoly on peanuts, until his friends figure out how to do it, and then there we go.
So, what's significant about this to me isn't that we can train crows to pick up peanuts.
Mind you, there's 216 million dollars' worth of change lost every year, but I'm not sure I can depend on that ROI from crows.
(Laughter) Instead, I think we should look a little bit larger.
I think crows can be trained to do other things.
For example, why not train them to pick up garbage after stadium events?
Or find expensive components from discarded electronics?
Or maybe do search and rescue?
The main point of all this for me is, we can find mutually beneficial systems for these species.
We can find ways to interact with these other species that doesn't involve exterminating them, but involves finding an equilibrium with them that's a useful balance.
Thanks very much.
(Applause)
I want to start by doing an experiment.
I'm going to play three videos of a rainy day.
But I've replaced the audio of one of the videos, and instead of the sound of rain, I've added the sound of bacon frying.
So I want you think carefully which one the clip with the bacon is.
(Rain falls) (Rain falls) (Rain falls) All right.
Actually, I lied.
They're all bacon.
(Bacon sizzles) (Applause) My point here isn't really to make you hungry every time you see a rainy scene, but it's to show that our brains are conditioned to embrace the lies.
We're not looking for accuracy.
So on the subject of deception, I wanted to quote one of my favorite authors.
In "The Decay of Lying," Oscar Wilde establishes the idea that all bad art comes from copying nature and being realistic; and all great art comes from lying and deceiving, and telling beautiful, untrue things.
So when you're watching a movie and a phone rings, it's not actually ringing.
It's been added later in postproduction in a studio.
All of the sounds you hear are fake.
Everything, apart from the dialogue, is fake.
When you watch a movie and you see a bird flapping its wings -- (Wings flap) They haven't really recorded the bird.
It sounds a lot more realistic if you record a sheet or shaking kitchen gloves.
(Flaps) The burning of a cigarette up close -- (Cigarette burns) It actually sounds a lot more authentic if you take a small Saran Wrap ball and release it.
(A Saran Warp ball being released) Punches?
(Punch) Oops, let me play that again.
(Punch) That's often done by sticking a knife in vegetables, usually cabbage.
(Cabbage stabbed with a knife) The next one -- it's breaking bones.
(Bones break) Well, no one was really harmed.
It's actually ...
breaking celery or frozen lettuce.
(Breaking frozen lettuce or celery) (Laughter) Making the right sounds is not always as easy as a trip to the supermarket and going to the vegetable section.
But it's often a lot more complicated than that.
So let's reverse-engineer together the creation of a sound effect.
One of my favorite stories comes from Frank Serafine.
He's a contributor to our library, and a great sound designer for "Tron" and "Star Trek" and others.
He was part of the Paramount team that won the Oscar for best sound for "The Hunt for Red October."
In this Cold War classic, in the '90s, they were asked to produce the sound of the propeller of the submarine.
So they had a small problem: they couldn't really find a submarine in West Hollywood.
So basically, what they did is, they went to a friend's swimming pool, and Frank performed a cannonball, or bomba.
They placed an underwater mic and an overhead mic outside the swimming pool.
So here's what the underwater mic sounds like.
(Underwater plunge) Adding the overhead mic, it sounded a bit like this: (Water splashes) So now they took the sound and pitched it one octave down, sort of like slowing down a record.
(Water splashes at lower octave) And then they removed a lot of the high frequencies.
(Water splashes) And pitched it down another octave.
(Water splashes at lower octave) And then they added a little bit of the splash from the overhead microphone.
(Water splashes) And by looping and repeating that sound, they got this: (Propeller churns) So, creativity and technology put together in order to create the illusion that we're inside the submarine.
But once you've created your sounds and you've synced them to the image, you want those sounds to live in the world of the story.
And one the best ways to do that is to add reverb.
So this is the first audio tool I want to talk about.
Reverberation, or reverb, is the persistence of the sound after the original sound has ended.
So it's sort of like the -- all the reflections from the materials, the objects and the walls around the sound.
Take, for example, the sound of a gunshot.
The original sound is less than half a second long.
(Gunshot) By adding reverb, we can make it sound like it was recorded inside a bathroom.
(Gunshot reverbs in bathroom) Or like it was recorded inside a chapel or a church.
(Gunshot reverbs church) Or in a canyon.
(Gunshot reverbs in canyon) So reverb gives us a lot of information about the space between the listener and the original sound source.
If the sound is the taste, then reverb is sort of like the smell of the sound.
But reverb can do a lot more.
Listening to a sound with a lot less reverberation than the on-screen action is going to immediately signify to us that we're listening to a commentator, to an objective narrator that's not participating in the on-screen action.
Also, emotionally intimate moments in cinema are often heard with zero reverb, because that's how it would sound if someone was speaking inside our ear.
On the completely other side, adding a lot of reverb to a voice is going to make us think that we're listening to a flashback, or perhaps that we're inside the head of a character or that we're listening to the voice of God.
Or, even more powerful in film, Morgan Freeman.
(Laughter) So -- (Applause) But what are some other tools or hacks that sound designers use?
Well, here's a really big one.
It's silence.
A few moments of silence is going to make us pay attention.
And in the Western world, we're not really used to verbal silences.
They're considered awkward or rude.
So silence preceding verbal communication can create a lot of tension.
But imagine a really big Hollywood movie, where it's full of explosions and automatic guns.
Loud stops being loud anymore, after a while.
So in a yin-yang way, silence needs loudness and loudness needs silence for either of them to have any effect.
But what does silence mean?
Well, it depends how it's used in each film.
Silence can place us inside the head of a character or provoke thought.
We often relate silences with ...
contemplation, meditation, being deep in thought.
But apart from having one meaning, silence becomes a blank canvas upon which the viewer is invited to the paint their own thoughts.
But I want to make it clear: there is no such thing as silence.
And I know this sounds like the most pretentious TED Talk statement ever.
But even if you were to enter a room with zero reverberation and zero external sounds, you would still be able to hear the pumping of your own blood.
And in cinema, traditionally, there was never a silent moment because of the sound of the projector.
And even in today's Dolby world, there's not really any moment of silence if you listen around you.
There's always some sort of noise.
Now, since there's no such thing as silence, what do filmmakers and sound designers use?
Well, as a synonym, they often use ambiences.
Ambiences are the unique background sounds that are specific to each location.
Each location has a unique sound, and each room has a unique sound, which is called room tone.
So here's a recording of a market in Morocco.
(Voices, music) And here's a recording of Times Square in New York.
(Traffic sounds, car horns, voices) Room tone is the addition of all the noises inside the room: the ventilation, the heating, the fridge.
Here's a recording of my apartment in Brooklyn.
(You can hear the ventilation, the boiler, the fridge and street traffic) Ambiences work in a most primal way.
They can speak directly to our brain subconsciously.
So, birds chirping outside your window may indicate normality, perhaps because, as a species, we've been used to that sound every morning for millions of years.
(Birds chirp) On the other hand, industrial sounds have been introduced to us a little more recently.
Even though I really like them personally -- they've been used by one of my heroes, David Lynch, and his sound designer, Alan Splet -- industrial sounds often carry negative connotations.
(Machine noises) Now, sound effects can tap into our emotional memory.
Occasionally, they can be so significant that they become a character in a movie.
The sound of thunder may indicate divine intervention or anger.
(Thunder) Church bells can remind us of the passing of time, or perhaps our own mortality.
(Bells ring) And breaking of glass can indicate the end of a relationship or a friendship.
(Glass breaks) Scientists believe that dissonant sounds, for example, brass or wind instruments played very loud, may remind us of animal howls in nature and therefore create a sense of irritation or fear.
(Brass and wind instruments play) So now we've spoken about on-screen sounds.
But occasionally, the source of a sound cannot be seen.
That's what we call offscreen sounds, or "acousmatic."
Acousmatic sounds -- well, the term "acousmatic" comes from Pythagoras in ancient Greece, who used to teach behind a veil or curtain for years, not revealing himself to his disciples.
I think the mathematician and philosopher thought that, in that way, his students might focus more on the voice, and his words and its meaning, rather than the visual of him speaking.
So sort of like the Wizard of Oz, or "1984's" Big Brother, separating the voice from its source, separating cause and effect sort of creates a sense of ubiquity or panopticism, and therefore, authority.
There's a strong tradition of acousmatic sound.
Nuns in monasteries in Rome and Venice used to sing in rooms up in galleries close to the ceiling, creating the illusion that we're listening to angels up in the sky.
Richard Wagner famously created the hidden orchestra that was placed in a pit between the stage and the audience.
And one of my heroes, Aphex Twin, famously hid in dark corners of clubs.
I think what all these masters knew is that by hiding the source, you create a sense of mystery.
This has been seen in cinema over and over, with Hitchcock, and Ridley Scott in "Alien."
Hearing a sound without knowing its source is going to create some sort of tension.
Also, it can minimize certain visual restrictions that directors have and can show something that wasn't there during filming.
And if all this sounds a little theoretical, I wanted to play a little video.
(Toy squeaks) (Typewriter) (Drums) (Ping-pong) (Knives being sharpened) (Record scratches) (Saw cuts) (Woman screams) What I'm sort of trying to demonstrate with these tools is that sound is a language.
It can trick us by transporting us geographically; it can change the mood; it can set the pace; it can make us laugh or it can make us scared.
On a personal level, I fell in love with that language a few years ago, and somehow managed to make it into some sort of profession.
And I think with our work through the sound library, we're trying to kind of expand the vocabulary of that language.
And in that way, we want to offer the right tools to sound designers, filmmakers, and video game and app designers, to keep telling even better stories and creating even more beautiful lies.
So thanks for listening.
(Applause)
(Music) I went down to St. James Infirmary To see my baby there She was lying on a long wooden table So cold, so still, so fair I went up to see the doctor "She's very low," he said I went back to see my baby Good God she's lying there dead I went down to old Joe's bar room On the corner of the square They were serving drinks as per usual And the usual crowd was there To my left stood Old Joe McKennedy His eyes were bloodshot red He turned to the crowd around him And these are the words he said "Let her go, let her go, God bless her Wherever she may be She can search this whole wide world all over But she'll never find another man like me She can search this whole wide world all over And she'll never find another man like me When I die, please God, bury me In my ten-dollar Stetson hat Put a twenty-dollar gold piece on my watch chain So my friends know I died standing pat Get six gamblers to carry my coffin And six choir girls to sing me a song Stick a jazz band on my hearse wagon To raise hell as I go along Now that's the end of my story Let's have another round of booze And if anyone should ask you Just tell them I got the St. James Infirmary blues (Applause)
I'm here today to talk to you about a very powerful little word, one that people will do almost anything to avoid becoming.
Billion-dollar industries thrive because of the fear of it, and those of us who undeniably are it are left to navigate a relentless storm surrounding it.
I'm not sure if any of you have noticed, but I'm fat.
Not the lowercase, muttered-behind-my-back kind, or the seemingly harmless chubby or cuddly.
I'm not even the more sophisticated voluptuous or curvaceous kind.
Let's not sugarcoat it.
I am the capital F-A-T kind of fat.
I am the elephant in the room.
When I walked out on stage, some of you may have been thinking, "Aww, this is going to be hilarious, because everybody knows that fat people are funny."
(Laughter) Or you may have been thinking, "Where does she get her confidence from?"
Because a confident fat woman is almost unthinkable.
The fashion-conscious members of the audience may have been thinking how fabulous I look in this Beth Ditto dress -- (Cheers) thank you very much.
Whereas some of you might have thought, "Hmm, black would have been so much more slimming."
(Laughter) You may have wondered, consciously or not, if I have diabetes, or a partner, or if I eat carbs after 7pm.
(Laughter) You may have worried that you ate carbs after 7pm last night, and that you really should renew your gym membership.
These judgments are insidious.
They can be directed at individuals and groups, and they can also be directed at ourselves.
And this way of thinking is known as fatphobia.
Like any form of systematic oppression, fatphobia is deeply rooted in complex structures like capitalism, patriarchy and racism, and that can make it really difficult to see, let alone challenge.
We live in a culture where being fat is seen as being a bad person -- lazy, greedy, unhealthy, irresponsible and morally suspect.
And we tend to see thinness as being universally good -- responsible, successful, and in control of our appetites, bodies and lives.
We see these ideas again and again in the media, in public health policy, doctors' offices, in everyday conversations and in our own attitudes.
We may even blame fat people themselves for the discrimination they face because, after all, if we don't like it, we should just lose weight.
Easy.
This antifat bias has become so integral, so ingrained to how we value ourselves and each other that we rarely question why we have such contempt for people of size and where that disdain comes from.
But we must question it, because the enormous value we place on how we look affects every one of us.
And do we really want to live in a society where people are denied their basic humanity if they don't subscribe to some arbitrary form of acceptable?
So when I was six years old, my sister used to teach ballet to a bunch of little girls in our garage.
I was about a foot taller and a foot wider than most of the group.
When it came to doing our first performance, I was so excited about wearing a pretty pink tutu.
I was going to sparkle.
As the other girls slipped easily into their Lycra and tulle creations, not one of the tutus was big enough to fit me.
I was determined not to be excluded from the performance, so I turned to my mother and loud enough for everyone to hear said, "Mom, I don't need a tutu.
I need a fourfour."
(Laughter) Thanks, Mom.
(Applause) And although I didn't recognize it at the time, claiming space for myself in that glorious fourfour was the first step towards becoming a radical fat activist.
Now, I'm not saying that this whole body-love thing has been an easy skip along a glittering path of self-acceptance since that day in class.
Far from it.
I soon learned that living outside what the mainstream considers normal can be a frustrating and isolating place.
I've spent the last 20 years unpacking and deprogramming these messages, and it's been quite the roller coaster.
I've been openly laughed at, abused from passing cars and been told that I'm delusional.
I also receive smiles from strangers who recognize what it takes to walk down the street with a spring in your step and your head held high.
(Cheer) Thanks.
And through it all, that fierce little six-year-old has stayed with me, and she has helped me stand before you today as an unapologetic fat person, a person that simply refuses to subscribe to the dominant narrative about how I should move through the world in this body of mine.
(Applause) And I'm not alone.
I am part of an international community of people who choose to, rather than passively accepting that our bodies are and probably always will be big, we actively choose to flourish in these bodies as they are today.
People who honor our strength and work with, not against, our perceived limitations, people who value health as something much more holistic than a number on an outdated BMI chart.
Instead, we value mental health, self-worth and how we feel in our bodies as vital aspects to our overall well-being.
People who refuse to believe that living in these fat bodies is a barrier to anything, really.
There are doctors, academics and bloggers who have written countless volumes on the many facets of this complex subject.
There are fatshionistas who reclaim their bodies and their beauty by wearing fatkinis and crop tops, exposing the flesh that we're all taught to hide.
There are fat athletes who run marathons, teach yoga or do kickboxing, all done with a middle finger firmly held up to the status quo.
And these people have taught me that radical body politics is the antidote to our body-shaming culture.
But to be clear, I'm not saying that people shouldn't change their bodies if that's what they want to do.
Reclaiming yourself can be one of the most gorgeous acts of self-love and can look like a million different things, from hairstyles to tattoos to body contouring to hormones to surgery and yes, even weight loss.
It's simple: it's your body, and you decide what's best to do with it.
My way of engaging in activism is by doing all the things that we fatties aren't supposed to do, and there's a lot of them, inviting other people to join me and then making art about it.
The common thread through most of this work has been reclaiming spaces that are often prohibitive to bigger bodies, from the catwalk to club shows, from public swimming pools to prominent dance stages.
And reclaiming spaces en masse is not only a powerful artistic statement but a radical community-building approach.
This was so true of "AQUAPORKO!" -- (Laughter) the fat fem synchronized swim team I started with a group of friends in Sydney.
The impact of seeing a bunch of defiant fat women in flowery swimming caps and bathers throwing their legs in the air without a care should not be underestimated.
(Laughter) Throughout my career, I have learned that fat bodies are inherently political, and unapologetic fat bodies can blow people's minds.
When director Kate Champion, of acclaimed dance theater company Force Majeure, asked me to be the artistic associate on a work featuring all fat dancers, I literally jumped at the opportunity.
And I mean literally.
"Nothing to Lose" is a work made in collaboration with performers of size who drew from their lived experiences to create a work as varied and authentic as we all are.
And it was as far from ballet as you could imagine.
The very idea of a fat dance work by such a prestigious company was, to put it mildly, controversial, because nothing like it had ever been done on mainstream dance stages before anywhere in the world.
People were skeptical.
"What do you mean, 'fat dancers?' Like, size 10, size 12 kind of fat?
Where did they do their dance training?
Are they going to have the stamina for a full-length production?"
But despite the skepticism, "Nothing to Lose" became a sellout hit of Sydney Festival.
We received rave reviews, toured, won awards and were written about in over 27 languages.
These incredible images of our cast were seen worldwide.
I've lost count of how many times people of all sizes have told me that the show has changed their lives, how it helped them shift their relationship to their own and other people's bodies, and how it made them confront their own bias.
But of course, work that pushes people's buttons is not without its detractors.
I have been told that I'm glorifying obesity.
I have received violent death threats and abuse for daring to make work that centers fat people's bodies and lives and treats us as worthwhile human beings with valuable stories to tell.
I've even been called "the ISIS of the obesity epidemic" -- (Laughter) a comment so absurd that it is funny.
But it also speaks to the panic, the literal terror, that the fear of fat can evoke.
It is this fear that's feeding the diet industry, which is keeping so many of us from making peace with our own bodies, for waiting to be the after-photo before we truly start to live our lives.
Because the real elephant in the room here is fatphobia.
Fat activism refuses to indulge this fear.
By advocating for self-determination and respect for all of us, we can shift society's reluctance to embrace diversity and start to celebrate the myriad ways there are to have a body.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In the spring of 2016, a legal battle between Apple and the Federal Bureau of Investigation captured the world's attention.
Apple has built security features into its mobile products which protect data on its devices from everyone but the owner.
That means that criminals, hackers and yes, even governments are all locked out.
For Apple's customers, this is a great thing.
But governments are not so happy.
You see, Apple has made a conscious decision to get out of the surveillance business.
Apple has tried to make surveillance as difficult as possible for governments and any other actors.
There are really two smartphone operating systems in the global smartphone market: iOS and Android.
iOS is made by Apple. Android is made by Google.
Apple has spent a lot of time and money to make sure that its products are as secure as possible.
Apple encrypts all data stored on iPhones by default, and text messages sent from one Apple customer to another Apple customer are encrypted by default without the user having to take any actions.
What this means is that, if the police seize an iPhone and it has a password, they'll have a difficult time getting any data off of it, if they can do it at all.
In contrast, the security of Android just really isn't as good.
Android phones, or at least most of the Android phones that have been sold to consumers, do not encrypt data stored on the device by default, and the built-in text messaging app in Android does not use encryption.
So if the police seize an Android phone, chances are, they'll be able to get all the data they want off of that device.
Two smartphones from two of the biggest companies in the world; one that protects data by default, and one that doesn't.
Apple is a seller of luxury goods.
It dominates the high end of the market.
And we would expect a manufacturer of luxury goods to have products that include more features.
But not everyone can afford an iPhone.
That's where Android really, really dominates: at the middle and low end of the market, smartphones for the billion and a half people who cannot or will not spend 600 dollars on a phone.
But the dominance of Android has led to what I call the "digital security divide."
That is, there is now increasingly a gap between the privacy and security of the rich, who can afford devices that secure their data by default, and of the poor, whose devices do very little to protect them by default.
So, think of the average Apple customer: a banker, a lawyer, a doctor, a politician.
These individuals now increasingly have smartphones in their pockets that encrypt their calls, their text messages, all the data on the device, without them doing really anything to secure their information.
In contrast, the poor and the most vulnerable in our societies are using devices that leave them completely vulnerable to surveillance.
In the United States, where I live, African-Americans are more likely to be seen as suspicious or more likely to be profiled, and are more likely to be targeted by the state with surveillance.
But African-Americans are also disproportionately likely to use Android devices that do nothing at all to protect them from that surveillance.
This is a problem.
We must remember that surveillance is a tool.
It's a tool used by those in power against those who have no power.
And while I think it's absolutely great that companies like Apple are making it easy for people to encrypt, if the only people who can protect themselves from the gaze of the government are the rich and powerful, that's a problem.
And it's not just a privacy or a cybersecurity problem.
It's a civil rights problem.
So the lack of default security in Android is not just a problem for the poor and vulnerable users who are depending on these devices.
This is actually a problem for our democracy.
I'll explain what I mean.
Modern social movements rely on technology -- from Black Lives Matter to the Arab Spring to Occupy Wall Street.
The organizers of these movements and the members of these movements increasingly communicate and coordinate with smartphones.
And so, naturally governments that feel threatened by these movements will also target the organizers and their smartphones.
Now, it's quite possible that a future Martin Luther King or a Mandela or a Gandhi will have an iPhone and be protected from government surveillance.
But chances are, they'll probably have a cheap, $20 Android phone in their pocket.
And so if we do nothing to address the digital security divide, if we do nothing to ensure that everyone in our society gets the same benefits of encryption and is equally able to protect themselves from surveillance by the state, not only will the poor and vulnerable be exposed to surveillance, but future civil rights movements may be crushed before they ever reach their full potential.
Thank you.
(Applause) Helen Walters: Chris, thank you so much.
I have a question for you.
We saw recently in the press that Mark Zuckerberg from Facebook covers over his camera and does something with his headphone mic jack.
So I wanted to ask you a personal question, which is: Do you do that?
And, on behalf of everyone here, particularly myself, Should we be doing that?
Should we be covering these things?
Christopher Soghoian: Putting a sticker -- actually, I like Band-Aids, because you can remove them and put them back on whenever you want to make a call or a Skype call.
Putting a sticker over your web cam is probably the best thing you can do for your privacy in terms of bang for buck.
There really is malware, malicious software out there that can take over your web cam, even without the light turning on.
This is used by criminals. This is used by stalkers.
You can buy $19.99 "spy on your ex-girlfriend" software online.
It's really terrifying.
And then, of course, it's used by governments.
And there's obviously a sexual violence component to this, which is that this kind of surveillance can be used most effectively against women and other people who can be shamed in our society.
Even if you think you have nothing to hide, at the very least, if you have children, teenagers in your lives, make sure you put a sticker on their camera and protect them.
HW: Wow. Thank you so much. CS: Thank you.
HW: Thanks, Chris.
(Applause)
For over a decade, I have studied young people that have been pushed out of school, so called "dropouts."
As they end up failed by the education system, they're on the streets where they're vulnerable to violence, police harassment, police brutality and incarceration.
I follow these young people for years at a time, across institutional settings, to try to understand what some of us call the "school-to-prison pipeline."
When you look at a picture like this, of young people who are in my study ...
you might see trouble.
I mean one of the boys has a bottle of liquor in his hand, he's 14 years old and it's a school day.
Other people, when they see this picture, might see gangs, thugs, delinquents -- criminals.
But I see it different.
I see these young people through a perspective that looks at the assets that they bring to the education system.
So will you join me in changing the way we label young people from "at-risk" to "at-promise?"
(Applause) How do I know that these young people have the potential and the promise to change?
I know this because I am one of them.
You see, I grew up in dire poverty in the inner city, without a father -- he abandoned me before I was even born.
We were on welfare, sometimes homeless, many times hungry.
By the time I was 15 years old, I had been incarcerated in juvy three times for three felonies.
My best friend had already been killed.
And soon after, while I'm standing next to my uncle, he gets shot.
And as I'm waiting for the ambulance to arrive for over an hour ...
he bleeds to death on the street.
I had lost faith and hope in the world, and I had given up on the system because the system had failed me.
I had nothing to offer and no one had anything to offer me.
I was fatalistic.
I didn't even think I could make it to my 18th birthday.
The reason I'm here today is because a teacher that cared reached out and managed to tap into my soul.
This teacher, Ms. Russ ...
she was the kind of teacher that was always in your business.
(Laughter) She was the kind of teacher that was like, "Victor, I'm here for you whenever you're ready."
(Laughter) I wasn't ready.
But she understood one basic principle about young people like me.
We're like oysters.
We're only going to open up when we're ready, and if you're not there when we're ready, we're going to clam back up.
Ms. Russ was there for me.
She was culturally relevant, she respected my community, my people, my family.
I told her a story about my Uncle Ruben.
He would take me to work with him because I was broke, and he knew I needed some money.
He collected glass bottles for a living.
Four in the morning on a school day, we'd throw the glass bottles in the back of his van, and the bottles would break.
And my hands and arms would start to bleed and my tennis shoes and pants would get all bloody.
And I was terrified and in pain, and I would stop working.
And my uncle, he would look me in the eyes and he would say to me, "Mijo, estamos buscando vida."
"We're searching for a better life, we're trying to make something out of nothing."
Ms. Russ listened to my story, welcomed it into the classroom and said, "Victor, this is your power.
This is your potential.
Your family, your culture, your community have taught you a hard-work ethic and you will use it to empower yourself in the academic world so you can come back and empower your community."
With Ms. Russ's help, I ended up returning to school.
I even finished my credits on time and graduated with my class.
(Applause) But Ms. Russ said to me right before graduation, "Victor, I'm so proud of you.
I knew you could do it.
Now it's time to go to college."
(Laughter) College, me?
Man, what is this teacher smoking thinking I'm going to college?
I applied with the mentors and support she provided, got a letter of acceptance, and one of the paragraphs read, "You've been admitted under probationary status."
I said, "Probation? I'm already on probation, that don't matter?"
(Laughter) It was academic probation, not criminal probation.
But what do teachers like Ms. Russ do to succeed with young people like the ones I study?
I propose three strategies.
The first: let's get rid of our deficit perspective in education.
"These people come from a culture of violence, a culture of poverty.
These people are at-risk; these people are truant.
These people are empty containers for us to fill with knowledge.
They have the problems, we have the solutions."
Number two.
Let's value the stories that young people bring to the schoolhouse.
Their stories of overcoming insurmountable odds are so powerful.
And I know you know some of these stories.
These very same stories and experiences already have grit, character and resilience in them.
So let's help young people refine those stories.
Let's help them be proud of who they are, because our education system welcomes their families, their cultures, their communities and the skill set they've learned to survive.
And of course the third strategy being the most important: resources.
We have to provide adequate resources to young people.
Grit alone isn't going to cut it.
You can sit there and tell me all you want, "Hey man, pick yourself up by the bootstraps."
But if I was born without any straps on my boots -- (Laughter) How am I supposed to pick myself up?
(Applause) Job training, mentoring, counseling ...
Teaching young people to learn from their mistakes instead of criminalizing them, and dragging them out of their classrooms like animals.
How about this?
I propose that we implement restorative justice in every high school in America.
(Applause) So we went out to test these ideas in the community of Watts in LA with 40 young people that had been pushed out of school.
William was one of them.
William was the kind of kid that had been given every label.
He had dropped out, he was a gang member, a criminal.
And when we met him he was very resistant.
But I remember what Ms. Russ used to say.
"Hey, I'm here for you whenever you're ready."
(Laughter) So over time -- over time he began to open up.
And I remember the day that he made the switch.
We were in a large group and a young lady in our program was crying because she told us her powerful story of her dad being killed and then his body being shown in the newspaper the next day.
And as she's crying, I don't know what to do, so I give her her space, and William had enough.
He slammed his hands on the desk and he said, "Hey, everybody! Group hug! Group hug!"
(Applause) This young lady's tears and pain turned into joy and laughter knowing that her community had her back, and William had now learned that he did have a purpose in life: to help to heal the souls of people in his own community.
He told us his story.
We refined his story to go from being the story of a victim to being the story of a survivor that has overcome adversity.
We placed high value on it.
William went on to finish high school, get his security guard certificate to become a security guard, and is now working at a local school district.
(Applause) Ms. Russ's mantra -- her mantra was always, "when you teach to the heart, the mind will follow."
The great writer Khalil Gibran says, "Out of suffering have emerged the greatest souls.
The massive characters are seared with scars."
I believe that in this education revolution that we're talking about we need to invite the souls of the young people that we work with, and once they're able to refine -- identify their grit, resilience and character that they've already developed -- their academic performance will improve.
Let's believe in young people.
Let's provide them the right kinds of resources.
I'll tell you what my teacher did for me.
She believed in me so much that she tricked me into believing in myself.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk to you about my kids.
Now, I know everyone thinks that their kid is the most fantastic, the most beautiful kid that ever lived.
But mine really are.
(Laughter) I have 696 kids, and they are the most intelligent, inventive, innovative, brilliant and powerful kids that you'll ever meet.
Any student I've had the honor of teaching in my classroom is my kid.
However, because their "real" parents aren't rich and, I argue, because they are mostly of color, they will seldom get to see in themselves the awesomeness that I see in them.
Because what I see in them is myself -- or what would have been myself.
I am the daughter of two hardworking, college-educated, African-American parents who chose careers as public servants: my father, a minister; my mother, an educator.
Wealth was never the primary ambition in our house.
Because of this lack of wealth, we lived in a neighborhood that lacked wealth, and henceforth a school system that lacked wealth.
Luckily, however, we struck the educational jackpot in a voluntary desegregation program that buses inner-city kids -- black and brown -- out to suburban schools -- rich and white.
At five years old, I had to take an hour-long bus ride to a faraway place to get a better education.
At five years old, I thought everyone had a life just like mine.
I thought everyone went to school and were the only ones using the brown crayons to color in their family portraits, while everyone else was using the peach-colored ones.
At five years old, I thought everyone was just like me.
But as I got older, I started noticing things, like: How come my neighborhood friend don't have to wake up at five o'clock in the morning, and go to a school that's an hour away?
How come I'm learning to play the violin while my neighborhood friends don't even have a music class?
Why were my neighborhood friends learning and reading material that I had done two to three years prior?
See, as I got older, I started to have this unlawful feeling in my belly, like I was doing something that I wasn't supposed to be doing; taking something that wasn't mine; receiving a gift, but with someone else's name on it.
All these amazing things that I was being exposed to and experiencing, I felt I wasn't really supposed to have.
I wasn't supposed to have a library, fully equipped athletic facilities, or safe fields to play in.
I wasn't supposed to have theatre departments with seasonal plays and concerts -- digital, visual, performing arts.
I wasn't supposed to have fully resourced biology or chemistry labs, school buses that brought me door-to-door, freshly prepared school lunches or even air conditioning.
These are things my kids don't get.
You see, as I got older, while I was grateful for this amazing opportunity that I was being given, there was this ever-present pang of: But what about everyone else?
There are thousands of other kids just like me, who deserve this, too.
Why doesn't everyone get this?
Why is a high-quality education only exclusive to the rich?
It was like I had some sort of survivor's remorse.
All of my neighborhood friends were experiencing an educational train wreck that I was saved from through a bus ride.
I was like an educational Moses screaming, "Let my people go ...
to high-quality schools!"
(Laughter) I'd seen firsthand how the other half was being treated and educated.
I'd seen the educational promised land, and I could not for the life of me justify the disparity.
I now teach in the very same school system from which I sought refuge.
I know firsthand the tools that were given to me as a student, and now as a teacher, I don't have access to those same tools to give my students.
There have been countless nights when I've cried in frustration, anger and sorrow, because I can't teach my kids the way that I was taught, because I don't have access to the same resources or tools that were used to teach me.
My kids deserve so much better.
We sit and we keep banging our heads against this term: "Achievement gap, achievement gap!"
Is it really that hard to understand why these kids perform well and these kids don't?
I mean, really.
I think we've got it all wrong.
I think we, as Gloria Ladson-Billings says, should flip our paradigm and our language and call it what it really is.
It's not an achievement gap; it's an education debt, for all of the foregone schooling resources that were never invested in the education of the black and brown child over time.
A little-known secret in American history is that the only American institution created specifically for people of color is the American slave trade -- and some would argue the prison system, but that's another topic for another TED Talk.
(Laughter) The public school system of this country was built, bought and paid for using commerce generated from the slave trade and slave labor.
While African-Americans were enslaved and prohibited from schooling, their labor established the very institution from which they were excluded.
Ever since then, every court case, educational policy, reform, has been an attempt to retrofit the design, rather than just stopping and acknowledging: we've had it all wrong from the beginning.
An oversimplification of American educational history.
All right, just bear with me.
Blacks were kept out -- you know, the whole slavery thing.
With the help of philanthropic white people, they built their own schools.
Separate but equal was OK.
But while we all know things were indeed separate, they were in no ways equal.
Enter Brown v. the Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas in 1954; legal separation of the races is now illegal.
But very few people pay attention to all of the court cases since then, that have undone the educational promised land for every child that Brown v. Board intended.
Some argue that today our schools are now more segregated than they ever were before we tried to desegregate them in the first place.
Teaching my kids about desegregation, the Little Rock Nine, the Civil Rights Movement, is a real awkward moment in my classroom, when I have to hear the voice of a child ask, "If schools were desegregated in 1954, how come there are no white kids here?"
(Laughter) These kids aren't dumb.
They know exactly what's happening, and what's not.
They know that when it comes to schooling, black lives don't matter and they never have.
For years, I tried desperately to cultivate in my kids a love of reading.
I'd amassed a modest classroom library of books I'd accumulated from secondhand shops, thrift stores, attics -- you know.
But whenever I said those dreadful words, "Take out a book and read," you'd think I'd just declared war.
It was torture.
One day, after I'd heard about this website called DonorsChoose, where classroom teachers create wish lists of items they need for their classroom and anonymous donors fulfill them, I figured I'd go out on a limb and just make a wish list of the teenager's dream library.
Over 200 brand-new books were sent to my room piece by piece.
Every day there were new deliveries and my kids would exclaim with glee, "This feels like Christmas!"
(Laughter) Then they'd say, "Ms. Sumner, where did these books come from?"
And then I'd reply, "Strangers from all over the country wanted you to have these."
And then they'd say, almost suspiciously, "But they're brand-new."
(Laughter) To which I'd reply, "You deserve brand-new books."
The whole experience hit home for me when one of my girls, as she peeled open a crisp paperback said, "Ms. Sumner -- you know, I figured you bought these books, 'cause you teachers are always buying us stuff.
But to know that a stranger, someone I don't even know, cares this much about me is pretty cool."
Knowing that strangers will take care of you is a privilege my kids aren't afforded.
Ever since the donation, there has been a steady stream of kids signing out books to take home, and then returning them with the exclamation, "This one was good!"
(Laughter) Now when I say, "Take out a book and read," kids rush to my library.
It wasn't that they didn't want to read, but instead, they'd gladly read if the resources were there.
Institutionally speaking, our public school system has never done right by the black and brown child.
We keep focusing on the end results or test results, and getting frustrated.
We get to a catastrophe and we wonder, "How did it get so bad? How did we get here?"
Really?
If you neglect a child long enough, you no longer have the right to be surprised when things don't turn out well.
Stop being perplexed or confused or befuddled by the achievement gap, the income gap, the incarceration rates, or whatever socioeconomic disparity is the new "it" term for the moment.
The problems we have as a country are the problems we created as a country.
The quality of your education is directly proportionate to your access to college, your access to jobs, your access to the future.
Until we live in a world where every kid can get a high-quality education no matter where they live, or the color of their skin, there are things we can do on a macro level.
School funding should not be decided by property taxes or some funky economic equation where rich kids continue to benefit from state aid, while poor kids are continuously having food and resources taken from their mouths.
Governors, senators, mayors, city council members -- if we're going to call public education public education, then it should be just that.
Otherwise, we should call it what it really is: poverty insurance.
"Public education: keeping poor kids poor since 1954."
(Laughter) If we really, as a country, believe that education is the "great equalizer," then it should be just that: equal and equitable.
Until then, there's no democracy in our democratic education.
On a mezzo level: historically speaking, the education of the black and brown child has always depended on the philanthropy of others.
And unfortunately, today it still does.
If your son or daughter or niece or nephew or neighbor or little Timmy down the street goes to an affluent school, challenge your school committee to adopt an impoverished school or an impoverished classroom.
Close the divide by engaging in communication and relationships that matter.
When resources are shared, they're not divided; they're multiplied.
And on a micro level: if you're a human being, donate.
Time, money, resources, opportunities -- whatever is in your heart.
There are websites like DonorsChoose that recognize the disparity and actually want to do something about it.
What is a carpenter with no tools?
What is an actress with no stage?
What is a scientist with no laboratory?
What is a doctor with no equipment?
I'll tell you: they're my kids.
Shouldn't they be your kids, too?
Thank you.
(Applause)
June 2010.
I landed for the first time in Rome, Italy.
I wasn't there to sightsee.
I was there to solve world hunger.
(Laughter) That's right.
I was a 25-year-old PhD student armed with a prototype tool developed back at my university, and I was going to help the World Food Programme fix hunger.
So I strode into the headquarters building and my eyes scanned the row of UN flags, and I smiled as I thought to myself, "The engineer is here."
(Laughter) Give me your data.
I'm going to optimize everything.
(Laughter) Tell me the food that you've purchased, tell me where it's going and when it needs to be there, and I'm going to tell you the shortest, fastest, cheapest, best set of routes to take for the food.
We're going to save money, we're going to avoid delays and disruptions, and bottom line, we're going to save lives.
You're welcome.
(Laughter) I thought it was going to take 12 months, OK, maybe even 13.
This is not quite how it panned out.
Just a couple of months into the project, my French boss, he told me, "You know, Mallory, it's a good idea, but the data you need for your algorithms is not there.
It's the right idea but at the wrong time, and the right idea at the wrong time is the wrong idea."
(Laughter) Project over.
I was crushed.
When I look back now on that first summer in Rome and I see how much has changed over the past six years, it is an absolute transformation.
It's a coming of age for bringing data into the humanitarian world.
It's exciting. It's inspiring.
But we're not there yet.
And brace yourself, executives, because I'm going to be putting companies on the hot seat to step up and play the role that I know they can.
My experiences back in Rome prove using data you can save lives.
OK, not that first attempt, but eventually we got there.
Let me paint the picture for you.
Imagine that you have to plan breakfast, lunch and dinner for 500,000 people, and you only have a certain budget to do it, say 6.5 million dollars per month.
Well, what should you do? What's the best way to handle it?
Should you buy rice, wheat, chickpea, oil?
How much?
It sounds simple. It's not.
You have 30 possible foods, and you have to pick five of them.
That's already over 140,000 different combinations.
Then for each food that you pick, you need to decide how much you'll buy, where you're going to get it from, where you're going to store it, how long it's going to take to get there.
You need to look at all of the different transportation routes as well.
And that's already over 900 million options.
If you considered each option for a single second, that would take you over 28 years to get through.
900 million options.
So we created a tool that allowed decisionmakers to weed through all 900 million options in just a matter of days.
It turned out to be incredibly successful.
In an operation in Iraq, we saved 17 percent of the costs, and this meant that you had the ability to feed an additional 80,000 people.
It's all thanks to the use of data and modeling complex systems.
But we didn't do it alone.
The unit that I worked with in Rome, they were unique.
They believed in collaboration.
They brought in the academic world.
They brought in companies.
And if we really want to make big changes in big problems like world hunger, we need everybody to the table.
We need the data people from humanitarian organizations leading the way, and orchestrating just the right types of engagements with academics, with governments.
And there's one group that's not being leveraged in the way that it should be.
Did you guess it? Companies.
Companies have a major role to play in fixing the big problems in our world.
I've been in the private sector for two years now.
I've seen what companies can do, and I've seen what companies aren't doing, and I think there's three main ways that we can fill that gap: by donating data, by donating decision scientists and by donating technology to gather new sources of data.
This is data philanthropy, and it's the future of corporate social responsibility.
Bonus, it also makes good business sense.
Companies today, they collect mountains of data, so the first thing they can do is start donating that data.
Some companies are already doing it.
Take, for example, a major telecom company.
They opened up their data in Senegal and the Ivory Coast and researchers discovered that if you look at the patterns in the pings to the cell phone towers, you can see where people are traveling.
And that can tell you things like where malaria might spread, and you can make predictions with it.
Or take for example an innovative satellite company.
They opened up their data and donated it, and with that data you could track how droughts are impacting food production.
With that you can actually trigger aid funding before a crisis can happen.
This is a great start.
There's important insights just locked away in company data.
And yes, you need to be very careful.
You need to respect privacy concerns, for example by anonymizing the data.
But even if the floodgates opened up, and even if all companies donated their data to academics, to NGOs, to humanitarian organizations, it wouldn't be enough to harness that full impact of data for humanitarian goals.
Why?
To unlock insights in data, you need decision scientists.
Decision scientists are people like me.
They take the data, they clean it up, transform it and put it into a useful algorithm that's the best choice to address the business need at hand.
In the world of humanitarian aid, there are very few decision scientists.
Most of them work for companies.
So that's the second thing that companies need to do.
In addition to donating their data, they need to donate their decision scientists.
Now, companies will say, "Ah! Don't take our decision scientists from us.
We need every spare second of their time."
But there's a way.
If a company was going to donate a block of a decision scientist's time, it would actually make more sense to spread out that block of time over a long period, say for example five years.
This might only amount to a couple of hours per month, which a company would hardly miss, but what it enables is really important: long-term partnerships.
Long-term partnerships allow you to build relationships, to get to know the data, to really understand it and to start to understand the needs and challenges that the humanitarian organization is facing.
In Rome, at the World Food Programme, this took us five years to do, five years.
That first three years, OK, that was just what we couldn't solve for.
Then there was two years after that of refining and implementing the tool, like in the operations in Iraq and other countries.
I don't think that's an unrealistic timeline when it comes to using data to make operational changes.
It's an investment. It requires patience.
But the types of results that can be produced are undeniable.
In our case, it was the ability to feed tens of thousands more people.
So we have donating data, we have donating decision scientists, and there's actually a third way that companies can help: donating technology to capture new sources of data.
You see, there's a lot of things we just don't have data on.
Right now, Syrian refugees are flooding into Greece, and the UN refugee agency, they have their hands full.
The current system for tracking people is paper and pencil, and what that means is that when a mother and her five children walk into the camp, headquarters is essentially blind to this moment.
That's all going to change in the next few weeks, thanks to private sector collaboration.
There's going to be a new system based on donated package tracking technology from the logistics company that I work for.
With this new system, there will be a data trail, so you know exactly the moment when that mother and her children walk into the camp.
And even more, you know if she's going to have supplies this month and the next.
Information visibility drives efficiency.
For companies, using technology to gather important data, it's like bread and butter.
They've been doing it for years, and it's led to major operational efficiency improvements.
Just try to imagine your favorite beverage company trying to plan their inventory and not knowing how many bottles were on the shelves.
It's absurd.
Data drives better decisions.
Now, if you're representing a company, and you're pragmatic and not just idealistic, you might be saying to yourself, "OK, this is all great, Mallory, but why should I want to be involved?"
Well for one thing, beyond the good PR, humanitarian aid is a 24-billion-dollar sector, and there's over five billion people, maybe your next customers, that live in the developing world.
Further, companies that are engaging in data philanthropy, they're finding new insights locked away in their data.
Take, for example, a credit card company that's opened up a center that functions as a hub for academics, for NGOs and governments, all working together.
They're looking at information in credit card swipes and using that to find insights about how households in India live, work, earn and spend.
For the humanitarian world, this provides information about how you might bring people out of poverty.
But for companies, it's providing insights about your customers and potential customers in India.
It's a win all around.
Now, for me, what I find exciting about data philanthropy -- donating data, donating decision scientists and donating technology -- it's what it means for young professionals like me who are choosing to work at companies.
Studies show that the next generation of the workforce care about having their work make a bigger impact.
We want to make a difference, and so through data philanthropy, companies can actually help engage and retain their decision scientists.
And that's a big deal for a profession that's in high demand.
Data philanthropy makes good business sense, and it also can help revolutionize the humanitarian world.
If we coordinated the planning and logistics across all of the major facets of a humanitarian operation, we could feed, clothe and shelter hundreds of thousands more people, and companies need to step up and play the role that I know they can in bringing about this revolution.
You've probably heard of the saying "food for thought."
Well, this is literally thought for food.
It finally is the right idea at the right time.
(Laughter) Trs magnifique.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When you come to TEDx, you always think about technology, the world changing, becoming more innovative.
You think about the driverless.
Everyone's talking about driverless cars these days, and I love the concept of a driverless car, but when I go in one, you know, I want it really slow, I want access to the steering wheel and the brake, just in case.
I don't know about you, but I am not ready for a driverless bus.
I am not ready for a driverless airplane.
How about a driverless world?
And I ask you that because we are increasingly in one.
It's not supposed to be that way.
We're number one, the United States is large and in charge.
Americanization and globalization for the last several generations have basically been the same thing.
Right? Whether it's the World Trade Organization or it's the IMF, the World Bank, the Bretton Woods Accord on currency, these were American institutions, our values, our friends, our allies, our money, our standards.
That was the way the world worked.
So it's sort of interesting, if you want to look at how the US looks, here it is.
This is our view of how the world is run.
President Obama has got the red carpet, he goes down Air Force One, and it feels pretty good, it feels pretty comfortable.
Well, I don't know how many of you saw the China trip last week and the G20.
Oh my God. Right?
This is how we landed for the most important meeting of the world's leaders in China.
The National Security Advisor was actually spewing expletives on the tarmac -- no red carpet, kind of left out the bottom of the plane along with all the media and everybody else.
Later on in the G20, well, there's Obama.
(Laughter) Hi, George.
Hi, Norman.
They look like they're about to get into a cage match, right?
And they did. It was 90 minutes long, and they talked about Syria.
That's what Putin wanted to talk about.
He's increasingly calling the shots.
He's the one willing to do stuff there.
There's not a lot of mutual like or trust, but it's not as if the Americans are telling him what to do.
How about when the whole 20 are getting together?
Surely, when the leaders are all onstage, then the Americans are pulling their weight.
Uh-oh.
(Laughter) Xi Jinping seems fine.
Angela Merkel has -- she always does -- that look, she always does that.
But Putin is telling Turkish president Erdogan what to do, and Obama is like, what's going on over there?
You see. And the problem is it's not a G20, the problem is it's a G-Zero world that we live in, a world order where there is no single country or alliance that can meet the challenges of global leadership.
The G20 doesn't work, the G7, all of our friends, that's history.
So globalization is continuing.
Goods and services and people and capital are moving across borders faster and faster than ever before, but Americanization is not.
So if I've convinced you of that, I want to do two things with the rest of this talk.
I want to talk about the implications of that for the whole world.
I'll go around it.
And then I want to talk about what we think right here in the United States and in New York.
So why? What are the implications. Why are we here?
Well, we're here because the United States, we spent two trillion dollars on wars in Iraq and Afghanistan that were failed.
We don't want to do that anymore.
We have large numbers of middle and working classes that feel like they've not benefited from promises of globalization, so they don't want to see it particularly.
And we have an energy revolution where we don't need OPEC or the Middle East the way we used to.
We produce all that right here in the United States.
So the Americans don't want to be the global sheriff for security or the architect of global trade.
The Americans don't want to even be the cheerleader of global values.
Well, then you look to Europe, and the most important alliance in the world has been the transatlantic relationship.
But it is now weaker than it has been at any point since World War II, all of the crises, the Brexit conversations, the hedging going on between the French and the Russians, or the Germans and the Turks, or the Brits and the Chinese.
China does want to do more leadership.
They do, but only in the economic sphere, and they want their own values, standards, currency, in competition with that of the US.
The Russians want to do more leadership.
You see that in Ukraine, in the Baltic states, in the Middle East, but not with the Americans.
They want their own preferences and order.
That's why we are where we are.
So what happens going forward?
Let's start easy, with the Middle East.
(Laughter) You know, I left a little out, but you get the general idea.
Look, there are three reasons why the Middle East has had stability such as it is. Right?
One is because there was a willingness to provide some level of military security by the US and allies.
Number two, it was easy to take a lot of cheap money out of the ground because oil was expensive.
And number three was no matter how bad the leaders were, the populations were relatively quiescent.
They didn't have the ability, and many didn't have the will to really rise up against.
Well, I can tell you, in a G-Zero world, all three of those things are increasingly not true, and so failed states, terrorism, refugees and the rest.
Does the entire Middle East fall apart?
No, the Kurds will do better, and Iraq, Israel, Iran over time.
But generally speaking, it's not a good look.
OK, how about this guy?
He's playing a poor hand very well.
There's no question he's hitting above his weight.
But long term -- I didn't mean that.
But long term, long term, if you think that the Russians were antagonized by the US and Europe expanding NATO right up to their borders when we said they weren't going to, and the EU encroaching them, just wait until the Chinese put hundreds of billions of dollars in every country around Russia they thought they had influence in.
The Chinese are going to dominate it. The Russians are picking up the crumbs.
In a G-Zero world, this is going to be a very tense 10 years for Mr. Putin.
It's not all bad. Right?
Asia actually looks a lot better.
There are real leaders across Asia, they have a lot of political stability.
They're there for a while.
Mr. Modi in India, Mr. Abe, who is probably about to get a third term written in in the Liberal Democratic Party in Japan, of course Xi Jinping who is consolidating enormous power, the most powerful leader in China since Mao.
Those are the three most important economies in Asia.
Now look, there are problems in Asia.
We see the sparring over the South China Sea.
We see that Kim Jong Un, just in the last couple of days, tested yet another nuclear weapon.
But the leaders in Asia do not feel the need to wave the flag, to go xenophobic, to actually allow escalation of the geopolitical and cross-border tensions.
They want to focus on long-term economic stability and growth.
And that's what they're actually doing.
Let's turn to Europe.
Europe does look a little scared in this environment.
So much of what is happening in the Middle East is washing up quite literally onto European shores.
You see Brexit and you see the concerns of populism across all of the European states.
Let me tell you that over the long term, in a G-Zero world, European expansion will be seen to have gone too far.
Europe went right up to Russia, went right down to the Middle East, and if the world were truly becoming more flat and more Americanized, that would be less of a problem, but in a G-Zero world, those countries nearest Russia and nearest the Middle East actually have different economic capabilities, different social stability and different political preferences and systems than core Europe.
So Europe was able to truly expand under the G7, but under the G-Zero, Europe will get smaller.
Core Europe around Germany and France and others will still work, be functional, stable, wealthy, integrated.
But the periphery, countries like Greece and Turkey and others, will not look that good at all.
Latin America, a lot of populism, made the economies not go so well.
They had been more opposed to the United States for decades.
Increasingly, they're coming back.
We see that in Argentina.
We see it with the openness in Cuba.
We will see it in Venezuela when Maduro falls.
We will see it in Brazil after the impeachment and when we finally see a new legitimate president elected there.
The only place you see that is moving in another direction is the unpopularity of Mexican president Pea Nieto.
There you could actually see a slip away from the United States over the coming years.
The US election matters a lot on that one, too.
(Laughter) Africa, right?
A lot of people have said it's going to be Africa's decade, finally.
In a G-Zero world, it is absolutely an amazing time for a few African countries, those governed well with a lot of urbanization, a lot of smart people, women really getting into the workforce, entrepreneurship taking off.
But for most of the countries in Africa, it's going to be a lot more dicey: extreme climate conditions, radicalism both from Islam and also Christianity, very poor governance, borders you can't defend, lots of forced migration.
Those countries can fall off the map.
So you're really going to see an extreme segregation going on between the winners and the losers across Africa.
Finally, back to the United States.
What do I think about us?
Because there are a lot of upset people, not here at TEDx, I know, but in the United States, my God, after 15 months of campaigning, we should be upset.
I understand that.
But a lot of people are upset because they say, "Washington's broken, we don't trust the establishment, we hate the media."
Heck, even globalists like me are taking it on the chin.
Look, I do think we have to recognize, my fellow campers, that when you are being chased by the bear, in the global context, you need not outrun the bear, you need to only outrun your fellow campers.
(Laughter) Now, I just told you about our fellow campers.
Right? And from that perspective, we look OK.
A lot of people in that context say, "Let's go dollar. Let's go New York real estate.
Let's send our kids to American universities."
You know, our neighbors are awesome: Canada, Mexico and two big bodies of water.
You know how much Turkey would love to have neighbors like that?
Those are awesome neighbors.
Terrorism is a problem in the United States.
God knows we know it here in New York.
But it's a much bigger problem in Europe than the US.
It's a much bigger problem in the Middle East than it is in Europe.
These are factors of large magnitude.
We just accepted 10,000 Syrian refugees, and we're complaining bitterly about it.
You know why? Because they can't swim here.
Right? I mean, the Turks would love to have only 10,000 Syrian refugees.
The Jordanians, the Germans, the Brits. Right?
That's not the situation.
That's the reality of the United States.
Now, that sounds pretty good.
Here's the challenge.
In a G-Zero world, the way you lead is by example.
If we know we don't want to be the global cop anymore, if we know we're not going to be the architect of global trade, we're not going to be the cheerleader of global values, we're not going to do it the way we used to, the 21st century is changing, we need to lead by example -- be so compelling that all these other people are going to still say, it's not just they're faster campers.
Even when the bear is not chasing us, this is a good place to be.
We want to emulate them.
The election process this year is not proving a good option for leading by example.
Hillary Clinton says it's going to be like the '90s.
We can still be that cheerleader on values.
We can still be the architect of global trade.
We can still be the global sheriff.
And Donald Trump wants to bring us back to the '30s.
He's saying, "Our way or the highway. You don't like it, lump it." Right?
Neither are recognizing a fundamental truth of the G-Zero, which is that even though the US is not in decline, it is getting objectively harder for the Americans to impose their will, even have great influence, on the global order.
Are we prepared to truly lead by example?
What would we have to do to fix this after November, after the next president comes in?
Well, either we have to have another crisis that forces us to respond.
A depression would do that.
Another global financial crisis could do this.
God forbid, another 9/11 could do that.
Or, absent crisis, we need to see that the hollowing out, the inequality, the challenges that are growing and growing in the United States, are themselves urgent enough to force our leaders to change, and that we have those voices.
Through our cell phones, individually, we have those voices to compel them to change.
There is, of course, a third choice, perhaps the most likely one, which is that we do neither of those things, and in four years time you invite me back, and I will give this speech yet again.
Thank you very, very much.
(Applause)
Half of the human workforce is expected to be replaced by software and robots in the next 20 years.
And many corporate leaders welcome that as a chance to increase profits.
Machines are more efficient; humans are complicated and difficult to manage.
Well, I want our organizations to remain human.
In fact, I want them to become beautiful.
Because as machines take our jobs and do them more efficiently, soon the only work left for us humans will be the kind of work that must be done beautifully rather than efficiently.
To maintain our humanity in the this second Machine Age, we may have no other choice than to create beauty.
Beauty is an elusive concept.
For the writer Stendhal it was the promise of happiness.
For me it's a goal by Lionel Messi.
(Laughter) So bear with me as I am proposing four admittedly very subjective principles that you can use to build a beautiful organization.
First: do the unnecessary.
[Do the Unnecessary] A few months ago, Hamdi Ulukaya, the CEO and founder of the yogurt company Chobani, made headlines when he decided to grant stock to all of his 2,000 employees.
Some called it a PR stunt, others -- a genuine act of giving back.
But there is something else that was remarkable about it.
It came completely out of the blue.
There had been no market or stakeholder pressure, and employees were so surprised that they burst into tears when they heard the news.
Actions like Ulukaya's are beautiful because they catch us off guard.
They create something out of nothing because they're completely unnecessary.
I once worked at a company that was the result of a merger of a large IT outsourcing firm and a small design firm.
We were merging 9,000 software engineers with 1,000 creative types.
And to unify these immensely different cultures, we were going to launch a third, new brand.
And the new brand color was going to be orange.
And as we were going through the budget for the rollouts, we decided last minute to cut the purchase of 10,000 orange balloons, which we had meant to distribute to all staff worldwide.
They just seemed unnecessary and cute in the end.
I didn't know back then that our decision marked the beginning of the end -- that these two organizations would never become one.
And sure enough, the merger eventually failed.
Now, was it because there weren't any orange balloons?
No, of course not.
But the kill-the-orange-balloons mentality permeated everything else.
You might not always realize it, but when you cut the unnecessary, you cut everything.
Leading with beauty means rising above what is merely necessary.
So do not kill your orange balloons.
The second principle: create intimacy.
[Create Intimacy] Studies show that how we feel about our workplace very much depends on the relationships with our coworkers.
And what are relationships other than a string of microinteractions?
There are hundreds of these every day in our organizations that have the potential to distinguish a good life from a beautiful one.
The marriage researcher John Gottman says that the secret of a healthy relationship is not the great gesture or the lofty promise, it's small moments of attachment.
In other words, intimacy.
In our networked organizations, we tout the strength of weak ties but we underestimate the strength of strong ones.
We forget the words of the writer Richard Bach who once said, "Intimacy -- not connectedness -- intimacy is the opposite of loneliness."
So how do we design for organizational intimacy?
The humanitarian organization CARE wanted to launch a campaign on gender equality in villages in northern India.
But it realized quickly that it had to have this conversation first with its own staff.
So it invited all 36 team members and their partners to one of the Khajuraho Temples, known for their famous erotic sculptures.
And there they openly discussed their personal relationships -- their own experiences of gender equality with the coworkers and the partners.
It was eye-opening for the participants.
Not only did it allow them to relate to the communities they serve, it also broke down invisible barriers and created a lasting bond amongst themselves.
Not a single team member quit in the next four years.
So this is how you create intimacy.
No masks ...
or lots of masks.
(Laughter) When Danone, the food company, wanted to translate its new company manifesto into product initiatives, it gathered the management team and 100 employees from across different departments, seniority levels and regions for a three-day strategy retreat.
And it asked everybody to wear costumes for the entire meeting: wigs, crazy hats, feather boas, huge glasses and so on.
And they left with concrete outcomes and full of enthusiasm.
And when I asked the woman who had designed this experience why it worked, she simply said, "Never underestimate the power of a ridiculous wig."
(Laughter) (Applause) Because wigs erase hierarchy, and hierarchy kills intimacy -- both ways, for the CEO and the intern.
Wigs allow us to use the disguise of the false to show something true about ourselves.
And that's not easy in our everyday work lives, because the relationship with our organizations is often like that of a married couple that has grown apart, suffered betrayals and disappointments, and is now desperate to be beautiful for one another once again.
And for either of us the first step towards beauty involves a huge risk.
The risk to be ugly.
[Be Ugly] So many organizations these days are keen on designing beautiful workplaces that look like anything but work: vacation resorts, coffee shops, playgrounds or college campuses -- (Laughter) Based on the promises of positive psychology, we speak of play and gamification, and one start-up even says that when someone gets fired, they have graduated.
(Laughter) That kind of beautiful language only goes "skin deep, but ugly cuts clean to the bone," as the writer Dorothy Parker once put it.
To be authentic is to be ugly.
It doesn't mean that you can't have fun or must give in to the vulgar or cynical, but it does mean that you speak the actual ugly truth.
Like this manufacturer that wanted to transform one of its struggling business units.
It identified, named and pinned on large boards all the issues -- and there were hundreds of them -- that had become obstacles to better performance.
They put them on boards, moved them all into one room, which they called "the ugly room."
The ugly became visible for everyone to see -- it was celebrated.
And the ugly room served as a mix of mirror exhibition and operating room -- a biopsy on the living flesh to cut out all the bureaucracy.
The ugliest part of our body is our brain.
Literally and neurologically.
Our brain renders ugly what is unfamiliar ...
modern art, atonal music, jazz, maybe -- VR goggles for that matter -- strange objects, sounds and people.
But we've all been ugly once.
We were a weird-looking baby, a new kid on the block, a foreigner.
And we will be ugly again when we don't belong.
The Center for Political Beauty, an activist collective in Berlin, recently staged an extreme artistic intervention.
With the permission of relatives, it exhumed the corpses of refugees who had drowned at Europe's borders, transported them all the way to Berlin, and then reburied them at the heart of the German capital.
The idea was to allow them to reach their desired destination, if only after their death.
Such acts of beautification may not be pretty, but they are much needed.
Because things tend to get ugly when there's only one meaning, one truth, only answers and no questions.
Beautiful organizations keep asking questions.
They remain incomplete, which is the fourth and the last of the principles.
[Remain Incomplete] Recently I was in Paris, and a friend of mine took me to Nuit Debout, which stands for "up all night," the self-organized protest movement that had formed in response to the proposed labor laws in France.
Every night, hundreds gathered at the Place de la Rpublique.
Every night they set up a small, temporary village to deliberate their own vision of the French Republic.
And at the core of this adhocracy was a general assembly where anybody could speak using a specially designed sign language.
Like Occupy Wall Street and other protest movements, Nuit Debout was born in the face of crisis.
It was messy -- full of controversies and contradictions.
But whether you agreed with the movement's goals or not, every gathering was a beautiful lesson in raw humanity.
And how fitting that Paris -- the city of ideals, the city of beauty -- was it's stage.
It reminds us that like great cities, the most beautiful organizations are ideas worth fighting for -- even and especially when their outcome is uncertain.
They are movements; they are always imperfect, never fully organized, so they avoid ever becoming banal.
They have something but we don't know what it is.
They remain mysterious; we can't take our eyes off them.
We find them beautiful.
So to do the unnecessary, to create intimacy, to be ugly, to remain incomplete -- these are not only the qualities of beautiful organizations, these are inherently human characteristics.
And these are also the qualities of what we call home.
And as we disrupt, and are disrupted, the least we can do is to ensure that we still feel at home in our organizations, and that we use our organizations to create that feeling for others.
Beauty can save the world when we embrace these principles and design for them.
In the face of artificial intelligence and machine learning, we need a new radical humanism.
We must acquire and promote a new aesthetic and sentimental education.
Because if we don't, we might end up feeling like aliens in organizations and societies that are full of smart machines that have no appreciation whatsoever for the unnecessary, the intimate, the incomplete and definitely not for the ugly.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Hi.
I want to talk about understanding, and the nature of understanding, and what the essence of understanding is, because understanding is something we aim for, everyone.
We want to understand things.
My claim is that understanding has to do with the ability to change your perspective.
If you don't have that, you don't have understanding.
So that is my claim.
And I want to focus on mathematics.
Many of us think of mathematics as addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, percent, geometry, algebra -- all that stuff.
But actually, I want to talk about the essence of mathematics as well.
And my claim is that mathematics has to do with patterns.
Behind me, you see a beautiful pattern, and this pattern actually emerges just from drawing circles in a very particular way.
So my day-to-day definition of mathematics that I use every day is the following: First of all, it's about finding patterns.
And by "pattern," I mean a connection, a structure, some regularity, some rules that govern what we see.
Second of all, I think it is about representing these patterns with a language.
We make up language if we don't have it, and in mathematics, this is essential.
It's also about making assumptions and playing around with these assumptions and just seeing what happens.
We're going to do that very soon.
And finally, it's about doing cool stuff.
Mathematics enables us to do so many things.
So let's have a look at these patterns.
If you want to tie a tie knot, there are patterns.
Tie knots have names.
And you can also do the mathematics of tie knots.
This is a left-out, right-in, center-out and tie.
This is a left-in, right-out, left-in, center-out and tie.
This is a language we made up for the patterns of tie knots, and a half-Windsor is all that.
This is a mathematics book about tying shoelaces at the university level, because there are patterns in shoelaces.
You can do it in so many different ways.
We can analyze it.
We can make up languages for it.
And representations are all over mathematics.
This is Leibniz's notation from 1675.
He invented a language for patterns in nature.
When we throw something up in the air, it falls down.
Why?
We're not sure, but we can represent this with mathematics in a pattern.
This is also a pattern.
This is also an invented language.
Can you guess for what?
It is actually a notation system for dancing, for tap dancing.
That enables him as a choreographer to do cool stuff, to do new things, because he has represented it.
I want you to think about how amazing representing something actually is.
Here it says the word "mathematics."
But actually, they're just dots, right?
So how in the world can these dots represent the word?
Well, they do.
They represent the word "mathematics," and these symbols also represent that word and this we can listen to.
It sounds like this.
(Beeps) Somehow these sounds represent the word and the concept.
How does this happen?
There's something amazing going on about representing stuff.
So I want to talk about that magic that happens when we actually represent something.
Here you see just lines with different widths.
They stand for numbers for a particular book.
And I can actually recommend this book, it's a very nice book.
(Laughter) Just trust me.
OK, so let's just do an experiment, just to play around with some straight lines.
This is a straight line.
Let's make another one.
So every time we move, we move one down and one across, and we draw a new straight line, right?
We do this over and over and over, and we look for patterns.
So this pattern emerges, and it's a rather nice pattern.
It looks like a curve, right?
Just from drawing simple, straight lines.
Now I can change my perspective a little bit. I can rotate it.
Have a look at the curve.
What does it look like?
Is it a part of a circle?
It's actually not a part of a circle.
So I have to continue my investigation and look for the true pattern.
Perhaps if I copy it and make some art?
Well, no.
Perhaps I should extend the lines like this, and look for the pattern there.
Let's make more lines.
We do this.
And then let's zoom out and change our perspective again.
Then we can actually see that what started out as just straight lines is actually a curve called a parabola.
This is represented by a simple equation, and it's a beautiful pattern.
So this is the stuff that we do.
We find patterns, and we represent them.
And I think this is a nice day-to-day definition.
But today I want to go a little bit deeper, and think about what the nature of this is.
What makes it possible?
There's one thing that's a little bit deeper, and that has to do with the ability to change your perspective.
And I claim that when you change your perspective, and if you take another point of view, you learn something new about what you are watching or looking at or hearing.
And I think this is a really important thing that we do all the time.
So let's just look at this simple equation, x + x = 2  x.
This is a very nice pattern, and it's true, because 5 + 5 = 2  5, etc.
We've seen this over and over, and we represent it like this.
But think about it: this is an equation.
It says that something is equal to something else, and that's two different perspectives.
One perspective is, it's a sum.
It's something you plus together.
On the other hand, it's a multiplication, and those are two different perspectives.
And I would go as far as to say that every equation is like this, every mathematical equation where you use that equality sign is actually a metaphor.
It's an analogy between two things.
You're just viewing something and taking two different points of view, and you're expressing that in a language.
Have a look at this equation.
This is one of the most beautiful equations.
It simply says that, well, two things, they're both -1.
This thing on the left-hand side is -1, and the other one is.
And that, I think, is one of the essential parts of mathematics -- you take different points of view.
So let's just play around.
Let's take a number.
We know four-thirds. We know what four-thirds is.
It's 1.333, but we have to have those three dots, otherwise it's not exactly four-thirds.
But this is only in base 10.
You know, the number system, we use 10 digits.
If we change that around and only use two digits, that's called the binary system.
It's written like this.
So we're now talking about the number.
The number is four-thirds.
We can write it like this, and we can change the base, change the number of digits, and we can write it differently.
So these are all representations of the same number.
We can even write it simply, like 1.3 or 1.6.
It all depends on how many digits you have.
Or perhaps we just simplify and write it like this.
I like this one, because this says four divided by three.
And this number expresses a relation between two numbers.
You have four on the one hand and three on the other.
And you can visualize this in many ways.
What I'm doing now is viewing that number from different perspectives.
I'm playing around.
I'm playing around with how we view something, and I'm doing it very deliberately.
We can take a grid.
If it's four across and three up, this line equals five, always.
It has to be like this. This is a beautiful pattern.
And this rectangle, which is 4 x 3, you've seen a lot of times.
This is your average computer screen.
800 x 600 or 1,600 x 1,200 is a television or a computer screen.
So these are all nice representations, but I want to go a little bit further and just play more with this number.
Here you see two circles. I'm going to rotate them like this.
Observe the upper-left one.
You can see this.
It actually goes exactly four-thirds as fast.
That means that when it goes around four times, the other one goes around three times.
Now let's make two lines, and draw this dot where the lines meet.
We get this dot dancing around.
(Laughter) And this dot comes from that number.
Right? Now we should trace it.
Let's trace it and see what happens.
This is what mathematics is all about.
It's about seeing what happens.
And this emerges from four-thirds.
I like to say that this is the image of four-thirds.
It's much nicer -- (Cheers) Thank you!
(Applause) This is not new.
This has been known for a long time, but -- (Laughter) But this is four-thirds.
Let's do another experiment.
Let's now take a sound, this sound: (Beep) This is a perfect A, 440Hz.
Let's multiply it by two.
We get this sound. (Beep) When we play them together, it sounds like this.
This is an octave, right?
We can do this game. We can play a sound, play the same A.
(Beep) This is what we call a perfect fifth.
(Beep) They sound really nice together.
Let's multiply this sound by four-thirds. (Beep) What happens?
You get this sound. (Beep) This is the perfect fourth.
If the first one is an A, this is a D.
They sound like this together. (Beeps) This is the sound of four-thirds.
What I'm doing now, I'm changing my perspective.
I'm just viewing a number from another perspective.
I can even do this with rhythms, right?
I can take a rhythm and play three beats at one time (Drumbeats) in a period of time, and I can play another sound four times in that same space.
(Clanking sounds) Sounds kind of boring, but listen to them together.
(Drumbeats and clanking sounds) (Laughter) Hey! So.
(Laughter) I can even make a little hi-hat.
(Drumbeats and cymbals) Can you hear this?
So, this is the sound of four-thirds.
Again, this is as a rhythm.
(Drumbeats and cowbell) And I can keep doing this and play games with this number.
Four-thirds is a really great number. I love four-thirds!
(Laughter) Truly -- it's an undervalued number.
So if you take a sphere and look at the volume of the sphere, it's actually four-thirds of some particular cylinder.
So four-thirds is in the sphere. It's the volume of the sphere.
OK, so why am I doing all this?
Well, I want to talk about what it means to understand something and what we mean by understanding something.
That's my aim here.
And my claim is that you understand something if you have the ability to view it from different perspectives.
Let's look at this letter. It's a beautiful R, right?
How do you know that?
Well, as a matter of fact, you've seen a bunch of R's, and you've generalized and abstracted all of these and found a pattern.
So you know that this is an R.
So what I'm aiming for here is saying something about how understanding and changing your perspective are linked.
And I'm a teacher and a lecturer, and I can actually use this to teach something, because when I give someone else another story, a metaphor, an analogy, if I tell a story from a different point of view, I enable understanding.
I make understanding possible, because you have to generalize over everything you see and hear, and if I give you another perspective, that will become easier for you.
Let's do a simple example again.
This is four and three. This is four triangles.
So this is also four-thirds, in a way.
Let's just join them together.
Now we're going to play a game; we're going to fold it up into a three-dimensional structure.
I love this.
This is a square pyramid.
And let's just take two of them and put them together.
So this is what is called an octahedron.
It's one of the five platonic solids.
Now we can quite literally change our perspective, because we can rotate it around all of the axes and view it from different perspectives.
And I can change the axis, and then I can view it from another point of view, but it's the same thing, but it looks a little different.
I can do it even one more time.
Every time I do this, something else appears, so I'm actually learning more about the object when I change my perspective.
I can use this as a tool for creating understanding.
I can take two of these and put them together like this and see what happens.
And it looks a little bit like the octahedron.
Have a look at it if I spin it around like this.
What happens?
Well, if you take two of these, join them together and spin it around, there's your octahedron again, a beautiful structure.
If you lay it out flat on the floor, this is the octahedron.
This is the graph structure of an octahedron.
And I can continue doing this.
You can draw three great circles around the octahedron, and you rotate around, so actually three great circles is related to the octahedron.
And if I take a bicycle pump and just pump it up, you can see that this is also a little bit like the octahedron.
Do you see what I'm doing here?
I am changing the perspective every time.
So let's now take a step back -- and that's actually a metaphor, stepping back -- and have a look at what we're doing.
I'm playing around with metaphors.
I'm playing around with perspectives and analogies.
I'm telling one story in different ways.
I'm telling stories.
I'm making a narrative; I'm making several narratives.
And I think all of these things make understanding possible.
I think this actually is the essence of understanding something.
I truly believe this.
So this thing about changing your perspective -- it's absolutely fundamental for humans.
Let's play around with the Earth.
Let's zoom into the ocean, have a look at the ocean.
We can do this with anything.
We can take the ocean and view it up close.
We can look at the waves.
We can go to the beach.
We can view the ocean from another perspective.
Every time we do this, we learn a little bit more about the ocean.
If we go to the shore, we can kind of smell it, right?
We can hear the sound of the waves.
We can feel salt on our tongues.
So all of these are different perspectives.
And this is the best one.
We can go into the water.
We can see the water from the inside.
And you know what?
This is absolutely essential in mathematics and computer science.
If you're able to view a structure from the inside, then you really learn something about it.
That's somehow the essence of something.
So when we do this, and we've taken this journey into the ocean, we use our imagination.
And I think this is one level deeper, and it's actually a requirement for changing your perspective.
We can do a little game.
You can imagine that you're sitting there.
You can imagine that you're up here, and that you're sitting here.
You can view yourselves from the outside.
That's really a strange thing.
You're changing your perspective.
You're using your imagination, and you're viewing yourself from the outside.
That requires imagination.
Mathematics and computer science are the most imaginative art forms ever.
And this thing about changing perspectives should sound a little bit familiar to you, because we do it every day.
And then it's called empathy.
When I view the world from your perspective, I have empathy with you.
If I really, truly understand what the world looks like from your perspective, I am empathetic.
That requires imagination.
And that is how we obtain understanding.
And this is all over mathematics and this is all over computer science, and there's a really deep connection between empathy and these sciences.
So my conclusion is the following: understanding something really deeply has to do with the ability to change your perspective.
So my advice to you is: try to change your perspective.
You can study mathematics.
It's a wonderful way to train your brain.
Changing your perspective makes your mind more flexible.
It makes you open to new things, and it makes you able to understand things.
And to use yet another metaphor: have a mind like water.
That's nice.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I feel incredibly lucky to be from a country that's generally considered to be the best place in the world to be a woman.
In 1975, when I was seven years old, women in Iceland went on a strike.
They did no work that day, whether they held professional jobs or had the work of the home.
They marched into the center of Reykjavk -- 90 percent of women participated -- and peacefully and in solidarity asked for equality.
Nothing worked in Iceland that day, because nothing works when women are not at work.
(Applause) Five years later, Icelanders had the courage to be the first country in the world to democratically elect a woman as their president.
I will never forget this day, that President Vigds, as we know her by her first name, stepped out on the balcony of her own home, a single mom with her daughter by her side as she had won.
(Applause) This woman was an incredible role model for me and everyone growing up at that time, including boys.
She frequently shares the story of how a young boy approached her after a couple of terms in office and asked, "Can boys really grow up to be president?"
(Laughter) Role models really matter, but even with such strong role models who I am so grateful for, when I was encouraged to run for president, my first reaction was, "Who am I to run for president?
Who am I to be president?"
It turns out that women are less likely to consider running than men.
So a study done in the US in 2011 showed that 62 percent of men had considered running for office, but 45 percent of women.
That's gap of 16 percentage points, and it's the same gap that existed a decade earlier.
And it really is a shame, because I am so convinced that the world is in real need for women leaders and more principle-based leadership in general.
So my decision to run ultimately came down to the fact that I felt that I had to do my bit, even if I had no political experience, to step up and try to be part of creating the world that will make sense and be sustainable for our kids, and a world where we truly allow both our boys and girls to be all they can be.
And it was the journey of my life.
It was amazing.
The journey started with potentially as many as 20 candidates.
It boiled down to nine candidates qualifying, and ultimately the race came down to four of us, three men and me.
(Applause) But that's not all the drama yet.
You may think you have drama in the US, but I can -- (Laughter) I can assure you we had our own drama in Iceland.
So our sitting president of 20 years announced initially that he was not going to run, which is probably what gave rise to so many candidates considering running.
Then later he changed his mind when our prime minister resigned following the infamous Panama Papers that implicated him and his family.
And there was a popular protest in Iceland, so the sitting president thought they needed a trusted leader.
A few days later, relations to his wife and her family's companies were also discovered in the Panama Papers, and so he withdrew from the race again.
Before doing so, he said he was doing that because now there were two qualified men who he felt could fill his shoes running for office.
So on May 9, 45 days before election day, it was not looking too good for me.
I did not even make the graph in the newspaper.
The polls had me at 1 percent, but that was still the highest that any woman announcing her candidacy had earned.
So it would be an understatement to say that I had to work extremely hard to get my seat at the table and access to television, because the network decided that they would only include those with 2.5 percent or more in the polls in the first TV debate.
I found out on the afternoon of the first TV debate that I would participate along with the three men, and I found out on live TV that I came in at exactly 2.5 percent on the day of the first TV debate.
(Applause) So, challenges.
The foremost challenges I had to face and overcome on this journey had to do with media, muscle and money.
Let's start with media.
There are those who say gender doesn't matter when it comes to media and politics.
I can't say that I agree.
It proved harder for me to both get access and airtime in media.
As a matter of fact, the leading candidate appeared in broadcast media 87 times in the months leading up to the elections, whereas I appeared 31 times.
And I am not saying media is doing this consciously.
I think largely this has to do with unconscious bias, because in media, much like everywhere else, we have both conscious and unconscious bias, and we need to have the courage to talk about it if we want to change it.
When I finally got access to TV, the first question I got was, "Are you going to quit?"
And that was a hard one.
But of course, with 1 percent to 2.5 percent in the polls, maybe it's understandable.
But media really matters, and every time I appeared on TV, we saw and experienced a rise in the polls, so I know firsthand how much this matters and why we have to talk about it.
I was the only one out of the final four candidates that never got a front page interview.
I was sometimes left out of the questions asked of all other candidates and out of coverage about the elections.
So I did face this, but I will say this to compliment the Icelandic media.
I got few if any comments about my hair and pantsuit.
(Applause) So kudos to them.
But there is another experience that's very important.
I ran as an independent candidate, not with any political party or muscle behind me.
That lack of experience and lack of access to resources probably came at a cost to our campaign, but it also allowed us to innovate and do politics differently.
We ran a positive campaign, and we probably changed the tone of the election for others by doing that.
It may be the reason why I had less airtime on TV, because I wanted to show other contenders respect.
When access to media proved to be so difficult, we ran our own media.
I ran live Facebook sessions where I took questions from voters on anything and responded on the spot.
And we put all the questions I got and all the answers on an open Facebook because we thought transparency is important if you want to establish trust.
And when reaching young voters proved to be challenging, I became a Snapchatter.
I got young people to teach me how to do that, and I used every filter on Snapchat during the last part of the campaign.
And I actually had to use a lot of humor and humility, as I was very bad at it.
But we grew the following amongst young people by doing that.
So it's possible to run a different type of campaign.
But unfortunately, one cannot talk about politics without mentioning money.
I am sad that it is that way, but it's true, and we had less financial resources than the other candidates.
This probably was partly due to the fact that I think I had a harder time asking for financial support.
And maybe I also had the ambition to do more with less.
Some would call that very womanly of me.
But even with one third the media, one third the financial resources, and only an entrepreneurial team, but an amazing team, we managed to surprise everyone on election night, when the first numbers came in.
I surprised myself, as you may see in that photo.
(Laughter) So the first numbers, I came in neck to neck to the leading candidate.
(Cheers) Well, too early, because I didn't quite pull that, but I came in second, and we went a long way from the one percent, with nearly a third of the vote, and we beat the polls by an unprecedented margin, or 10 percentage points above what the last poll came in at.
Some people call me the real winner of the election because of this, and there are many people who encouraged me to run again.
But what really makes me proud is to know that I earned proportionately higher percentage support from the young people, and a lot of people encouraged my daughter to run in 2040.
(Applause) She is 13, and she had never been on TV before.
And on election day, I observed her on TV repeatedly, and she was smart, she was self-confident, she was sincere, and she was supportive of her mother.
This was probably the highlight of my campaign.
(Applause) But there was another one.
These are preschool girls out on a walk, and they found a poster of me on a bus stop, and they saw the need to kiss it.
Audience: Aw!
This picture was really enough of a win for me.
What we see, we can be.
So screw fear and challenges.
(Applause) It matters that women run, and it's time for women to run for office, be it the office of the CEO or the office of the president.
I also managed to put an impression on your very own "New Yorker."
I earned a new title, "A living emoji of sincerity."
(Cheers) It is possibly my proudest title yet, and the reason is that women too often get penalized for using what I call their emotional capital, but I know from experience that we become so good when we do just that.
(Applause) And we need more of that.
We celebrated as if we had won on election night, because that's how we felt.
So you don't necessarily have to reach that office.
You just have to go for it, and you, your family, your friends, everyone working with you, if you do it well, you will grow beyond anything you will experience before.
So we had a good time, and I learned a lot on this journey, probably more lessons than I can share here in the time we have today.
But rest assured, it was hard work.
I lost a lot of sleep during those months.
It took resilience and perseverance to not quit, but I learned something that I knew before on the one percent day, and that is that you can only be good when you are truly, authentically listening to your own voice and working in alignment with that.
As a good sister of mine sometimes says, you may cheat on your intuition, but your intuition never cheats on you.
I think it's also very important, and you all know this, that on any journey you go on, it's the team you take along.
It's having people around you who share your values, your vision, but are different in every other way.
That's the formula for success for me, and I am blessed with an amazing husband, here today, an incredible family -- (Applause) and great friends, and we came together as entrepreneurs in the political arena, and pulled something off that everyone said would be impossible.
As a matter of fact, the leading PR expert told me before I made my decision that I would do well to get seven percent.
I appreciated his perspective, because he was probably right, and he was basing it on valuable experience.
But on the one percent day, I decided here to show him that he was wrong.
It's very important to mention this, because I did lose a lot of sleep, and I worked hard, and so did the people with me.
We can never go the distance if we forget to take care of ourselves.
And it's two things that I think are very important in that, in surrounding yourself with people and practices that nourish you, but it's equally important, maybe even more important, to have the courage to get rid of people and practices that take away your energy, including the wonderful bloggers and commentators.
I took a lot of support from others in doing this, and I made the decision to go high when others went low, and that's partly how I kept my energy going throughout all of this.
And when I lost my energy for a moment -- and I did from time to time, it wasn't easy -- I went back to why I decided to run, and how I had decided to run my own race.
I called it a 4G campaign, the G's representing the Icelandic words.
And the first one is called "Gagn."
I ran to do good, to be of service, and I wanted servant leadership to be at the center of how I worked and everybody else in the campaign.
Second one is "Glei," or joy.
I decided to enjoy the journey.
There was a lot to be taken out of the journey, no matter if the destination was reached or not.
And I tried my utmost to inspire others to do so as well.
Third is "Gagnsi."
I was open to any questions.
I kept no secrets, and it was all open, on Facebook and websites.
Because I think if you're choosing your president, you deserve answers to your questions.
Last but not least, I don't need to explain that in this room, we ran on the principle of Girlpower.
(Cheers) I am incredibly glad that I had the courage to run, to risk failure but receive success on so many levels.
I can't tell you that it was easy, but I can tell you, and I think my entire team will agree with me, that it was worth it.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
Thank you.
(Applause) Pat Mitchell: I'm not letting you go yet.
Halla Tmasdttir: What a great crowd.
PM: I can't let you go without saying that probably everybody in the room is ready to move to Iceland and vote for you.
But of course we probably can't vote there, but one thing we can get from Iceland and have always gotten is inspiration.
I mean, I'm old enough to remember 1975 when all the Icelandic women walked out, and that really was a very big factor in launching the women's movement.
You made a reference to it earlier. I'd love to bring the picture back up and just have us remember what it was like when a country came to a standstill.
And then what you may not know because our American media did not report it, the Icelandic women walked out again on Monday. Right?
HT: Yes, they did. PM: Can you tell us about that?
HT: Yes, so 41 years after the original strike, we may be the best place in the world to be a woman, but our work isn't done.
So at 2:38pm on Monday, women in Iceland left work, because that's when they had earned their day's salary.
(Applause) What's really cool about this is that young women and men participated in greater numbers than before, because it is time that we close the pay gap.
PM: So I'm not going to ask Halla to commit right now to what she's doing next, but I will say that you'd have a very large volunteer army should you decide to do that again.
Thank you Halla.
HT: Thank you all.
(Applause)
Last year, three of my family members were gruesomely murdered in a hate crime.
It goes without saying that it's really difficult for me to be here today, but my brother Deah, his wife Yusor, and her sister Razan don't give me much of a choice.
I'm hopeful that by the end of this talk you will make a choice, and join me in standing up against hate.
It's December 27, 2014: the morning of my brother's wedding day.
He asks me to come over and comb his hair in preparation for his wedding photo shoot.
A 23-year-old, six-foot-three basketball, particularly Steph Curry, fanatic -- (Laughter) An American kid in dental school ready to take on the world.
When Deah and Yusor have their first dance, I see the love in his eyes, her reciprocated joy, and my emotions begin to overwhelm me.
I move to the back of the hall and burst into tears.
And the second the song finishes playing, he beelines towards me, buries me into his arms and rocks me back and forth.
Even in that moment, when everything was so distracting, he was attuned to me.
He cups my face and says, "Suzanne, I am who I am because of you.
Thank you for everything.
I love you."
About a month later, I'm back home in North Carolina for a short visit, and on the last evening, I run upstairs to Deah's room, eager to find out how he's feeling being a newly married man.
With a big boyish smile he says, "I'm so happy. I love her. She's an amazing girl."
And she is.
At just 21, she'd recently been accepted to join Deah at UNC dental school.
She shared his love for basketball, and at her urging, they started their honeymoon off attending their favorite team of the NBA, the LA Lakers.
I mean, check out that form.
(Laughter) I'll never forget that moment sitting there with him -- how free he was in his happiness.
My littler brother, a basketball-obsessed kid, had become and transformed into an accomplished young man.
He was at the top of his dental school class, and alongside Yusor and Razan, was involved in local and international community service projects dedicated to the homeless and refugees, including a dental relief trip they were planning for Syrian refugees in Turkey.
Razan, at just 19, used her creativity as an architectural engineering student to serve those around her, making care packages for the local homeless, among other projects.
That is who they were.
Standing there that night, I take a deep breath and look at Deah and tell him, "I have never been more proud of you than I am in this moment."
He pulls me into his tall frame, hugs me goodnight, and I leave the next morning without waking him to go back to San Francisco.
That is the last time I ever hug him.
Ten days later, I'm on call at San Francisco General Hospital when I receive a barrage of vague text messages expressing condolences.
Confused, I call my father, who calmly intones, "There's been a shooting in Deah's neighborhood in Chapel Hill.
It's on lock-down. That's all we know."
I hang up and quickly Google, "shooting in Chapel Hill."
One hit comes up.
Quote: "Three people were shot in the back of the head and confirmed dead on the scene."
Something in me just knows.
I fling out of my chair and faint onto the gritty hospital floor, wailing.
I take the first red-eye out of San Francisco, numb and disoriented.
I walk into my childhood home and faint into my parents' arms, sobbing.
I then run up to Deah's room as I did so many times before, just looking for him, only to find a void that will never be filled.
Investigation and autopsy reports eventually revealed the sequence of events.
Deah had just gotten off the bus from class, Razan was visiting for dinner, already at home with Yusor.
As they began to eat, they heard a knock on the door.
When Deah opened it, their neighbor proceeded to fire multiple shots at him.
According to 911 calls, the girls were heard screaming.
The man turned towards the kitchen and fired a single shot into Yusor's hip, immobilizing her.
He then approached her from behind, pressed the barrel of his gun against her head, and with a single bullet, lacerated her midbrain.
He then turned towards Razan, who was screaming for her life, and, execution-style, with a single bullet to the back of the head, killed her.
On his way out, he shot Deah one last time -- a bullet in the mouth -- for a total of eight bullets: two lodged in the head, two in his chest and the rest in his extremities.
Deah, Yusor and Razan were executed in a place that was meant to be safe: their home.
For months, this man had been harassing them: knocking on their door, brandishing his gun on a couple of occasions.
His Facebook was cluttered with anti-religion posts.
Yusor felt particularly threatened by him.
As she was moving in, he told Yusor and her mom that he didn't like the way they looked.
In response, Yusor's mom told her to be kind to her neighbor, that as he got to know them, he'd see them for who they were.
I guess we've all become so numb to the hatred that we couldn't have ever imagined it turning into fatal violence.
The man who murdered my brother turned himself in to the police shortly after the murders, saying he killed three kids, execution-style, over a parking dispute.
The police issued a premature public statement that morning, echoing his claims without bothering to question it or further investigate.
It turns out there was no parking dispute.
There was no argument.
No violation.
But the damage was already done.
In a 24-hour media cycle, the words "parking dispute" had already become the go-to sound bite.
I sit on my brother's bed and remember his words, the words he gave me so freely and with so much love, "I am who I am because of you."
That's what it takes for me to climb through my crippling grief and speak out.
I cannot let my family's deaths be diminished to a segment that is barely discussed on local news.
They were murdered by their neighbor because of their faith, because of a piece of cloth they chose to don on their heads, because they were visibly Muslim.
Some of the rage I felt at the time was that if roles were reversed, and an Arab, Muslim or Muslim-appearing person had killed three white American college students execution-style, in their home, what would we have called it?
A terrorist attack.
When white men commit acts of violence in the US, they're lone wolves, mentally ill or driven by a parking dispute.
I know that I have to give my family voice, and I do the only thing I know how: I send a Facebook message to everyone I know in media.
A couple of hours later, in the midst of a chaotic house overflowing with friends and family, our neighbor Neal comes over, sits down next to my parents and asks, "What can I do?"
Neal had over two decades of experience in journalism, but he makes it clear that he's not there in his capacity as journalist, but as a neighbor who wants to help.
I ask him what he thinks we should do, given the bombardment of local media interview requests.
He offers to set up a press conference at a local community center.
Even now I don't have the words to thank him.
"Just tell me when, and I'll have all the news channels present," he said.
He did for us what we could not do for ourselves in a moment of devastation.
I delivered the press statement, still wearing scrubs from the previous night.
And in under 24 hours from the murders, I'm on CNN being interviewed by Anderson Cooper.
The following day, major newspapers -- including the New York Times, Chicago Tribune -- published stories about Deah, Yusor and Razan, allowing us to reclaim the narrative and call attention the mainstreaming of anti-Muslim hatred.
These days, it feels like Islamophobia is a socially acceptable form of bigotry.
We just have to put up with it and smile.
The nasty stares, the palpable fear when boarding a plane, the random pat downs at airports that happen 99 percent of the time.
It doesn't stop there.
We have politicians reaping political and financial gains off our backs.
Here in the US, we have presidential candidates like Donald Trump, casually calling to register American Muslims, and ban Muslim immigrants and refugees from entering this country.
It is no coincidence that hate crimes rise in parallel with election cycles.
Just a couple months ago, Khalid Jabara, a Lebanese-American Christian, was murdered in Oklahoma by his neighbor -- a man who called him a "filthy Arab."
This man was previously jailed for a mere 8 months, after attempting run over Khalid's mother with his car.
Chances are you haven't heard Khalid's story, because it didn't make it to national news.
The least we can do is call it what it is: a hate crime.
The least we can do is talk about it, because violence and hatred doesn't just happen in a vacuum.
Not long after coming back to work, I'm the senior on rounds in the hospital, when one of my patients looks over at my colleague, gestures around her face and says, "San Bernardino," referencing a recent terrorist attack.
Here I am having just lost three family members to Islamophobia, having been a vocal advocate within my program on how to deal with such microaggressions, and yet -- silence.
I was disheartened.
Humiliated.
Days later rounding on the same patient, she looks at me and says, "Your people are killing people in Los Angeles."
I look around expectantly.
Again: silence.
I realize that yet again, I have to speak up for myself.
I sit on her bed and gently ask her, "Have I ever done anything but treat you with respect and kindness?
Have I done anything but give you compassionate care?"
She looks down and realizes what she said was wrong, and in front of the entire team, she apologizes and says, "I should know better. I'm Mexican-American.
I receive this kind of treatment all the time."
Many of us experience microaggressions on a daily basis.
Odds are you may have experienced it, whether for your race, gender, sexuality or religious beliefs.
We've all been in situations where we've witnessed something wrong and didn't speak up.
Maybe we weren't equipped with the tools to respond in the moment.
Maybe we weren't even aware of our own implicit biases.
We can all agree that bigotry is unacceptable, but when we see it, we're silent, because it makes us uncomfortable.
But stepping right into that discomfort means you are also stepping into the ally zone.
There may be over three million Muslims in America.
That's still just one percent of the total population.
Martin Luther King once said, "In the end, we will remember not the words of our enemies, but the silence of our friends."
So what made my neighbor Neal's allyship so profound?
A couple of things.
He was there as a neighbor who cared, but he was also bringing in his professional expertise and resources when the moment called for it.
Others have done the same.
Larycia Hawkins drew on her platform as the first tenured African-American professor at Wheaton College to wear a hijab in solidarity with Muslim women who face discrimination every day.
As a result, she lost her job.
Within a month, she joined the faculty at the University of Virginia, where she now works on pluralism, race, faith and culture.
Reddit cofounder, Alexis Ohanian, demonstrated that not all active allyship needs to be so serious.
He stepped up to support a 15-year-old Muslim girl's mission to introduce a hijab emoji.
(Laughter) It's a simple gesture, but it has a significant subconscious impact on normalizing and humanizing Muslims, including the community as a part of an "us" instead of an "other."
The editor in chief of Women's Running magazine just put the first hijabi to ever be on the cover of a US fitness magazine.
These are all very different examples of people who drew upon their platforms and resources in academia, tech and media, to actively express their allyship.
What resources and expertise do you bring to the table?
Are you willing to step into your discomfort and speak up when you witness hateful bigotry?
Will you be Neal?
Many neighbors appeared in this story.
And you, in your respective communities, all have a Muslim neighbor, colleague or friend your child plays with at school.
Reach out to them.
Let them know you stand with them in solidarity.
It may feel really small, but I promise you it makes a difference.
Nothing will ever bring back Deah, Yusor and Razan.
But when we raise our collective voices, that is when we stop the hate.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I design engineering projects for middle school and high school students, often using materials that are pretty unexpected.
My inspiration comes from problems in my daily life.
For example, one time I needed a costume to go to a comic convention, but I didn't want to spend too much money, so I made my own ...
with a light-up crown and skirt.
(Laughter) Another time, I was devastated because my favorite mobile game, Flappy Bird, was being taken off the app store.
(Laughter) So I was faced with the dilemma to either never update my phone or never play Flappy Bird again.
(Laughter) Unhappy with both options, I did the only thing that made sense to me.
I made a physical version of Flappy Bird that could never be taken off the app store.
(Laughter) (Music) (Beeping) (Music) (Laughter) So a few of my friends were also pretty addicted to the game, and I invited them to play as well.
(Video) Friend: Ah!
(Laughter) (Video) Friend: What the heck?
(Laughter) And they told me that it was just as infuriating as the original game.
(Laughter) So I uploaded a demo of this project online, and to my surprise it went viral.
It had over two million views in just a few days.
(Laughter) And what's more interesting are people's comments.
A lot of people wanted to make it their own, or asked me how it was made.
So this kind of confirmed my idea that through a creative project, we can teach people about engineering.
With the money made from the viral video, we were able to let students in our classroom all make their own game in a box.
Although it was pretty challenging, they learned a lot of new concepts in engineering and programming.
And they were all eager to learn so they could finish the game as well.
(Laughter) So before Flappy Bird Box, I had the idea of using creative engineering projects to teach students.
When I was teaching at a middle school, we asked our students to build a robot from a standard technology kit.
And I noticed that a lot of them seemed bored.
Then a few of them started taking pieces of paper and decorating their robots.
And then more of them got into it, and they became more interested in the project.
So I started looking for more creative ways to introduce technology to students.
What I found was that most technology kits available in school look a little intimidating.
They're all made of plastic parts that you can't customize.
On top of that, they're all very expensive, costing hundreds of dollars per kit.
So that's certainly not very affordable for most classroom budgets.
Since I didn't find anything, I decided to make something on my own.
I started with paper and fabric.
After all, we all played with those since we were kids, and they are also pretty cheap and can be found anywhere around the house.
And I prototyped a project where students can create a light-up creature using fabric and googly eyes.
They were all helping each other in classrooms, and were laughing and discussing the project.
And most importantly, they were able to insert their own creativity into the project.
So because of the success of this project, I continued to create more engineering projects to challenge my students.
And I also started to take these workshops outside of school and into the community.
And something really interesting happened.
I noticed a lot of people from very diverse backgrounds started coming to our workshops.
And specifically, there were a lot more women and minorities than I expected, and that you wouldn't usually see at a traditional engineering workshop.
Now take a look at this employee report at a major technology company in 2016.
Women make up only 19 percent of the technology workforce.
And underrepresented minorities make up only four percent.
This statistic might look familiar if you walked into a high school robotics club, or a college engineering class.
Now, there's a wide variety of problems that contribute to the lack of diversity in the technology force.
Perhaps one solution could be to introduce technology to students through creative projects.
I'm not saying that this could solve everything, but it could introduce technology to people who originally wouldn't be interested in it because of how it has been portrayed and taught in school.
So how do we start to change the perception of technology?
Most students think that it's boring or unwelcoming, so I have always designed projects following three principles.
First is having a low floor, and that means this project is easy to get started.
So take a look at this tutorial.
The first project we asked students to learn is to make a circuit on paper.
As you can see, it doesn't take very long to learn, and it's pretty easy even for beginners.
And having a low floor also means that we're removing the financial barrier that prevents people from completing a project.
So with paper, copper tape, lightbulb and a battery, people can complete this project for under a dollar.
So second principle is having a high ceiling.
This means that there's a lot of room to grow, and students are constantly being challenged.
At first it might just be a light-up creature, but then you can add sensors and microcontrollers, and start to program the creature to interact with its environment.
(Laughter) And finally, the third principle is customization.
This means that we can make this project relevant to anyone.
That's the beauty of using everyday materials; it's very easy to customize using paper and fabric.
So even if you don't like Flappy Bird, you can still make your own game.
(Video) Student: So our game is about Justin Bieber, because he's been speeding, and the object is to prevent him from getting caught by the LAPD -- (Laughter) (Video) Student: Yeah, but he's changing so -- we're a part of his posse.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause)
Carlos, the Vietnam vet Marine who volunteered for three tours and got shot up in every one.
In 1971, he was medically retired because he had so much shrapnel in his body that he was setting off metal detectors.
For the next 42 years, he suffered from nightmares, extreme anxiety in public, isolation, depression.
He self-medicated with alcohol.
He was married and divorced three times.
Carlos had post-traumatic stress disorder.
Now, I became a psychologist to help mitigate human suffering, and for the past 10 years, my target has been the suffering caused by PTSD, as experienced by veterans like Carlos.
Until recently, the science of PTSD just wasn't there.
And so, we didn't know what to do.
We put some veterans on heavy drugs.
Others we hospitalized and gave generic group therapy, and others still we simply said to them, "Just go home and try to forget about your experiences."
More recently, we've tried therapy dogs, wilderness retreats -- many things which may temporarily relieve stress, but which don't actually eliminate PTSD symptoms over the long term.
But things have changed.
And I am here to tell you that we can now eliminate PTSD, not just manage the symptoms, and in huge numbers of veterans.
Because new scientific research has been able to show, objectively, repeatedly, which treatments actually get rid of symptoms and which do not.
Now as it turns out, the best treatments for PTSD use many of the very same training principles that the military uses in preparing its trainees for war.
Now, making war -- this is something that we are good at.
We humans have been making war since before we were even fully human.
And since then, we have gone from using stone and sinew to developing the most sophisticated and devastating weapon systems imaginable.
And to enable our warriors to use these weapons, we employ the most cutting-edge training methods.
We are good at making war.
And we are good at training our warriors to fight.
Yet, when we consider the experience of the modern-day combat veteran, we begin to see that we have not been as good at preparing them to come home.
Why is that?
Well, our ancestors lived immersed in conflict, and they fought right where they lived.
So until only very recently in our evolutionary history, there was hardly a need to learn how to come home from war, because we never really did.
But thankfully, today, most of humanity lives in far more peaceful societies, and when there is conflict, we, especially in the United States, now have the technology to put our warriors through advanced training, drop them in to fight anywhere on the globe and when they're done, jet them back to peacetime suburbia.
But just imagine for a moment what this must feel like.
I've spoken with veterans who've told me that one day they're in a brutal firefight in Afghanistan where they saw carnage and death, and just three days later, they found themselves toting an ice chest to their kid's soccer game.
"Mindfuck" is the most common term.
(Laughter) It's the most common term I've heard to describe that experience.
And that's exactly what that is.
Because while our warriors spend countless hours training for war, we've only recently come to understand that many require training on how to return to civilian life.
Now, like any training, the best PTSD treatments require repetition.
In the military, we don't simply hand trainees Mark-19 automatic grenade launchers and say, "Here's the trigger, here's some ammo and good luck."
No. We train them, on the range and in specific contexts, over and over and over until lifting their weapon and engaging their target is so engrained into muscle memory that it can be performed without even thinking, even under the most stressful conditions you can imagine.
Now, the same holds for training-based treatments.
The first of these treatments is cognitive therapy, and this is a kind of mental recalibration.
When veterans come home from war, their way of mentally framing the world is calibrated to an immensely more dangerous environment.
So when you try to overlay that mind frame onto a peacetime environment, you get problems.
You begin drowning in worries about dangers that aren't present.
You begin not trusting family or friends.
Which is not to say there are no dangers in civilian life; there are.
It's just that the probability of encountering them compared to combat is astronomically lower.
So we never advise veterans to turn off caution completely.
We do train them, however, to adjust caution according to where they are.
If you find yourself in a bad neighborhood, you turn it up.
Out to dinner with family?
You turn it way down.
We train veterans to be fiercely rational, to systematically gauge the actual statistical probability of encountering, say, an IED here in peacetime America.
With enough practice, those recalibrations stick.
The next of these treatments is exposure therapy, and this is a kind of field training, and the fastest of the proven effective treatments out there.
You remember Carlos?
This was the treatment that he chose.
And so we started off by giving him exercises, for him, challenging ones: going to a grocery store, going to a shopping mall, going to a restaurant, sitting with his back to the door.
And, critically -- staying in these environments.
Now, at first he was very anxious.
He wanted to sit where he could scan the room, where he could plan escape routes, where he could get his hands on a makeshift weapon.
And he wanted to leave, but he didn't.
He remembered his training in the Marine Corps, and he pushed through his discomfort.
And every time he did this, his anxiety ratcheted down a little bit, and then a little bit more and then a little bit more, until in the end, he had effectively relearned how to sit in a public space and just enjoy himself.
He also listened to recordings of his combat experiences, over and over and over.
He listened until those memories no longer generated any anxiety.
He processed his memories so much that his brain no longer needed to return to those experiences in his sleep.
And when I spoke with him a year after treatment had finished, he told me, "Doc, this is the first time in 43 years that I haven't had nightmares."
Now, this is different than erasing a memory.
Veterans will always remember their traumatic experiences, but with enough practice, those memories are no longer as raw or as painful as they once were.
They don't feel emotionally like they just happened yesterday, and that is an immensely better place to be.
But it's often difficult.
And, like any training, it may not work for everybody.
And there are trust issues.
Sometimes I'm asked, "If you haven't been there, Doc, how can you help me?"
Which is understandable.
But at the point of returning to civilian life, you do not require somebody who's been there.
You don't require training for operations on the battlefield; you require training on how to come home.
For the past 10 years of my work, I have been exposed to detailed accounts of the worst experiences that you can imagine, daily.
And it hasn't always been easy.
There have been times where I have just felt my heart break or that I've absorbed too much.
But these training-based treatments work so well, that whatever this work takes out of me, it puts back even more, because I see people get better.
I see people's lives transform.
Carlos can now enjoy outings with his grandchildren, which is something he couldn't even do with his own children.
And what's amazing to me is that after 43 years of suffering, it only took him 10 weeks of intense training to get his life back.
And when I spoke with him, he told me, "I know that I can't get those years back.
But at least now, whatever days that I have left on this Earth, I can live them in peace."
He also said, "I hope that these younger veterans don't wait to get the help they need."
And that's my hope, too.
Because ...
this life is short, and if you are fortunate enough to have survived war or any kind of traumatic experience, you owe it to yourself to live your life well.
And you shouldn't wait to get the training you need to make that happen.
Now, the best way of ending human suffering caused by war is to never go to war.
But we are just not there yet as a species.
Until we are, the mental suffering that we create in our sons and in our daughters when we send them off to fight can be alleviated.
But we must ensure that the science, the energy level, the value that we place on sending them off to war is at the very least mirrored in how well we prepare them to come back home to us.
This much, we owe them.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Chris Anderson: So, Jon, this feels scary.
Jonathan Haidt: Yeah.
CA: It feels like the world is in a place that we haven't seen for a long time.
People don't just disagree in the way that we're familiar with, on the left-right political divide.
There are much deeper differences afoot.
What on earth is going on, and how did we get here?
JH: This is different.
There's a much more apocalyptic sort of feeling.
Survey research by Pew Research shows that the degree to which we feel that the other side is not just -- we don't just dislike them; we strongly dislike them, and we think that they are a threat to the nation.
Those numbers have been going up and up, and those are over 50 percent now on both sides.
People are scared, because it feels like this is different than before; it's much more intense.
Whenever I look at any sort of social puzzle, I always apply the three basic principles of moral psychology, and I think they'll help us here.
So the first thing that you have to always keep in mind when you're thinking about politics is that we're tribal.
We evolved for tribalism.
One of the simplest and greatest insights into human social nature is the Bedouin proverb: "Me against my brother; me and my brother against our cousin; me and my brother and cousins against the stranger."
And that tribalism allowed us to create large societies and to come together in order to compete with others.
That brought us out of the jungle and out of small groups, but it means that we have eternal conflict.
The question you have to look at is: What aspects of our society are making that more bitter, and what are calming them down?
CA: That's a very dark proverb.
You're saying that that's actually baked into most people's mental wiring at some level?
JH: Oh, absolutely. This is just a basic aspect of human social cognition.
But we can also live together really peacefully, and we've invented all kinds of fun ways of, like, playing war.
I mean, sports, politics -- these are all ways that we get to exercise this tribal nature without actually hurting anyone.
We're also really good at trade and exploration and meeting new people.
So you have to see our tribalism as something that goes up or down -- it's not like we're doomed to always be fighting each other, but we'll never have world peace.
CA: The size of that tribe can shrink or expand.
JH: Right.
CA: The size of what we consider "us" and what we consider "other" or "them" can change.
And some people believed that process could continue indefinitely.
JH: That's right.
CA: And we were indeed expanding the sense of tribe for a while.
JH: So this is, I think, where we're getting at what's possibly the new left-right distinction.
I mean, the left-right as we've all inherited it, comes out of the labor versus capital distinction, and the working class, and Marx.
But I think what we're seeing now, increasingly, is a divide in all the Western democracies between the people who want to stop at nation, the people who are more parochial -- and I don't mean that in a bad way -- people who have much more of a sense of being rooted, they care about their town, their community and their nation.
And then those who are anti-parochial and who -- whenever I get confused, I just think of the John Lennon song "Imagine."
"Imagine there's no countries, nothing to kill or die for."
And so these are the people who want more global governance, they don't like nation states, they don't like borders.
You see this all over Europe as well.
There's a great metaphor guy -- actually, his name is Shakespeare -- writing ten years ago in Britain.
He had a metaphor: "Are we drawbridge-uppers or drawbridge-downers?"
And Britain is divided 52-48 on that point.
And America is divided on that point, too.
CA: And so, those of us who grew up with The Beatles and that sort of hippie philosophy of dreaming of a more connected world -- it felt so idealistic and "how could anyone think badly about that?"
And what you're saying is that, actually, millions of people today feel that that isn't just silly; it's actually dangerous and wrong, and they're scared of it.
JH: I think the big issue, especially in Europe but also here, is the issue of immigration.
And I think this is where we have to look very carefully at the social science about diversity and immigration.
Once something becomes politicized, once it becomes something that the left loves and the right -- then even the social scientists can't think straight about it.
Now, diversity is good in a lot of ways.
It clearly creates more innovation.
The American economy has grown enormously from it.
Diversity and immigration do a lot of good things.
But what the globalists, I think, don't see, what they don't want to see, is that ethnic diversity cuts social capital and trust.
There's a very important study by Robert Putnam, the author of "Bowling Alone," looking at social capital databases.
And basically, the more people feel that they are the same, the more they trust each other, the more they can have a redistributionist welfare state.
Scandinavian countries are so wonderful because they have this legacy of being small, homogenous countries.
And that leads to a progressive welfare state, a set of progressive left-leaning values, which says, "Drawbridge down! The world is a great place.
People in Syria are suffering -- we must welcome them in."
And it's a beautiful thing.
But if, and I was in Sweden this summer, if the discourse in Sweden is fairly politically correct and they can't talk about the downsides, you end up bringing a lot of people in.
That's going to cut social capital, it makes it hard to have a welfare state and they might end up, as we have in America, with a racially divided, visibly racially divided, society.
So this is all very uncomfortable to talk about.
But I think this is the thing, especially in Europe and for us, too, we need to be looking at.
CA: You're saying that people of reason, people who would consider themselves not racists, but moral, upstanding people, have a rationale that says humans are just too different; that we're in danger of overloading our sense of what humans are capable of, by mixing in people who are too different.
JH: Yes, but I can make it much more palatable by saying it's not necessarily about race.
It's about culture.
There's wonderful work by a political scientist named Karen Stenner, who shows that when people have a sense that we are all united, we're all the same, there are many people who have a predisposition to authoritarianism.
Those people aren't particularly racist when they feel as through there's not a threat to our social and moral order.
But if you prime them experimentally by thinking we're coming apart, people are getting more different, then they get more racist, homophobic, they want to kick out the deviants.
So it's in part that you get an authoritarian reaction.
The left, following through the Lennonist line -- the John Lennon line -- does things that create an authoritarian reaction.
We're certainly seeing that in America with the alt-right.
We saw it in Britain, we've seen it all over Europe.
But the more positive part of that is that I think the localists, or the nationalists, are actually right -- that, if you emphasize our cultural similarity, then race doesn't actually matter very much.
So an assimilationist approach to immigration removes a lot of these problems.
And if you value having a generous welfare state, you've got to emphasize that we're all the same.
CA: OK, so rising immigration and fears about that are one of the causes of the current divide.
What are other causes?
JH: The next principle of moral psychology is that intuitions come first, strategic reasoning second.
You've probably heard the term "motivated reasoning" or "confirmation bias."
There's some really interesting work on how our high intelligence and our verbal abilities might have evolved not to help us find out the truth, but to help us manipulate each other, defend our reputation ...
We're really, really good at justifying ourselves.
And when you bring group interests into account, so it's not just me, it's my team versus your team, whereas if you're evaluating evidence that your side is wrong, we just can't accept that.
So this is why you can't win a political argument.
If you're debating something, you can't persuade the person with reasons and evidence, because that's not the way reasoning works.
So now, give us the internet, give us Google: "I heard that Barack Obama was born in Kenya.
Let me Google that -- oh my God! 10 million hits! Look, he was!"
CA: So this has come as an unpleasant surprise to a lot of people.
Social media has often been framed by techno-optimists as this great connecting force that would bring people together.
And there have been some unexpected counter-effects to that.
JH: That's right.
That's why I'm very enamored of yin-yang views of human nature and left-right -- that each side is right about certain things, but then it goes blind to other things.
And so the left generally believes that human nature is good: bring people together, knock down the walls and all will be well.
The right -- social conservatives, not libertarians -- social conservatives generally believe people can be greedy and sexual and selfish, and we need regulation, and we need restrictions.
So, yeah, if you knock down all the walls, allow people to communicate all over the world, you get a lot of porn and a lot of racism.
CA: So help us understand.
What's changed that's deepened this feeling of division?
JH: You have to see six to ten different threads all coming together.
I'll just list a couple of them.
So in America, one of the big -- actually, America and Europe -- one of the biggest ones is World War II.
There's interesting research from Joe Henrich and others that says if your country was at war, especially when you were young, then we test you 30 years later in a commons dilemma or a prisoner's dilemma, you're more cooperative.
Because of our tribal nature, if you're -- my parents were teenagers during World War II, and they would go out looking for scraps of aluminum to help the war effort.
I mean, everybody pulled together.
And so then these people go on, they rise up through business and government, they take leadership positions.
They're really good at compromise and cooperation.
They all retire by the '90s.
So we're left with baby boomers by the end of the '90s.
And their youth was spent fighting each other within each country, in 1968 and afterwards.
The loss of the World War II generation, "The Greatest Generation," is huge.
So that's one.
Another, in America, is the purification of the two parties.
There used to be liberal Republicans and conservative Democrats.
So America had a mid-20th century that was really bipartisan.
But because of a variety of factors that started things moving, by the 90's, we had a purified liberal party and conservative party.
So now, the people in either party really are different, and we really don't want our children to marry them, which, in the '60s, didn't matter very much.
So, the purification of the parties.
Third is the internet and, as I said, it's just the most amazing stimulant for post-hoc reasoning and demonization.
CA: The tone of what's happening on the internet now is quite troubling.
I just did a quick search on Twitter about the election and saw two tweets next to each other.
One, against a picture of racist graffiti: "This is disgusting!
Ugliness in this country, brought to us by #Trump."
And then the next one is: "Crooked Hillary dedication page. Disgusting!"
So this idea of "disgust" is troubling to me.
Because you can have an argument or a disagreement about something, you can get angry at someone.
Disgust, I've heard you say, takes things to a much deeper level.
JH: That's right. Disgust is different.
Anger -- you know, I have kids.
They fight 10 times a day, and they love each other 30 times a day.
You just go back and forth: you get angry, you're not angry; you're angry, you're not angry.
But disgust is different.
Disgust paints the person as subhuman, monstrous, deformed, morally deformed.
Disgust is like indelible ink.
There's research from John Gottman on marital therapy.
If you look at the faces -- if one of the couple shows disgust or contempt, that's a predictor that they're going to get divorced soon, whereas if they show anger, that doesn't predict anything, because if you deal with anger well, it actually is good.
So this election is different.
Donald Trump personally uses the word "disgust" a lot.
He's very germ-sensitive, so disgust does matter a lot -- more for him, that's something unique to him -- but as we demonize each other more, and again, through the Manichaean worldview, the idea that the world is a battle between good and evil as this has been ramping up, we're more likely not just to say they're wrong or I don't like them, but we say they're evil, they're satanic, they're disgusting, they're revolting.
And then we want nothing to do with them.
And that's why I think we're seeing it, for example, on campus now.
We're seeing more the urge to keep people off campus, silence them, keep them away.
I'm afraid that this whole generation of young people, if their introduction to politics involves a lot of disgust, they're not going to want to be involved in politics as they get older.
CA: So how do we deal with that?
Disgust. How do you defuse disgust?
JH: You can't do it with reasons.
I think ...
I studied disgust for many years, and I think about emotions a lot.
And I think that the opposite of disgust is actually love.
Love is all about, like ...
Disgust is closing off, borders.
Love is about dissolving walls.
So personal relationships, I think, are probably the most powerful means we have.
You can be disgusted by a group of people, but then you meet a particular person and you genuinely discover that they're lovely.
And then gradually that chips away or changes your category as well.
The tragedy is, Americans used to be much more mixed up in the their towns by left-right or politics.
And now that it's become this great moral divide, there's a lot of evidence that we're moving to be near people who are like us politically.
It's harder to find somebody who's on the other side.
So they're over there, they're far away.
It's harder to get to know them.
CA: What would you say to someone or say to Americans, people generally, about what we should understand about each other that might help us rethink for a minute this "disgust" instinct?
JH: Yes.
A really important thing to keep in mind -- there's research by political scientist Alan Abramowitz, showing that American democracy is increasingly governed by what's called "negative partisanship."
That means you think, OK there's a candidate, you like the candidate, you vote for the candidate.
But with the rise of negative advertising and social media and all sorts of other trends, increasingly, the way elections are done is that each side tries to make the other side so horrible, so awful, that you'll vote for my guy by default.
And so as we more and more vote against the other side and not for our side, you have to keep in mind that if people are on the left, they think, "Well, I used to think that Republicans were bad, but now Donald Trump proves it.
And now every Republican, I can paint with all the things that I think about Trump."
And that's not necessarily true.
They're generally not very happy with their candidate.
This is the most negative partisanship election in American history.
So you have to first separate your feelings about the candidate from your feelings about the people who are given a choice.
And then you have to realize that, because we all live in a separate moral world -- the metaphor I use in the book is that we're all trapped in "The Matrix," or each moral community is a matrix, a consensual hallucination.
And so if you're within the blue matrix, everything's completely compelling that the other side -- they're troglodytes, they're racists, they're the worst people in the world, and you have all the facts to back that up.
But somebody in the next house from yours is living in a different moral matrix.
They live in a different video game, and they see a completely different set of facts.
And each one sees different threats to the country.
And what I've found from being in the middle and trying to understand both sides is: both sides are right.
There are a lot of threats to this country, and each side is constitutionally incapable of seeing them all.
CA: So, are you saying that we almost need a new type of empathy?
Empathy is traditionally framed as: "Oh, I feel your pain. I can put myself in your shoes."
And we apply it to the poor, the needy, the suffering.
We don't usually apply it to people who we feel as other, or we're disgusted by.
JH: No. That's right.
CA: What would it look like to build that type of empathy?
JH: Actually, I think ...
Empathy is a very, very hot topic in psychology, and it's a very popular word on the left in particular.
Empathy is a good thing, and empathy for the preferred classes of victims.
So it's important to empathize with the groups that we on the left think are so important.
That's easy to do, because you get points for that.
But empathy really should get you points if you do it when it's hard to do.
And, I think ...
You know, we had a long 50-year period of dealing with our race problems and legal discrimination, and that was our top priority for a long time and it still is important.
But I think this year, I'm hoping it will make people see that we have an existential threat on our hands.
Our left-right divide, I believe, is by far the most important divide we face.
We still have issues about race and gender and LGBT, but this is the urgent need of the next 50 years, and things aren't going to get better on their own.
So we're going to need to do a lot of institutional reforms, and we could talk about that, but that's like a whole long, wonky conversation.
But I think it starts with people realizing that this is a turning point.
And yes, we need a new kind of empathy.
We need to realize: this is what our country needs, and this is what you need if you don't want to -- Raise your hand if you want to spend the next four years as angry and worried as you've been for the last year -- raise your hand.
So if you want to escape from this, read Buddha, read Jesus, read Marcus Aurelius.
They have all kinds of great advice for how to drop the fear, reframe things, stop seeing other people as your enemy.
There's a lot of guidance in ancient wisdom for this kind of empathy.
CA: Here's my last question: Personally, what can people do to help heal?
JH: Yeah, it's very hard to just decide to overcome your deepest prejudices.
And there's research showing that political prejudices are deeper and stronger than race prejudices in the country now.
So I think you have to make an effort -- that's the main thing.
Make an effort to actually meet somebody.
Everybody has a cousin, a brother-in-law, somebody who's on the other side.
So, after this election -- wait a week or two, because it's probably going to feel awful for one of you -- but wait a couple weeks, and then reach out and say you want to talk.
And before you do it, read Dale Carnegie, "How to Win Friends and Influence People" -- (Laughter) I'm totally serious.
You'll learn techniques if you start by acknowledging, if you start by saying, "You know, we don't agree on a lot, but one thing I really respect about you, Uncle Bob," or "... about you conservatives, is ... " And you can find something.
If you start with some appreciation, it's like magic.
This is one of the main things I've learned that I take into my human relationships.
I still make lots of stupid mistakes, but I'm incredibly good at apologizing now, and at acknowledging what somebody was right about.
And if you do that, then the conversation goes really well, and it's actually really fun.
CA: Jon, it's absolutely fascinating speaking with you.
It really does feel like the ground that we're on is a ground populated by deep questions of morality and human nature.
Your wisdom couldn't be more relevant.
Thank you so much for sharing this time with us.
JH: Thanks, Chris.
JH: Thanks, everyone.
(Applause)
Economists have been exploring people's behavior for hundreds of years: how we make decisions, how we act individually and in groups, how we exchange value.
They've studied the institutions that facilitate our trade, like legal systems, corporations, marketplaces.
But there is a new, technological institution that will fundamentally change how we exchange value, and it's called the blockchain.
Now, that's a pretty bold statement, but if you take nothing else away from this talk, I actually want you to remember that while blockchain technology is relatively new, it's also a continuation of a very human story, and the story is this.
As humans, we find ways to lower uncertainty about one another so that we can exchange value.
Now, one of the first people to really explore the idea of institutions as a tool in economics to lower our uncertainties about one another and be able to do trade was the Nobel economist Douglass North.
He passed away at the end of 2015, but North pioneered what's called "new institutional economics."
And what he meant by institutions were really just formal rules like a constitution, and informal constraints, like bribery.
These institutions are really the grease that allow our economic wheels to function, and we can see this play out over the course of human history.
If we think back to when we were hunter-gatherer economies, we really just traded within our village structure.
We had some informal constraints in place, but we enforced all of our trade with violence or social repercussions.
As our societies grew more complex and our trade routes grew more distant, we built up more formal institutions, institutions like banks for currency, governments, corporations.
These institutions helped us manage our trade as the uncertainty and the complexity grew, and our personal control was much lower.
Eventually with the internet, we put these same institutions online.
We built platform marketplaces like Amazon, eBay, Alibaba, just faster institutions that act as middlemen to facilitate human economic activity.
As Douglass North saw it, institutions are a tool to lower uncertainty so that we can connect and exchange all kinds of value in society.
And I believe we are now entering a further and radical evolution of how we interact and trade, because for the first time, we can lower uncertainty not just with political and economic institutions, like our banks, our corporations, our governments, but we can do it with technology alone.
So what is the blockchain?
Blockchain technology is a decentralized database that stores a registry of assets and transactions across a peer-to-peer network.
It's basically a public registry of who owns what and who transacts what.
The transactions are secured through cryptography, and over time, that transaction history gets locked in blocks of data that are then cryptographically linked together and secured.
This creates an immutable, unforgeable record of all of the transactions across this network.
This record is replicated on every computer that uses the network.
It's not an app.
It's not a company.
I think it's closest in description to something like Wikipedia.
We can see everything on Wikipedia.
It's a composite view that's constantly changing and being updated.
We can also track those changes over time on Wikipedia, and we can create our own wikis, because at their core, they're just a data infrastructure.
On Wikipedia, it's an open platform that stores words and images and the changes to that data over time.
On the blockchain, you can think of it as an open infrastructure that stores many kinds of assets.
It stores the history of custodianship, ownership and location for assets like the digital currency Bitcoin, other digital assets like a title of ownership of IP.
It could be a certificate, a contract, real world objects, even personal identifiable information.
There are of course other technical details to the blockchain, but at its core, that's how it works.
It's this public registry that stores transactions in a network and is replicated so that it's very secure and hard to tamper with.
Which brings me to my point of how blockchains lower uncertainty and how they therefore promise to transform our economic systems in radical ways.
So uncertainty is kind of a big term in economics, but I want to go through three forms of it that we face in almost all of our everyday transactions, where blockchains can play a role.
We face uncertainties like not knowing who we're dealing with, not having visibility into a transaction and not having recourse if things go wrong.
So let's take the first example, not knowing who we're dealing with.
Say I want to buy a used smartphone on eBay.
The first thing I'm going to do is look up who I'm buying from.
Are they a power user?
Do they have great reviews and ratings, or do they have no profile at all?
Reviews, ratings, checkmarks: these are the attestations about our identities that we cobble together today and use to lower uncertainty about who we're dealing with.
But the problem is they're very fragmented.
Think about how many profiles you have.
Blockchains allow for us to create an open, global platform on which to store any attestation about any individual from any source.
This allows us to create a user-controlled portable identity.
More than a profile, it means you can selectively reveal the different attributes about you that help facilitate trade or interaction, for instance that a government issued you an ID, or that you're over 21, by revealing the cryptographic proof that these details exist and are signed off on.
Having this kind of portable identity around the physical world and the digital world means we can do all kinds of human trade in a totally new way.
So I've talked about how blockchains could lower uncertainty in who we're dealing with.
The second uncertainty that we often face is just not having transparency into our interactions.
Say you're going to send me that smartphone by mail.
I want some degree of transparency.
I want to know that the product I bought is the same one that arrives in the mail and that there's some record for how it got to me.
This is true not just for electronics like smartphones, but for many kinds of goods and data, things like medicine, luxury goods, any kind of data or product that we don't want tampered with.
The problem in many companies, especially those that produce something complicated like a smartphone, is they're managing all of these different vendors across a horizontal supply chain.
All of these people that go into making a product, they don't have the same database.
They don't use the same infrastructure, and so it becomes really hard to see transparently a product evolve over time.
Using the blockchain, we can create a shared reality across nontrusting entities.
By this I mean all of these nodes in the network do not need to know each other or trust each other, because they each have the ability to monitor and validate the chain for themselves.
Think back to Wikipedia.
It's a shared database, and even though it has multiple readers and multiple writers at the same time, it has one single truth.
So we can create that using blockchains.
We can create a decentralized database that has the same efficiency of a monopoly without actually creating that central authority.
So all of these vendors, all sorts of companies, can interact using the same database without trusting one another.
It means for consumers, we can have a lot more transparency.
As a real-world object travels along, we can see its digital certificate or token move on the blockchain, adding value as it goes.
This is a whole new world in terms of our visibility.
So I've talked about how blockchains can lower our uncertainties about identity and how they change what we mean about transparency in long distances and complex trades, like in a supply chain.
The last uncertainty that we often face is one of the most open-ended, and it's reneging.
What if you don't send me the smartphone?
Can I get my money back?
Blockchains allow us to write code, binding contracts, between individuals and then guarantee that those contracts will bear out without a third party enforcer.
So if we look at the smartphone example, you could think about escrow.
You are financing that phone, but you don't need to release the funds until you can verify that all the conditions have been met.
You got the phone.
I think this is one of the most exciting ways that blockchains lower our uncertainties, because it means to some degree we can collapse institutions and their enforcement.
It means a lot of human economic activity can get collateralized and automated, and push a lot of human intervention to the edges, the places where information moves from the real world to the blockchain.
I think what would probably floor Douglass North about this use of technology is the fact that the very thing that makes it work, the very thing that keeps the blockchain secure and verified, is our mutual distrust.
So rather than all of our uncertainties slowing us down and requiring institutions like banks, our governments, our corporations, we can actually harness all of that collective uncertainty and use it to collaborate and exchange more and faster and more open.
Now, I don't want you to get the impression that the blockchain is the solution to everything, even though the media has said that it's going to end world poverty, it's also going to solve the counterfeit drug problem and potentially save the rainforest.
The truth is, this technology is in its infancy, and we're going to need to see a lot of experiments take place and probably fail before we truly understand all of the use cases for our economy.
But there are tons of people working on this, from financial institutions to technology companies, start-ups and universities.
And one of the reasons is that it's not just an economic evolution.
It's also an innovation in computer science.
Blockchains give us the technological capability of creating a record of human exchange, of exchange of currency, of all kinds of digital and physical assets, even of our own personal attributes, in a totally new way.
So in some ways, they become a technological institution that has a lot of the benefits of the traditional institutions we're used to using in society, but it does this in a decentralized way.
It does this by converting a lot of our uncertainties into certainties.
So I think we need to start preparing ourselves, because we are about to face a world where distributed, autonomous institutions have quite a significant role.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you, Bettina.
I think I understood that it's coming, it offers a lot of potential, and it's complex.
What is your estimate for the rate of adoption?
Bettina Warburg: I think that's a really good question.
My lab is pretty much focused on going the enterprise and government route first, because in reality, blockchain is a complex technology.
How many of you actually understand how the internet works?
But you use it every day, so I think we're sort of facing the same John Sculley idea of technology should either be invisible or beautiful, and blockchain is kind of neither of those things right now, so it's better suited for either really early adopters who kind of get it and can tinker around or for finding those best use cases like identity or asset tracking or smart contracts that can be used at that level of an enterprise or government.
BG: Thank you. Thanks for coming to TED.
BW: Thanks.
(Applause)
The earliest time measurements were observations of cycles of the natural world, using patterns of changes from day to night and season to season to build calendars.
More precise time-keeping, like sundials and mechanical clocks, eventually came along to put time in more convenient boxes.
But what exactly is it that were measuring?
Is time something that physically exists, or is it just in our heads?
At first the answer seems obvious of course time exists; it constantly unfolds all around us, and its hard to imagine the universe without it.
But our understanding of time started getting complicated thanks to Einstein.
His theory of relativity tells us that time passes for everyone, but doesnt always pass at the same rate for people in different situations, like those travelling close to the speed of light or orbiting a supermassive black hole.
Einstein resolved the malleability of time by combining it with space to define space-time, which can bend, but behaves in consistent, predictable ways.
Einsteins theory seemed to confirm that time is woven into the very fabric of the universe.
But theres a big question it didnt fully resolve: why is it we can move through space in any direction, but through time in only one?
No matter what we do, the past is always, stubbornly, behind us.
This is called the arrow of time.
When a drop of food coloring is dropped into a glass of water, we instinctively know that the coloring will drift out from the drop, eventually filling the glass.
Imagine watching the opposite happen.
Here, wed recognize time as unfolding backwards.
We live in a universe where the food coloring spreads out in the water, not a universe where it collects together.
In physics, this is described by the Second Law of Thermodynamics, which says that systems will gain disorder, or entropy, over time.
Systems in our universe move from order to disorder, and it is that property of the universe that defines the direction of times arrow.
So if time is such a fundamental property, it should be in our most fundamental equations describing the universe, right?
We currently have two sets of equations that govern physics.
General relativity describes the behavior of very large things, while quantum physics explains the very small.
One of the biggest goals in theoretical physics over the last half century has been reconciling the two into one fundamental theory of everything."
There have been many attempts none yet proven and they treat time in different ways.
Oddly enough, one contender called the Wheeler-DeWitt equation, doesnt include time at all.
Like all current theories of everything, that equation is speculative.
But as a thought experiment, if it or a similarly time-starved equation turned out to be true, would that mean that time doesnt exist, at the most fundamental level?
Could time just be some sort of illusion generated by the limitations of the way we perceive the universe?
We dont yet know, but maybe thats the wrong way of thinking about it.
Instead of asking if time exists as a fundamental property, maybe it could exist as an emergent one.
Emergent properties are things that dont exist in individual pieces of a system, but do exist for the system as a whole.
Each individual water molecule doesnt have a tide, but the whole ocean does.
A movie creates change through time by using a series of still images that appear to have a fluid, continuous change between them.
Flipping through the images fast enough, our brains perceive the passage of time from the sequence of still images.
No individual frame of the movie changes or contains the passage of time, but its a property that comes out of how the pieces are strung together.
The movement is real, yet also an illusion.
Could the physics of time somehow be a similar illusion?
Physicists are still exploring these and other questions, so were far from a complete explanation.
At least for the moment.
Today, there are 1.8 billion young people between the ages of 10 and 24 in the world.
It is the largest cohort in human history.
Meeting their needs will be a big challenge.
But it's also a big opportunity.
They hold our shared future in their hands.
Every day, we read about young people lending their ideas and passions to fighting for change, social change, political change, change in their communities.
Imagine what they'll create: breakthroughs, inventions.
Maybe new medicines, new modes of transportation, new ways to communicate, sustainable economies and maybe even a world at peace.
But this opportunity, this youth dividend, is not a given.
One point eight billion young women and young men are standing at the door of adulthood.
Are they ready?
Right now, too few of them are.
My favorite part of my job at UNICEF is a chance to talk to, meet with and hear from young people all around the world.
And they tell me about their hopes and dreams.
And they have amazing hopes and dreams for what they'll accomplish in their lives.
But what they're also telling me is that they have fears.
They feel that they're facing a series of urgent crises.
A crisis of demographics, a crisis of education, a crisis of employment, a crisis of violence and a crisis for girls.
If you look at these crises, you realize that they're urgent and they need to be addressed now.
Because they tell us that they're worried.
They're worried that they might not get the education that they need.
And you know what?
They're right.
Two hundred million adolescents are out of school worldwide, about the population of Brazil.
And those that are in school feel that they may not be getting the right skills.
Globally, six in 10 children and young people do not meet the minimum proficiency level for reading and mathematics.
No country can be successful if nearly half of its population of young people are unable to read or write.
And what about the lucky few who are in secondary school?
Many of them are dropping out because they're worried that they're not getting skills that they can use to make a livelihood.
And sometimes, their parents can no longer afford the fees.
It's a tragedy.
And young people are also telling me that they're worried about employment, that they won't be able to find a job.
And again, they're right.
Every month, 10 million young people reach working age.
It's a staggering number.
Some will go on for further education, but many will enter the workforce.
And our world is not creating 10 million new jobs each month.
The competition is fierce for the jobs that are available.
So, imagine being a young person today, needing a job, seeking a livelihood, ready to build a future, and opportunities are hard to find.
Young people are also telling me that they're worried that they're not getting the skills that they need.
And again, they're right.
We are finding ourselves at a time in the world when the world is changing so fast for work.
We're in the fourth industrial revolution.
Young people do not want to be on the farms and in rural communities.
They want to go to the cities.
They want to learn future skills for future work.
They want to learn digital technology and green technologies.
They want to have a chance to learn modern agriculture.
They want to learn business and entrepreneurship, so that they can create a business of their own.
They want to be nurses and radiologists and pharmacists and doctors.
And they want to have all of the skills that they'll need for the future.
They also want to learn the trades, like construction and electricians.
These are all the professions that a country needs, as well as the professions that have not been invented yet.
And young people are also telling me that they're worried about violence.
At home, online, in school, in their communities.
And again, they're right.
A young person can have hundreds of friends on social media, but when they need to find a friendly face, someone who can be there as their friend, to talk to, they do not find one.
They face bullying, harassment and more.
And hundreds of millions are facing exploitation and abuse, and violence.
Every seven minutes, an adolescent boy or girl somewhere in the world is killed by an act of violence.
And girls are telling me that they're especially worried about their futures.
And sadly, they're right, too.
Girls face prejudice and discrimination.
They face early childhood marriage and they face life-threatening early pregnancy.
Imagine a population of the United States.
Now double it.
That's the number of women who were married before their 18th birthday.
Six hundred and fifty million.
And many were mothers while they were still children themselves.
One out of every three women will face physical abuse or sexual abuse in her lifetime.
So, no wonder girls are worried about their futures.
These urgent crises may not be a reality in your life or in your neighborhood.
And perhaps you've had opportunities for a good education and for marketable skills, and for getting a job.
And maybe you've never faced violence, or prejudice, or discrimination.
But there are tens of millions of young people who are not so lucky.
And they are sounding the alarm for their futures.
And that is why UNICEF and our many public and private partners are launching a new global initiative.
Young people themselves have named it.
And it's called Generation Unlimited or Gen-U or Gen you.
So, what they're saying is, it's our time, it's our turn, it's our future.
Our goal is very straightforward.
We want every young person in school, learning, training, or age-appropriate employment by the year 2030.
This goal is urgent, it's necessary, it's ambitious.
But we think it's also achievable.
So we're calling out for cutting-edge solutions and new ideas.
Ideas that will give young people a fighting chance for their futures.
We don't know all the answers, so we're reaching out to businesses and governments, and nonprofits, and academia, and communities, and innovators for help.
Gen-U is to be an open platform, where people can come and share their ideas and solutions about what works, what does not work, and importantly, what might work.
So if we can take these ideas and add a little bit of seed money, and add some good partners, and add good political will, we think they can scale up to reach thousands and millions of people around the world.
And with this project, we're also going to do something new.
We're going to co-design and co-create with young people.
So with Gen-U, they're going to be in the driver's seat, steering us all along the way.
In Argentina, there's a program where we connect students who are in rural, remote, hard to reach mountainous communities, with something they've seldom seen: a secondary school teacher.
So these students come to a classroom, they're joined by a community teacher and they're connected to urban schools online.
And there is the secondary school teacher, who is teaching them about digital technology and a good secondary school education, without them ever having to leave their own communities.
And in South Africa, there's a program called Techno Girls.
And these are girls from disadvantaged neighborhoods who are studying the STEM program area: science, technology, engineering and math.
And they have a chance to job shadow.
This is the way that they then can see themselves in jobs that are in engineering, in science, and maybe in the space program.
In Bangladesh, we have partners who are training tens of thousands of young people in the trades, so that they can become motorcycle repair people, or mobile phone service people.
But these are a chance to see their own livelihoods.
And maybe even to have a business of their own.
And in Vietnam, there's a program where we are pairing young entrepreneurs with the needs in their own local communities.
So with this program, a group gathered and they decided that they would solve the problem of transportation for people with disabilities in their communities.
So with a mentor and a bit of seed funding, they've now developed a new app to help the whole community.
And I've seen how these programs can make a difference.
When I was in Lebanon, I visited a program called Girls Got IT, or Girls Got It.
And in this program, girls who have been studying computer skills and the STEM program have a chance to work side by side with young professionals, so that they can learn firsthand what it's like to be an architect, a designer or a scientist.
And when you see these girls, smiles on their faces, the hot lights in their eyes, they are so excited, they have hope for the future.
They want to change the world.
And now, with this program and these mentors, they'll be able to do it.
But these ideas and programs are just a start.
They'll only reach a fraction of the young people that we need to reach.
We want to take these ideas and find ways to scale them up.
To reach more young people in more communities, in more places around the world.
And we want to dream big.
Could every school, everywhere in the world, no matter how remote or mountainous, or even if it's in a refugee camp, could they be connected to the internet?
Could we have instant translation for young people, so that you could get a good education in your own language, anywhere in the world?
And would it be possible that we could connect the education in your school with skills that you're going to need to get a job in your own community?
So that you actually can move from school to work.
And more.
In our everyday lives and in our workplaces, are there ways that we could support young people?
Young people are asking us for apprenticeships, for job shadowing, for internships.
Could we do this?
Young people are also asking us for work-study programs, places where they can learn and earn.
Could we do this and could we reach out to a community that's nearby, that's less advantaged, and help them?
Young people are also saying that they want to help other young people.
They want more space and more voice, so that they can gather to help each other.
In HIV centers, in refugee camps, but also to stop online bullying and early child marriage.
We need ideas, we need ideas that are big and small, ideas that are local and global.
This, in the end, is our responsibility.
A massive generation of young people are about to inherit our world.
It is our duty to leave a legacy of hope and opportunity for them but also with them.
Young people are 25 percent of our population.
But they are 100 percent of our future.
And they're calling out for a fighting chance to build a better world.
So their call should be our calling.
The calling of our time.
The time is now, the need is urgent.
And 1.8 billion young people are waiting.
Thank you.
(Applause)
(Music) We are the tribe that they cannot see We live on an industrial reservation We are the Halluci Nation We have been called the Indians We have been called Native American We have been called hostile We have been called pagan We have been called militant We have been called many names We are the Halluci Nation We are the human beings The callers of names cannot see us but we can see them We are the Halluci Nation Our DNA is of earth and sky Our DNA is of past and future We are the Halluci Nation We are the evolution, the continuation The Halluci Nation (Music) The virus took on many shapes The bear, the elk, the antelope, the elephant, the deer The mineral, the iron, the copper, the coltan, the rubber The coffee, the cotton, the sugar The people The germ traveled faster than the bullet They harvest the mountainside, protect the crops, herd the cattle The people The women and children were separated from the men They divided us according to the regional filters of their minds The violence of arrogance crawls into the air, nestles into the geospatial cortex We are not a conquered people The compound was on fire The missionaries never hid their perspective Prospectors of land would rather see us disappear Recyclable prayers The people This is my body which is given for you The people This is my blood We are not a conquered people (Electronic music and chanting) I was wakened by my elder brother The compound was on fire Awakened by my elder brother The compound was on fire (Music) The compound was on fire The compound was on fire The Halluci Nation The human beings The people See the spiritual in the natural Through sense and feeling Everything is related All the things of earth And in the sky have spirit Everything is sacred Confronted by the ALie Nation The subjects and the citizens See the material religions Through trauma and numb Nothing is related All the things of the earth and in the sky have energy to be exploited Even themselves, mining their spirits into souls sold Into nothing is sacred Not even their self The ALie Nation Alienation Ancestors Live in the DNA In genetic memory The evolution of descendants Human being is our natural identity Natural identity is where the power of being Waits for human recognition To understand Not to just know But to understand sacred Without religion we evolve Back into our ancestors With religion we disappear Into religious heaven and hell (Electronic music and chanting) Human beings We are human, we are of the earth (Electronic music and chanting) Human beings We are human We are of the earth Our bone, flesh, blood, metals, minerals, liquids, of earth We are earth We are being We are of the sky The sun, moon, stars A reality of how ancestors live We are the children of earth and sky We are the Halluci Nation (Applause) (Cheering) (Applause)
In the summer of 1895, crowds flooded the Coney Island boardwalk to see the latest marvel of roller coaster technology: the Flip Flap Railway.
This was Americas first-ever looping coaster  but its thrilling flip came at a price.
The ride caused numerous cases of severe whiplash, neck injury and even ejections, all due to its signature loop.
Today, coasters can pull off far more exciting tricks, without resorting to the thrill of a hospital visit.
But what exactly are roller coasters doing to your body, and how have they managed to get scarier and safer at the same time?
At the center of every roller coaster design is gravity.
Unlike cars or transit trains, most coasters are propelled around their tracks almost entirely by gravitational energy.
After the coaster crests the initial lift hill, it begins an expertly engineered cycle  building potential energy on ascents and expending kinetic energy on descents.
This rhythm repeats throughout the ride, acting out the coaster engineers choreographed dance of gravitational energy.
But theres a key variable in this cycle that wasnt always so carefully considered: you.
In the days of the Flip-Flap, ride designers were most concerned with coasters getting stuck somewhere along the track.
This led early builders to overcompensate, hurling trains down hills and pulling on the brakes when they reached the station.
But as gravity affects the cars, it also affects the passengers.
And under the intense conditions of a coaster, gravitys effects are multiplied.
Theres a common unit used by jet pilots, astronauts, and coaster designers called g force.
One G force is the familiar tug of gravity you feel when standing on Earth  this is the force of Earths gravitational pull on our bodies.
But as riders accelerate and decelerate, they experience more or less gravitational force.
Modern ride designers know that the body can handle up to roughly 5 Gs, but the Flip-Flap and its contemporaries routinely reached up to 12 Gs.
At those levels of gravitational pressure, blood is sent flying from your brain to your feet, leading to light-headedness or blackouts as the brain struggles to stay conscious.
And oxygen deprivation in the retinal cells impairs their ability to process light, causing greyed out vision or temporary blindness.
If the riders are upside down, blood can flood the skull, causing a bout of crimson vision called a redout.
Conversely, negative Gs create weightlessness.
Within the body, short-term weightlessness is mostly harmless.
It can contribute to a riders motion sickness by suspending the fluid in their inner ears which coordinates balance.
But the bigger potential danger  and thrill  comes from what ride designers call airtime.
This is when riders typically experience seat separation, and, without the proper precautions, ejection.
The numerous belts and harnesses of modern coasters have largely solved this issue, but the passengers ever-changing position can make it difficult to determine what needs to be strapped down.
Fortunately, modern ride designers are well aware of what your body, and the coaster, can handle.
Coaster engineers play these competing forces against each other, to relieve periods of intense pressure with periods of no pressure at all.
And since a quick transition from positive to negative G-force can result in whiplash, headaches, and back and neck pain, they avoid the extreme changes in speed and direction so common in thrill rides of old.
Modern rides are also much sturdier, closely considering the amount of gravity they need to withstand.
At 5 Gs, your body feels 5 times heavier; so if you weigh 100lbs, youd exert the weight of 500 lbs on the coaster.
Engineers have to account for the multiplied weight of every passenger when designing a coasters supports.
Still, these rides arent for everyone.
The floods of adrenaline, light-headedness, and motion sickness arent going anywhere soon.
But todays redundant restraints, 3D modeling and simulation software have made roller coasters safer and more thrilling than ever.
Our precise knowledge about the limits of the human body have helped us build coasters that are faster, taller, and loopier  and all without going off the rails.
Hi.
Thank you.
[Jennifer Brea is sound-sensitive.
The live audience was asked to applaud ASL-style, in silence.] So, five years ago, this was me.
I was a PhD student at Harvard, and I loved to travel.
I had just gotten engaged to marry the love of my life.
I was 28, and like so many of us when we are in good health, I felt like I was invincible.
Then one day I had a fever of 104.7 degrees.
I probably should have gone to the doctor, but I'd never really been sick in my life, and I knew that usually, if you have a virus, you stay home and you make some chicken soup, and in a few days, everything will be fine.
But this time it wasn't fine.
After the fever broke, for three weeks I was so dizzy, I couldn't leave my house.
I would walk straight into door frames.
I had to hug the walls just to make it to the bathroom.
That spring I got infection after infection, and every time I went to the doctor, he said there was absolutely nothing wrong.
He had his laboratory tests, which always came back normal.
All I had were my symptoms, which I could describe, but no one else can see.
I know it sounds silly, but you have to find a way to explain things like this to yourself, and so I thought maybe I was just aging.
Maybe this is what it's like to be on the other side of 25.
(Laughter) Then the neurological symptoms started.
Sometimes I would find that I couldn't draw the right side of a circle.
Other times I wouldn't be able to speak or move at all.
I saw every kind of specialist: infectious disease doctors, dermatologists, endocrinologists, cardiologists.
I even saw a psychiatrist.
My psychiatrist said, "It's clear you're really sick, but not with anything psychiatric.
I hope they can find out what's wrong with you."
The next day, my neurologist diagnosed me with conversion disorder.
He told me that everything -- the fevers, the sore throats, the sinus infection, all of the gastrointestinal, neurological and cardiac symptoms -- were being caused by some distant emotional trauma that I could not remember.
The symptoms were real, he said, but they had no biological cause.
I was training to be a social scientist.
I had studied statistics, probability theory, mathematical modeling, experimental design.
I felt like I couldn't just reject my neurologist's diagnosis.
It didn't feel true, but I knew from my training that the truth is often counterintuitive, so easily obscured by what we want to believe.
So I had to consider the possibility that he was right.
That day, I ran a small experiment.
I walked back the two miles from my neurologist's office to my house, my legs wrapped in this strange, almost electric kind of pain.
I meditated on that pain, contemplating how my mind could have possibly generated all this.
As soon as I walked through the door, I collapsed.
My brain and my spinal cord were burning.
My neck was so stiff I couldn't touch my chin to my chest, and the slightest sound -- the rustling of the sheets, my husband walking barefoot in the next room -- could cause excruciating pain.
I would spend most of the next two years in bed.
How could my doctor have gotten it so wrong?
I thought I had a rare disease, something doctors had never seen.
And then I went online and found thousands of people all over the world living with the same symptoms, similarly isolated, similarly disbelieved.
Some could still work, but had to spend their evenings and weekends in bed, just so they could show up the next Monday.
On the other end of the spectrum, some were so sick they had to live in complete darkness, unable to tolerate the sound of a human voice or the touch of a loved one.
I was diagnosed with myalgic encephalomyelitis.
You've probably heard it called "chronic fatigue syndrome."
For decades, that's a name that's meant that this has been the dominant image of a disease that can be as serious as this.
The key symptom we all share is that whenever we exert ourselves -- physically, mentally -- we pay and we pay hard.
If my husband goes for a run, he might be sore for a couple of days.
If I try to walk half a block, I might be bedridden for a week.
It is a perfect custom prison.
I know ballet dancers who can't dance, accountants who can't add, medical students who never became doctors.
It doesn't matter what you once were; you can't do it anymore.
It's been four years, and I've still never been as well as I was the minute before I walked home from my neurologist's office.
It's estimated that about 15 to 30 million people around the world have this disease.
In the US, where I'm from, it's about one million people.
That makes it roughly twice as common as multiple sclerosis.
Patients can live for decades with the physical function of someone with congestive heart failure.
Twenty-five percent of us are homebound or bedridden, and 75 to 85 percent of us can't even work part-time.
Yet doctors do not treat us and science does not study us.
How could a disease this common and this devastating have been forgotten by medicine?
When my doctor diagnosed me with conversion disorder, he was invoking a lineage of ideas about women's bodies that are over 2,500 years old.
The Roman physician Galen thought that hysteria was caused by sexual deprivation in particularly passionate women.
The Greeks thought the uterus would literally dry up and wander around the body in search of moisture, pressing on internal organs -- yes -- causing symptoms from extreme emotions to dizziness and paralysis.
The cure was marriage and motherhood.
These ideas went largely unchanged for several millennia until the 1880s, when neurologists tried to modernize the theory of hysteria.
Sigmund Freud developed a theory that the unconscious mind could produce physical symptoms when dealing with memories or emotions too painful for the conscious mind to handle.
It converted these emotions into physical symptoms.
This meant that men could now get hysteria, but of course women were still the most susceptible.
When I began investigating the history of my own disease, I was amazed to find how deep these ideas still run.
In 1934, 198 doctors, nurses and staff at the Los Angeles County General Hospital became seriously ill.
They had muscle weakness, stiffness in the neck and back, fevers -- all of the same symptoms I had when I first got diagnosed.
Doctors thought it was a new form of polio.
Since then, there have been more than 70 outbreaks documented around the world, of a strikingly similar post-infectious disease.
All of these outbreaks have tended to disproportionately affect women, and in time, when doctors failed to find the one cause of the disease, they thought that these outbreaks were mass hysteria.
Why has this idea had such staying power?
I do think it has to do with sexism, but I also think that fundamentally, doctors want to help.
They want to know the answer, and this category allows doctors to treat what would otherwise be untreatable, to explain illnesses that have no explanation.
The problem is that this can cause real harm.
In the 1950s, a psychiatrist named Eliot Slater studied a cohort of 85 patients who had been diagnosed with hysteria.
Nine years later, 12 of them were dead and 30 had become disabled.
Many had undiagnosed conditions like multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, brain tumors.
In 1980, hysteria was officially renamed "conversion disorder."
When my neurologist gave me that diagnosis in 2012, he was echoing Freud's words verbatim, and even today, women are 2 to 10 times more likely to receive that diagnosis.
The problem with the theory of hysteria or psychogenic illness is that it can never be proven.
It is by definition the absence of evidence, and in the case of ME, psychological explanations have held back biological research.
All around the world, ME is one of the least funded diseases.
In the US, we spend each year roughly 2,500 dollars per AIDS patient, 250 dollars per MS patient and just 5 dollars per year per ME patient.
This was not just lightning.
I was not just unlucky.
The ignorance surrounding my disease has been a choice, a choice made by the institutions that were supposed to protect us.
We don't know why ME sometimes runs in families, why you can get it after almost any infection, from enteroviruses to Epstein-Barr virus to Q fever, or why it affects women at two to three times the rate of men.
This issue is much bigger than just my disease.
When I first got sick, old friends were reaching out to me.
I soon found myself a part of a cohort of women in their late 20s whose bodies were falling apart.
What was striking was just how much trouble we were having being taken seriously.
I learned of one woman with scleroderma, an autoimmune connective tissue disease, who was told for years that it was all in her head.
Between the time of onset and diagnosis, her esophagus was so thoroughly damaged, she will never be able to eat again.
Another woman with ovarian cancer, who for years was told that it was just early menopause.
A friend from college, whose brain tumor was misdiagnosed for years as anxiety.
Here's why this worries me: since the 1950s, rates of many autoimmune diseases have doubled to tripled.
Forty-five percent of patients who are eventually diagnosed with a recognized autoimmune disease are initially told they're hypochondriacs.
Like the hysteria of old, this has everything to do with gender and with whose stories we believe.
Seventy-five percent of autoimmune disease patients are women, and in some diseases, it's as high as 90 percent.
Even though these diseases disproportionately affect women, they are not women's diseases.
ME affects children and ME affects millions of men.
And as one patient told me, we get it coming and going -- if you're a woman, you're told you're exaggerating your symptoms, but if you're a guy, you're told to be strong, to buck up.
And men may even have a more difficult time getting diagnosed.
My brain is not what it used to be.
Here's the good part: despite everything, I still have hope.
So many diseases were once thought of as psychological until science uncovered their biological mechanisms.
Patients with epilepsy could be forcibly institutionalized until the EEG was able to measure abnormal electrical activity in the brain.
Multiple sclerosis could be misdiagnosed as hysterical paralysis until the CAT scan and the MRI discovered brain lesions.
And recently, we used to think that stomach ulcers were just caused by stress, until we discovered that H. pylori was the culprit.
ME has never benefited from the kind of science that other diseases have had, but that's starting to change.
In Germany, scientists are starting to find evidence of autoimmunity, and in Japan, of brain inflammation.
In the US, scientists at Stanford are finding abnormalities in energy metabolism that are 16 standard deviations away from normal.
And in Norway, researchers are running a phase-3 clinical trial on a cancer drug that in some patients causes complete remission.
What also gives me hope is the resilience of patients.
Online we came together, and we shared our stories.
We devoured what research there was.
We experimented on ourselves.
We became our own scientists and our own doctors because we had to be.
And slowly I added five percent here, five percent there, until eventually, on a good day, I was able to leave my home.
I still had to make ridiculous choices: Will I sit in the garden for 15 minutes, or will I wash my hair today?
But it gave me hope that I could be treated.
I had a sick body; that was all.
And with the right kind of help, maybe one day I could get better.
I came together with patients around the world, and we started to fight.
We have filled the void with something wonderful, but it is not enough.
I still don't know if I will ever be able to run again, or walk at any distance, or do any of those kinetic things that I now only get to do in my dreams.
But I am so grateful for how far I have come.
Progress is slow, and it is up and it is down, but I am getting a little better each day.
I remember what it was like when I was stuck in that bedroom, when it had been months since I had seen the sun.
I thought that I would die there.
But here I am today, with you, and that is a miracle.
I don't know what would have happened had I not been one of the lucky ones, had I gotten sick before the internet, had I not found my community.
I probably would have already taken my own life, as so many others have done.
How many lives could we have saved, decades ago, if we had asked the right questions?
How many lives could we save today if we decide to make a real start?
Even once the true cause of my disease is discovered, if we don't change our institutions and our culture, we will do this again to another disease.
Living with this illness has taught me that science and medicine are profoundly human endeavors.
Doctors, scientists and policy makers are not immune to the same biases that affect all of us.
We need to think in more nuanced ways about women's health.
Our immune systems are just as much a battleground for equality as the rest of our bodies.
We need to listen to patients' stories, and we need to be willing to say, "I don't know."
"I don't know" is a beautiful thing.
"I don't know" is where discovery starts.
And if we can do that, if we can approach the great vastness of all that we do not know, and then, rather than fear uncertainty, maybe we can greet it with a sense of wonder.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I am so excited to be here.
Everything in America is so much bigger than in Europe.
Look at me -- I am huge!
(Laughter) It's fantastic!
And TED Talks -- TED Talks are where everybody has great ideas.
So the question is: Where do those great ideas come from?
Well, it's a little bit of debate, but it's generally reckoned that the average person -- that's me -- has about 50,000 thoughts a day.
Which is a lot, until you realize that 95 percent of them are the same ones you had the day before.
(Laughter) And a lot of mine are really boring, OK?
I think things like, "Oh! I know -- I must clean the floor.
Oh! I forgot to walk the dog."
My most popular: "Don't eat that cookie."
(Laughter) So, 95 percent repetition.
That leaves us with just a five percent window of opportunity each day to actually think something new.
And some of my new thoughts are useless.
The other day I was watching some sports on television, and I was trying to decide why I just don't engage with it.
Some of it I find curious.
This is odd.
(Laughter) Do you think it would be worth being that flexible just to be able to see your heel at that angle?
(Laughter) And here's the thing: I'm never going to be able to relate to that, because I'm never going to be able to do it, OK?
Well, not twice, anyway.
(Laughter) But I'll tell you the truth.
The truth is I have never been any good at sport, OK?
I've reached that wonderful age when all my friends say, "Oh, I wish I was as fit as I was when I was 18."
And I always feel rather smug then.
(Laughter) I'm exactly as fit as I was when I -- (Laughter) (Applause) I couldn't run then. I'm certainly not going to do it now.
(Laughter) So then I had my new idea: Why not engage people like me in sport?
I think what the world needs now is the Olympics for people with zero athletic ability.
(Laughter) Oh, it would be so much more fun.
We'd have three basic rules, OK?
Obviously no drugs; no corruption, no skills.
(Laughter) It would be -- No, it's a terrible idea.
And I also know why I don't engage with sport when I watch it on television.
It's because probably 97 percent of it is about men running and men kicking things, men trying to look neatly packaged in Lycra.
There is -- (Laughter) Not always successfully.
There is -- (Laughter) There is so little female sport on television, that a young woman watching might be forgiven for thinking, and how can I put this nicely, that the male member is the very lever you need to get yourself off the couch and onto a sports ground.
(Laughter) The inequalities in sport are breathtaking.
So this is what happens to me: I have a brand new idea, and immediately I come back to an old one.
The fact is, there is not now, nor has there ever been in the whole of history, a single country in the world where women have equality with men.
Not one.
196 countries, it hasn't happened in the whole of evolution.
So, here is a picture of evolution.
(Laughter) We women are not even in it!
(Laughter) It's a wonder men have been able to evolve quite so brilliantly.
So -- (Laughter) It bugs me, and I know I should do something about it.
But I'm busy, OK?
I have a full-on career, I've got three kids, I've got an elderly mom.
In fact, if I'm honest with you, one of the reasons I came out here is because TED Talks said I could have 15 minutes to myself, and I never have that much time -- (Laughter) (Applause) So I'm busy.
And anyway, I already had a go at changing the world.
Here's the thing, OK?
Everybody has inside themselves what I call an "activation button."
It's the button that gets pressed when you think, "I must do something about this."
It gets pressed for all sorts of reasons.
Maybe you face some kind of inequality, or you've come across an injustice of some kind, sometimes an illness strikes, or you're born in some way disadvantaged, or perhaps underprivileged.
So I was born gay, OK?
I've always known, I don't think my family were the least bit surprised.
Here is a picture of me aged four.
I look cute, but inside I genuinely believed that I looked like Clint Eastwood.
(Laughter) So my activation button was pressed when I had my kids -- three wonderful kids, born to my then-partner.
Now here's the thing: I work on television in Britain.
By the time they were born, I was already hosting my own shows and working in the public eye.
I love what I do, but I love my kids more.
And I didn't want them to grow up with a secret.
1994, when my son, my youngest was born, there was not, as far as I was aware, a single out, gay woman in British public life.
I don't think secrets are a good thing.
I think they are a cancer of the soul.
So I decided to come out.
Everybody warned me that I would never work again, but I decided it was absolutely worth the risk.
Well, it was hell.
In Britain, we have a particularly vicious section of the right-wing press, and they went nuts.
And their hatred stirred up the less stable elements of society, and we got death threats -- enough death threats that I had to take the kids into hiding, and we had to have police protection.
And I promise you there were many moments in the still of the night when I was terrified by what I had done.
Eventually the dust settled.
Against all expectation I carried on working, and my kids were and continue to be absolutely fantastic.
I remember when my son was six, he had a friend over to play.
They were in the next room; I could hear them chatting.
The friend said to my son, "What's it like having two mums?"
I was a little anxious to hear, so I leant in to hear and my son said, "It's fantastic, because if one of them's sick, you've still got another one to cook for you."
(Laughter) So my activation button for gay equality was pressed, and along with many, many others, I campaigned for years for gay rights, and in particular, the right to marry the person that I love.
In the end, we succeeded.
And in 2014, on the day that the law was changed, I married my wife, who I love very much, indeed.
(Applause) We didn't do it in a quiet way -- we did it on the stage at the Royal Festival Hall in London.
It was a great event.
The hall seats two-and-a-half thousand people.
We invited 150 family and friends, then I let it be known to the public: anybody who wanted to come and celebrate, please come and join us.
It would be free to anybody who wanted to come.
Two-and-half thousand people turned up.
(Applause) Every kind of person you can imagine: gays, straights, rabbis, nuns, married people, black, white -- the whole of humanity was there.
And I remember standing on that stage thinking, "How fantastic.
Job done.
Love triumphs.
Law changed."
And I -- (Applause) And I genuinely thought my activation days were over, OK?
So every year in that same hall, I host a fantastic concert to celebrate International Women's Day.
We gather the world's only all-female orchestra, we play fantastic music by forgotten or overlooked women composers, we have amazing conductors -- it's Marin Alsop there from Baltimore conducting, Petula Clark singing -- and I give a lecture on women's history.
I love to gather inspirational stories from the past and pass them on.
Too often, I think history's what I call the Mount Rushmore model.
It looks majestic, but the women have been entirely left out of it.
And I was giving a talk in 2015 about the suffragettes -- I'm sure you know those magnificent women who fought so hard for the right for women in Britain to vote.
And their slogan was: "Deeds, not words."
And boy, they succeeded, because women did indeed get the vote in 1928.
So I'm giving this talk about this, and as I'm talking, what I realized is: this was not a history lecture I was giving; this was not something where the job was done.
This was something where there was so much left to do.
Nowhere in the world, for example, do women have equal representation in positions of power.
OK, let's take a very quick look at the top 100 companies in the London Stock Exchange in 2016.
Top 100 companies: How many women running them?
Seven. OK. Seven. That's all right, I suppose.
Until you realize that 17 are run by men called "John."
(Laughter) There are more men called John running FTSE 100 companies -- (Laughter) than there are women.
There are 14 run by men called "Dave."
(Laughter) Now, I'm sure Dave and John are doing a bang-up job.
(Laughter) OK. Why does it matter?
Well, it's that pesky business of the gender pay gap.
Nowhere in the world do women earn the same as men.
And that is never going to change unless we have more women at the top in the boardroom.
We have plenty of laws; the Equal Pay Act in Britain was passed in 1975.
Nevertheless, there are still many, many women who, from early November until the end of the year, by comparison to their male colleagues, are effectively working for free.
In fact, the World Economic Forum estimates that women will finally get equal pay in ...
2133!
Yay!
(Laughter) That's a terrible figure.
And here's the thing: the day before I came out to give my talk, the World Economic Forum revised it.
So that's good, because that's a terrible -- 2133.
Do you know what they revised it to?
2186.
(Laughter) Yeah, another 53 years, OK?
We are not going to get equal pay in my grandchildren's grandchildren's lives under the current system.
And I have waited long enough.
I've waited long enough in my own business.
In 2016 I became the very first woman on British television to host a prime-time panel show.
Isn't that great? Wonderful, I'm thrilled.
But -- (Applause) But 2016! The first!
Television's been around for 80 years!
(Laughter) It may be television's not so important, but it's kind of symptomatic, isn't it?
2016, the UN were looking for a brand new ambassador to represent women's empowerment and gender equality, and who did they choose?
Wonder Woman.
Yes, they chose a cartoon, OK?
(Laughter) Because no woman was up to the job.
The representation of women in positions of power is shockingly low.
It's true in Congress, and it's certainly true in the British Parliament.
In 2015, the number of men elected to the Parliament that year was greater than the total number of women who have ever been members of Parliament.
And why does it matter?
Here's the thing: if they're not at the table -- literally, in Britain, at that table helping to make the laws -- do not be surprised if the female perspective is overlooked.
It's a great role model for young people to see a woman in charge.
In 2016, Britain got its second female Prime Minister; Theresa May came to power.
The day she came to power she was challenged: just do one thing.
Do one thing in the first 100 days that you're in office to try and improve lives for women in Britain.
And what did she do? Nothing.
Nothing.
Because she's much too busy cleaning up the mess the boys made.
Even having a female leader, they always find something better to do than to sort out the pesky issue of inequality.
So I keep talking about equality like it matters. Does it?
Well, let's take a very quick look at the STEM industries, OK?
So science, technology, engineering and mathematics.
Pretty much important in every single aspect of our daily lives.
There is the thickest and most incredibly well-documented glass ceiling in the STEM industries.
What if the cure for cancer or the answer the global warming lies in the head of a young female scientist who fails to progress?
So I thought all these things, and I knew I had to do "Deeds, not words."
And I spoke to my wonderful friend, brilliant journalist Catherine Mayer in Britain, and we rather foolishly -- and I suspect there was wine involved -- (Laughter) We decided to found a brand new political party.
Because here's the critical thing: the one place women and men are absolutely equal is at the ballot box.
We had no idea what we were doing, we didn't know how complicated it was to start a political party.
I thought, "It can't be that difficult, men have been doing it for years."
(Laughter) So we started by calling it "The Women's Equality Party."
And straightaway people said to me, "Why did you call it that?"
I said, "I don't know, I just thought we'd be clear."
(Laughter) I didn't want what we were doing to be a secret, you know? I just -- (Laughter) Some people said, "You can't call it that! It's much too feminist!"
Ooh! Scary word! Ahh!
I can't tell you how many times I've heard somebody say, "I'm not a feminist, but ..."
And I always think if there's a "but" in the sentence, it can't all be roses in the garden.
And then I started getting asked the hilarious question, "Are you all going to burn your bras?"
Yes! Because bras are famously made of flammable material.
(Laughter) That's why all women spark when they walk.
(Laughter) Here's quick history sidebar for you: no woman ever burnt her bra in the '60s.
It's a story made up by a journalist.
Thank goodness journalism has improved since then.
So -- (Laughter) I announced what we were going to do in a broadcast interview, and straightaway, the emails started coming.
First hundreds, then thousands and thousands, from every age group: from the very young to women in their '90s, to hundreds of wonderful men.
People wrote and said, "Please, can I help?
Please, can I visit you at party headquarters?"
We didn't have a headquarters -- we didn't have a party!
We didn't have anything.
All we had was a wonderful, tight group of fabulous friends trying to answer emails pretty much 24-7 in our pajamas.
We were all busy.
Many of us had careers, many of us had children, but we did what women do, and we shared the work.
And almost instantly, we agreed on certain fundamental things.
First thing: we want to be the only political party in the world whose main aim was to no longer need to exist.
That's a fantastic idea.
We wanted to be the only political party with no particular political leaning.
We wanted people from the left, from the right, from the middle, every age group.
Because the whole point was to work with a simple agenda: let's get equality in every aspect of our lives, and when we're finished, let's go home and get the other chores done.
(Laughter) And we wanted to change how politics is conducted.
I don't know if you have this, but in Britain we have two major political parties.
They're the dinosaurs of politics.
And how they speak to each other is shameful and poisonous.
I'm sure you've never had that kind of name-calling -- (Laughter) And lying here.
Wouldn't it be great if just one politician said, "Do you know, my opponent has a point.
Let's see if we can't work together and get the job done."
(Applause) And let's get more women into politics, OK?
Let's immediately get more women into politics by being the only political party to offer free childcare to our candidates, so they can get out of the house and start campaigning.
(Applause) Within 10 months, we had more than 70 branches of our party across the UK.
We stood candidates for election in London, Scotland and Wales in May 2016.
One in 20 people voted for our candidate for London Mayor.
And when the men in the race saw how many votes we were attracting, wonder of wonders, they began to talk about the need to tackle gender equality.
(Applause) You know, I've been promised change since I was a child.
It was always coming: women were going to stand shoulder to shoulder with men.
All I got were empty promises and disappointment -- enough disappointment to found a political party.
But here is my new idea for today -- this is my five percent, OK?
And this one is really good.
The fact is, this is not enough.
It is not enough to found one political party for equality in a single country.
What we need is a seismic change in the global political landscape.
And the wonderful thing about the model we have created is that it would work anywhere.
It would work in America, it would work in Australia, it would work in India.
It's like we've made the perfect recipe: anybody can cook it, and it's good for everybody.
And we want to give it away.
If you want to know what we did, we're giving it away.
Can you imagine if we could mobilize millions of women across the world to say, "That's enough!" to the traditional battles of politics?
To say, "Stop the bickering, let's get the work done."
We could literally change the world.
And I want that.
(Applause) I want ...
(Applause) I want that for our daughters, and I want it for our sons.
Because the fact is: equality is better for everyone.
Come on people, let's activate! Let's change the world!
I know we can do it, and it wants doing!
(Applause)
I'd like to try something new.
Those of you who are able, please stand up.
OK, so I'm going to name some names.
When you hear a name that you don't recognize, you can't tell me anything about them, I'd like you to take a seat and stay seated.
The last person standing, we're going to see what they know. OK?
(Laughter) All right.
Eric Garner.
Mike Brown.
Tamir Rice.
Freddie Gray.
So those of you who are still standing, I'd like you to turn around and take a look.
I'd say half to most of the people are still standing.
So let's continue.
Michelle Cusseaux.
Tanisha Anderson.
Aura Rosser.
Meagan Hockaday.
So if we look around again, there are about four people still standing, and actually I'm not going to put you on the spot.
I just say that to encourage transparency, so you can be seated.
(Laughter) So those of you who recognized the first group of names know that these were African-Americans who have been killed by the police over the last two and a half years.
What you may not know is that the other list is also African-Americans who have been killed within the last two years.
Only one thing distinguishes the names that you know from the names that you don't know: gender.
So let me first let you know that there's nothing at all distinct about this audience that explains the pattern of recognition that we've just seen.
I've done this exercise dozens of times around the country.
I've done it to women's rights organizations.
I've done it with civil rights groups.
I've done it with professors. I've done it with students.
I've done it with psychologists. I've done it with sociologists.
I've done it even with progressive members of Congress.
And everywhere, the awareness of the level of police violence that black women experience is exceedingly low.
Now, it is surprising, isn't it, that this would be the case.
I mean, there are two issues involved here.
There's police violence against African-Americans, and there's violence against women, two issues that have been talked about a lot lately.
But when we think about who is implicated by these problems, when we think about who is victimized by these problems, the names of these black women never come to mind.
Now, communications experts tell us that when facts do not fit with the available frames, people have a difficult time incorporating new facts into their way of thinking about a problem.
These women's names have slipped through our consciousness because there are no frames for us to see them, no frames for us to remember them, no frames for us to hold them.
As a consequence, reporters don't lead with them, policymakers don't think about them, and politicians aren't encouraged or demanded that they speak to them.
Now, you might ask, why does a frame matter?
I mean, after all, an issue that affects black people and an issue that affects women, wouldn't that necessarily include black people who are women and women who are black people?
Well, the simple answer is that this is a trickle-down approach to social justice, and many times it just doesn't work.
Without frames that allow us to see how social problems impact all the members of a targeted group, many will fall through the cracks of our movements, left to suffer in virtual isolation.
But it doesn't have to be this way.
Many years ago, I began to use the term "intersectionality" to deal with the fact that many of our social justice problems like racism and sexism are often overlapping, creating multiple levels of social injustice.
Now, the experience that gave rise to intersectionality was my chance encounter with a woman named Emma DeGraffenreid.
Emma DeGraffenreid was an African-American woman, a working wife and a mother.
I actually read about Emma's story from the pages of a legal opinion written by a judge who had dismissed Emma's claim of race and gender discrimination against a local car manufacturing plant.
Emma, like so many African-American women, sought better employment for her family and for others.
She wanted to create a better life for her children and for her family.
But she applied for a job, and she was not hired, and she believed that she was not hired because she was a black woman.
Now, the judge in question dismissed Emma's suit, and the argument for dismissing the suit was that the employer did hire African-Americans and the employer hired women.
The real problem, though, that the judge was not willing to acknowledge was what Emma was actually trying to say, that the African-Americans that were hired, usually for industrial jobs, maintenance jobs, were all men.
And the women that were hired, usually for secretarial or front-office work, were all white.
Only if the court was able to see how these policies came together would he be able to see the double discrimination that Emma DeGraffenreid was facing.
But the court refused to allow Emma to put two causes of action together to tell her story because he believed that, by allowing her to do that, she would be able to have preferential treatment.
She would have an advantage by having two swings at the bat, when African-American men and white women only had one swing at the bat.
But of course, neither African-American men or white women needed to combine a race and gender discrimination claim to tell the story of the discrimination they were experiencing.
Why wasn't the real unfairness law's refusal to protect African-American women simply because their experiences weren't exactly the same as white women and African-American men?
Rather than broadening the frame to include African-American women, the court simply tossed their case completely out of court.
Now, as a student of antidiscrimination law, as a feminist, as an antiracist, I was struck by this case.
It felt to me like injustice squared.
So first of all, black women weren't allowed to work at the plant.
Second of all, the court doubled down on this exclusion by making it legally inconsequential.
And to boot, there was no name for this problem.
And we all know that, where there's no name for a problem, you can't see a problem, and when you can't see a problem, you pretty much can't solve it.
Many years later, I had come to recognize that the problem that Emma was facing was a framing problem.
The frame that the court was using to see gender discrimination or to see race discrimination was partial, and it was distorting.
For me, the challenge that I faced was trying to figure out whether there was an alternative narrative, a prism that would allow us to see Emma's dilemma, a prism that would allow us to rescue her from the cracks in the law, that would allow judges to see her story.
So it occurred to me, maybe a simple analogy to an intersection might allow judges to better see Emma's dilemma.
So if we think about this intersection, the roads to the intersection would be the way that the workforce was structured by race and by gender.
And then the traffic in those roads would be the hiring policies and the other practices that ran through those roads.
Now, because Emma was both black and female, she was positioned precisely where those roads overlapped, experiencing the simultaneous impact of the company's gender and race traffic.
The law -- the law is like that ambulance that shows up and is ready to treat Emma only if it can be shown that she was harmed on the race road or on the gender road but not where those roads intersected.
So what do you call being impacted by multiple forces and then abandoned to fend for yourself?
Intersectionality seemed to do it for me.
I would go on to learn that African-American women, like other women of color, like other socially marginalized people all over the world, were facing all kinds of dilemmas and challenges as a consequence of intersectionality, intersections of race and gender, of heterosexism, transphobia, xenophobia, ableism, all of these social dynamics come together and create challenges that are sometimes quite unique.
But in the same way that intersectionality raised our awareness to the way that black women live their lives, it also exposes the tragic circumstances under which African-American women die.
Police violence against black women is very real.
The level of violence that black women face is such that it's not surprising that some of them do not survive their encounters with police.
Black girls as young as seven, great grandmothers as old as 95 have been killed by the police.
They've been killed in their living rooms, in their bedrooms.
They've been killed in their cars.
They've been killed on the street.
They've been killed in front of their parents and they've been killed in front of their children.
They have been shot to death.
They have been stomped to death.
They have been suffocated to death.
They have been manhandled to death.
They have been tasered to death.
They've been killed when they've called for help.
They've been killed when they were alone, and they've been killed when they were with others.
They've been killed shopping while black, driving while black, having a mental disability while black, having a domestic disturbance while black.
They've even been killed being homeless while black.
They've been killed talking on the cell phone, laughing with friends, sitting in a car reported as stolen and making a U-turn in front of the White House with an infant strapped in the backseat of the car.
Why don't we know these stories?
Why is it that their lost lives don't generate the same amount of media attention and communal outcry as the lost lives of their fallen brothers?
It's time for a change.
So what can we do?
In 2014, the African-American Policy Forum began to demand that we "say her name" at rallies, at protests, at conferences, at meetings, anywhere and everywhere that state violence against black bodies is being discussed.
But saying her name is not enough.
We have to be willing to do more.
We have to be willing to bear witness, to bear witness to the often painful realities that we would just rather not confront, the everyday violence and humiliation that many black women have had to face, black women across color, age, gender expression, sexuality and ability.
So we have the opportunity right now -- bearing in mind that some of the images that I'm about to share with you may be triggering for some -- to collectively bear witness to some of this violence.
We're going to hear the voice of the phenomenal Abby Dobson.
And as we sit with these women, some who have experienced violence and some who have not survived them, we have an opportunity to reverse what happened at the beginning of this talk, when we could not stand for these women because we did not know their names.
So at the end of this clip, there's going to be a roll call.
Several black women's names will come up.
I'd like those of you who are able to join us in saying these names as loud as you can, randomly, disorderly.
Let's create a cacophony of sound to represent our intention to hold these women up, to sit with them, to bear witness to them, to bring them into the light.
(Singing) Abby Dobson: Say, say her name.
Say, say her name.
(Audience) Shelly!
(Audience) Kayla!
AD: Oh, say her name.
(Audience shouting names) Say, say, say her name.
Say her name.
For all the names I'll never know, say her name.
KC: Aiyanna Stanley Jones, Janisha Fonville, Kathryn Johnston, Kayla Moore, Michelle Cusseaux, Rekia Boyd, Shelly Frey, Tarika, Yvette Smith.
AD: Say her name.
KC: So I said at the beginning, if we can't see a problem, we can't fix a problem.
Together, we've come together to bear witness to these women's lost lives.
But the time now is to move from mourning and grief to action and transformation.
This is something that we can do.
It's up to us.
Thank you for joining us.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I write about food. I write about cooking.
I take it quite seriously, but I'm here to talk about something that's become very important to me in the last year or two.
It is about food, but it's not about cooking, per se.
I'm going to start with this picture of a beautiful cow.
I'm not a vegetarian -- this is the old Nixon line, right?
But I still think that this -- (Laughter) -- may be this year's version of this.
Now, that is only a little bit hyperbolic.
And why do I say it?
Because only once before has the fate of individual people and the fate of all of humanity been so intertwined.
There was the bomb, and there's now.
And where we go from here is going to determine not only the quality and the length of our individual lives, but whether, if we could see the Earth a century from now, we'd recognize it.
It's a holocaust of a different kind, and hiding under our desks isn't going to help.
Start with the notion that global warming is not only real, but dangerous.
Since every scientist in the world now believes this, and even President Bush has seen the light, or pretends to, we can take this is a given.
Then hear this, please.
After energy production, livestock is the second-highest contributor to atmosphere-altering gases.
Nearly one-fifth of all greenhouse gas is generated by livestock production -- more than transportation.
Now, you can make all the jokes you want about cow farts, but methane is 20 times more poisonous than CO2, and it's not just methane.
Livestock is also one of the biggest culprits in land degradation, air and water pollution, water shortages and loss of biodiversity.
There's more.
Like half the antibiotics in this country are not administered to people, but to animals.
But lists like this become kind of numbing, so let me just say this: if you're a progressive, if you're driving a Prius, or you're shopping green, or you're looking for organic, you should probably be a semi-vegetarian.
Now, I'm no more anti-cattle than I am anti-atom, but it's all in the way we use these things.
There's another piece of the puzzle, which Ann Cooper talked about beautifully yesterday, and one you already know.
There's no question, none, that so-called lifestyle diseases -- diabetes, heart disease, stroke, some cancers -- are diseases that are far more prevalent here than anywhere in the rest of the world.
And that's the direct result of eating a Western diet.
Our demand for meat, dairy and refined carbohydrates -- the world consumes one billion cans or bottles of Coke a day -- our demand for these things, not our need, our want, drives us to consume way more calories than are good for us.
And those calories are in foods that cause, not prevent, disease.
Now global warming was unforeseen.
We didn't know that pollution did more than cause bad visibility.
Maybe a few lung diseases here and there, but, you know, that's not such a big deal.
The current health crisis, however, is a little more the work of the evil empire.
We were told, we were assured, that the more meat and dairy and poultry we ate, the healthier we'd be.
No. Overconsumption of animals, and of course, junk food, is the problem, along with our paltry consumption of plants.
Now, there's no time to get into the benefits of eating plants here, but the evidence is that plants -- and I want to make this clear -- it's not the ingredients in plants, it's the plants.
It's not the beta-carotene, it's the carrot.
The evidence is very clear that plants promote health.
This evidence is overwhelming at this point.
You eat more plants, you eat less other stuff, you live longer.
Not bad.
But back to animals and junk food.
What do they have in common?
One: we don't need either of them for health.
We don't need animal products, and we certainly don't need white bread or Coke.
Two: both have been marketed heavily, creating unnatural demand.
We're not born craving Whoppers or Skittles.
Three: their production has been supported by government agencies at the expense of a more health- and Earth-friendly diet.
Now, let's imagine a parallel.
Let's pretend that our government supported an oil-based economy, while discouraging more sustainable forms of energy, knowing all the while that the result would be pollution, war and rising costs.
Incredible, isn't it?
Yet they do that.
And they do this here. It's the same deal.
The sad thing is, when it comes to diet, is that even when well-intentioned Feds try to do right by us, they fail.
Either they're outvoted by puppets of agribusiness, or they are puppets of agribusiness.
So, when the USDA finally acknowledged that it was plants, rather than animals, that made people healthy, they encouraged us, via their overly simplistic food pyramid, to eat five servings of fruits and vegetables a day, along with more carbs.
What they didn't tell us is that some carbs are better than others, and that plants and whole grains should be supplanting eating junk food.
But industry lobbyists would never let that happen.
And guess what?
Half the people who developed the food pyramid have ties to agribusiness.
So, instead of substituting plants for animals, our swollen appetites simply became larger, and the most dangerous aspects of them remained unchanged.
So-called low-fat diets, so-called low-carb diets -- these are not solutions.
But with lots of intelligent people focusing on whether food is organic or local, or whether we're being nice to animals, the most important issues just aren't being addressed.
Now, don't get me wrong.
I like animals, and I don't think it's just fine to industrialize their production and to churn them out like they were wrenches.
But there's no way to treat animals well, when you're killing 10 billion of them a year.
That's our number. 10 billion.
If you strung all of them -- chickens, cows, pigs and lambs -- to the moon, they'd go there and back five times, there and back.
Now, my math's a little shaky, but this is pretty good, and it depends whether a pig is four feet long or five feet long, but you get the idea.
That's just the United States.
And with our hyper-consumption of those animals producing greenhouse gases and heart disease, kindness might just be a bit of a red herring.
Let's get the numbers of the animals we're killing for eating down, and then we'll worry about being nice to the ones that are left.
Another red herring might be exemplified by the word "locavore," which was just named word of the year by the New Oxford American Dictionary.
Seriously.
And locavore, for those of you who don't know, is someone who eats only locally grown food -- which is fine if you live in California, but for the rest of us it's a bit of a sad joke.
Between the official story -- the food pyramid -- and the hip locavore vision, you have two versions of how to improve our eating.
(Laughter).
They both get it wrong, though.
The first at least is populist, and the second is elitist.
How we got to this place is the history of food in the United States.
And I'm going to go through that, at least the last hundred years or so, very quickly right now.
A hundred years ago, guess what?
Everyone was a locavore: even New York had pig farms nearby, and shipping food all over the place was a ridiculous notion.
Every family had a cook, usually a mom.
And those moms bought and prepared food.
It was like your romantic vision of Europe.
Margarine didn't exist.
In fact, when margarine was invented, several states passed laws declaring that it had to be dyed pink, so we'd all know that it was a fake.
There was no snack food, and until the '20s, until Clarence Birdseye came along, there was no frozen food.
There were no restaurant chains.
There were neighborhood restaurants run by local people, but none of them would think to open another one.
Eating ethnic was unheard of unless you were ethnic.
And fancy food was entirely French.
As an aside, those of you who remember Dan Aykroyd in the 1970s doing Julia Child imitations can see where he got the idea of stabbing himself from this fabulous slide.
(Laughter) Back in those days, before even Julia, back in those days, there was no philosophy of food.
You just ate.
You didn't claim to be anything.
There was no marketing. There were no national brands.
Vitamins had not been invented.
There were no health claims, at least not federally sanctioned ones.
Fats, carbs, proteins -- they weren't bad or good, they were food.
You ate food.
Hardly anything contained more than one ingredient, because it was an ingredient.
The cornflake hadn't been invented.
(Laughter) The Pop-Tart, the Pringle, Cheez Whiz, none of that stuff.
Goldfish swam.
(Laughter) It's hard to imagine. People grew food, and they ate food.
And again, everyone ate local.
In New York, an orange was a common Christmas present, because it came all the way from Florida.
From the '30s on, road systems expanded, trucks took the place of railroads, fresh food began to travel more.
Oranges became common in New York.
The South and West became agricultural hubs, and in other parts of the country, suburbs took over farmland.
The effects of this are well known. They are everywhere.
And the death of family farms is part of this puzzle, as is almost everything from the demise of the real community to the challenge of finding a good tomato, even in summer.
Eventually, California produced too much food to ship fresh, so it became critical to market canned and frozen foods.
Thus arrived convenience.
It was sold to proto-feminist housewives as a way to cut down on housework.
Now, I know everybody over the age of, like 45 -- their mouths are watering at this point.
(Laughter) (Applause) If we had a slide of Salisbury steak, even more so, right?
(Laughter) But this may have cut down on housework, but it cut down on the variety of food we ate as well.
Many of us grew up never eating a fresh vegetable except the occasional raw carrot or maybe an odd lettuce salad.
I, for one -- and I'm not kidding -- didn't eat real spinach or broccoli till I was 19.
Who needed it though? Meat was everywhere.
What could be easier, more filling or healthier for your family than broiling a steak?
But by then cattle were already raised unnaturally.
Rather than spending their lives eating grass, for which their stomachs were designed, they were forced to eat soy and corn.
They have trouble digesting those grains, of course, but that wasn't a problem for producers.
New drugs kept them healthy.
Well, they kept them alive.
Healthy was another story.
Thanks to farm subsidies, the fine collaboration between agribusiness and Congress, soy, corn and cattle became king.
And chicken soon joined them on the throne.
It was during this period that the cycle of dietary and planetary destruction began, the thing we're only realizing just now.
Listen to this, between 1950 and 2000, the world's population doubled.
Meat consumption increased five-fold.
Now, someone had to eat all that stuff, so we got fast food.
And this took care of the situation resoundingly.
Home cooking remained the norm, but its quality was down the tubes.
There were fewer meals with home-cooked breads, desserts and soups, because all of them could be bought at any store.
Not that they were any good, but they were there.
Most moms cooked like mine: a piece of broiled meat, a quickly made salad with bottled dressing, canned soup, canned fruit salad.
Maybe baked or mashed potatoes, or perhaps the stupidest food ever, Minute Rice.
For dessert, store-bought ice cream or cookies.
My mom is not here, so I can say this now.
This kind of cooking drove me to learn how to cook for myself.
(Laughter) It wasn't all bad.
By the '70s, forward-thinking people began to recognize the value of local ingredients.
We tended gardens, we became interested in organic food, we knew or we were vegetarians.
We weren't all hippies, either.
Some of us were eating in good restaurants and learning how to cook well.
Meanwhile, food production had become industrial. Industrial.
Perhaps because it was being produced rationally, as if it were plastic, food gained magical or poisonous powers, or both.
Many people became fat-phobic.
Others worshiped broccoli, as if it were God-like.
But mostly they didn't eat broccoli.
Instead they were sold on yogurt, yogurt being almost as good as broccoli.
Except, in reality, the way the industry sold yogurt was to convert it to something much more akin to ice cream.
Similarly, let's look at a granola bar.
You think that that might be healthy food, but in fact, if you look at the ingredient list, it's closer in form to a Snickers than it is to oatmeal.
Sadly, it was at this time that the family dinner was put in a coma, if not actually killed -- the beginning of the heyday of value-added food, which contained as many soy and corn products as could be crammed into it.
Think of the frozen chicken nugget.
The chicken is fed corn, and then its meat is ground up, and mixed with more corn products to add bulk and binder, and then it's fried in corn oil.
All you do is nuke it. What could be better?
And zapped horribly, pathetically.
By the '70s, home cooking was in such a sad state that the high fat and spice contents of foods like McNuggets and Hot Pockets -- and we all have our favorites, actually -- made this stuff more appealing than the bland things that people were serving at home.
At the same time, masses of women were entering the workforce, and cooking simply wasn't important enough for men to share the burden.
So now, you've got your pizza nights, you've got your microwave nights, you've got your grazing nights, you've got your fend-for-yourself nights and so on.
Leading the way -- what's leading the way?
Meat, junk food, cheese: the very stuff that will kill you.
So, now we clamor for organic food.
That's good.
And as evidence that things can actually change, you can now find organic food in supermarkets, and even in fast-food outlets.
But organic food isn't the answer either, at least not the way it's currently defined.
Let me pose you a question.
Can farm-raised salmon be organic, when its feed has nothing to do with its natural diet, even if the feed itself is supposedly organic, and the fish themselves are packed tightly in pens, swimming in their own filth?
And if that salmon's from Chile, and it's killed down there and then flown 5,000 miles, whatever, dumping how much carbon into the atmosphere?
I don't know.
Packed in Styrofoam, of course, before landing somewhere in the United States, and then being trucked a few hundred more miles.
This may be organic in letter, but it's surely not organic in spirit.
Now here is where we all meet.
The locavores, the organivores, the vegetarians, the vegans, the gourmets and those of us who are just plain interested in good food.
Even though we've come to this from different points, we all have to act on our knowledge to change the way that everyone thinks about food.
We need to start acting.
And this is not only an issue of social justice, as Ann Cooper said -- and, of course, she's completely right -- but it's also one of global survival.
Which bring me full circle and points directly to the core issue, the overproduction and overconsumption of meat and junk food.
As I said, 18 percent of greenhouse gases are attributed to livestock production.
How much livestock do you need to produce this?
70 percent of the agricultural land on Earth, 30 percent of the Earth's land surface is directly or indirectly devoted to raising the animals we'll eat.
And this amount is predicted to double in the next 40 years or so.
And if the numbers coming in from China are anything like what they look like now, it's not going to be 40 years.
There is no good reason for eating as much meat as we do.
And I say this as a man who has eaten a fair share of corned beef in his life.
The most common argument is that we need nutrients -- even though we eat, on average, twice as much protein as even the industry-obsessed USDA recommends.
But listen: experts who are serious about disease reduction recommend that adults eat just over half a pound of meat per week.
What do you think we eat per day? Half a pound.
But don't we need meat to be big and strong?
Isn't meat eating essential to health?
Won't a diet heavy in fruit and vegetables turn us into godless, sissy, liberals?
(Laughter) Some of us might think that would be a good thing.
But, no, even if we were all steroid-filled football players, the answer is no.
In fact, there's no diet on Earth that meets basic nutritional needs that won't promote growth, and many will make you much healthier than ours does.
We don't eat animal products for sufficient nutrition, we eat them to have an odd form of malnutrition, and it's killing us.
To suggest that in the interests of personal and human health Americans eat 50 percent less meat -- it's not enough of a cut, but it's a start.
It would seem absurd, but that's exactly what should happen, and what progressive people, forward-thinking people should be doing and advocating, along with the corresponding increase in the consumption of plants.
I've been writing about food more or less omnivorously -- one might say indiscriminately -- for about 30 years.
During that time, I've eaten and recommended eating just about everything.
I'll never stop eating animals, I'm sure, but I do think that for the benefit of everyone, the time has come to stop raising them industrially and stop eating them thoughtlessly.
Ann Cooper's right.
The USDA is not our ally here.
We have to take matters into our own hands, not only by advocating for a better diet for everyone -- and that's the hard part -- but by improving our own.
And that happens to be quite easy.
Less meat, less junk, more plants.
It's a simple formula: eat food.
Eat real food.
We can continue to enjoy our food, and we continue to eat well, and we can eat even better.
We can continue the search for the ingredients we love, and we can continue to spin yarns about our favorite meals.
We'll reduce not only calories, but our carbon footprint.
We can make food more important, not less, and save ourselves by doing so.
We have to choose that path.
Thank you.
(Music) Roughly 43,000 years ago, a young cave bear died in the rolling hills on the northwest border of modern day Slovenia.
A thousand years later, a mammoth died in southern Germany.
A few centuries after that, a griffon vulture also died in the same vicinity.
And we know almost nothing about how these animals met their deaths, but these different creatures dispersed across both time and space did share one remarkable fate.
After their deaths, a bone from each of their skeletons was crafted by human hands into a flute.
Think about that for a second.
Imagine you're a caveman, 40,000 years ago.
You've mastered fire.
You've built simple tools for hunting.
You've learned how to craft garments from animal skins to keep yourself warm in the winter.
What would you choose to invent next?
It seems preposterous that you would invent the flute, a tool that created useless vibrations in air molecules.
But that is exactly what our ancestors did.
Now this turns out to be surprisingly common in the history of innovation.
Sometimes people invent things because they want to stay alive or feed their children or conquer the village next door.
But just as often, new ideas come into the world simply because they're fun.
And here's the really strange thing: many of those playful but seemingly frivolous inventions ended up sparking momentous transformations in science, in politics and society.
Take what may be the most important invention of modern times: programmable computers.
Now, the standard story is that computers descend from military technology, since many of the early computers were designed specifically to crack wartime codes or calculate rocket trajectories.
But in fact, the origins of the modern computer are much more playful, even musical, than you might imagine.
The idea behind the flute, of just pushing air through tubes to make a sound, was eventually modified to create the first organ more than 2,000 years ago.
Someone came up with the brilliant idea of triggering sounds by pressing small levers with our fingers, inventing the first musical keyboard.
Now, keyboards evolved from organs to clavichords to harpsichords to the piano, until the middle of the 19th century, when a bunch of inventors finally hit on the idea of using a keyboard to trigger not sounds but letters.
In fact, the very first typewriter was originally called "the writing harpsichord."
Flutes and music led to even more powerful breakthroughs.
About a thousand years ago, at the height of the Islamic Renaissance, three brothers in Baghdad designed a device that was an automated organ.
They called it "the instrument that plays itself."
Now, the instrument was basically a giant music box.
The organ could be trained to play various songs by using instructions encoded by placing pins on a rotating cylinder.
And if you wanted the machine to play a different song, you just swapped a new cylinder in with a different code on it.
This instrument was the first of its kind.
It was programmable.
Now, conceptually, this was a massive leap forward.
The whole idea of hardware and software becomes thinkable for the first time with this invention.
And that incredibly powerful concept didn't come to us as an instrument of war or of conquest, or necessity at all.
It came from the strange delight of watching a machine play music.
In fact, the idea of programmable machines was exclusively kept alive by music for about 700 years.
In the 1700s, music-making machines became the playthings of the Parisian elite.
Showmen used the same coded cylinders to control the physical movements of what were called automata, an early kind of robot.
One of the most famous of those robots was, you guessed it, an automated flute player designed by a brilliant French inventor named Jacques de Vaucanson.
And as de Vaucanson was designing his robot musician, he had another idea.
If you could program a machine to make pleasing sounds, why not program it to weave delightful patterns of color out of cloth?
Instead of using the pins of the cylinder to represent musical notes, they would represent threads with different colors.
If you wanted a new pattern for your fabric, you just programmed a new cylinder.
This was the first programmable loom.
Now, the cylinders were too expensive and time-consuming to make, but a half century later, another French inventor named Jacquard hit upon the brilliant idea of using paper-punched cards instead of metal cylinders.
Paper turned out to be much cheaper and more flexible as a way of programming the device.
That punch card system inspired Victorian inventor Charles Babbage to create his analytical engine, the first true programmable computer ever designed.
And punch cards were used by computer programmers as late as the 1970s.
So ask yourself this question: what really made the modern computer possible?
Yes, the military involvement is an important part of the story, but inventing a computer also required other building blocks: music boxes, toy robot flute players, harpsichord keyboards, colorful patterns woven into fabric, and that's just a small part of the story.
There's a long list of world-changing ideas and technologies that came out of play: public museums, rubber, probability theory, the insurance business and many more.
Necessity isn't always the mother of invention.
The playful state of mind is fundamentally exploratory, seeking out new possibilities in the world around us.
And that seeking is why so many experiences that started with simple delight and amusement eventually led us to profound breakthroughs.
Now, I think this has implications for how we teach kids in school and how we encourage innovation in our workspaces, but thinking about play and delight this way also helps us detect what's coming next.
Think about it: if you were sitting there in 1750 trying to figure out the big changes coming to society in the 19th, the 20th centuries, automated machines, computers, artificial intelligence, a programmable flute entertaining the Parisian elite would have been as powerful a clue as anything else at the time.
It seemed like an amusement at best, not useful in any serious way, but it turned out to be the beginning of a tech revolution that would change the world.
You'll find the future wherever people are having the most fun.
Speaking up is hard to do.
I understood the true meaning of this phrase exactly one month ago, when my wife and I became new parents.
It was an amazing moment.
It was exhilarating and elating, but it was also scary and terrifying.
And it got particularly terrifying when we got home from the hospital, and we were unsure whether our little baby boy was getting enough nutrients from breastfeeding.
And we wanted to call our pediatrician, but we also didn't want to make a bad first impression or come across as a crazy, neurotic parent.
So we worried.
And we waited.
When we got to the doctor's office the next day, she immediately gave him formula because he was pretty dehydrated.
Our son is fine now, and our doctor has reassured us we can always contact her.
But in that moment, I should've spoken up, but I didn't.
But sometimes we speak up when we shouldn't, and I learned that over 10 years ago when I let my twin brother down.
My twin brother is a documentary filmmaker, and for one of his first films, he got an offer from a distribution company.
He was excited, and he was inclined to accept the offer.
But as a negotiations researcher, I insisted he make a counteroffer, and I helped him craft the perfect one.
And it was perfect -- it was perfectly insulting.
The company was so offended, they literally withdrew the offer and my brother was left with nothing.
And I've asked people all over the world about this dilemma of speaking up: when they can assert themselves, when they can push their interests, when they can express an opinion, when they can make an ambitious ask.
And the range of stories are varied and diverse, but they also make up a universal tapestry.
Can I correct my boss when they make a mistake?
Can I confront my coworker who keeps stepping on my toes?
Can I challenge my friend's insensitive joke?
Can I tell the person I love the most my deepest insecurities?
And through these experiences, I've come to recognize that each of us have something called a range of acceptable behavior.
Now, sometimes we're too strong; we push ourselves too much.
That's what happened with my brother.
Even making an offer was outside his range of acceptable behavior.
But sometimes we're too weak.
That's what happened with my wife and I.
And this range of acceptable behaviors -- when we stay within our range, we're rewarded.
When we step outside that range, we get punished in a variety of ways.
We get dismissed or demeaned or even ostracized.
Or we lose that raise or that promotion or that deal.
Now, the first thing we need to know is: What is my range?
But the key thing is, our range isn't fixed; it's actually pretty dynamic.
It expands and it narrows based on the context.
And there's one thing that determines that range more than anything else, and that's your power.
Your power determines your range.
What is power?
Power comes in lots of forms.
In negotiations, it comes in the form of alternatives.
So my brother had no alternatives; he lacked power.
The company had lots of alternatives; they had power.
Sometimes it's being new to a country, like an immigrant, or new to an organization or new to an experience, like my wife and I as new parents.
Sometimes it's at work, where someone's the boss and someone's the subordinate.
Sometimes it's in relationships, where one person's more invested than the other person.
And the key thing is that when we have lots of power, our range is very wide.
We have a lot of leeway in how to behave.
But when we lack power, our range narrows.
We have very little leeway.
The problem is that when our range narrows, that produces something called the low-power double bind.
The low-power double bind happens when, if we don't speak up, we go unnoticed, but if we do speak up, we get punished.
Now, many of you have heard the phrase the "double bind" and connected it with one thing, and that's gender.
The gender double bind is women who don't speak up go unnoticed, and women who do speak up get punished.
And the key thing is that women have the same need as men to speak up, but they have barriers to doing so.
But what my research has shown over the last two decades is that what looks like a gender difference is not really a gender double bind, it's a really a low-power double bind.
And what looks like a gender difference are really often just power differences in disguise.
Oftentimes we see a difference between a man and a woman or men and women, and think, "Biological cause. There's something fundamentally different about the sexes."
But in study after study, I've found that a better explanation for many sex differences is really power.
And so it's the low-power double bind.
And the low-power double bind means that we have a narrow range, and we lack power.
We have a narrow range, and our double bind is very large.
So we need to find ways to expand our range.
And over the last couple decades, my colleagues and I have found two things really matter.
The first: you seem powerful in your own eyes.
The second: you seem powerful in the eyes of others.
When I feel powerful, I feel confident, not fearful; I expand my own range.
When other people see me as powerful, they grant me a wider range.
So we need tools to expand our range of acceptable behavior.
And I'm going to give you a set of tools today.
Speaking up is risky, but these tools will lower your risk of speaking up.
The first tool I'm going to give you got discovered in negotiations in an important finding.
On average, women make less ambitious offers and get worse outcomes than men at the bargaining table.
But Hannah Riley Bowles and Emily Amanatullah have discovered there's one situation where women get the same outcomes as men and are just as ambitious.
That's when they advocate for others.
When they advocate for others, they discover their own range and expand it in their own mind.
They become more assertive.
This is sometimes called "the mama bear effect."
Like a mama bear defending her cubs, when we advocate for others, we can discover our own voice.
But sometimes, we have to advocate for ourselves.
How do we do that?
One of the most important tools we have to advocate for ourselves is something called perspective-taking.
And perspective-taking is really simple: it's simply looking at the world through the eyes of another person.
It's one of the most important tools we have to expand our range.
When I take your perspective, and I think about what you really want, you're more likely to give me what I really want.
But here's the problem: perspective-taking is hard to do.
So let's do a little experiment.
I want you all to hold your hand just like this: your finger -- put it up.
And I want you to draw a capital letter E on your forehead as quickly as possible.
OK, it turns out that we can draw this E in one of two ways, and this was originally designed as a test of perspective-taking.
I'm going to show you two pictures of someone with an E on their forehead -- my former student, Erika Hall.
And you can see over here, that's the correct E.
I drew the E so it looks like an E to another person.
That's the perspective-taking E because it looks like an E from someone else's vantage point.
But this E over here is the self-focused E.
We often get self-focused.
And we particularly get self-focused in a crisis.
I want to tell you about a particular crisis.
A man walks into a bank in Watsonville, California.
And he says, "Give me $2,000, or I'm blowing the whole bank up with a bomb."
Now, the bank manager didn't give him the money.
She took a step back.
She took his perspective, and she noticed something really important.
He asked for a specific amount of money.
So she said, "Why did you ask for $2,000?"
And he said, "My friend is going to be evicted unless I get him $2,000 immediately."
And she said, "Oh! You don't want to rob the bank -- you want to take out a loan."
(Laughter) "Why don't you come back to my office, and we can have you fill out the paperwork."
(Laughter) Now, her quick perspective-taking defused a volatile situation.
So when we take someone's perspective, it allows us to be ambitious and assertive, but still be likable.
Here's another way to be assertive but still be likable, and that is to signal flexibility.
Now, imagine you're a car salesperson, and you want to sell someone a car.
You're going to more likely make the sale if you give them two options.
Let's say option A: $24,000 for this car and a five-year warranty.
Or option B: $23,000 and a three-year warranty.
My research shows that when you give people a choice among options, it lowers their defenses, and they're more likely to accept your offer.
And this doesn't just work with salespeople; it works with parents.
When my niece was four, she resisted getting dressed and rejected everything.
But then my sister-in-law had a brilliant idea.
What if I gave my daughter a choice?
This shirt or that shirt? OK, that shirt.
This pant or that pant? OK, that pant.
And it worked brilliantly.
She got dressed quickly and without resistance.
When I've asked the question around the world when people feel comfortable speaking up, the number one answer is: "When I have social support in my audience; when I have allies."
So we want to get allies on our side.
How do we do that?
Well, one of the ways is be a mama bear.
When we advocate for others, we expand our range in our own eyes and the eyes of others, but we also earn strong allies.
Another way we can earn strong allies, especially in high places, is by asking other people for advice.
When we ask others for advice, they like us because we flatter them, and we're expressing humility.
And this really works to solve another double bind.
And that's the self-promotion double bind.
The self-promotion double bind is that if we don't advertise our accomplishments, no one notices.
And if we do, we're not likable.
But if we ask for advice about one of our accomplishments, we are able to be competent in their eyes but also be likeable.
And this is so powerful it even works when you see it coming.
There have been multiple times in life when I have been forewarned that a low-power person has been given the advice to come ask me for advice.
I want you to notice three things about this: First, I knew they were going to come ask me for advice.
Two, I've actually done research on the strategic benefits of asking for advice.
And three, it still worked!
I took their perspective, I became more invested in their cause, I became more committed to them because they asked for advice.
Now, another time we feel more confident speaking up is when we have expertise.
Expertise gives us credibility.
When we have high power, we already have credibility.
We only need good evidence.
When we lack power, we don't have the credibility.
We need excellent evidence.
And one of the ways we can come across as an expert is by tapping into our passion.
I want everyone in the next few days to go up to friend of theirs and just say to them, "I want you to describe a passion of yours to me."
I've had people do this all over the world and I asked them, "What did you notice about the other person when they described their passion?"
And the answers are always the same.
"Their eyes lit up and got big."
"They smiled a big beaming smile."
"They used their hands all over -- I had to duck because their hands were coming at me."
"They talk quickly with a little higher pitch."
(Laughter) "They leaned in as if telling me a secret."
And then I said to them, "What happened to you as you listened to their passion?"
They said, "My eyes lit up.
I leaned in."
When we tap into our passion, we give ourselves the courage, in our own eyes, to speak up, but we also get the permission from others to speak up.
Tapping into our passion even works when we come across as too weak.
Both men and women get punished at work when they shed tears.
But Lizzie Wolf has shown that when we frame our strong emotions as passion, the condemnation of our crying disappears for both men and women.
I want to end with a few words from my late father that he spoke at my twin brother's wedding.
Here's a picture of us.
My dad was a psychologist like me, but his real love and his real passion was cinema, like my brother.
And so he wrote a speech for my brother's wedding about the roles we play in the human comedy.
And he said, "The lighter your touch, the better you become at improving and enriching your performance.
Those who embrace their roles and work to improve their performance grow, change and expand the self.
Play it well, and your days will be mostly joyful."
What my dad was saying is that we've all been assigned ranges and roles in this world.
But he was also saying the essence of this talk: those roles and ranges are constantly expanding and evolving.
So when a scene calls for it, be a ferocious mama bear and a humble advice seeker.
Have excellent evidence and strong allies.
Be a passionate perspective taker.
And if you use those tools -- and each and every one of you can use these tools -- you will expand your range of acceptable behavior, and your days will be mostly joyful.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Here's a question that matters.
[Is it ethical to evolve the human body?] Because we're beginning to get all the tools together to evolve ourselves.
And we can evolve bacteria and we can evolve plants and we can evolve animals, and we're now reaching a point where we really have to ask, is it really ethical and do we want to evolve human beings?
And as you're thinking about that, let me talk about that in the context of prosthetics, prosthetics past, present, future.
So this is the iron hand that belonged to one of the German counts.
Loved to fight, lost his arm in one of these battles.
No problem, he just made a suit of armor, put it on, perfect prosthetic.
That's where the concept of ruling with an iron fist comes from.
And of course these prosthetics have been getting more and more useful, more and more modern.
You can hold soft-boiled eggs.
You can have all types of controls, and as you're thinking about that, there are wonderful people like Hugh Herr who have been building absolutely extraordinary prosthetics.
So the wonderful Aimee Mullins will go out and say, how tall do I want to be tonight?
Or Hugh will say what type of cliff do I want to climb?
Or does somebody want to run a marathon, or does somebody want to ballroom dance?
And as you adapt these things, the interesting thing about prosthetics is they've been coming inside the body.
So these external prosthetics have now become artificial knees.
They've become artificial hips.
And then they've evolved further to become not just nice to have but essential to have.
So when you're talking about a heart pacemaker as a prosthetic, you're talking about something that isn't just, "I'm missing my leg," it's, "if I don't have this, I can die."
And at that point, a prosthetic becomes a symbiotic relationship with the human body.
And four of the smartest people that I've ever met -- Ed Boyden, Hugh Herr, Joe Jacobson, Bob Lander -- are working on a Center for Extreme Bionics.
And the interesting thing of what you're seeing here is these prosthetics now get integrated into the bone.
They get integrated into the skin.
They get integrated into the muscle.
And one of the other sides of Ed is he's been thinking about how to connect the brain using light or other mechanisms directly to things like these prosthetics.
And if you can do that, then you can begin changing fundamental aspects of humanity.
So how quickly you react to something depends on the diameter of a nerve.
And of course, if you have nerves that are external or prosthetic, say with light or liquid metal, then you can increase that diameter and you could even increase it theoretically to the point where, as long as you could see the muzzle flash, you could step out of the way of a bullet.
Those are the order of magnitude of changes you're talking about.
This is a fourth sort of level of prosthetics.
These are Phonak hearing aids, and the reason why these are so interesting is because they cross the threshold from where prosthetics are something for somebody who is "disabled" and they become something that somebody who is "normal" might want to actually have, because what this prosthetic does, which is really interesting, is not only does it help you hear, you can focus your hearing, so it can hear the conversation going on over there.
You can have superhearing.
You can have hearing in 360 degrees. You can have white noise.
You can record, and oh, by the way, they also put a phone into this.
So this functions as your hearing aid and also as your phone.
And at that point, somebody might actually want to have a prosthetic voluntarily.
All of these thousands of loosely connected little pieces are coming together, and it's about time we ask the question, how do we want to evolve human beings over the next century or two?
And for that we turn to a great philosopher who was a very smart man despite being a Yankee fan.
(Laughter) And Yogi Berra used to say, of course, that it's very tough to make predictions, especially about the future.
(Laughter) So instead of making a prediction about the future to begin with, let's take what's happening in the present with people like Tony Atala, who is redesigning 30-some-odd organs.
And maybe the ultimate prosthetic isn't having something external, titanium.
Maybe the ultimate prosthetic is take your own gene code, remake your own body parts, because that's a whole lot more effective than any kind of a prosthetic.
But while you're at it, then you can take the work of Craig Venter and Ham Smith.
And one of the things that we've been doing is trying to figure out how to reprogram cells.
And if you can reprogram a cell, then you can change the cells in those organs.
So if you can change the cells in those organs, maybe you make those organs more radiation-resistant.
Maybe you make them absorb more oxygen.
Maybe you make them more efficient to filter out stuff that you don't want in your body.
And over the last few weeks, George Church has been in the news a lot because he's been talking about taking one of these programmable cells and inserting an entire human genome into that cell.
And once you can insert an entire human genome into a cell, then you begin to ask the question, would you want to enhance any of that genome?
Do you want to enhance a human body?
How would you want to enhance a human body?
Where is it ethical to enhance a human body and where is it not ethical to enhance a human body?
And all of a sudden, what we're doing is we've got this multidimensional chess board where we can change human genetics by using viruses to attack things like AIDS, or we can change the gene code through gene therapy to do away with some hereditary diseases, or we can change the environment, and change the expression of those genes in the epigenome and pass that on to the next generations.
And all of a sudden, it's not just one little bit, it's all these stacked little bits that allow you to take little portions of it until all the portions coming together lead you to something that's very different.
And a lot of people are very scared by this stuff.
And it does sound scary, and there are risks to this stuff.
So why in the world would you ever want to do this stuff?
Why would we really want to alter the human body in a fundamental way?
The answer lies in part with Lord Rees, astronomer royal of Great Britain.
And one of his favorite sayings is the universe is 100 percent malevolent.
So what does that mean?
It means if you take any one of your bodies at random, drop it anywhere in the universe, drop it in space, you die.
Drop it on the Sun, you die.
Drop it on the surface of Mercury, you die.
Drop it near a supernova, you die.
But fortunately, it's only about 80 percent effective.
So as a great physicist once said, there's these little upstream eddies of biology that create order in this rapid torrent of entropy.
So as the universe dissipates energy, there's these upstream eddies that create biological order.
Now, the problem with eddies is, they tend to disappear.
They shift. They move in rivers.
And because of that, when an eddy shifts, when the Earth becomes a snowball, when the Earth becomes very hot, when the Earth gets hit by an asteroid, when you have supervolcanoes, when you have solar flares, when you have potentially extinction-level events like the next election -- (Laughter) then all of a sudden, you can have periodic extinctions.
And by the way, that's happened five times on Earth, and therefore it is very likely that the human species on Earth is going to go extinct someday.
Not next week, not next month, maybe in November, but maybe 10,000 years after that.
As you're thinking of the consequence of that, if you believe that extinctions are common and natural and normal and occur periodically, it becomes a moral imperative to diversify our species.
And it becomes a moral imperative because it's going to be really hard to live on Mars if we don't fundamentally modify the human body.
Right?
You go from one cell, mom and dad coming together to make one cell, in a cascade to 10 trillion cells.
We don't know, if you change the gravity substantially, if the same thing will happen to create your body.
We do know that if you expose our bodies as they currently are to a lot of radiation, we will die.
So as you're thinking of that, you have to really redesign things just to get to Mars.
Forget about the moons of Neptune or Jupiter.
And to borrow from Nikolai Kardashev, let's think about life in a series of scales.
So Life One civilization is a civilization that begins to alter his or her looks.
And we've been doing that for thousands of years.
You've got tummy tucks and you've got this and you've got that.
You alter your looks, and I'm told that not all of those alterations take place for medical reasons.
(Laughter) Seems odd.
A Life Two civilization is a different civilization.
A Life Two civilization alters fundamental aspects of the body.
So you put human growth hormone in, the person grows taller, or you put x in and the person gets fatter or loses metabolism or does a whole series of things, but you're altering the functions in a fundamental way.
To become an intrasolar civilization, we're going to have to create a Life Three civilization, and that looks very different from what we've got here.
Maybe you splice in Deinococcus radiodurans so that the cells can resplice after a lot of exposure to radiation.
Maybe you breathe by having oxygen flow through your blood instead of through your lungs.
But you're talking about really radical redesigns, and one of the interesting things that's happened in the last decade is we've discovered a whole lot of planets out there.
And some of them may be Earth-like.
The problem is, if we ever want to get to these planets, the fastest human objects -- Juno and Voyager and the rest of this stuff -- take tens of thousands of years to get from here to the nearest solar system.
So if you want to start exploring beaches somewhere else, or you want to see two-sun sunsets, then you're talking about something that is very different, because you have to change the timescale and the body of humans in ways which may be absolutely unrecognizable.
And that's a Life Four civilization.
Now, we can't even begin to imagine what that might look like, but we're beginning to get glimpses of instruments that might take us even that far.
And let me give you two examples.
So this is the wonderful Floyd Romesberg, and one of the things that Floyd's been doing is he's been playing with the basic chemistry of life.
So all life on this planet is made in ATCGs, the four letters of DNA.
All bacteria, all plants, all animals, all humans, all cows, everything else.
And what Floyd did is he changed out two of those base pairs, so it's ATXY.
And that means that you now have a parallel system to make life, to make babies, to reproduce, to evolve, that doesn't mate with most things on Earth or in fact maybe with nothing on Earth.
Maybe you make plants that are immune to all bacteria.
Maybe you make plants that are immune to all viruses.
But why is that so interesting?
It means that we are not a unique solution.
It means you can create alternate chemistries to us that could be chemistries adaptable to a very different planet that could create life and heredity.
The second experiment, or the other implication of this experiment, is that all of you, all life is based on 20 amino acids.
If you don't substitute two amino acids, if you don't say ATXY, if you say ATCG + XY, then you go from 20 building blocks to 172, and all of a sudden you've got 172 building blocks of amino acids to build life-forms in very different shapes.
The second experiment to think about is a really weird experiment that's been taking place in China.
So this guy has been transplanting hundreds of mouse heads.
Right?
And why is that an interesting experiment?
Well, think of the first heart transplants.
One of the things they used to do is they used to bring in the wife or the daughter of the donor so the donee could tell the doctors, "Do you recognize this person? Do you love this person?
Do you feel anything for this person?"
We laugh about that today.
We laugh because we know the heart is a muscle, but for hundreds of thousands of years, or tens of thousands of years, "I gave her my heart. She took my heart. She broke my heart."
We thought this was emotion and we thought maybe emotions were transplanted with the heart. Nope.
So how about the brain?
Two possible outcomes to this experiment.
If you can get a mouse that is functional, then you can see, is the new brain a blank slate?
And boy, does that have implications.
Second option: the new mouse recognizes Minnie Mouse.
The new mouse remembers what it's afraid of, remembers how to navigate the maze, and if that is true, then you can transplant memory and consciousness.
And then the really interesting question is, if you can transplant this, is the only input-output mechanism this down here?
Or could you transplant that consciousness into something that would be very different, that would last in space, that would last tens of thousands of years, that would be a completely redesigned body that could hold consciousness for a long, long period of time?
And let's come back to the first question: Why would you ever want to do that?
Well, I'll tell you why.
Because this is the ultimate selfie.
(Laughter) This is taken from six billion miles away, and that's Earth.
And that's all of us.
And if that little thing goes, all of humanity goes.
And the reason you want to alter the human body is because you eventually want a picture that says, that's us, and that's us, and that's us, because that's the way humanity survives long-term extinction.
And that's the reason why it turns out it's actually unethical not to evolve the human body even though it can be scary, even though it can be challenging, but it's what's going to allow us to explore, live and get to places we can't even dream of today, but which our great-great-great-great- grandchildren might someday.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
It's easy to forget that last night, one billion people went to sleep without access to electricity.
One billion people.
Two and a half billion people did not have access to clean cooking fuels or clean heating fuels.
Those are the problems in the developing world.
And it's easy for us not to be empathetic with those people who seem so distanced from us.
But even in our own world, the developed world, we see the tension of stagnant economies impacting the lives of people around us.
We see it in whole pieces of the economy, where the people involved have lost hope about the future and despair about the present.
We see that in the Brexit vote.
We see that in the Sanders/Trump campaigns in my own country.
But even in countries as recently turning the corner towards being in the developed world, in China, we see the difficulty that President Xi has as he begins to un-employ so many people in his coal and mining industries who see no future for themselves.
As we as a society figure out how to manage the problems of the developed world and the problems of the developing world, we have to look at how we move forward and manage the environmental impact of those decisions.
We've been working on this problem for 25 years, since Rio, the Kyoto Protocols.
Our most recent move is the Paris treaty, and the resulting climate agreements that are being ratified by nations around the world.
I think we can be very hopeful that those agreements, which are bottom-up agreements, where nations have said what they think they can do, are genuine and forthcoming for the vast majority of the parties.
The unfortunate thing is that now, as we look at the independent analyses of what those climate treaties are liable to yield, the magnitude of the problem before us becomes clear.
This is the United States Energy Information Agency's assessment of what will happen if the countries implement the climate commitments that they've made in Paris between now and 2040.
It shows basically CO2 emissions around the world over the next 30 years.
There are three things that you need to look at and appreciate.
One, CO2 emissions are expected to continue to grow for the next 30 years.
In order to control climate, CO2 emissions have to literally go to zero because it's the cumulative emissions that drive heating on the planet.
This should tell you that we are losing the race to fossil fuels.
The second thing you should notice is that the bulk of the growth comes from the developing countries, from China, from India, from the rest of the world, which includes South Africa and Indonesia and Brazil, as most of these countries move their people into the lower range of lifestyles that we literally take for granted in the developed world.
The final thing that you should notice is that each year, about 10 gigatons of carbon are getting added to the planet's atmosphere, and then diffusing into the ocean and into the land.
That's on top of the 550 gigatons that are in place today.
At the end of 30 years, we will have put 850 gigatons of carbon into the air, and that probably goes a long way towards locking in a 2-4 degree C increase in global mean surface temperatures, locking in ocean acidification and locking in sea level rise.
Now, this is a projection made by men by the actions of society, and it's ours to change, not to accept.
But the magnitude of the problem is something we need to appreciate.
Different nations make different energy choices.
It's a function of their natural resources.
It's a function of their climate.
It's a function of the development path that they've followed as a society.
It's a function of where on the surface of the planet they are.
Are they where it's dark a lot of the time, or are they at the mid-latitudes?
Many, many, many things go into the choices of countries, and they each make a different choice.
The overwhelming thing that we need to appreciate is the choice that China has made.
China has made the choice, and will make the choice, to run on coal.
The United States has an alternative.
It can run on natural gas as a result of the inventions of fracking and shale gas, which we have here.
They provide an alternative.
The OECD Europe has a choice.
It has renewables that it can afford to deploy in Germany because it's rich enough to afford to do it.
The French and the British show interest in nuclear power.
Eastern Europe, still very heavily committed to natural gas and to coal, and with natural gas that comes from Russia, with all of its entanglements.
China has many fewer choices and a much harder row to hoe.
If you look at China, and you ask yourself why has coal been important to it, you have to remember what China's done.
China brought people to power, not power to people.
It didn't do rural electrification.
It urbanized.
It urbanized by taking low-cost labor and low-cost energy, creating export industries that could fund a tremendous amount of growth.
If we look at China's path, all of us know that prosperity in China has dramatically increased.
In 1980, 80 percent of China's population lived below the extreme poverty level, below the level of having $1.90 per person per day.
By the year 2000, only 20 percent of China's population lived below the extreme poverty level -- a remarkable feat, admittedly, with some costs in civil liberties that would be tough to accept in the Western world.
But the impact of all that wealth allowed people to get massively better nutrition.
It allowed water pipes to be placed.
It allowed sewage pipes to be placed, dramatic decrease in diarrheal diseases, at the cost of some outdoor air pollution.
But in 1980, and even today, the number one killer in China is indoor air pollution, because people do not have access to clean cooking and heating fuels.
In fact, in 2040, it's still estimated that 200 million people in China will not have access to clean cooking fuels.
They have a remarkable path to follow.
India also needs to meet the needs of its own people, and it's going to do that by burning coal.
When we look at the EIA's projections of coal burning in India, India will supply nearly four times as much of its energy from coal as it will from renewables.
It's not because they don't know the alternatives; it's because rich countries can do what they choose, poor countries do what they must.
So what can we do to stop coal's emissions in time?
What can we do that changes this forecast that's in front of us?
Because it's a forecast that we can change if we have the will to do it.
First of all, we have to think about the magnitude of the problem.
Between now and 2040, 800 to 1,600 new coal plants are going to be built around the world.
This week, between one and three one-gigawatt coal plants are being turned on around the world.
That's happening regardless of what we want, because the people that rule their countries, assessing the interests of their citizens, have decided it's in the interest of their citizens to do that.
And that's going to happen unless they have a better alternative.
And every 100 of those plants will use up between one percent and three percent of the Earth's climate budget.
So every day that you go home thinking that you should do something about global warming, at the end of that week, remember: somebody fired up a coal plant that's going to run for 50 years and take away your ability to change it.
What we've forgotten is something that Vinod Khosla used to talk about, a man of Indian ethnicity but an American venture capitalist.
And he said, back in the early 2000s, that if you needed to get China and India off of fossil fuels, you had to create a technology that passed the "Chindia test," "Chindia" being the appending of the two words.
It had to be first of all viable, meaning that technically, they could implement it in their country, and that it would be accepted by the people in the country.
Two, it had to be a technology that was scalable, that it could deliver the same benefits on the same timetable as fossil fuels, so that they can enjoy the kind of life, again, that we take for granted.
And third, it had to be cost-effective without subsidy or without mandate.
It had to stand on its own two feet; it could not be maintained for that many people if in fact, those countries had to go begging or had some foreign country say, "I won't trade with you," in order to get the technology shift to occur.
If you look at the Chindia test, we simply have not come up with alternatives that meet that test.
That's what the EIA forecast tells us.
China's building 800 gigawatts of coal, 400 gigawatts of hydro, about 200 gigawatts of nuclear, and on an energy-equivalent basis, adjusting for intermittency, about 100 gigawatts of renewables.
800 gigawatts of coal.
They're doing that, knowing the costs better than any other country, knowing the need better than any other country.
But that's what they're aiming for in 2040 unless we give them a better choice.
To give them a better choice, it's going to have to meet the Chindia test.
If you look at all the alternatives that are out there, there are really two that come near to meeting it.
First is this area of new nuclear that I'll talk about in just a second.
It's a new generation of nuclear plants that are on the drawing boards around the world, and the people who are developing these say we can get them in position to demo by 2025 and to scale by 2030, if you will just let us.
The second alternative that could be there in time is utility-scale solar backed up with natural gas, which we can use today, versus the batteries which are still under development.
So what's holding new nuclear back?
Outdated regulations and yesterday's mindsets.
We have not used our latest scientific thinking on radiological health to think how we communicate with the public and govern the testing of new nuclear reactors.
We have new scientific knowledge that we need to use in order to improve the way we regulate nuclear industry.
The second thing is we've got a mindset that it takes 25 years and 2 to 5 billion dollars to develop a nuclear power plant.
That comes from the historical, military mindset of the places nuclear power came from.
These new nuclear ventures are saying that they can deliver power for 5 cents a kilowatt hour; they can deliver it for 100 gigawatts a year; they can demo it by 2025; and they can deliver it in scale by 2030, if only we give them a chance.
Right now, we're basically waiting for a miracle.
What we need is a choice.
If they can't make it safe, if they can't make it cheap, it should not be deployed.
But what I want you to do is not carry an idea forward, but write your leaders, write the head of the NGOs you support, and tell them to give you the choice, not the past.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Mia Birdsong: Why is Black Lives Matter important for the US right now and in the world?
Patrisse Cullors: Black Lives Matter is our call to action.
It is a tool to reimagine a world where black people are free to exist, free to live.
It is a tool for our allies to show up differently for us.
I grew up in a neighborhood that was heavily policed.
I witnessed my brothers and my siblings continuously stopped and frisked by law enforcement.
I remember my home being raided.
And one of my questions as a child was, why?
Why us?
Black Lives Matter offers answers to the why.
It offers a new vision for young black girls around the world that we deserve to be fought for, that we deserve to call on local governments to show up for us.
Opal Tometi: And antiblack racism -- (Applause) And antiblack racism is not only happening in the United States.
It's actually happening all across the globe.
And what we need now more than ever is a human rights movement that challenges systemic racism in every single context.
(Applause) We need this because the global reality is that black people are subject to all sorts of disparities in most of our most challenging issues of our day.
I think about issues like climate change, and how six of the 10 worst impacted nations by climate change are actually on the continent of Africa.
People are reeling from all sorts of unnatural disasters, displacing them from their ancestral homes and leaving them without a chance at making a decent living.
We also see disasters like Hurricane Matthew, which recently wreaked havoc in many different nations, but caused the most damage to Haiti.
Haiti is the poorest country in this hemisphere, and its inhabitants are black people.
And what we're seeing in Haiti is that they were actually facing a number of challenges that even preceded this hurricane.
They were reeling from the earthquake, they were reeling from cholera that was brought in by UN peacekeepers and still hasn't been eradicated.
This is unconscionable.
And this would not happen if this nation didn't have a population that was black, and we have to be real about that.
But what's most heartening right now is that despite these challenges, what we're seeing is that there's a network of Africans all across the continent who are rising up and fighting back and demanding climate justice.
(Applause) MB: So Alicia, you've said that when black people are free, everyone is free.
Can you talk about what that means?
Alicia Garza: Sure.
So I think race and racism is probably the most studied social, economic and political phenomenon in this country, but it's also the least understood.
The reality is that race in the United States operates on a spectrum from black to white.
Doesn't mean that people who are in between don't experience racism, but it means that the closer you are to white on that spectrum, the better off you are.
And the closer to black that you are on that spectrum the worse off your are.
When we think about how we address problems in this country, we often start from a place of trickle-down justice.
So using white folks as the control we say, well, if we make things better for white folks then everybody else is going to get free.
But actually it doesn't work that way.
We have to address problems at the root, and when you deal with what's happening in black communities, it creates an effervescence, right?
So a bubble up rather than a trickle down.
Let me give an example.
When we talk about the wage gap, we often say women make 78 cents to every dollar that a man makes.
You all have heard that before.
But those are the statistics for white women and white men.
The reality is that black women make something like 64 cents to every 78 cents that white women make.
When we talk about latinas, it goes down to about 58 cents.
If we were to talk about indigenous women, if we were to talk about trans women, it would even go further down.
So again, if you deal with those who are the most impacted, everybody has an opportunity to benefit from that, rather than dealing with the folks who are not as impacted, and expecting it to trickle down.
MB: So I love the effervescence, bubbling up.
(Laughter) MB: Who doesn't love a glass of champagne, right?
(Laughter) What more could we want, y'all?
So you all have been doing this for a minute, and the last few years have been -- well, I can't even imagine, but I'm sure very transformative.
And I know that you all have learned a lot about leadership.
What do you want to share with these people about what you've learned about leadership?
Patrisse, let's start with you.
That's what I've learned the most in the last few years.
(Applause) What we've seen is thousands of black people showing up for our lives with very little infrastructure and very little support.
I think our work as movement leaders isn't just about our own visibility but rather how do we make the whole visible.
How do we not just fight for our individual selves but fight for everybody?
And I also think leadership looks like everybody in this audience showing up for black lives.
It's not just about coming and watching people on a stage, right?
It's about how do you become that leader -- whether it's in your workplace, whether it's in your home -- and believe that the movement for black lives isn't just for us, but it's for everybody.
(Applause) MB: What about you, Opal?
OT: So I've been learning a great deal about interdependence.
I've been learning about how to trust your team.
I've come up with this new mantra after coming back from a three-month sabbatical, which is rare for black women to take who are in leadership, but I felt it was really important for my leadership and for my team to also practice stepping back as well as also sometimes stepping in.
And what I learned in this process was that we need to acknowledge that different people contribute different strengths, and that in order for our entire team to flourish, we have to allow them to share and allow them to shine.
And so during my sabbatical with the organization that I also work with, I saw our team rise up in my absence.
They were able to launch new programs, fundraise.
And when I came back, I had to give them a lot of gratitude and praise because they showed me that they truly had my back and that they truly had their own backs.
You know, in this process of my sabbatical, I was really reminded of this Southern African philosophy of Ubuntu.
I am because you are; you are because I am.
And I realized that my own leadership, and the contributions that I'm able to make, is in large part due to the contributions that they make, right?
And I have to acknowledge that, and I have to see that, and so my new mantra is, "Keep calm and trust the team."
And also, "Keep calm and thank the team."
MB: You know, one of the things I feel like I've heard in the context of the Black Lives Matter movement more than anywhere else is about being a leaderful movement, and that's such a beautiful concept, and I think that something that women often bring to the conversation about leadership is really the collective piece.
What about you, Alicia?
AG: Yeah ...
How many of you heard that saying that leadership is lonely?
I think that there is an element where leadership is lonely, but I also believe that it doesn't have to be like that.
And in order for us to get to that point, I think there's a few things that we need to be doing.
So one is we have to stop treating leaders like superheroes.
We are ordinary people attempting to do extraordinary things, and so we need to be supported in that way.
The other thing that I've learned about leadership is that there's a difference between leadership and celebrities, right?
And there's a way in which we've been kind of transformed into celebrities rather than people who are trying to solve a problem.
And the way that we treat celebrities is very fickle, right?
We like them one day, we don't like what they're wearing the next day, and all of a sudden we have issues, right?
So we need to stop deifying leaders so that more people will step into leadership.
Lots of people are terrified to step into leadership because of how much scrutiny they receive and how brutal we are with leaders.
And then the last thing that I've learned about leadership is that it's really easy to be a leader when everybody likes you.
But it's hard to be a leader when you have to make hard choices and when you have to do what's right, even though people are not going to like you for it.
And so in that way, I think another way that we can support leaders is to struggle with us, but struggle with us politically, not personally.
We can have disagreements without being disagreeable, but it's important for us to sharpen each other, so that we all can rise.
MB: That's beautiful, thank you.
(Applause) So you all are doing work that forces you to face some brutal, painful realities on a daily basis.
What gives you hope and inspires you in that context?
PC: I am hopeful for black futures.
And I say that because we live in a society that's so obsessed with black death.
We have images of our death on the TV screen, on our Twitter timelines, on our Facebook timelines, but what if instead we imagine black life?
We imagine black people living and thriving.
And that -- that inspires me.
OT: What inspires me these days are immigrants.
Immigrants all over the world who are doing the best that they can to make a living, to survive and also to thrive.
Right now there are over 244 million people who aren't living in their country of origin.
This is a 40 percent increase since the year 2000.
So what this tells me is that the disparities across the globe are only getting worse.
Yet there are people who are finding the strength and wherewithal to travel, to move, to eke out a better living for themselves and to provide for their families and their loved ones.
And some of these people who are immigrants are also undocumented.
They're unauthorized.
And they inspire me even more because although our society is telling them, you're not wanted, you're not needed here, and they're highly vulnerable and subject to abuse, to wage theft, to exploitation and xenophobic attacks, many of them are also beginning to organize in their communities.
And what I'm seeing is that there's also an emerging network of black, undocumented people who are resisting the framework, and resisting the criminalization of their existence.
And that to me is incredibly powerful and inspires me every singe day.
MB: Thank you.
Alicia?
AG: So we know that young people are the present and the future, but what inspires me are older people who are becoming transformed in the service of this movement.
We all know that as you get older, you get a little more entrenched in your ways.
It's happening to me, I know that's right.
But I'm so inspired when I see people who have a way that they do things, have a way that they think about the world, and they're courageous enough to be open to listening to what the experiences are of so many of us who want to live in world that's just and want to live in a world that's equitable.
And I'm also inspired by the actions that I'm seeing older people taking in service of this movement.
I'm inspired by seeing older people step into their own power and leadership and say, "I'm not passing a torch, I'm helping you light the fire."
(Applause) MB: I love that -- yes.
So in terms of action, I think that it is awesome to sit here and be able to listen to you all, and to have our minds open and shift, but that's not going to get black people free.
So if you had one thing you would like this audience and the folks who are watching around the world to actually do, what would that be?
AG: OK, two quick ones.
One, call the White House.
The water protectors are being forcibly removed from the camp that they have set up to defend what keeps us alive.
And that is intricately related to black lives.
So definitely call the White House and demand that they stop doing that.
There are tanks and police officers arresting every single person there as we speak.
(Applause) The second thing that you can do is to join something.
Be a part of something.
There are groups, collectives -- doesn't have to be a non-profit, you know what I mean?
But there are groups that are doing work in our communities right now to make sure that black lives matter so all lives matter.
Get involved; don't sit on your couch and tell people what you think they should be doing.
Go do it with us.
MB: Do you guys want to add anything?
That's good? All right. So -- And I think that the joining something, like if you feel like there's not something where you are, start it.
AG: Start it.
MB: These conversations that we're having, have those conversations with somebody else.
And then instead of just letting it be a talk that you had, actually decide to start something.
OT: That's right.
MB: I mean, that's what you all did.
Thank you all so much for being here with us today.
OT: Thank you.
(Applause)
Tiq Milan: Our first conversation was on Facebook, and it was three days long.
(Laughter) We shared over 3,000 messages between us, and it was during those 72 hours that I knew she was going to be my wife.
We didn't wait any prerequisite amount of time for our courtship; we told each other the vulnerable truths up front: I am a transgender man, which means the F on my birth certificate should have stood for "False," instead of "Female."
(Laughter) Walking around as a woman in the world felt like walking with pebbles in my shoes.
It took the rhythm out of my swagger, it threw me off balance, it pained me with every step I took forward.
But today I'm a man of my own intention; a man of my own design.
Kim Katrin Milan: I am a cisgender queer woman.
Cisgender means the gender I was assigned at birth is still and has always been female.
This doesn't make me natural or normal, this is just one way of describing the many different ways that we exist in this world.
And queer is a cultural term, but in this case, it refers to the way that I'm not restricted by gender when it comes to choosing partners.
I've identified in a few different ways -- as a bisexual, as a lesbian -- but for me, queerness encompasses all of the layers of who I am and how I've loved.
I'm layers, and not fractions.
And for me, the fact that he was queer meant that I could trust his courtship from the very beginning.
As queer and trans people, we're so often excluded from institutions and traditions.
We create spaces outside of convention, including the conventions of time.
And in those 3,000 messages between us, we collapsed time; we queered it; we laid it all on the table.
(Laughter) With no pretense at all.
And this meant that we were able to commit to each other in a profoundly different way.
So often what we're told is this idea of the "Golden Rule," that we should treat other people the way we want to be treated.
But the problem with that is that it assumes that we are the standard for other people, and we're not.
We need to treat other people the way they want to be treated, which means we had to ask.
I couldn't assume that the kind of love that Tiq needed was the same kind of love that I needed.
So I asked him everything -- about his fears, his insecurities -- and we started from there.
TM: I didn't know what kind of love I needed.
I had just come out of a year-long fog of being rejected and utterly depleted.
I had someone look me in my eyes and tell me that I was unworthy of their love because I was trans.
And there's a culture of lovelessness that we've created around transgender people.
It's reasoned, justified and often signed into law.
And I was a heartbeat away from internalizing that message, that I wasn't worthy.
But Kim said that I was her ideal -- the heartbroken mess that I was.
(Laughter) KKM: He totally was my ideal.
(Laughter) In more ways than one.
Both poets, writers, creatives with a long history of community work behind us, and big, huge dreams of a family in front of us, we shared a lot of things in common, but we were also incredibly different.
I've been a lifelong traveler and a bit of an orphan, whereas he comes from a huge family, and definitely stays grounded.
I often kind of sum up the differences in our strengths by saying, "Keep me safe, and I'll keep you wild."
(Laughter) TM: We have marginalized identities but we don't live marginalized lives.
Being queer and trans is about creating new ways of existing.
It's about loving people as they are, not as they're supposed to be.
Kim is unapologetically feminine in a world that is often cruel and violent to women who are too proud and too freeing.
And I didn't enter into this union under the auspices that she was going to be my helper or my rib, but a fully complex -- (Laughter) KKM: Right? That's not right.
TM: But a fully complex human being whose femininity wasn't for me to rein in, control or critique.
It's her brilliance, the way she leads with compassion, and how she never loses sight of her empathy.
She has been my hero since day one.
(Applause) KKM: Our relationship has always been about setting each other free.
One of the first questions I asked him was what dreams he had left to accomplish, and how would I help him get there.
His dreams to live as a poet, to adopt and raise a family together, to live a life that he was proud of, and one that would live up to his mother's incredible legacy.
And I really appreciated that we were able to start from that place, and not from a place that was around figuring out how to make each other work together.
And I think this really allowed us to grow into the people that we were in a way that was incredibly different.
I love him whole; pre-transition, now and in the future.
And it's this love that had us committed to each other before we'd even seen each other's faces.
TM: My mother's biggest concern when I transitioned was who was going to love me as I am.
Had being transgender somehow precluded me from love and monogamy because I was supposedly born in the wrong body?
But it's this type of structuring that has to be reframed in order to let love in.
My body never betrayed me, and my body was never wrong.
It's this restrictive, binary thinking on gender that said that I didn't exist.
But when we met, she loved me for exactly how I showed up.
She would trace her fingers along the numb keloid scars left by my top surgery.
Scars that run from the middle of my chest all the way out to my outer torso.
She said that these were reminders of my strength and everything that I went through and nothing for me to be ashamed of.
So sprinting towards her hand in marriage was the queerest thing that I could do.
(Laughter) It flew in the face of more conventional trajectories of love and relationships, because God was never supposed to bless a union for folks like us, and the law was never supposed to recognize it.
KKM: So on May 5, 2014, just about three months after meeting online, we were married on the steps of City Hall in Manhattan, and it was beautiful in every conceivable way.
It's safe to say that we reimagined some traditions, but we also kept some old ones that we worked in, and we created something that worked for us.
My bouquet and corsage was actually filled with wildflowers from Brooklyn -- also added in a little bit of lavender and sage to keep us grounded because we were so nervous.
And it was put together by a sweet sister healer friend of ours.
I never wanted a diamond ring, because conflict and convention are not my thing, so my ring is the deepest purple, like the color of my crown chakra, and set in place with my birthstones.
The gift of queerness is options.
I never had to choose his last name, it was never an exception, but I did because I am my father's bastard child, someone who has always been an apology, a secret, an imposition.
And it was incredibly freeing to choose the name of a man who chose me first.
(Applause) TM: So we told some family and some close friends, many of whom were still in disbelief as we took our vows.
Fittingly, we posted all of our wedding photos on Facebook, where we met -- and Instagram, of course.
And we quickly realized that our coming together was more than just a union of two people, but was a model of possibility for the millions of LGBTQ folks who have been sold this lie that family and matrimony is antithetical to who they are -- for those of us who rarely get to see ourselves reflected in love and happiness.
KKM: And the thing is, absolutely we are marginalized because of our identities, but it also emboldens us to be the people that we are.
Queerness is our major key; blackness is our magic.
It's because of these things that we are able to be hopeful, open, receptive and shape-shifting.
These are the things that give us, and are such an incredible source of, our strength.
Our queerness is a source of that strength.
I think of the words of Ottawa-based poet Brandon Wint: "Not queer like gay; queer like escaping definition.
Queer like some sort of fluidity and limitlessness all at once.
Queer like a freedom too strange to be conquered.
Queer like the fearlessness to imagine what love can look like, and to pursue it."
TM: We are part of a community of folks -- Yeah, that's good right?
(Laughter) We are part of a community of folks who are living their authentic selves all along the gender spectrum, despite the ubiquitous threat of violence, despite the undercurrent of anxiety that always is present for people who live on their own terms.
Globally, a transgender person is murdered every 21 hours.
And the United States has had more trans murders on record this year than any year to date.
However, our stories are much more than this rigid dichotomy of strength and resilience.
We are expanding the human complexity on these margins, and we are creating freedom on these margins.
KKM: And we don't have any blueprints.
We're creating a world that we have literally never seen before; organizing families based on love and not by blood, guiding by a compassion that so few of us have been shown ourselves.
So many of us have not received love from our families -- have been betrayed by the people that we trust most.
So what we do here is we create entirely new languages of love.
Ones that are about creating the space for us to be our authentic selves and not imposing this standard of what masculinity or femininity is supposed to be.
TM: We are interested in love and inclusion as a tool of revolutionary change, right?
And the idea is simply, if we drop all our preconceived notions about how somebody is supposed to be -- in their body, in their gender, in their skin -- if we take the intentional steps to unlearn these deep-seated biases and create space for people to be self-determined, and embrace who they are, then we will definitely create a better world than the one we were born into.
(Applause) KKM: We want to mark this time in history by leaving evidence of the fact that we were here.
We open up little windows into our relationship for our community to bear witness, and we do this because we want to make maps to the future and not monuments to ourselves.
Our experience does not invalidate other peoples' experience, but it should and necessarily does complicate this idea of what love and marriage are supposed to be.
TM: OK, now for all the talking, and inspiring, and possibility-modeling we've done, we've been nowhere near perfect.
And we've had to hold a mirror up to ourselves.
And I saw that I wasn't always the best listener, and that my ego got in the way of our progress as a couple.
And I've had to really assess these deep-seated, sexist ideas that I've had about the value of a woman's experience in the world.
I've had to reevaluate what it means to be in allyship with my wife.
KKM: And I had to remind myself of a lot of things, too.
What it means to be hard on the issues, but soft on the person.
While we were writing this, we got into a massive fight.
(Laughter) For so many different reasons, but based on the content about our values and our lived experiences -- and we were really hurt, you know?
Because what we do and how we love puts ourselves entirely on the line.
But even though the fight lasted over the course of two days -- (Laughter) We were able to come back together to each other, and recommit to ourselves, to each other and to our marriage.
And that really yielded some of the most passionate parts of what we share with you here today.
TM: I have had to interrogate masculinity, which I think doesn't happen enough.
I've had to interrogate masculinity; the toxic privileges that come with being a man don't define me, but I have to be accountable for how it shows up in my life every day.
I have allowed my wife to do all of the emotional labor of prying open the lines of communication when I'd rather clam up and run away.
(Laughter) I've stripped away emotional support instead of facing my own vulnerabilities, particularly around the heartbreaking miscarriage we suffered last year, and I'm sorry for that.
Sometimes as men, we get to take the easy way out.
And so my journey as a trans person is about reimagining masculinity.
About creating a manhood that isn't measured by the power it wields, by the entitlements afforded to it, or any simulacrum of control that it can muster, but works in tandem with femininity, and is guided by my spirit.
KKM: Y'all ...
(Applause) And this has created the space for my femininity to flourish in a way I had never experienced before.
He never is threatened by my sexuality, he never polices what I wear or how I act.
I cook but he does way more of the cleaning than I do.
And when we're rushing to get out of the house and we have so much to handle, he handles everything, so I have time to do my hair and makeup.
(Laughter) He understands that this is my armor, and he never treats femininity as though it is frivolous or superficial, and this, and him -- he grows my experience of gender every single day.
TM: I love to watch her get dressed in the morning.
Watching her in the closet, looking for something comfortable and colorful, and tight, and safe -- (Laughter) But it's challenging to watch her negotiate her decisions looking for something that's going to get the least amount of attention, but at the same time be an expression of the vibrant and sexy woman she is.
And all I want to do is celebrate her for her beauty, and the things that make her beautiful and special and free, from her long acrylic nails, to her uncompromising black feminism.
(Applause) KKM: I love you. TM: I love you.
(Laughter) KKM: There are so many queer and trans people who have come before us, whose stories we will never get to hear.
We constantly experience this retelling of history where we are conspicuously left out.
And it's really hard to not see ourselves there.
And so living out loud for us is about that representation.
It's about having possibility models, and having hope that love is part of our inheritance in this world, too.
TM: The possibility that we are practicing is about reinventing time, love and institutions.
We are creating a future of multiplicity.
We are expanding the spectrum of gender and sexuality, imagining ourselves into existence, imagining a world where gender is self-determined and not imposed, and where who we are is a kaleidoscope of possibility without the narrow-minded limitations masquerading as science or justice.
(Applause) KKM: And I can't lie: it is really, really hard.
It is hard to stand in the face of bigotry with an open heart and a smile on my face.
It is really hard to face the injustice that exists in the world, while still believing in the ability of people to really change.
That takes an enormous amount of faith and dedication.
And beyond that, marriage is hard work.
(Laughter) Piles of dirty socks on the floor, more boring sports shows than I ever thought possible -- (Laughter) And fights that bring me to tears when it feels like we're not speaking the same language.
But there is not a day that goes by where I am not so grateful to be married to this man; where I'm not so grateful for the possibility of changing minds, and rewarding conversations, and creating a world where love belongs to us all.
I think about our acronym: LGBTQ2SIA.
A seemingly endless evolution of self and a community, but also this really deep desire not to leave anyone behind.
We've learned how to love each other, and we've committed to loving each other throughout changes to gender and changes in spirit.
And we learned this love in our chat rooms, in our clubs, in our bars and in our community centers.
We've learned how to love each other for the long haul.
TM &amp; KKM: Thank you.
(Applause)
This picture is from my metro card when I spent a year abroad in Paris in college in the mid-'90s.
My friend says I look like a French anarchist -- (Laughter) But this is still what I see when I look in the mirror in the morning.
Within a month of living in Paris, I'd lost 15 pounds and I was in the best shape of my life because I was eating fresh food and I was walking wherever I went.
Having grown up in suburban Atlanta, a region built largely by highways and automobiles and with a reputation as a poster child for sprawl, Paris fundamentally changed the way I understood the construction of the world around me, and I got obsessed with the role of infrastructure -- that it's not just the way to move people from point A to point B, it's not just the way to convey water or sewage or energy, but it's the foundation for our economy.
It's the foundation for our social life and for our culture, and it really matters to the way that we live.
When I came home, I was instantly frustrated, stuck in traffic as I crossed the top end of our perimeter highway.
Not only was I not moving a muscle, I had no social interaction with the hundreds of thousands of people that were hurtling past me, like me, with their eyes faced forward and their music blaring.
I wondered if this was an inevitable outcome, or could we do something about it.
Was it possible to transform this condition in Atlanta into the kind of place that I wanted to live in?
I went back to grad school in architecture and city planning, developed this interest in infrastructure, and in 1999 came up with an idea for my thesis project: the adaptation of an obsolete loop of old railroad circling downtown as a new infrastructure for urban revitalization.
It was just an idea.
I never thought we would actually build it.
But I went to work at an architecture firm, and eventually talked to my coworkers about it, and they loved the idea.
And as we started talking to more people about it, more people wanted to hear about it.
In the summer of 2001, we connected with Cathy Woolard, who was soon elected city council president.
And we built a citywide vision around this idea: the Atlanta BeltLine, a 22-mile loop of transit and trails and transformation.
I was doing two and three meetings a week for two and a half years, and so was Cathy and her staff and a handful of volunteers.
Together, we built this amazing movement of people and ideas.
It included community advocates who were used to fighting against things, but found the Atlanta BeltLine as something that they could fight for; developers who saw the opportunity to take advantage of a lot of new growth in the city; and dozens of nonprofit partners who saw their mission at least partly accomplished by the shared vision.
Now, usually these groups of people aren't at the same table wanting the same outcome.
But there we were, and it was kind of weird, but it was really, really powerful.
The people of Atlanta fell in love with a vision that was better than what they saw through their car windshields, and the people of Atlanta made it happen, and I guarantee you we would not be building it otherwise.
From the beginning, our coalition was diverse.
People of all stripes were part of our story.
People on the lower end of the economic spectrum loved it, too.
They were just afraid they weren't going to be able to be there when it got built, that they'd be priced out.
And we've all heard that kind of story before, right?
But we promised that the Atlanta BeltLine would be different, and people took ownership of the idea, and they made it better than anything we ever imagined in the beginning, including significant subsidies for housing, new parks, art, an arboretum -- a list that continues to grow.
And we put in place the organizations and agencies that were required to make it happen.
And importantly, it is.
Now we're in the early stages of implementation, and it's working.
The first mainline section of trail was opened in 2012, and it's already generated over three billion dollars of private-sector investment.
But it's not only changing the physical form of the city, it's changing the way we think about the city, and what our expectations are for living there.
About a month ago, I had to take my kids with me to the grocery store and they were complaining about it, because they didn't want to get in the car.
They were saying, "Dad, if we have to go, can we at least ride our bikes?"
And I said, "Of course we can.
That's what people in Atlanta do.
We ride our bikes to the grocery store."
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you, yeah.
Now, they don't know how ridiculous that is, but I do.
And I also understand that their expectations for Atlanta are really powerful.
This kind of transformation is exactly like sprawl in the last century, the movement where our investment in highways and automobiles fundamentally changed American life.
That wasn't some grand conspiracy.
There were conspiracies within it, of course.
But it was a cultural momentum.
It was millions of people making millions of decisions over an extended period of time, that fundamentally changed not only the way that we build cities, but it changed our expectations for our lives.
These changes were the foundations for urban sprawl.
We didn't call it sprawl at that time.
We called it the future.
And it was.
And we got all the highways and strip malls and cul-de-sacs we wanted.
It was a radical transformation, but it was built by a cultural momentum.
So it's important to not separate the physical construction of the places we live from other things that are happening at that time.
At that time, in the second half of the last century, science was curing disease and lifting us to the moon, and the sexual revolution was breaking down barriers, and the Civil Rights Movement began its march toward the fulfillment of our nation's promise.
Television, entertainment, food, travel, business -- everything was changing, and both the public and private sectors were colluding to give us the lives we wanted.
The Federal Highway Administration, for example, didn't exist before there were highways.
Think about it.
(Laughter) Of course, today it's important to understand and acknowledge that those benefits accrued to some groups of people and not to others.
It was not an equitable cultural momentum.
But when we look today in wonder and disgust, maybe, at the metropolis sprawl before us, we wonder if we're stuck.
Are we stuck with the legacy of that inequity?
Are we stuck with this dystopian traffic hellscape?
Are we stuck with rampant urban displacement, with environmental degradation?
Are we stuck with social isolation or political polarization?
Are these the inevitable and permanent outcomes?
Or are they the result of our collective cultural decisions that we've made for ourselves?
And if they are, can't we change them?
What I have learned from our experience in Atlanta is not an anomaly.
Similar stories are playing out everywhere, where people are reclaiming not only old railroads, but also degraded urban waterways and obsolete roadways, reinventing all of the infrastructure in their lives.
Whether here in New York or in Houston or Miami, Detroit, Philadelphia, Seoul, Hong Kong, Singapore, Toronto and Paris, cities big and small all over the world are reclaiming and reinventing this infrastructure for themselves, including the mother of all catalyst infrastructure projects, the Los Angeles River, the revitalization effort for which similarly started as a grassroots movement, has developed into a cultural momentum, and is now in the early stages of being transformed into some kind of life-affirming infrastructure again, this one with trails and parks and fishing and boating and community revitalization, and of course, water quality and flood control.
It's already improving the lives of people.
It's already changing the way the rest of us think about Los Angeles.
This is more than just infrastructure.
We're building new lives for ourselves.
It's a movement that includes local food, urban agriculture, craft beer, the maker movement, tech and design -- all of these things, early indicators of a really radical shift in the way we build cities.
We're taking places like this and transforming them into this.
And soon this.
And this is all exciting and good.
We're changing the world for the better.
Good for us!
And it is awesome -- I mean that.
But our history of sprawl, and from what we can already see with these catalyst projects today, we know and must remember that big changes like this don't usually benefit everyone.
The market forces unleashed by this cultural momentum often include the seemingly unstoppable and inevitable cycle of rising taxes, prices and rents.
This is urgent.
If we care, we have to stand up and speak out.
This should be a call to action, because the answer can't be to not improve communities.
The answer can't be to not build parks and transit and grocery stores.
The answer can't be to hold communities down just to keep them affordable.
But we do have to follow through and address the financial realities that we're facing.
This is hard, and it won't happen on its own.
We can do it, and I'm committed to this goal in Atlanta, to sticking up again for people who made it possible in the first place.
We can't call it a success without them.
I certainly can't, because the people I made commitments to all those years weren't abstract populations.
They're my friends and neighbors.
They're people that I love.
So even though it started as my graduate thesis and I'm working hard for 16 years with thousands of people to help make this thing come to life, I know and believe that who the BeltLine is being built for is just as important as whether it's built at all.
Not just in Atlanta, but locally and globally, we have to understand this accountability to the people whose lives we are changing, because this is us.
We are the lives we're talking about.
These places aren't inevitable.
The places we live aren't inevitable, and if we want something different, we just need to speak up.
We have to ensure that change comes on our terms.
And to do that, we have to participate actively in the process of shaping change.
Thank you.
(Applause)
In 1987, Tina Lord found herself in quite the pickle.
See, this gold digger made sure she married sweet Cord Roberts just before he inherited millions.
But when Cord found out Tina loved his money as much as she loved him, he dumped her.
Cord's mother Maria was thrilled until they hooked up again.
So Maria hired Max Holden to romance Tina and then made sure Cord didn't find out Tina was pregnant with his baby.
So Tina, still married but thinking Cord didn't love her flew to Argentina with Max.
Cord finally figured out what was going on and rushed after them, but he was too late.
Tina had already been kidnapped, strapped to a raft and sent over a waterfall.
She and her baby were presumed dead.
Cord was sad for a bit, but then he bounced right back with a supersmart archaeologist named Kate, and they had a gorgeous wedding until Tina, seemingly back from the dead, ran into the church holding a baby.
"Stop!" she screamed.
"Am I too late?
Cord, I've come so far.
This is your son."
And that, ladies and gentlemen, is how the soap opera "One Life to Live" introduced a love story that lasted 25 years.
(Laughter) Now, if you've ever seen a soap opera, you know the stories and the characters can be exaggerated, larger than life, and if you're a fan, you find that exaggeration fun, and if you're not, maybe you find them melodramatic or unsophisticated.
Maybe you think watching soap operas is a waste of time, that their bigness means their lessons are small or nonexistent.
But I believe the opposite to be true.
Soap operas reflect life, just bigger.
So there are real life lessons we can learn from soap operas, and those lessons are as big and adventurous as any soap opera storyline.
Now, I've been a fan since I ran home from the bus stop in second grade desperate to catch the end of Luke and Laura's wedding, the biggest moment in "General Hospital" history.
(Applause) So you can imagine how much I loved my eight years as the assistant casting director on "As the World Turns."
My job was watching soap operas, reading soap opera scripts and auditioning actors to be on soap operas.
So I know my stuff.
(Laughter) And yes, soap operas are larger than life, drama on a grand scale, but our lives can be filled with as much intensity, and the stakes can feel just as dramatic.
We cycle through tragedy and joy just like these characters.
We cross thresholds, fight demons and find salvation unexpectedly, and we do it again and again and again, but just like soaps, we can flip the script, which means we can learn from these characters that move like bumblebees, looping and swerving through life.
And we can use those lessons to craft our own life stories.
Soap operas teach us to push away doubt and believe in our capacity for bravery, vulnerability, adaptability and resilience.
And most importantly, they show us it's never too late to change your story.
So with that, let's start with soap opera lesson one: surrender is not an option.
(Laughter) "All My Children"'s Erica Kane was daytime's version of Scarlett O'Hara, a hyperbolically self-important princess who deep down was scrappy and daring.
Now, in her 41 years on TV, perhaps Erica's most famous scene is her alone in the woods suddenly face to face with a grizzly bear.
She screamed at the bear, "You may not do this!
Do you understand me?
You may not come near me!
I am Erica Kane and you are a filthy beast!"
(Laughter) And of course the bear left, so what that teaches us is obstacles are to be expected and we can choose to surrender or we can stand and fight.
Pandora's Tim Westergren knows this better than most.
You might even call him the Erica Kane of Silicon Valley.
Tim and his cofounders launched the company with two million dollars in funding.
They were out of cash the next year.
Now, lots of companies fold at that point, but Tim chose to fight.
He maxed out 11 credit cards and racked up six figures in personal debt and it still wasn't enough.
So every two weeks for two years on payday he stood in front of his employees and he asked them to sacrifice their salaries, and it worked.
More than 50 people deferred two million dollars, and now, more than a decade later, Pandora is worth billions.
When you believe that there is a way around or through whatever is in front of you, that surrender is not an option, you can overcome enormous obstacles.
Which brings us to soap opera lesson two: sacrifice your ego and drop the superiority complex.
Now, this is scary.
It's an acknowledgment of need or fallibility.
Maybe it's even an admission that we're not as special as we might like to think.
Stephanie Forrester of "The Bold and the Beautiful" thought she was pretty darn special.
She thought she was so special, she didn't need to mix with the riffraff from the valley, and she made sure valley girl Brooke knew it.
But after nearly 25 years of epic fighting, Stephanie got sick and let Brooke in.
They made amends, archenemies became soul mates and Stephanie died in Brooke's arms, and here's our takeaway.
Drop your ego.
Life is not about you.
It's about us, and our ability to experience joy and love and to improve our reality comes only when we make ourselves vulnerable and we accept responsibility for our actions and our inactions, kind of like Howard Schultz, the CEO of Starbucks.
Now, after a great run as CEO, Howard stepped down in 2000, and Starbucks quickly overextended itself and stock prices fell.
Howard rejoined the team in 2008, and one of the first things he did was apologize to all 180,000 employees.
He apologized.
And then he asked for help, honesty, and ideas in return.
And now, Starbucks has more than doubled its net revenue since Howard came back.
So sacrifice your desire to be right or safe all the time.
It's not helping anyone, least of all you.
Sacrifice your ego.
Soap opera lesson three: evolution is real.
You're not meant to be static characters.
On television, static equals boring and boring equals fired.
Characters are supposed to grow and change.
Now, on TV, those dynamic changes can make for some rough transitions, particularly when a character is played by one person yesterday and played by someone new today.
Recasting happens all the time on soaps.
Over the last 20 years, four different actors have played the same key role of Carly Benson on "General Hospital."
Each new face triggered a change in the character's life and personality.
Now, there was always an essential nugget of Carly in there, but the character and the story adapted to whomever was playing her.
And here's what that means for us.
While we may not swap faces in our own lives, we can evolve too.
We can choose to draw a circle around our feet and stay in that spot, or we can open ourselves to opportunities like Carly, who went from nursing student to hotel owner, or like Julia Child.
Julia was a World War II spy, and when the war ended, she got married, moved to France, and decided to give culinary school a shot.
Julia, her books and her TV shows revolutionized the way America cooks.
We all have the power to initiate change in our lives, to evolve and adapt.
We make the choice, but sometimes life chooses for us, and we don't get a heads up.
Surprise slams us in the face.
You're flat on the ground, the air is gone, and you need resuscitation.
So thank goodness for soap opera lesson four: resurrection is possible.
(Laughter) (Applause) In 1983, "Days of Our Lives"' Stefano DiMera died of a stroke, but not really, because in 1984 he died when his car plunged into the harbor, and yet he was back in 1985 with a brain tumor.
(Laughter) But before the tumor could kill him, Marlena shot him, and he tumbled off a catwalk to his death.
And so it went for 30 years.
(Laughter) Even when we saw the body, we knew better.
He's called the Phoenix for a reason.
And here's what that means for us.
As long as the show is still on the air, or you're still breathing, nothing is permanent.
Resurrection is possible.
Now, of course, just like life, soap operas do ultimately meet the big finale.
CBS canceled my show, "As The World Turns," in December 2009, and we shot our final episode in June 2010.
It was six months of dying and I rode that train right into the mountain.
And even though we were in the middle of a huge recession and millions of people were struggling to find work, I somehow thought everything would be OK.
So I packed up the kids and the Brooklyn apartment, and we moved in with my in-laws in Alabama.
(Laughter) Three months later, nothing was OK.
That was when I watched the final episode air, and I realized the show was not the only fatality.
I was one too.
I was unemployed and living on the second floor of my in-laws' home, and that's enough to make anyone feel dead inside.
(Laughter) But I knew my story wasn't over, that it couldn't be over.
I just had to tap into everything I had ever learned about soap operas.
I had to be brave like Erica and refuse to surrender, so every day, I made a decision to fight.
I had to be vulnerable like Stephanie and sacrifice my ego.
I had to ask for help a lot of times across many states.
I had to be adaptable like Carly and evolve my skills, my mindset, and my circumstances, and then I had to be resilient, like Stefano, and resurrect myself and my career like a phoenix from the ashes.
Eventually I got an interview.
After 15 years in news and entertainment, nine months of unemployment and this one interview, I had an offer for an entry level job.
I was 37 years old and I was back from the dead.
We will all experience what looks like an ending, and we can choose to make it a beginning.
Kind of like Tina, who miraculously survived that waterfall, and because I hate to leave a cliffhanger hanging, Tina and Cord did get divorced, but they got remarried three times before the show went off the air in 2012.
So remember, as long as there is breath in your body, it's never too late to change your story.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was six years old, I received my gifts.
My first grade teacher had this brilliant idea.
She wanted us to experience receiving gifts but also learning the virtue of complimenting each other.
So she had all of us come to the front of the classroom, and she bought all of us gifts and stacked them in the corner.
And she said, "Why don't we just stand here and compliment each other?
If you hear your name called, go and pick up your gift and sit down."
What a wonderful idea, right?
What could go wrong?
(Laughter) Well, there were 40 of us to start with, and every time I heard someone's name called, I would give out the heartiest cheer.
And then there were 20 people left, and 10 people left, and five left ...
and three left.
And I was one of them.
And the compliments stopped.
Well, at that moment, I was crying.
And the teacher was freaking out.
She was like, "Hey, would anyone say anything nice about these people?"
(Laughter) "No one? OK, why don't you go get your gift and sit down.
So behave next year -- someone might say something nice about you."
(Laughter) Well, as I'm describing this you, you probably know I remember this really well.
(Laughter) But I don't know who felt worse that day.
Was it me or the teacher?
She must have realized that she turned a team-building event into a public roast for three six-year-olds.
And without the humor.
You know, when you see people get roasted on TV, it was funny.
There was nothing funny about that day.
So that was one version of me, and I would die to avoid being in that situation again -- to get rejected in public again.
That's one version.
Then fast-forward eight years.
Bill Gates came to my hometown -- Beijing, China -- to speak, and I saw his message.
I fell in love with that guy.
I thought, wow, I know what I want to do now.
That night I wrote a letter to my family telling them: "By age 25, I will build the biggest company in the world, and that company will buy Microsoft."
(Laughter) I totally embraced this idea of conquering the world -- domination, right?
And I didn't make this up, I did write that letter.
And here it is -- (Laughter) You don't have to read this through -- (Laughter) This is also bad handwriting, but I did highlight some key words.
(Laughter) So ...
that was another version of me: one who will conquer the world.
Well, then two years later, I was presented with the opportunity to come to the United States.
I jumped on it, because that was where Bill Gates lived, right?
(Laughter) I thought that was the start of my entrepreneur journey.
Then, fast-forward another 14 years.
I was 30.
Nope, I didn't build that company.
I didn't even start.
I was actually a marketing manager for a Fortune 500 company.
And I felt I was stuck; I was stagnant.
Why is that?
Where is that 14-year-old who wrote that letter?
It's not because he didn't try.
It's because every time I had a new idea, every time I wanted to try something new, even at work -- I wanted to make a proposal, I wanted to speak up in front of people in a group -- I felt there was this constant battle between the 14-year-old and the six-year-old.
One wanted to conquer the world -- make a difference -- another was afraid of rejection.
And every time that six-year-old won.
And this fear even persisted after I started my own company.
I mean, I started my own company when I was 30 -- if you want to be Bill Gates, you've got to start sooner or later, right?
When I was an entrepreneur, I was presented with an investment opportunity, and then I was turned down.
And that rejection hurt me.
It hurt me so bad that I wanted to quit right there.
But then I thought, hey, would Bill Gates quit after a simple investment rejection?
Would any successful entrepreneur quit like that?
No way.
And this is where it clicked for me.
OK, I can build a better company.
I can build a better team or better product, but one thing for sure: I've got to be a better leader.
I've got to be a better person.
I cannot let that six-year-old keep dictating my life anymore.
I have to put him back in his place.
So this is where I went online and looked for help.
Google was my friend.
(Laughter) I searched, "How do I overcome the fear of rejection?"
I came up with a bunch of psychology articles about where the fear and pain are coming from.
Then I came up with a bunch of "rah-rah" inspirational articles about "Don't take it personally, just overcome it."
Who doesn't know that?
(Laughter) But why was I still so scared?
Then I found this website by luck.
It's called rejectiontherapy.com.
(Laughter) "Rejection Therapy" was this game invented by this Canadian entrepreneur.
His name is Jason Comely.
And basically the idea is for 30 days you go out and look for rejection, and every day get rejected at something, and then by the end, you desensitize yourself from the pain.
And I loved that idea.
(Laughter) I said, "You know what? I'm going to do this.
And I'll feel myself getting rejected 100 days."
And I came up with my own rejection ideas, and I made a video blog out of it.
And so here's what I did.
This is what the blog looked like.
Day One ...
(Laughter) Borrow 100 dollars from a stranger.
So this is where I went to where I was working.
I came downstairs and I saw this big guy sitting behind a desk.
He looked like a security guard.
So I just approached him.
And I was just walking and that was the longest walk of my life -- hair on the back of my neck standing up, I was sweating and my heart was pounding.
And I got there and said, "Hey, sir, can I borrow 100 dollars from you?"
(Laughter) And he looked up, he's like, "No."
"Why?"
And I just said, "No? I'm sorry."
Then I turned around, and I just ran.
(Laughter) I felt so embarrassed.
But because I filmed myself -- so that night I was watching myself getting rejected, I just saw how scared I was.
I looked like this kid in "The Sixth Sense."
I saw dead people.
(Laughter) But then I saw this guy.
You know, he wasn't that menacing.
He was a chubby, loveable guy, and he even asked me, "Why?"
In fact, he invited me to explain myself.
And I could've said many things.
I could've explained, I could've negotiated.
I didn't do any of that.
All I did was run.
I felt, wow, this is like a microcosm of my life.
Every time I felt the slightest rejection, I would just run as fast as I could.
And you know what?
The next day, no matter what happens, I'm not going to run.
I'll stay engaged.
Day Two: Request a "burger refill."
(Laughter) It's when I went to a burger joint, I finished lunch, and I went to the cashier and said, "Hi, can I get a burger refill?"
(Laughter) He was all confused, like, "What's a burger refill?"
(Laughter) I said, "Well, it's just like a drink refill but with a burger."
And he said, "Sorry, we don't do burger refill, man."
(Laughter) So this is where rejection happened and I could have run, but I stayed.
I said, "Well, I love your burgers, I love your joint, and if you guys do a burger refill, I will love you guys more."
(Laughter) And he said, "Well, OK, I'll tell my manager about it, and maybe we'll do it, but sorry, we can't do this today."
Then I left.
And by the way, I don't think they've ever done burger refill.
(Laughter) I think they're still there.
But the life and death feeling I was feeling the first time was no longer there, just because I stayed engaged -- because I didn't run.
I said, "Wow, great, I'm already learning things.
Great."
And then Day Three: Getting Olympic Doughnuts.
This is where my life was turned upside down.
I went to a Krispy Kreme.
It's a doughnut shop in mainly the Southeastern part of the United States.
I'm sure they have some here, too.
And I went in, I said, "Can you make me doughnuts that look like Olympic symbols?
Basically, you interlink five doughnuts together ... " I mean there's no way they could say yes, right?
The doughnut maker took me so seriously.
(Laughter) So she put out paper, started jotting down the colors and the rings, and is like, "How can I make this?"
And then 15 minutes later, she came out with a box that looked like Olympic rings.
And I was so touched.
I just couldn't believe it.
And that video got over five million views on Youtube.
The world couldn't believe that either.
(Laughter) You know, because of that I was in newspapers, in talk shows, in everything.
And I became famous.
A lot of people started writing emails to me and saying, "What you're doing is awesome."
But you know, fame and notoriety did not do anything to me.
What I really wanted to do was learn, and to change myself.
So I turned the rest of my 100 days of rejection into this playground -- into this research project.
I wanted to see what I could learn.
And then I learned a lot of things.
I discovered so many secrets.
For example, I found if I just don't run, if I got rejected, I could actually turn a "no" into a "yes," and the magic word is, "why."
So one day I went to a stranger's house, I had this flower in my hand, knocked on the door and said, "Hey, can I plant this flower in your backyard?"
(Laughter) And he said, "No."
But before he could leave I said, "Hey, can I know why?"
And he said, "Well, I have this dog that would dig up anything I put in the backyard.
I don't want to waste your flower.
If you want to do this, go across the street and talk to Connie.
She loves flowers."
So that's what I did.
I went across and knocked on Connie's door.
And she was so happy to see me.
(Laughter) And then half an hour later, there was this flower in Connie's backyard.
I'm sure it looks better now.
(Laughter) But had I left after the initial rejection, I would've thought, well, it's because the guy didn't trust me, it's because I was crazy, because I didn't dress up well, I didn't look good.
It was none of those.
It was because what I offered did not fit what he wanted.
And he trusted me enough to offer me a referral, using a sales term.
I converted a referral.
Then one day -- and I also learned that I can actually say certain things and maximize my chance to get a yes.
So for example, one day I went to a Starbucks, and asked the manager, "Hey, can I be a Starbucks greeter?"
He was like, "What's a Starbucks greeter?"
I said, "Do you know those Walmart greeters?
You know, those people who say 'hi' to you before you walk in the store, and make sure you don't steal stuff, basically?
I want to give a Walmart experience to Starbucks customers."
(Laughter) Well, I'm not sure that's a good thing, actually -- Actually, I'm pretty sure it's a bad thing.
And he was like, "Oh" -- yeah, this is how he looked, his name is Eric -- and he was like, "I'm not sure."
This is how he was hearing me. "Not sure."
Then I ask him, "Is that weird?"
He's like, "Yeah, it's really weird, man."
But as soon as he said that, his whole demeanor changed.
It's as if he's putting all the doubt on the floor.
And he said, "Yeah, you can do this, just don't get too weird."
(Laughter) So for the next hour I was the Starbucks greeter.
I said "hi" to every customer that walked in, and gave them holiday cheers.
By the way, I don't know what your career trajectory is, don't be a greeter.
(Laughter) It was really boring.
But then I found I could do this because I mentioned, "Is that weird?"
I mentioned the doubt that he was having.
And because I mentioned, "Is that weird?", that means I wasn't weird.
That means I was actually thinking just like him, seeing this as a weird thing.
And again, and again, I learned that if I mention some doubt people might have before I ask the question, I gained their trust.
People were more likely to say yes to me.
And then I learned I could fulfill my life dream ...
by asking.
You know, I came from four generations of teachers, and my grandma has always told me, "Hey Jia, you can do anything you want, but it'd be great if you became a teacher."
(Laughter) But I wanted to be an entrepreneur, so I didn't.
But it has always been my dream to actually teach something.
So I said, "What if I just ask and teach a college class?"
I lived in Austin at the time, so I went to University of Texas at Austin and knocked on professors' doors and said, "Can I teach your class?"
I didn't get anywhere the first couple of times.
But because I didn't run -- I kept doing it -- and on the third try the professor was very impressed.
He was like, "No one has done this before."
And I came in prepared with powerpoints and my lesson.
He said, "Wow, I can use this.
Why don't you come back in two months? I'll fit you in my curriculum."
And two months later I was teaching a class.
This is me -- you probably can't see, this is a bad picture.
You know, sometimes you get rejected by lighting, you know?
(Laughter) But wow -- when I finished teaching that class, I walked out crying, because I thought I could fulfill my life dream just by simply asking.
I used to think I have to accomplish all these things -- have to be a great entrepreneur, or get a PhD to teach -- but no, I just asked, and I could teach.
And in that picture, which you can't see, I quoted Martin Luther King, Jr.
Why? Because in my research I found that people who really change the world, who change the way we live and the way we think, are the people who were met with initial and often violent rejections.
People like Martin Luther King, Jr., like Mahatma Gandhi, Nelson Mandela, or even Jesus Christ.
These people did not let rejection define them.
They let their own reaction after rejection define themselves.
And they embraced rejection.
And we don't have to be those people to learn about rejection, and in my case, rejection was my curse, was my boogeyman.
It has bothered me my whole life because I was running away from it.
Then I started embracing it.
I turned that into the biggest gift in my life.
I started teaching people how to turn rejections into opportunities.
I use my blog, I use my talk, I use the book I just published, and I'm even building technology to help people overcome their fear of rejection.
When you get rejected in life, when you are facing the next obstacle or next failure, consider the possibilities.
Don't run.
If you just embrace them, they might become your gifts as well.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Our lives depend on a world we can't see.
Think about your week so far.
Have you watched TV, used GPS, checked the weather or even ate a meal?
These many things that enable our daily lives rely either directly or indirectly on satellites.
And while we often take for granted the services that satellites provide us, the satellites themselves deserve our attention as they are leaving a lasting mark on the space they occupy.
People around the world rely on satellite infrastructure every day for information, entertainment and to communicate.
There's agricultural and environmental monitoring, Internet connectivity, navigation.
Satellites even play a role in the operation of our financial and energy markets.
But these satellites that we rely on day in and day out have a finite life.
They might run out of propellant, they could malfunction, or they may just naturally reach the end of their mission life.
At this point, these satellites effectively become space junk, cluttering the orbital environment.
So imagine you're driving down the highway on a beautiful, sunny day out running errands.
You've got your music cranked, your windows rolled down, with the cool breeze blowing through your hair.
Feels nice, right?
Everything is going smoothly until suddenly your car stutters and stalls right in the middle of the highway.
So now you have no choice but to abandon your car where it is on the highway.
Maybe you were lucky enough to be able to move it out of the way and into a shoulder lane so that it's out of the way of other traffic.
A couple of hours ago, your car was a useful machine that you relied on in your everyday life.
Now, it's a useless hunk of metal taking up space in a valuable transportation network.
And imagine international roadways all cluttered with broken down vehicles that are just getting in the way of other traffic.
And imagine the debris that would be strewn everywhere if a collision actually happened, thousands of smaller pieces of debris becoming new obstacles.
This is the paradigm of the satellite industry.
Satellites that are no longer working are often left to deorbit over many, many years, or only moved out of the way as a temporary solution.
And there are no international laws in space to enforce us to clean up after ourselves.
So the world's first satellite, Sputnik I, was launched in 1957, and in that year, there were only a total of three launch attempts.
Decades later and dozens of countries from all around the world have launched thousands of more satellites into orbit, and the frequency of launches is only going to increase in the future, especially if you consider things like the possibility of 900-plus satellite constellations being launched.
Now, we send satellites to different orbits depending on what they're needed for.
One of the most common places we send satellites is the low Earth orbit, possibly to image the surface of Earth at up to about 2,000 kilometers altitude.
Satellites there are naturally buffeted by Earth's atmosphere, so their orbits naturally decay, and they'll eventually burn up, probably within a couple of decades.
Another common place we send satellites is the geostationary orbit at about 35,000 kilometers altitude.
Satellites there remain in the same place above Earth as the Earth rotates, which enables things like communications or television broadcast, for example.
Satellites in high orbits like these could remain there for centuries.
And then there's the orbit coined "the graveyard," the ominous junk or disposal orbits, where some satellites are intentionally placed at the end of their life so that they're out of the way of common operational orbits.
Of the nearly 7,000 satellites launched since the late 1950s, only about one in seven is currently operational, and in addition to the satellites that are no longer working, there's also hundreds of thousands of marble-sized debris and millions of paint chip-sized debris that are also orbiting around the Earth.
Space debris is a major risk to space missions, but also to the satellites that we rely on each and every day.
Now, because space debris and junk has become increasingly worrisome, there have been some national and international efforts to develop technical standards to help us limit the generation of additional debris.
So for example, there are recommendations for those low-Earth orbiting spacecraft to be made to deorbit in under 25 years, but that's still a really long time, especially if a satellite hasn't been working for years.
There's also mandates for those dead geostationary spacecraft to be moved into a graveyard orbit.
But neither of these guidelines is binding under international law, and the understanding is that they will be implemented through national mechanisms.
These guidelines are also not long-term, they're not proactive, nor do they address the debris that's already up there.
They're only in place to limit the future creation of debris.
Space junk is no one's responsibility.
Now, Mount Everest is actually an interesting comparison of a new approach to how we interact with our environments, as it's often given the dubious honor of being the world's highest garbage dump.
Decades after the first conquest of the world's highest peak, tons of rubbish left behind by climbers has started to raise concern, and you may have read in the news that there's speculation that Nepal will crack down on mountaineers with stricter enforcement of penalties and legal obligations.
The goal, of course, is to persuade climbers to clean up after themselves, so maybe local not-for-profits will pay climbers who bring down extra waste, or expeditions might organize voluntary cleanup trips.
And yet still many climbers feel that independent groups should police themselves.
There's no simple or easy answer, and even well-intentioned efforts at conservation often run into problems.
But that doesn't mean we shouldn't do everything in our power to protect the environments that we rely and depend on, and like Everest, the remote location and inadequate infrastructure of the orbital environment make waste disposal a challenging problem.
But we simply cannot reach new heights and create an even higher garbage dump, one that's out of this world.
The reality of space is that if a component on a satellite breaks down, there really are limited opportunities for repairs, and only at great cost.
But what if we were smarter about how we designed satellites?
What if all satellites, regardless of what country they were built in, had to be standardized in some way for recycling, servicing or active deorbiting?
What if there actually were international laws with teeth that enforced end-of-life disposal of satellites instead of moving them out of the way as a temporary solution?
Or maybe satellite manufacturers need to be charged a deposit to even launch a satellite into orbit, and that deposit would only be returned if the satellite was disposed of properly or if they cleaned up some quota of debris.
Or maybe a satellite needs to have technology on board to help accelerate deorbit.
There are some encouraging signs.
The UK's TechDemoSat-1, launched in 2014, for example, was designed for end-of-life disposal via a small drag sail.
This works for the satellite because it's small, but satellites that are higher or in larger orbits or are larger altogether, like the size of school buses, will require other disposal options.
So maybe you get into things like high-powered lasers or tugging using nets or tethers, as crazy as those sound in the short term.
And then one really cool possibility is the idea of orbital tow trucks or space mechanics.
Imagine if a robotic arm on some sort of space tow truck could fix the broken components on a satellite, making them usable again.
Or what if that very same robotic arm could refuel the propellant tank on a spacecraft that relies on chemical propulsion just like you or I would refuel the fuel tanks on our cars?
Robotic repair and maintenance could extend the lives of hundreds of satellites orbiting around the Earth.
Whatever the disposal or cleanup options we come up with, it's clearly not just a technical problem.
There's also complex space laws and politics that we have to sort out.
Simply put, we haven't found a way to use space sustainably yet.
Exploring, innovating to change the way we live and work are what we as humans do, and in space exploration, we're literally moving beyond the boundaries of Earth.
But as we push thresholds in the name of learning and innovation, we must remember that accountability for our environments never goes away.
There is without doubt congestion in the low Earth and geostationary orbits, and we cannot keep launching new satellites to replace the ones that have broken down without doing something about them first, just like we would never leave a broken down car in the middle of the highway.
Next time you use your phone, check the weather or use your GPS, think about the satellite technologies that make those activities possible.
But also think about the very impact that the satellites have on the environment surrounding Earth, and help spread the message that together we must reduce our impact.
Earth orbit is breathtakingly beautiful and our gateway to exploration.
It's up to us to keep it that way.
Thank you.
(Applause)
The first question is this.
Our country has two exploration programs.
One is NASA, with a mission to explore the great beyond, to explore the heavens, which we all want to go to if we're lucky.
And you can see we have Sputnik, and we have Saturn, and we have other manifestations of space exploration.
Well, there's also another program, in another agency within our government, in ocean exploration.
It's in NOAA, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
And my question is this: "why are we ignoring the oceans?"
Here's the reason, or not the reason, but here's why I ask that question.
If you compare NASA's annual budget to explore the heavens, that one-year budget would fund NOAA's budget to explore the oceans for 1,600 years.
Why? Why are we looking up? Is it because it's heaven?
And hell is down here? Is it a cultural issue?
Why are people afraid of the ocean?
Or do they just assume the ocean is just a dark, gloomy place that has nothing to offer?
I'm going to take you on a 16-minute trip on 72 percent of the planet, so buckle up.
OK. And what we're going to do is we're going to immerse ourselves in my world.
And what I'm going to try -- I hope I make the following points.
I'm going to make it right now in case I forget.
Everything I'm going to present to you was not in my textbooks when I went to school.
And most of all, it was not even in my college textbooks.
I'm a geophysicist, and all my Earth science books when I was a student -- I had to give the wrong answer to get an A.
We used to ridicule continental drift. It was something we laughed at.
We learned of Marshall Kay's geosynclinal cycle, which is a bunch of crap.
In today's context, it was a bunch of crap, but it was the law of geology, vertical tectonics.
All the things we're going to walk through in our explorations and discoveries of the oceans were mostly discoveries made by accident.
Mostly discoveries made by accident.
We were looking for something and found something else.
And everything we're going to talk about represents a one tenth of one percent glimpse, because that's all we've seen.
I have a characterization.
This is a characterization of what it would look like if you could remove the water.
It gives you the false impression it's a map.
It is not a map.
In fact, I have another version at my office and I ask people, "Why are there mountains here, on this area here, but there are none over here?" And they go, "Well, gee, I don't know," saying, "Is it a fracture zone? Is it a hot spot?"
No, no, that's the only place a ship's been.
Most of the southern hemisphere is unexplored.
We had more exploration ships down there during Captain Cook's time than now. It's amazing.
All right. So we're going to immerse ourselves in the 72 percent of the planet because, you know, it's really naive to think that the Easter Bunny put all the resources on the continents.
(Laughter) You know, it's just ludicrous.
We are always, constantly playing the zero sum game.
You know, we're going to do this, we're going to take it away from something else.
I believe in just enriching the economy.
And we're leaving so much on the table, 72 percent of the planet.
And as I will point out later in the presentation, 50 percent of the United States of America lies beneath the sea.
50 percent of our country that we own, have all legal jurisdiction, have all rights to do whatever we want, lies beneath the sea and we have better maps of Mars than that 50 percent.
Why? OK. Now, I began my explorations the hard way.
Back then -- actually my first expedition was when I was 17 years old. It was 49 years ago.
Do the math, I'm 66. And I went out to sea on a Scripps ship and we almost got sunk by a giant rogue wave, and I was too young to be -- you know, I thought it was great!
I was a body surfer and I thought, "Wow, that was an incredible wave!"
And we almost sank the ship, but I became enraptured with mounting expeditions. And over the last 49 years, I've done about 120, 121 -- I keep doing them -- expeditions.
But in the early days, the only way I could get to the bottom was to crawl into a submarine, a very small submarine, and go down to the bottom.
I dove in a whole series of different deep diving submersibles.
Alvin and Sea Cliff and Cyana, and all the major deep submersibles we have, which are about eight.
In fact, on a good day, we might have four or five human beings at the average depth of the Earth -- maybe four or five human beings out of whatever billions we've got going.
And so it's very difficult to get there, if you do it physically.
But I was enraptured, and in my graduate years was the dawn of plate tectonics. And we realized that the greatest mountain range on Earth lies beneath the sea.
The mid-ocean ridge runs around like the seam on a baseball.
This is on a Mercator projection.
But if you were to put it on an equal area projection, you'd see that the mid-ocean ridge covers 23 percent of the Earth's total surface area.
Almost a quarter of our planet is a single mountain range and we didn't enter it until after Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin went to the moon.
So we went to the moon, played golf up there, before we went to the largest feature on our own planet.
And our interest in this mountain range, as Earth scientists in those days, was not only because of its tremendous size, dominating the planet, but the role it plays in the genesis of the Earth's outer skin.
Because it's along the axis of the mid-ocean ridge where the great crustal plates are separating.
And like a living organism, you tear it open, it bleeds its molten blood, rises up to heal that wound from the asthenosphere, hardens, forms new tissue and moves laterally.
But no one had actually gone down into the actual site of the boundary of creation as we call it -- into the Rift Valley -- until a group of seven of us crawled in our little submarines in the summer of 1973, 1974 and were the first human beings to enter the Great Rift Valley.
We went down into the Rift Valley.
This is all accurate except for one thing -- it's pitch black.
It's absolutely pitch black, because photons cannot reach the average depth of the ocean, which is 12,000 feet. In the Rift Valley, it's 9,000 feet.
Most of our planet does not feel the warmth of the sun.
Most of our planet is in eternal darkness.
And for that reason, you do not have photosynthesis in the deep sea.
And with the absence of photosynthesis you have no plant life, and as a result, you have very little animal life living in this underworld.
Or so we thought. And so in our initial explorations, we were totally focused on exploring the boundary of creation, looking at the volcanic features running along that entire 42,000 miles.
Running along this entire 42,000 miles are tens of thousands of active volcanoes.
Tens of thousands of active volcanoes.
There are more active volcanoes beneath the sea than on land by two orders of magnitude.
So, it's a phenomenally active region, it's not just a dark, boring place. It's a very alive place.
And it's then being ripped open.
But we were dealing with a particular scientific issue back then.
We couldn't understand why you had a mountain under tension.
In plate tectonic theory, we knew that if you had plates collide, it made sense: they would crush into one another, you would thicken the crust, you'd uplift it.
That's why you get, you know, you get seashells up on Mount Everest.
It's not a flood, it was pushed up there.
We understood mountains under compression, but we could not understand why we had a mountain under tension.
It should not be. Until one of my colleagues said, "It looks to me like a thermal blister, and the mid-ocean ridge must be a cooling curve." We said, "Let's go find out."
We punched a bunch of heat probes. Everything made sense, except, at the axis, there was missing heat. It was missing heat.
It was hot. It wasn't hot enough.
So, we came up with multiple hypotheses: there's little green people down there taking it; there's all sorts of things going on.
But the only logical [explanation] was that there were hot springs.
So, there must be underwater hot springs.
We mounted an expedition to look for the missing heat.
And so we went along this mountain range, in an area along Galapagos Rift, and did we find the missing heat.
It was amazing. These giant chimneys, huge giant chimneys.
We went up to them with our submersible.
We wanted to get a temperature probe, we stuck it in there, looked at it -- it pegged off scale.
The pilot made this great observation: "That's hot."
(Laughter) And then we realized our probe was made out of the same stuff -- it could have melted. But it turns out the exiting temperature was 650 degrees F, hot enough to melt lead.
This is what a real one looks like, on the Juan de Fuca Ridge.
What you're looking at is an incredible pipe organ of chemicals coming out of the ocean.
Everything you see in this picture is commercial grade: copper, lead, silver, zinc and gold.
So the Easter Bunny has put things in the ocean floor, and you have massive heavy metal deposits that we're making in this mountain range.
We're making huge discoveries of large commercial-grade ore along this mountain range, but it was dwarfed by what we discovered.
We discovered a profusion of life, in a world that it should not exist [in]. Giant tube worms, 10 feet tall.
I remember having to use vodka -- my own vodka -- to pickle it because we don't carry formaldehyde.
We went and found these incredible clam beds sitting on the barren rock. Large clams, and when we opened them, they didn't look like a clam.
And when we cut them open, they didn't have the anatomy of a clam.
No mouth, no gut, no digestive system.
Their bodies had been totally taken over by another organism, a bacterium, that had figured out how to replicate photosynthesis in the dark, through a process we now call chemosynthesis.
None of it in our textbooks. None of this in our textbooks.
We did not know about this life system.
We were not predicting it.
We stumbled on it, looking for some missing heat.
So, we wanted to accelerate this process.
We wanted to get away from this silly trip, up and down on a submarine: average depth of the ocean, 12,000 feet; two and half hours to get to work in the morning; two and half hours to get to home. Five hour commute to work.
Three hours of bottom time, average distance traveled -- one mile.
(Laughter) On a 42,000 mile mountain range. Great job security, but not the way to go.
So, I began designing a new technology of telepresence, using robotic systems to replicate myself, so I wouldn't have to cycle my vehicle system.
We began to introduce that in our explorations, and we continued to make phenomenal discoveries with our new robotic technologies. Again, looking for something else, moving from one part of the mid-ocean ridge to another.
The scientists were off watch and they came across incredible life forms.
They came across new creatures they had not seen before.
But more importantly, they discovered edifices down there that they did not understand.
That did not make sense. They were not above a magma chamber.
They shouldn't be there. And we called it Lost City.
And Lost City was characterized by these incredible limestone formations and upside down pools. Look at that.
How do you do that? That's water upside down.
We went in underneath and tapped it, and we found that it had the pH of Drano.
The pH of 11, and yet it had chemosynthetic bacteria living in it and at this extreme environment.
And the hydrothermal vents were in an acidic environment.
All the way at the other end, in an alkaline environment, at a pH of 11, life existed.
So life was much more creative than we had ever thought.
Again, discovered by accident. Just two years ago working off Santorini, where people are sunning themselves on the beach, unbeknownst to them in the caldera nearby, we found phenomenal hydrothermal vent systems and more life systems.
This was two miles from where people go to sunbathe, and they were oblivious to the existence of this system.
Again, you know, we stop at the water's edge.
Recently, diving off -- in the Gulf of Mexico, finding pools of water, this time not upside down, right side up.
Bingo. You'd think you're in air, until a fish swims by.
You're looking at brine pools formed by salt diapirs.
Near that was methane. I've never seen volcanoes of methane.
Instead of belching out lava, they were belching out big, big bubbles of methane. And they were creating these volcanoes, and there were flows, not of lava, but of the mud coming out of the Earth but driven by -- I've never seen this before.
Moving on, there's more than just natural history beneath the sea -- human history. Our discoveries of the Titanic.
The realization that the deep sea is the largest museum on Earth.
It contains more history than all of the museums on land combined.
And yet we're only now penetrating it.
Finding the state of preservation.
We found the Bismarck in 16,000 feet. We then found the Yorktown.
People always ask, "Did you find the right ship?"
It said Yorktown on the stern.
(Laughter) More recently, finding ancient history.
How many ancient mariners have had a bad day? The number's a million.
We've been discovering these along ancient trade routes, where they're not supposed to be.
This shipwreck sank 100 years before the birth of Christ.
This one sank carrying a prefabricated, Home Depot Roman temple.
And then here's one that sank at the time of Homer, at 750 B.C.
More recently, into the Black Sea, where we're exploring.
Because there's no oxygen there, it's the largest reservoir of hydrogen sulfide on Earth. Shipwrecks are perfectly preserved.
All their organics are perfectly preserved. We begin to excavate them.
We expect to start hauling out the bodies in perfect condition with their DNA.
Look at the state of preservation -- still the ad mark of a carpenter. Look at the state of those artifacts.
You still see the beeswax dripping. When they dropped, they sealed it.
This ship sank 1,500 years ago.
Fortunately, we've been able to convince Congress.
We begin to go on the Hill and lobby.
And we stole recently a ship from the United States Navy.
The Okeanos Explorer on its mission.
Its mission is as good as you could get.
Its mission is to go where no one has gone before on planet Earth.
And I was looking at it yesterday, it's up in Seattle. OK.
(Applause) It comes online this summer, and it begins its journey of exploration.
But we have no idea what we're going find when we go out there with our technology.
But certainly, it's going to be going to the unknown America.
This is that part of the United States that lies beneath the sea.
We own all of that blue and yet, like I say, particularly the western territorial trust, we don't have maps of them. We don't have maps of them.
We have maps of Venus, but not of the western territorial trust.
The way we're going to run this -- we have no idea what we're going to discover.
We have no idea what we're going to discover.
We're going to discover an ancient shipwreck, a Phoenician off Brazil, or a new rock formation, a new life.
So, we're going to run it like an emergency hospital.
We're going to connect our command center, via a high-bandwidth satellite link to a building we're building at the University of Rhode Island, called the Interspace Center.
And within that, we're going to run it just like you run a nuclear submarine, blue-gold team, switching them off and on, running 24 hours a day.
A discovery is made, that discovery is instantly seen in the command center a second later.
But then it's connected through Internet too -- the new Internet highway that makes Internet one look like a dirt road on the information highway -- with 10 gigabits of bandwidth.
We'll go into areas we have no knowledge of.
It's a big blank sheet on our planet. We'll map it within hours, have the maps disseminated out to the major universities.
It turns out that 90 percent of all the oceanographic intellect in this country are at 12 universities. They're all on I-2.
We can then build a command center.
This is a remote center at the University of Washington.
She's talking to the pilot. She's 5,000 miles away, but she's assumed command.
But the beauty of this, too, is we can then disseminate it to children.
We can disseminate.
They can follow this expedition. I've started a program -- where are you Jim? Jim Young who helped me start a program called the Jason Project. More recently, we've started a program with the Boys and Girls Clubs of America, so that we can use exploration, and the excitement of live exploration, to motivate them and excite them and then give them what they're already ready for.
I would not let an adult drive my robot.
You don't have enough gaming experience.
But I will let a kid with no license take over control of my vehicle system.
(Applause) Because we want to create -- we want to create the classroom of tomorrow.
We have stiff competition and we need to motivate and it's all being done.
You win or lose an engineer or a scientist by eighth grade.
The game is not over -- it's over by the eighth grade, it's not beginning.
We need to be not only proud of our universities.
We need to be proud of our middle schools.
And when we have the best middle schools in the world, we'll have the best kids pumped out of that system, let me tell you.
Because this is what we want. This is what we want.
This is a young lady, not watching a football game, not watching a basketball game.
Watching exploration live from thousands of miles away, and it's just dawning on her what she's seeing.
And when you get a jaw drop, you can inform.
You can put so much information into that mind, it's in full [receiving] mode.
(Applause) This, I hope, will be a future engineer or a future scientist in the battle for truth.
And my final question, my final question -- why are we not looking at moving out onto the sea?
Why do we have programs to build habitation on Mars, and we have programs to look at colonizing the moon, but we do not have a program looking at how we colonize our own planet?
And the technology is at hand.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Like many of us, I've had several careers in my life, and although they've been varied, my first job set the foundation for all of them.
I was a home-birth midwife throughout my 20s.
Delivering babies taught me valuable and sometimes surprising things, like how to start a car at 2am.
when it's 10 degrees below zero.
(Laughter) Or how to revive a father who's fainted at the sight of blood.
(Laughter) Or how to cut the umbilical cord just so, to make a beautiful belly button.
But those aren't the things that stuck with me or guided me when I stopped being a midwife and started other jobs.
What stuck with me was this bedrock belief that each one of us comes into this world with a unique worth.
When I looked into the face of a newborn, I caught a glimpse of that worthiness, that sense of unapologetic selfhood, that unique spark.
I use the word "soul" to describe that spark, because it's the only word in English that comes close to naming what each baby brought into the room.
Every newborn was as singular as a snowflake, a matchless mash-up of biology and ancestry and mystery.
And then that baby grows up, and in order to fit into the family, to conform to the culture, to the community, to the gender, that little one begins to cover its soul, layer by layer.
We're born this way, but -- (Laughter) But as we grow, a lot of things happen to us that make us ...
want to hide our soulful eccentricities and authenticity.
We've all done this.
Everyone in this room is a former baby -- (Laughter) with a distinctive birthright.
But as adults, we spend so much of our time uncomfortable in our own skin, like we have ADD: authenticity deficit disorder.
But not those babies -- not yet.
Their message to me was: uncover your soul and look for that soul-spark in everyone else.
It's still there.
And here's what I learned from laboring women.
Their message was about staying open, even when things are painful.
A woman's cervix normally looks like this.
It's a tight little muscle at the base of the uterus.
And during labor, it has to stretch from this to this.
Ouch!
If you fight against that pain, you just create more pain, and you block what wants to be born.
I'll never forget the magic that would happen when a woman stopped resisting the pain and opened.
It was as if the forces of the universe took notice and sent in a wave of help.
I never forgot that message, and now, when difficult or painful things happen to me in my life or my work, of course at first I resist them, but then I remember what I learned from the mothers: stay open.
Stay curious.
Ask the pain what it's come to deliver.
Something new wants to be born.
And there was one more big soulful lesson, and that one I learned from Albert Einstein.
He wasn't at any of the births, but -- (Laughter) It was a lesson about time.
At the end of his life, Albert Einstein concluded that our normal, hamster-wheel experience of life is an illusion.
We run round and round, faster and faster, trying to get somewhere.
And all the while, underneath surface time is this whole other dimension where the past and the present and the future merge and become deep time.
And there's nowhere to get to.
Albert Einstein called this state, this dimension, "only being."
And he said when he experienced it, he knew sacred awe.
When I was delivering babies, I was forced off the hamster wheel.
Sometimes I had to sit for days, hours and hours, just breathing with the parents; just being.
And I got a big dose of sacred awe.
So those are the three lessons I took with me from midwifery.
One: uncover your soul.
Two: when things get difficult or painful, try to stay open.
And three: every now and then, step off your hamster wheel into deep time.
Those lessons have served me throughout my life, but they really served me recently, when I took on the most important job of my life thus far.
Two years ago, my younger sister came out of remission from a rare blood cancer, and the only treatment left for her was a bone marrow transplant.
And against the odds, we found a match for her, who turned out to be me.
I come from a family of four girls, and when my sisters found out that I was my sister's perfect genetic match, their reaction was, "Really? You?"
(Laughter) "A perfect match for her?"
Which is pretty typical for siblings.
In a sibling society, there's lots of things.
There's love and there's friendship and there's protection.
But there's also jealousy and competition and rejection and attack.
In siblinghood, that's where we start assembling many of those first layers that cover our soul.
When I discovered I was my sister's match, I went into research mode.
And I discovered that the premise of transplants is pretty straightforward.
You destroy all the bone marrow in the cancer patient with massive doses of chemotherapy, and then you replace that marrow with several million healthy marrow cells from a donor.
And then you do everything you can to make sure that those new cells engraft in the patient.
I also learned that bone marrow transplants are fraught with danger.
If my sister made it through the near-lethal chemotherapy, she still would face other challenges.
My cells might attack her body.
And her body might reject my cells.
They call this rejection or attack, and both could kill her.
Rejection. Attack.
Those words had a familiar ring in the context of being siblings.
My sister and I had a long history of love, but we also had a long history of rejection and attack, from minor misunderstandings to bigger betrayals.
We didn't have the kind of the relationship where we talked about the deeper stuff; but, like many siblings and like people in all kinds of relationships, we were hesitant to tell our truths, to reveal our wounds, to admit our wrongdoings.
But when I learned about the dangers of rejection or attack, I thought, it's time to change this.
What if we left the bone marrow transplant up to the doctors, but did something that we later came to call our "soul marrow transplant?"
What if we faced any pain we had caused each other, and instead of rejection or attack, could we listen?
Could we forgive?
Could we merge?
Would that teach our cells to do the same?
To woo my skeptical sister, I turned to my parents' holy text: the New Yorker Magazine.
(Laughter) I sent her a cartoon from its pages as a way of explaining why we should visit a therapist before having my bone marrow harvested and transplanted into her body.
Here it is.
"I have never forgiven him for that thing I made up in my head."
(Laughter) I told my sister we had probably been doing the same thing, carting around made-up stories in our heads that kept us separate.
And I told her that after the transplant, all of the blood flowing in her veins would be my blood, made from my marrow cells, and that inside the nucleus of each of those cells is a complete set of my DNA.
"I will be swimming around in you for the rest of your life," I told my slightly horrified sister.
(Laughter) "I think we better clean up our relationship."
A health crisis makes people do all sorts of risky things, like quitting a job or jumping out of an airplane and, in the case of my sister, saying "yes" to several therapy sessions, during which we got down to the marrow.
We looked at and released years of stories and assumptions about each other and blame and shame until all that was left was love.
People have said I was brave to undergo the bone marrow harvest, but I don't think so.
What felt brave to me was that other kind of harvest and transplant, the soul marrow transplant, getting emotionally naked with another human being, putting aside pride and defensiveness, lifting the layers and sharing with each other our vulnerable souls.
I called on those midwife lessons: uncover your soul.
Open to what's scary and painful.
Look for the sacred awe.
Here I am with my marrow cells after the harvest.
That's they call it -- "harvest," like it's some kind of bucolic farm-to-table event -- (Laughter) Which I can assure you it is not.
And here is my brave, brave sister receiving my cells.
After the transplant, we began to spend more and more time together.
It was as if we were little girls again.
The past and the present merged.
We entered deep time.
I left the hamster wheel of work and life to join my sister on that lonely island of illness and healing.
We spent months together -- in the isolation unit, in the hospital and in her home.
Our fast-paced society does not support or even value this kind of work.
We see it as a disruption of real life and important work.
We worry about the emotional drain and the financial cost -- and, yes, there is a financial cost.
But I was paid in the kind of currency our culture seems to have forgotten all about.
I was paid in love.
I was paid in soul.
I was paid in my sister.
My sister said the year after transplant was the best year of her life, which was surprising.
She suffered so much.
But she said life never tasted as sweet, and that because of the soul-baring and the truth-telling we had done with each other, she became more unapologetically herself with everyone.
She said things she'd always needed to say.
She did things she always wanted to do.
The same happened for me.
I became braver about being authentic with the people in my life.
I said my truths, but more important than that, I sought the truth of others.
It wasn't until the final chapter of this story that I realized just how well midwifery had trained me.
After that best year of my sister's life, the cancer came roaring back, and this time there was nothing more the doctors could do.
They gave her just a couple of months to live.
The night before my sister died, I sat by her bedside.
She was so small and thin.
I could see the blood pulsing in her neck.
It was my blood, her blood, our blood.
When she died, part of me would die, too.
I tried to make sense of it all, how becoming one with each other had made us more ourselves, our soul selves, and how by facing and opening to the pain of our past, we'd finally been delivered to each other, and how by stepping out of time, we would now be connected forever.
My sister left me with so many things, and I'm going to leave you now with just one of them.
You don't have to wait for a life-or-death situation to clean up the relationships that matter to you, to offer the marrow of your soul and to seek it in another.
We can all do this.
We can be like a new kind of first responder, like the one to take the first courageous step toward the other, and to do something or try to do something other than rejection or attack.
We can do this with our siblings and our mates and our friends and our colleagues.
We can do this with the disconnection and the discord all around us.
We can do this for the soul of the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
What is a parent?
What is a parent?
It's not an easy question.
Today we have adoption, stepfamilies, surrogate mothers.
Many parents face tough questions and tough decisions.
Shall we tell our child about the sperm donation?
If so, when?
What words to use?
Sperm donors are often referred to as "biological fathers," but should we really be using the word "father?"
As a philosopher and social scientist, I have been studying these questions about the concept of parenthood.
But today, I will talk to you about what I learned from talking to parents and children.
I will show you that they know what matters most in a family, even though their family looks a little different.
I will show you their creative ways of dealing with tough questions.
But I will also show you the parents' uncertainties.
We interviewed couples who received fertility treatment at Ghent University Hospital, using sperm from a donor.
In this treatment timeline, you can see two points at which we conducted interviews.
We included heterosexual couples, where the man for some reason did not have good-quality sperm, and lesbian couples who obviously needed to find sperm elsewhere.
We also included children.
I wanted to know how those children define concepts like parenthood and family.
In fact, that is what I asked them, only not in that way.
I drew an apple tree instead.
This way, I could ask abstract, philosophical questions in a way that did not make them run off.
So as you can see, the apple tree is empty.
And that illustrates my research approach.
By designing techniques like this, I can bring as little meaning and content as possible to the interview, because I want to hear that from them.
I asked them: What would your family look like if it were an apple tree?
And they could take a paper apple for everyone who, in their view, was a member of the family, write a name on it and hang it wherever they wanted.
And I would ask questions.
Most children started with a parent or a sibling.
One started with "Boxer," the dead dog of his grandparents.
At this point, none of the children started mentioning the donor.
So, I asked them about their birth story.
I said, "Before you were born, it was just your mom and dad, or mom and mommy.
Can you tell me how you came into the family?"
And they explained.
One said, "My parents did not have good seeds, but there are friendly men out there who have spare seeds.
They bring them to the hospital, and they put them in a big jar.
My mommy went there, and she took two from the jar, one for me and one for my sister.
She put the seeds in her belly -- somehow -- and her belly grew really big, and there I was."
Hmm.
So only when they started mentioning the donor, I asked questions about him, using their own words.
I said, "If this would be an apple for the friendly man with the seeds, what would you do with it?"
And one boy was thinking out loud, holding the apple.
And he said, "I won't put this one up there with the others.
He's not part of my family.
But I will not put him on the ground.
That's too cold and too hard.
I think he should be in the trunk, because he made my family possible.
If he would not have done this, that would really be sad because my family would not be here, and I would not be here."
So also, parents constructed family tales -- tales to tell their children.
One couple explained their insemination by taking their children to a farm to watch a vet inseminate cows.
And why not?
It's their way of explaining; their do-it-yourself with family narratives.
DIY.
And we had another couple who made books -- a book for each child.
They were really works of art containing their thoughts and feelings throughout the treatment.
They even had the hospital parking tickets in there.
So it is DIY: finding ways, words and images to tell your family story to your child.
And these stories were highly diverse, but they all had one thing in common: it was a tale of longing for a child and a quest for that child.
It was about how special and how deeply loved their child was.
And research so far shows that these children are doing fine.
They do not have more problems than other kids.
Yet, these parents also wanted to justify their decisions through the tales they tell.
They hoped that their children would understand their reasons for making the family in this way.
Underlying was a fear that their children might disapprove and would reject the non-genetic parent.
And that fear is understandable, because we live in a very heteronormative and geneticized society -- a world that still believes that true families consist of one mom, one dad and their genetically related children.
Well.
I want to tell you about a teenage boy.
He was donor-conceived but not part of our study.
One day, he had an argument with his father, and he yelled, "You're telling me what to do?
You're not even my father!"
That was exactly what the parents in our study feared.
Now, the boy soon felt sorry, and they made up.
But it is the reaction of his father that is most interesting.
He said, "This outburst had nothing to do with the lack of a genetic link.
It was about puberty -- being difficult.
It's what they do at that age.
It will pass."
What this man shows us is that when something goes wrong, we should not immediately think it is because the family is a little different.
These things happen in all families.
And every now and then, all parents may wonder: Am I a good enough parent?
These parents, too.
They, above all, wanted to do what's best for their child.
But they also sometimes wondered: Am I a real parent?
And their uncertainties were present long before they even were parents.
At the start of treatment, when they first saw the counselor, they paid close attention to the counselor, because they wanted to do it right.
Even 10 years later, they still remember the advice they were given.
So when they thought about the counselor and the advice they were given, we discussed that.
And we saw one lesbian couple who said, "When our son asks us, 'Do I have a dad?' we will say 'No, you do not have a dad.' But we will say nothing more, not unless he asks, because he might not be ready for that.
The counselor said so."
Well.
I don't know; that's quite different from how we respond to children's questions.
Like, "Milk -- is that made in a factory?"
We will say, "No, it comes from cows," and we will talk about the farmer, and the way the milk ends up in the shop.
We will not say, "No, milk is not made in a factory."
So something strange happened here, and of course these children noticed that.
One boy said, "I asked my parents loads of questions, but they acted really weird.
So, you know, I have a friend at school, and she's made in the same way.
When I have a question, I just go and ask her."
Clever guy.
Problem solved.
But his parents did not notice, and it certainly was not what they had in mind, nor what the counselor had in mind when they were saying how important it is to be an open-communication family.
And that's the strange thing about advice.
When we offer people pills, we gather evidence first.
We do tests, we do follow-up studies.
We want to know, and rightly so, what this pill is doing and how it affects people's lives.
And advice?
It is not enough for advice, or for professionals to give advice that is theoretically sound, or well-meant.
It should be advice that there is evidence for -- evidence that it actually improves patients' lives.
So the philosopher in me would now like to offer you a paradox: I advise you to stop following advice.
But, yes.
(Applause) I will not end here with what went wrong; I would not be doing justice to the warmth we found in those families.
Remember the books and the trip to the farmer?
When parents do things that work for them, they do brilliant things.
What I want you to remember as members of families, in no matter what form or shape, is that what families need are warm relationships.
And we do not need to be professionals to create those.
Most of us do just fine, although it may be hard work, and from time to time, we can do with some advice.
In that case, bear in mind three things.
Work with advice that works for your family.
Remember -- you're the expert, because you live your family life.
And finally, believe in your abilities and your creativity, because you can do it yourself.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was a new mother and a young rabbi in the spring of 2004 and the world was in shambles.
Maybe you remember.
Every day, we heard devastating reports from the war in Iraq.
There were waves of terror rolling across the globe.
It seemed like humanity was spinning out of control.
I remember the night that I read about the series of coordinated bombings in the subway system in Madrid, and I got up and I walked over to the crib where my six-month-old baby girl lay sleeping sweetly, and I heard the rhythm of her breath, and I felt this sense of urgency coursing through my body.
We were living through a time of tectonic shifts in ideologies, in politics, in religion, in populations.
Everything felt so precarious.
And I remember thinking, "My God, what kind of world did we bring this child into?
And what was I as a mother and a religious leader willing to do about it?
Of course, I knew it was clear that religion would be a principle battlefield in this rapidly changing landscape, and it was already clear that religion was a significant part of the problem.
The question for me was, could religion also be part of the solution?
Now, throughout history, people have committed horrible crimes and atrocities in the name of religion.
And as we entered the 21st century, it was very clear that religious extremism was once again on the rise.
Our studies now show that over the course of the past 15, 20 years, hostilities and religion-related violence have been on the increase all over the world.
But we don't even need the studies to prove it, because I ask you, how many of us are surprised today when we hear the stories of a bombing or a shooting, when we later find out that the last word that was uttered before the trigger is pulled or the bomb is detonated is the name of God?
It barely raises an eyebrow today when we learn that yet another person has decided to show his love of God by taking the lives of God's children.
In America, religious extremism looks like a white, antiabortion Christian extremist walking into Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs and murdering three people.
It also looks like a couple inspired by the Islamic State walking into an office party in San Bernardino and killing 14.
And even when religion-related extremism does not lead to violence, it is still used as a political wedge issue, cynically leading people to justify the subordination of women, the stigmatization of LGBT people, racism, Islamophobia and anti-Semitism.
This ought to concern deeply those of us who care about the future of religion and the future of faith.
We need to call this what it is: a great failure of religion.
But the thing is, this isn't even the only challenge that religion faces today.
At the very same time that we need religion to be a strong force against extremism, it is suffering from a second pernicious trend, what I call religious routine-ism.
This is when our institutions and our leaders are stuck in a paradigm that is rote and perfunctory, devoid of life, devoid of vision and devoid of soul.
Let me explain what I mean like this.
One of the great blessings of being a rabbi is standing under the chuppah, under the wedding canopy, with a couple, and helping them proclaim publicly and make holy the love that they found for one another.
I want to ask you now, though, to think maybe from your own experience or maybe just imagine it about the difference between the intensity of the experience under the wedding canopy, and maybe the experience of the sixth or seventh anniversary.
(Laughter) And if you're lucky enough to make it 16 or 17 years, if you're like most people, you probably wake up in the morning realizing that you forgot to make a reservation at your favorite restaurant and you forgot so much as a card, and then you just hope and pray that your partner also forgot.
Well, religious ritual and rites were essentially designed to serve the function of the anniversary, to be a container in which we would hold on to the remnants of that sacred, revelatory encounter that birthed the religion in the first place.
The problem is that after a few centuries, the date remains on the calendar, but the love affair is long dead.
That's when we find ourselves in endless, mindless repetitions of words that don't mean anything to us, rising and being seated because someone has asked us to, holding onto jealously guarded doctrine that's completely and wildly out of step with our contemporary reality, engaging in perfunctory practice simply because that's the way things have always been done.
Religion is waning in the United States.
Across the board, churches and synagogues and mosques are all complaining about how hard it is to maintain relevance for a generation of young people who seem completely uninterested, not only in the institutions that stand at the heart of our traditions but even in religion itself.
And what they need to understand is that there is today a generation of people who are as disgusted by the violence of religious extremism as they are turned off by the lifelessness of religious routine-ism.
Of course there is a bright spot to this story.
Given the crisis of these two concurrent trends in religious life, about 12 or 13 years ago, I set out to try to determine if there was any way that I could reclaim the heart of my own Jewish tradition, to help make it meaningful and purposeful again in a world on fire.
I started to wonder, what if we could harness some of the great minds of our generation and think in a bold and robust and imaginative way again about what the next iteration of religious life would look like?
Now, we had no money, no space, no game plan, but we did have email.
So my friend Melissa and I sat down and we wrote an email which we sent out to a few friends and colleagues.
It basically said this: "Before you bail on religion, why don't we come together this Friday night and see what we might make of our own Jewish inheritance?"
We hoped maybe 20 people would show up.
It turned out 135 people came.
They were cynics and seekers, atheists and rabbis.
Many people said that night that it was the first time that they had a meaningful religious experience in their entire lives.
And so I set out to do the only rational thing that someone would do in such a circumstance: I quit my job and tried to build this audacious dream, a reinvented, rethought religious life which we called "IKAR," which means "the essence" or "the heart of the matter."
Now, IKAR is not alone out there in the religious landscape today.
There are Jewish and Christian and Muslim and Catholic religious leaders, many of them women, by the way, who have set out to reclaim the heart of our traditions, who firmly believe that now is the time for religion to be part of the solution.
We are going back into our sacred traditions and recognizing that all of our traditions contain the raw material to justify violence and extremism, and also contain the raw material to justify compassion, coexistence and kindness -- that when others choose to read our texts as directives for hate and vengeance, we can choose to read those same texts as directives for love and for forgiveness.
I have found now in communities as varied as Jewish indie start-ups on the coasts to a woman's mosque, to black churches in New York and in North Carolina, to a holy bus loaded with nuns that traverses this country with a message of justice and peace, that there is a shared religious ethos that is now emerging in the form of revitalized religion in this country.
And while the theologies and the practices vary very much between these independent communities, what we can see are some common, consistent threads between them.
I'm going to share with you four of those commitments now.
The first is wakefulness.
We live in a time today in which we have unprecedented access to information about every global tragedy that happens on every corner of this Earth.
Within 12 hours, 20 million people saw that image of Aylan Kurdi's little body washed up on the Turkish shore.
We all saw this picture.
We saw this picture of a five-year-old child pulled out of the rubble of his building in Aleppo.
And once we see these images, we are called to a certain kind of action.
My tradition tells a story of a traveler who is walking down a road when he sees a beautiful house on fire, and he says, "How can it be that something so beautiful would burn, and nobody seems to even care?"
So too we learn that our world is on fire, and it is our job to keep our hearts and our eyes open, and to recognize that it's our responsibility to help put out the flames.
This is extremely difficult to do.
Psychologists tell us that the more we learn about what's broken in our world, the less likely we are to do anything.
It's called psychic numbing.
We just shut down at a certain point.
Well, somewhere along the way, our religious leaders forgot that it's our job to make people uncomfortable.
It's our job to wake people up, to pull them out of their apathy and into the anguish, and to insist that we do what we don't want to do and see what we do not want to see.
Because we know that social change only happens -- (Applause) when we are awake enough to see that the house is on fire.
The second principle is hope, and I want to say this about hope.
Hope is not naive, and hope is not an opiate.
Hope may be the single greatest act of defiance against a politics of pessimism and against a culture of despair.
Because what hope does for us is it lifts us out of the container that holds us and constrains us from the outside, and says, "You can dream and think expansively again.
That they cannot control in you."
I saw hope made manifest in an African-American church in the South Side of Chicago this summer, where I brought my little girl, who is now 13 and a few inches taller than me, to hear my friend Rev. Otis Moss preach.
That summer, there had already been 3,000 people shot between January and July in Chicago.
We went into that church and heard Rev. Moss preach, and after he did, this choir of gorgeous women, 100 women strong, stood up and began to sing.
"I need you. You need me.
I love you. I need you to survive."
And I realized in that moment that this is what religion is supposed to be about.
It's supposed to be about giving people back a sense of purpose, a sense of hope, a sense that they and their dreams fundamentally matter in this world that tells them that they don't matter at all.
The third principle is the principle of mightiness.
There's a rabbinic tradition that we are to walk around with two slips of paper in our pockets.
One says, "I am but dust and ashes."
It's not all about me.
I can't control everything, and I cannot do this on my own.
The other slip of paper says, "For my sake the world was created."
Which is to say it's true that I can't do everything, but I can surely do something.
I can forgive.
I can love.
I can show up.
I can protest.
I can be a part of this conversation.
We even now have a religious ritual, a posture, that holds the paradox between powerlessness and power.
In the Jewish community, the only time of year that we prostrate fully to the ground is during the high holy days.
It's a sign of total submission.
Now in our community, when we get up off the ground, we stand with our hands raised to the heavens, and we say, "I am strong, I am mighty, and I am worthy.
I can't do everything, but I can do something."
In a world that conspires to make us believe that we are invisible and that we are impotent, religious communities and religious ritual can remind us that for whatever amount of time we have here on this Earth, whatever gifts and blessings we were given, whatever resources we have, we can and we must use them to try to make the world a little bit more just and a little bit more loving.
The fourth and final is interconnectedness.
A few years ago, there was a man walking on the beach in Alaska, when he came across a soccer ball that had some Japanese letters written on it.
He took a picture of it and posted it up on social media, and a Japanese teenager contacted him.
He had lost everything in the tsunami that devastated his country, but he was able to retrieve that soccer ball after it had floated all the way across the Pacific.
How small our world has become.
It's so hard for us to remember how interconnected we all are as human beings.
And yet, we know that it is systems of oppression that benefit the most from the lie of radical individualism.
Let me tell you how this works.
I'm not supposed to care when black youth are harassed by police, because my white-looking Jewish kids probably won't ever get pulled over for the crime of driving while black.
Well, not so, because this is also my problem.
And guess what? Transphobia and Islamophobia and racism of all forms, those are also all of our problems.
And so too is anti-Semitism all of our problems.
Because Emma Lazarus was right.
(Applause) Emma Lazarus was right when she said until all of us are free, we are none of us free.
We are all in this together.
And now somewhere at the intersection of these four trends, of wakefulness and hope and mightiness and interconnectedness, there is a burgeoning, multifaith justice movement in this country that is staking a claim on a countertrend, saying that religion can and must be a force for good in the world.
Our hearts hurt from the failed religion of extremism, and we deserve more than the failed religion of routine-ism.
It is time for religious leaders and religious communities to take the lead in the spiritual and cultural shift that this country and the world so desperately needs -- a shift toward love, toward justice, toward equality and toward dignity for all.
I believe that our children deserve no less than that.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Science.
The very word for many of you conjures unhappy memories of boredom in high school biology or physics class.
But let me assure that what you did there had very little to do with science.
That was really the "what" of science.
It was the history of what other people had discovered.
What I'm most interested in as a scientist is the "how" of science.
Because science is knowledge in process.
We make an observation, guess an explanation for that observation, and then make a prediction that we can test with an experiment or other observation.
A couple of examples.
First of all, people noticed that the Earth was below, the sky above, and both the Sun and the Moon seemed to go around them.
Their guessed explanation was that the Earth must be the center of the universe.
The prediction: everything should circle around the Earth.
This was first really tested when Galileo got his hands on one of the first telescopes, and as he gazed into the night sky, what he found there was a planet, Jupiter, with four moons circling around it.
He then used those moons to follow the path of Jupiter and found that Jupiter also was not going around the Earth but around the Sun.
So the prediction test failed.
And this led to the discarding of the theory that the Earth was the center of the universe.
Another example: Sir Isaac Newton noticed that things fall to the Earth.
The guessed explanation was gravity, the prediction that everything should fall to the Earth.
But of course, not everything does fall to the Earth.
So did we discard gravity?
No. We revised the theory and said, gravity pulls things to the Earth unless there is an equal and opposite force in the other direction.
This led us to learn something new.
We began to pay more attention to the bird and the bird's wings, and just think of all the discoveries that have flown from that line of thinking.
So the test failures, the exceptions, the outliers teach us what we don't know and lead us to something new.
This is how science moves forward. This is how science learns.
Sometimes in the media, and even more rarely, but sometimes even scientists will say that something or other has been scientifically proven.
But I hope that you understand that science never proves anything definitively forever.
Hopefully science remains curious enough to look for and humble enough to recognize when we have found the next outlier, the next exception, which, like Jupiter's moons, teaches us what we don't actually know.
We're going to change gears here for a second.
The caduceus, or the symbol of medicine, means a lot of different things to different people, but most of our public discourse on medicine really turns it into an engineering problem.
We have the hallways of Congress, and the boardrooms of insurance companies that try to figure out how to pay for it.
The ethicists and epidemiologists try to figure out how best to distribute medicine, and the hospitals and physicians are absolutely obsessed with their protocols and checklists, trying to figure out how best to safely apply medicine.
These are all good things.
However, they also all assume at some level that the textbook of medicine is closed.
We start to measure the quality of our health care by how quickly we can access it.
It doesn't surprise me that in this climate, many of our institutions for the provision of health care start to look a heck of a lot like Jiffy Lube.
(Laughter) The only problem is that when I graduated from medical school, I didn't get one of those little doohickeys that your mechanic has to plug into your car and find out exactly what's wrong with it, because the textbook of medicine is not closed.
Medicine is science.
Medicine is knowledge in process.
We make an observation, we guess an explanation of that observation, and then we make a prediction that we can test.
Now, the testing ground of most predictions in medicine is populations.
And you may remember from those boring days in biology class that populations tend to distribute around a mean as a Gaussian or a normal curve.
Therefore, in medicine, after we make a prediction from a guessed explanation, we test it in a population.
That means that what we know in medicine, our knowledge and our know-how, comes from populations but extends only as far as the next outlier, the next exception, which, like Jupiter's moons, will teach us what we don't actually know.
Now, I am a surgeon who looks after patients with sarcoma.
Sarcoma is a very rare form of cancer.
It's the cancer of flesh and bones.
And I would tell you that every one of my patients is an outlier, is an exception.
There is no surgery I have ever performed for a sarcoma patient that has ever been guided by a randomized controlled clinical trial, what we consider the best kind of population-based evidence in medicine.
People talk about thinking outside the box, but we don't even have a box in sarcoma.
What we do have as we take a bath in the uncertainty and unknowns and exceptions and outliers that surround us in sarcoma is easy access to what I think are those two most important values for any science: humility and curiosity.
Because if I am humble and curious, when a patient asks me a question, and I don't know the answer, I'll ask a colleague who may have a similar albeit distinct patient with sarcoma.
We'll even establish international collaborations.
Those patients will start to talk to each other through chat rooms and support groups.
It's through this kind of humbly curious communication that we begin to try and learn new things.
As an example, this is a patient of mine who had a cancer near his knee.
Because of humbly curious communication in international collaborations, we have learned that we can repurpose the ankle to serve as the knee when we have to remove the knee with the cancer.
He can then wear a prosthetic and run and jump and play.
This opportunity was available to him because of international collaborations.
It was desirable to him because he had contacted other patients who had experienced it.
And so exceptions and outliers in medicine teach us what we don't know, but also lead us to new thinking.
Now, very importantly, all the new thinking that outliers and exceptions lead us to in medicine does not only apply to the outliers and exceptions.
It is not that we only learn from sarcoma patients ways to manage sarcoma patients.
Sometimes, the outliers and the exceptions teach us things that matter quite a lot to the general population.
Like a tree standing outside a forest, the outliers and the exceptions draw our attention and lead us into a much greater sense of perhaps what a tree is.
We often talk about losing the forests for the trees, but one also loses a tree within a forest.
But the tree that stands out by itself makes those relationships that define a tree, the relationships between trunk and roots and branches, much more apparent.
Even if that tree is crooked or even if that tree has very unusual relationships between trunk and roots and branches, it nonetheless draws our attention and allows us to make observations that we can then test in the general population.
I told you that sarcomas are rare.
They make up about one percent of all cancers.
You also probably know that cancer is considered a genetic disease.
By genetic disease we mean that cancer is caused by oncogenes that are turned on in cancer and tumor suppressor genes that are turned off to cause cancer.
You might think that we learned about oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes from common cancers like breast cancer and prostate cancer and lung cancer, but you'd be wrong.
We learned about oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes for the first time in that itty-bitty little one percent of cancers called sarcoma.
In 1966, Peyton Rous got the Nobel Prize for realizing that chickens had a transmissible form of sarcoma.
Thirty years later, Harold Varmus and Mike Bishop discovered what that transmissible element was.
It was a virus carrying a gene, the src oncogene.
Now, I will not tell you that src is the most important oncogene.
I will not tell you that src is the most frequently turned on oncogene in all of cancer.
But it was the first oncogene.
The exception, the outlier drew our attention and led us to something that taught us very important things about the rest of biology.
Now, TP53 is the most important tumor suppressor gene.
It is the most frequently turned off tumor suppressor gene in almost every kind of cancer.
But we didn't learn about it from common cancers.
We learned about it when doctors Li and Fraumeni were looking at families, and they realized that these families had way too many sarcomas.
I told you that sarcoma is rare.
Remember that a one in a million diagnosis, if it happens twice in one family, is way too common in that family.
The very fact that these are rare draws our attention and leads us to new kinds of thinking.
Now, many of you may say, and may rightly say, that yeah, Kevin, that's great, but you're not talking about a bird's wing.
You're not talking about moons floating around some planet Jupiter.
This is a person.
This outlier, this exception, may lead to the advancement of science, but this is a person.
And all I can say is that I know that all too well.
I have conversations with these patients with rare and deadly diseases.
I write about these conversations.
These conversations are terribly fraught.
They're fraught with horrible phrases like "I have bad news" or "There's nothing more we can do."
Sometimes these conversations turn on a single word: "terminal."
Silence can also be rather uncomfortable.
Where the blanks are in medicine can be just as important as the words that we use in these conversations.
What are the unknowns?
What are the experiments that are being done?
Do this little exercise with me.
Up there on the screen, you see this phrase, "no where."
Notice where the blank is.
If we move that blank one space over "no where" becomes "now here," the exact opposite meaning, just by shifting the blank one space over.
I'll never forget the night that I walked into one of my patients' rooms.
I had been operating long that day but I still wanted to come and see him.
He was a boy I had diagnosed with a bone cancer a few days before.
He and his mother had been meeting with the chemotherapy doctors earlier that day, and he had been admitted to the hospital to begin chemotherapy.
It was almost midnight when I got to his room.
He was asleep, but I found his mother reading by flashlight next to his bed.
She came out in the hall to chat with me for a few minutes.
It turned out that what she had been reading was the protocol that the chemotherapy doctors had given her that day.
She had memorized it.
She said, "Dr. Jones, you told me that we don't always win with this type of cancer, but I've been studying this protocol, and I think I can do it.
I think I can comply with these very difficult treatments.
I'm going to quit my job. I'm going to move in with my parents.
I'm going to keep my baby safe."
I didn't tell her.
I didn't stop to correct her thinking.
She was trusting in a protocol that even if complied with, wouldn't necessarily save her son.
I didn't tell her.
I didn't fill in that blank.
But a year and a half later her boy nonetheless died of his cancer.
Should I have told her?
Now, many of you may say, "So what?
I don't have sarcoma.
No one in my family has sarcoma.
And this is all fine and well, but it probably doesn't matter in my life."
And you're probably right.
Sarcoma may not matter a whole lot in your life.
But where the blanks are in medicine does matter in your life.
I didn't tell you one dirty little secret.
I told you that in medicine, we test predictions in populations, but I didn't tell you, and so often medicine never tells you that every time an individual encounters medicine, even if that individual is firmly embedded in the general population, neither the individual nor the physician knows where in that population the individual will land.
Therefore, every encounter with medicine is an experiment.
You will be a subject in an experiment.
And the outcome will be either a better or a worse result for you.
As long as medicine works well, we're fine with fast service, bravado, brimmingly confident conversations.
But when things don't work well, sometimes we want something different.
A colleague of mine removed a tumor from a patient's limb.
He was concerned about this tumor.
In our physician conferences, he talked about his concern that this was a type of tumor that had a high risk for coming back in the same limb.
But his conversations with the patient were exactly what a patient might want: brimming with confidence.
He said, "I got it all and you're good to go."
She and her husband were thrilled.
They went out, celebrated, fancy dinner, opened a bottle of champagne.
The only problem was a few weeks later, she started to notice another nodule in the same area.
It turned out he hadn't gotten it all, and she wasn't good to go.
But what happened at this juncture absolutely fascinates me.
My colleague came to me and said, "Kevin, would you mind looking after this patient for me?"
I said, "Why, you know the right thing to do as well as I do.
You haven't done anything wrong."
He said, "Please, just look after this patient for me."
He was embarrassed -- not by what he had done, but by the conversation that he had had, by the overconfidence.
So I performed a much more invasive surgery and had a very different conversation with the patient afterwards.
I said, "Most likely I've gotten it all and you're most likely good to go, but this is the experiment that we're doing.
This is what you're going to watch for.
This is what I'm going to watch for.
And we're going to work together to find out if this surgery will work to get rid of your cancer."
I can guarantee you, she and her husband did not crack another bottle of champagne after talking to me.
But she was now a scientist, not only a subject in her experiment.
And so I encourage you to seek humility and curiosity in your physicians.
Almost 20 billion times each year, a person walks into a doctor's office, and that person becomes a patient.
You or someone you love will be that patient sometime very soon.
How will you talk to your doctors?
What will you tell them?
What will they tell you?
They cannot tell you what they do not know, but they can tell you when they don't know if only you'll ask.
So please, join the conversation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk a little bit about where technology's going.
And often technology comes to us, we're surprised by what it brings.
But there's actually a large aspect of technology that's much more predictable, and that's because technological systems of all sorts have leanings, they have urgencies, they have tendencies.
And those tendencies are derived from the very nature of the physics, chemistry of wires and switches and electrons, and they will make reoccurring patterns again and again.
And so those patterns produce these tendencies, these leanings.
You can almost think of it as sort of like gravity.
Imagine raindrops falling into a valley.
The actual path of a raindrop as it goes down the valley is unpredictable.
We cannot see where it's going, but the general direction is very inevitable: it's downward.
And so these baked-in tendencies and urgencies in technological systems give us a sense of where things are going at the large form.
So in a large sense, I would say that telephones were inevitable, but the iPhone was not.
The Internet was inevitable, but Twitter was not.
So we have many ongoing tendencies right now, and I think one of the chief among them is this tendency to make things smarter and smarter.
I call it cognifying -- cognification -- also known as artificial intelligence, or AI.
And I think that's going to be one of the most influential developments and trends and directions and drives in our society in the next 20 years.
So, of course, it's already here.
We already have AI, and often it works in the background, in the back offices of hospitals, where it's used to diagnose X-rays better than a human doctor.
It's in legal offices, where it's used to go through legal evidence better than a human paralawyer.
It's used to fly the plane that you came here with.
Human pilots only flew it seven to eight minutes, the rest of the time the AI was driving.
And of course, in Netflix and Amazon, it's in the background, making those recommendations.
That's what we have today.
And we have an example, of course, in a more front-facing aspect of it, with the win of the AlphaGo, who beat the world's greatest Go champion.
But it's more than that.
If you play a video game, you're playing against an AI.
But recently, Google taught their AI to actually learn how to play video games.
Again, teaching video games was already done, but learning how to play a video game is another step.
That's artificial smartness.
What we're doing is taking this artificial smartness and we're making it smarter and smarter.
There are three aspects to this general trend that I think are underappreciated; I think we would understand AI a lot better if we understood these three things.
I think these things also would help us embrace AI, because it's only by embracing it that we actually can steer it.
We can actually steer the specifics by embracing the larger trend.
So let me talk about those three different aspects.
The first one is: our own intelligence has a very poor understanding of what intelligence is.
We tend to think of intelligence as a single dimension, that it's kind of like a note that gets louder and louder.
It starts like with IQ measurement.
It starts with maybe a simple low IQ in a rat or mouse, and maybe there's more in a chimpanzee, and then maybe there's more in a stupid person, and then maybe an average person like myself, and then maybe a genius.
And this single IQ intelligence is getting greater and greater.
That's completely wrong.
That's not what intelligence is -- not what human intelligence is, anyway.
It's much more like a symphony of different notes, and each of these notes is played on a different instrument of cognition.
There are many types of intelligences in our own minds.
We have deductive reasoning, we have emotional intelligence, we have spatial intelligence; we have maybe 100 different types that are all grouped together, and they vary in different strengths with different people.
And of course, if we go to animals, they also have another basket -- another symphony of different kinds of intelligences, and sometimes those same instruments are the same that we have.
They can think in the same way, but they may have a different arrangement, and maybe they're higher in some cases than humans, like long-term memory in a squirrel is actually phenomenal, so it can remember where it buried its nuts.
But in other cases they may be lower.
When we go to make machines, we're going to engineer them in the same way, where we'll make some of those types of smartness much greater than ours, and many of them won't be anywhere near ours, because they're not needed.
So we're going to take these things, these artificial clusters, and we'll be adding more varieties of artificial cognition to our AIs.
We're going to make them very, very specific.
So your calculator is smarter than you are in arithmetic already; your GPS is smarter than you are in spatial navigation; Google, Bing, are smarter than you are in long-term memory.
And we're going to take, again, these kinds of different types of thinking and we'll put them into, like, a car.
The reason why we want to put them in a car so the car drives, is because it's not driving like a human.
It's not thinking like us.
That's the whole feature of it.
It's not being distracted, it's not worrying about whether it left the stove on, or whether it should have majored in finance.
It's just driving.
(Laughter) Just driving, OK?
And we actually might even come to advertise these as "consciousness-free."
They're without consciousness, they're not concerned about those things, they're not distracted.
So in general, what we're trying to do is make as many different types of thinking as we can.
We're going to populate the space of all the different possible types, or species, of thinking.
And there actually may be some problems that are so difficult in business and science that our own type of human thinking may not be able to solve them alone.
We may need a two-step program, which is to invent new kinds of thinking that we can work alongside of to solve these really large problems, say, like dark energy or quantum gravity.
What we're doing is making alien intelligences.
You might even think of this as, sort of, artificial aliens in some senses.
And they're going to help us think different, because thinking different is the engine of creation and wealth and new economy.
The second aspect of this is that we are going to use AI to basically make a second Industrial Revolution.
The first Industrial Revolution was based on the fact that we invented something I would call artificial power.
Previous to that, during the Agricultural Revolution, everything that was made had to be made with human muscle or animal power.
That was the only way to get anything done.
The great innovation during the Industrial Revolution was, we harnessed steam power, fossil fuels, to make this artificial power that we could use to do anything we wanted to do.
So today when you drive down the highway, you are, with a flick of the switch, commanding 250 horses -- 250 horsepower -- which we can use to build skyscrapers, to build cities, to build roads, to make factories that would churn out lines of chairs or refrigerators way beyond our own power.
And that artificial power can also be distributed on wires on a grid to every home, factory, farmstead, and anybody could buy that artificial power, just by plugging something in.
So this was a source of innovation as well, because a farmer could take a manual hand pump, and they could add this artificial power, this electricity, and he'd have an electric pump.
And you multiply that by thousands or tens of thousands of times, and that formula was what brought us the Industrial Revolution.
All the things that we see, all this progress that we now enjoy, has come from the fact that we've done that.
We're going to do the same thing now with AI.
We're going to distribute that on a grid, and now you can take that electric pump.
You can add some artificial intelligence, and now you have a smart pump.
And that, multiplied by a million times, is going to be this second Industrial Revolution.
So now the car is going down the highway, it's 250 horsepower, but in addition, it's 250 minds.
That's the auto-driven car.
It's like a new commodity; it's a new utility.
The AI is going to flow across the grid -- the cloud -- in the same way electricity did.
So everything that we had electrified, we're now going to cognify.
And I would suggest, then, that the formula for the next 10,000 start-ups is very, very simple, which is to take x and add AI.
That is the formula, that's what we're going to be doing.
And that is the way in which we're going to make this second Industrial Revolution.
And by the way -- right now, this minute, you can log on to Google and you can purchase AI for six cents, 100 hits.
That's available right now.
So the third aspect of this is that when we take this AI and embody it, we get robots.
And robots are going to be bots, they're going to be doing many of the tasks that we have already done.
A job is just a bunch of tasks, so they're going to redefine our jobs because they're going to do some of those tasks.
But they're also going to create whole new categories, a whole new slew of tasks that we didn't know we wanted to do before.
They're going to actually engender new kinds of jobs, new kinds of tasks that we want done, just as automation made up a whole bunch of new things that we didn't know we needed before, and now we can't live without them.
So they're going to produce even more jobs than they take away, but it's important that a lot of the tasks that we're going to give them are tasks that can be defined in terms of efficiency or productivity.
If you can specify a task, either manual or conceptual, that can be specified in terms of efficiency or productivity, that goes to the bots.
Productivity is for robots.
What we're really good at is basically wasting time.
(Laughter) We're really good at things that are inefficient.
Science is inherently inefficient.
It runs on that fact that you have one failure after another.
It runs on the fact that you make tests and experiments that don't work, otherwise you're not learning.
It runs on the fact that there is not a lot of efficiency in it.
Innovation by definition is inefficient, because you make prototypes, because you try stuff that fails, that doesn't work.
Exploration is inherently inefficiency.
Art is not efficient.
Human relationships are not efficient.
These are all the kinds of things we're going to gravitate to, because they're not efficient.
Efficiency is for robots.
We're also going to learn that we're going to work with these AIs because they think differently than us.
When Deep Blue beat the world's best chess champion, people thought it was the end of chess.
But actually, it turns out that today, the best chess champion in the world is not an AI.
And it's not a human.
It's the team of a human and an AI.
The best medical diagnostician is not a doctor, it's not an AI, it's the team.
We're going to be working with these AIs, and I think you'll be paid in the future by how well you work with these bots.
So that's the third thing, is that they're different, they're utility and they are going to be something we work with rather than against.
We're working with these rather than against them.
So, the future: Where does that take us?
I think that 25 years from now, they'll look back and look at our understanding of AI and say, "You didn't have AI. In fact, you didn't even have the Internet yet, compared to what we're going to have 25 years from now."
There are no AI experts right now.
There's a lot of money going to it, there are billions of dollars being spent on it; it's a huge business, but there are no experts, compared to what we'll know 20 years from now.
So we are just at the beginning of the beginning, we're in the first hour of all this.
We're in the first hour of the Internet.
We're in the first hour of what's coming.
The most popular AI product in 20 years from now, that everybody uses, has not been invented yet.
That means that you're not late.
Thank you.
(Laughter) (Applause)
So, my journey began in the Bronx, New York, in a one-bedroom apartment, with my two sisters and immigrant mother.
I loved our neighborhood.
It was lively.
There was all this merengue blasting, neighbors socializing on building stoops and animated conversations over domino playing.
It was home, and it was sweet.
But it wasn't simple.
In fact, everyone at school knew the block where we lived, because it was where people came to buy weed and other drugs.
And with drug-dealing comes conflict, so we often went to sleep to the sound of gunshots.
I spent much of my childhood worried, worried about our safety.
And so did our mother.
She worried that the violence we witnessed would overtake our lives; that our poverty meant that the neighbors with whom we lived and shared space would harm us.
Our entire life was in the Bronx, but my mother's anxiety spurred her into action, and soon we were driving so fast to Connecticut -- (Laughter) to boarding school campuses, with full scholarships in tow.
Man, don't underestimate the power of a mother determined to keep her children safe.
(Cheers) (Applause) At boarding school, for the first time, I was able to sleep without worry.
I could leave my dorm room unlocked, walk barefoot in the grass, and look up to see a night sky full of stars.
Happy novelties.
But there were other novelties as well.
Very quickly, I felt like I didn't belong.
I learned that I didn't speak the right way, and to demonstrate the proper ways of speaking, my teachers gave me frequent lessons, in public, on the appropriate way to enunciate certain words.
A teacher once instructed me in the hallway: "Aaaaaas-king."
She said this loudly.
"Dena, it's not 'axing,' like you're running around with an axe.
That's silly."
Now at this point, you can imagine the snickers of my classmates, but she continued: "Think about breaking the word into 'ass' and 'king,' and then put the two together to say it correctly -- 'Asking.'" There were some other moments that reminded me that I didn't belong.
Once, I walked into a classmate's dorm room, and I watched her watch her valuables around me.
Like, why would she do that? I thought to myself.
And then there was the time when another classmate walked into my dorm room, and yelled, "Ew!" as I was applying hair grease to my scalp.
There is emotional damage done when young people can't be themselves, when they are forced to edit who they are in order to be acceptable.
It's a kind of violence.
Ultimately, I'm a quintessential success story.
I attended boarding school and college in New England, studied abroad in Chile and returned to the Bronx to be a middle school teacher.
I received a Truman Scholarship, a Fulbright and a Soros Fellowship.
And I could list more.
(Laughter) But I won't.
(Laughter) I earned my doctorate at Columbia University.
(Cheers) (Applause) And then I landed a job at Yale.
(Applause) I am proud of everything that I've been able to accomplish on my journey thus far.
I have eternal imposter syndrome.
Either I've been invited because I'm a token, which really isn't about me, but rather, about a box someone needed to check off.
Or, I am exceptional, which means I've had to leave the people I love behind.
It's the price that I and so many others pay for learning while black.
(Applause) I police myself all the time.
Are my pants too tight?
Should I wear my hair up or in a fro?
Should I speak up for myself, or will the power of my words be reduced to: "She's angry"?
Why did I have to leave the Bronx to gain access to a better education?
And why, in the process of getting that better education, did I have to endure the trauma of erasing what made me, me -- a black girl from the Bronx, raised by an Antiguan mother?
So when I think about our current education reform initiatives, I can't help asking: What are our students of color learning about themselves?
Three -- three decades of research reveal that students of color are suspended and expelled at a rate three times greater than white students, and are punished in harsher ways for the same infractions.
They also learn this through the absence of their lives and narratives in the curricula.
The Cooperative Children's Book Center did a review of nearly 4,000 books and found that only three percent were about African-Americans.
And they further learn this through the lack of teachers that look like them.
An analysis of data from the National Center for Education Statistics found that 45 percent of our nation's pre-K to high school students were people of color, while only 17 percent of our teachers are.
Our youth of color pay a profound price when their schooling sends them the message that they must be controlled, that they must leave their identities at home in order to be successful.
Every child deserves an education that guarantees the safety to learn in the comfort of one's own skin.
(Applause) It is possible to create emotionally and physically safe classrooms where students also thrive academically.
I know, because I did it in my classroom when I returned to teach in the Bronx.
So what did that look like?
I centered my instruction on the lives, histories and identities of my students.
And I did all of this because I wanted my students to know that everyone around them was supporting them to be their best self.
So while I could not control the instability of their homes, the uncertainty of their next meal, or the loud neighbors that kept them from sleep, I provided them with a loving classroom that made them feel proud of who they are, that made them know that they mattered.
You know, every time I hear or say the word "asking," I am in high school again.
I am thinking about "ass" and "king" and putting the two together so that I speak in a way where someone in power will want to listen.
There is a better way, one that doesn't force kids of color into a double bind; a way for them to preserve their ties to their families, homes and communities; a way that teaches them to trust their instincts and to have faith in their own creative genius.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When people find out I write about time management, they assume two things.
One is that I'm always on time, and I'm not.
I have four small children, and I would like to blame them for my occasional tardiness, but sometimes it's just not their fault.
I was once late to my own speech on time management.
(Laughter) We all had to just take a moment together and savor that irony.
The second thing they assume is that I have lots of tips and tricks for saving bits of time here and there.
Sometimes I'll hear from magazines that are doing a story along these lines, generally on how to help their readers find an extra hour in the day.
And the idea is that we'll shave bits of time off everyday activities, add it up, and we'll have time for the good stuff.
I question the entire premise of this piece, but I'm always interested in hearing what they've come up with before they call me.
Some of my favorites: doing errands where you only have to make right-hand turns -- (Laughter) Being extremely judicious in microwave usage: it says three to three-and-a-half minutes on the package, we're totally getting in on the bottom side of that.
And my personal favorite, which makes sense on some level, is to DVR your favorite shows so you can fast-forward through the commercials.
That way, you save eight minutes every half hour, so in the course of two hours of watching TV, you find 32 minutes to exercise.
(Laughter) Which is true.
You know another way to find 32 minutes to exercise?
Don't watch two hours of TV a day, right?
(Laughter) Anyway, the idea is we'll save bits of time here and there, add it up, we will finally get to everything we want to do.
But after studying how successful people spend their time and looking at their schedules hour by hour, I think this idea has it completely backward.
We don't build the lives we want by saving time.
We build the lives we want, and then time saves itself.
Here's what I mean.
I recently did a time diary project looking at 1,001 days in the lives of extremely busy women.
They had demanding jobs, sometimes their own businesses, kids to care for, maybe parents to care for, community commitments -- busy, busy people.
I had them keep track of their time for a week so I could add up how much they worked and slept, and I interviewed them about their strategies, for my book.
One of the women whose time log I studied goes out on a Wednesday night for something.
She comes home to find that her water heater has broken, and there is now water all over her basement.
If you've ever had anything like this happen to you, you know it is a hugely damaging, frightening, sopping mess.
So she's dealing with the immediate aftermath that night, next day she's got plumbers coming in, day after that, professional cleaning crew dealing with the ruined carpet.
All this is being recorded on her time log.
Winds up taking seven hours of her week.
Seven hours.
That's like finding an extra hour in the day.
But I'm sure if you had asked her at the start of the week, "Could you find seven hours to train for a triathlon?"
"Could you find seven hours to mentor seven worthy people?"
I'm sure she would've said what most of us would've said, which is, "No -- can't you see how busy I am?"
Yet when she had to find seven hours because there is water all over her basement, she found seven hours.
And what this shows us is that time is highly elastic.
We cannot make more time, but time will stretch to accommodate what we choose to put into it.
And so the key to time management is treating our priorities as the equivalent of that broken water heater.
To get at this, I like to use language from one of the busiest people I ever interviewed.
By busy, I mean she was running a small business with 12 people on the payroll, she had six children in her spare time.
I was getting in touch with her to set up an interview on how she "had it all" -- that phrase.
I remember it was a Thursday morning, and she was not available to speak with me.
Of course, right?
But the reason she was unavailable to speak with me is that she was out for a hike, because it was a beautiful spring morning, and she wanted to go for a hike.
So of course this makes me even more intrigued, and when I finally do catch up with her, she explains it like this.
She says, "Listen Laura, everything I do, every minute I spend, is my choice."
And rather than say, "I don't have time to do x, y or z," she'd say, "I don't do x, y or z because it's not a priority."
"I don't have time," often means "It's not a priority."
If you think about it, that's really more accurate language.
I could tell you I don't have time to dust my blinds, but that's not true.
If you offered to pay me $100,000 to dust my blinds, I would get to it pretty quickly.
(Laughter) Since that is not going to happen, I can acknowledge this is not a matter of lacking time; it's that I don't want to do it.
Using this language reminds us that time is a choice.
And granted, there may be horrible consequences for making different choices, I will give you that.
But we are smart people, and certainly over the long run, we have the power to fill our lives with the things that deserve to be there.
So how do we do that?
How do we treat our priorities as the equivalent of that broken water heater?
Well, first we need to figure out what they are.
I want to give you two strategies for thinking about this.
The first, on the professional side: I'm sure many people coming up to the end of the year are giving or getting annual performance reviews.
You look back over your successes over the year, your "opportunities for growth."
And this serves its purpose, but I find it's more effective to do this looking forward.
So I want you to pretend it's the end of next year.
You're giving yourself a performance review, and it has been an absolutely amazing year for you professionally.
What three to five things did you do that made it so amazing?
So you can write next year's performance review now.
And you can do this for your personal life, too.
I'm sure many of you, like me, come December, get cards that contain these folded up sheets of colored paper, on which is written what is known as the family holiday letter.
(Laughter) Bit of a wretched genre of literature, really, going on about how amazing everyone in the household is, or even more scintillating, how busy everyone in the household is.
But these letters serve a purpose, which is that they tell your friends and family what you did in your personal life that mattered to you over the year.
So this year's kind of done, but I want you to pretend it's the end of next year, and it has been an absolutely amazing year for you and the people you care about.
What three to five things did you do that made it so amazing?
So you can write next year's family holiday letter now.
Don't send it.
(Laughter) Please, don't send it.
But you can write it.
And now, between the performance review and the family holiday letter, we have a list of six to ten goals we can work on in the next year.
And now we need to break these down into doable steps.
So maybe you want to write a family history.
First, you can read some other family histories, get a sense for the style.
Then maybe think about the questions you want to ask your relatives, set up appointments to interview them.
Or maybe you want to run a 5K.
So you need to find a race and sign up, figure out a training plan, and dig those shoes out of the back of the closet.
And then -- this is key -- we treat our priorities as the equivalent of that broken water heater, by putting them into our schedules first.
We do this by thinking through our weeks before we are in them.
I find a really good time to do this is Friday afternoons.
Friday afternoon is what an economist might call a "low opportunity cost" time.
Most of us are not sitting there on Friday afternoons saying, "I am excited to make progress toward my personal and professional priorities right now."
(Laughter) But we are willing to think about what those should be.
So take a little bit of time Friday afternoon, make yourself a three-category priority list: career, relationships, self.
Making a three-category list reminds us that there should be something in all three categories.
Career, we think about; relationships, self -- not so much.
But anyway, just a short list, two to three items in each.
Then look out over the whole of the next week, and see where you can plan them in.
Where you plan them in is up to you.
I know this is going to be more complicated for some people than others.
I mean, some people's lives are just harder than others.
It is not going to be easy to find time to take that poetry class if you are caring for multiple children on your own.
I get that.
And I don't want to minimize anyone's struggle.
But I do think that the numbers I am about to tell you are empowering.
There are 168 hours in a week.
Twenty-four times seven is 168 hours.
That is a lot of time.
If you are working a full-time job, so 40 hours a week, sleeping eight hours a night, so 56 hours a week -- that leaves 72 hours for other things.
That is a lot of time.
You say you're working 50 hours a week, maybe a main job and a side hustle.
Well, that leaves 62 hours for other things.
You say you're working 60 hours.
Well, that leaves 52 hours for other things.
You say you're working more than 60 hours.
Well, are you sure?
(Laughter) There was once a study comparing people's estimated work weeks with time diaries.
They found that people claiming 75-plus-hour work weeks were off by about 25 hours.
(Laughter) You can guess in which direction, right?
Anyway, in 168 hours a week, I think we can find time for what matters to you.
If you want to spend more time with your kids, you want to study more for a test you're taking, you want to exercise for three hours and volunteer for two, you can.
And that's even if you're working way more than full-time hours.
So we have plenty of time, which is great, because guess what?
We don't even need that much time to do amazing things.
But when most of us have bits of time, what do we do?
Pull out the phone, right?
Start deleting emails.
Otherwise, we're puttering around the house or watching TV.
But small moments can have great power.
You can use your bits of time for bits of joy.
Maybe it's choosing to read something wonderful on the bus on the way to work.
I know when I had a job that required two bus rides and a subway ride every morning, I used to go to the library on weekends to get stuff to read.
It made the whole experience almost, almost, enjoyable.
Breaks at work can be used for meditating or praying.
If family dinner is out because of your crazy work schedule, maybe family breakfast could be a good substitute.
It's about looking at the whole of one's time and seeing where the good stuff can go.
I truly believe this.
There is time.
Even if we are busy, we have time for what matters.
And when we focus on what matters, we can build the lives we want in the time we've got.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is a tuberculosis ward, and at the time this picture was taken in the late 1800s, one in seven of all people died from tuberculosis.
We had no idea what was causing this disease.
The hypothesis was actually it was your constitution that made you susceptible.
And it was a highly romanticized disease.
It was also called consumption, and it was the disorder of poets and artists and intellectuals.
And some people actually thought it gave you heightened sensitivity and conferred creative genius.
By the 1950s, we instead knew that tuberculosis was caused by a highly contagious bacterial infection, which is slightly less romantic, but that had the upside of us being able to maybe develop drugs to treat it.
So doctors had discovered a new drug, iproniazid, that they were optimistic might cure tuberculosis, and they gave it to patients, and patients were elated.
They were more social, more energetic.
One medical report actually says they were "dancing in the halls."
And unfortunately, this was not necessarily because they were getting better.
A lot of them were still dying.
Another medical report describes them as being "inappropriately happy."
And that is how the first antidepressant was discovered.
So accidental discovery is not uncommon in science, but it requires more than just a happy accident.
You have to be able to recognize it for discovery to occur.
As a neuroscientist, I'm going to talk to you a little bit about my firsthand experience with whatever you want to call the opposite of dumb luck -- let's call it smart luck.
But first, a bit more background.
Thankfully, since the 1950s, we've developed some other drugs and we can actually now cure tuberculosis.
And at least in the United States, though not necessarily in other countries, we have closed our sanitoriums and probably most of you are not too worried about TB.
But a lot of what was true in the early 1900s about infectious disease, we can say now about psychiatric disorders.
We are in the middle of an epidemic of mood disorders like depression and post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD.
One in four of all adults in the United States suffers from mental illness, which means that if you haven't experienced it personally or someone in your family hasn't, it's still very likely that someone you know has, though they may not talk about it.
Depression has actually now surpassed HIV/AIDS, malaria, diabetes and war as the leading cause of disability worldwide.
And also, like tuberculosis in the 1950s, we don't know what causes it.
Once it's developed, it's chronic, lasts a lifetime, and there are no known cures.
The second antidepressant we discovered, also by accident, in the 1950s, from an antihistamine that was making people manic, imipramine.
And in both the case of the tuberculosis ward and the antihistamine, someone had to be able to recognize that a drug that was designed to do one thing -- treat tuberculosis or suppress allergies -- could be used to do something very different -- treat depression.
And this sort of repurposing is actually quite challenging.
When doctors first saw this mood-enhancing effect of iproniazid, they didn't really recognize what they saw.
They were so used to thinking about it from the framework of being a tuberculosis drug that they actually just listed it as a side effect, an adverse side effect.
As you can see here, a lot of these patients in 1954 are experiencing severe euphoria.
And they were worried that this might somehow interfere with their recovering from tuberculosis.
So they recommended that iproniazid only be used in cases of extreme TB and in patients that were highly emotionally stable, which is of course the exact opposite of how we use it as an antidepressant.
They were so used to looking at it from the perspective of this one disease, they could not see the larger implications for another disease.
And to be fair, it's not entirely their fault.
Functional fixedness is a bias that affects all of us.
It's a tendency to only be able to think of an object in terms of its traditional use or function.
And mental set is another thing. Right?
That's sort of this preconceived framework with which we approach problems.
And that actually makes repurposing pretty hard for all of us, which is, I guess, why they gave a TV show to the guy who was, like, really great at repurposing.
(Laughter) So the effects in both the case of iproniazid and imipramine, they were so strong -- there was mania, or people dancing in the halls.
It's actually not that surprising they were caught.
But it does make you wonder what else we've missed.
So iproniazid and imipramine, they're more than just a case study in repurposing.
They have two other things in common that are really important.
One, they have terrible side effects.
That includes liver toxicity, weight gain of over 50 pounds, suicidality.
And two, they both increase levels of serotonin, which is a chemical signal in the brain, or a neurotransmitter.
And those two things together, right, one or the two, may not have been that important, but the two together meant that we had to develop safer drugs, and that serotonin seemed like a pretty good place to start.
So we developed drugs to more specifically focus on serotonin, the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, so the SSRIs, the most famous of which is Prozac.
And that was 30 years ago, and since then we have mostly just worked on optimizing those drugs.
And the SSRIs, they are better than the drugs that came before them, but they still have a lot of side effects, including weight gain, insomnia, suicidality -- and they take a really long time to work, something like four to six weeks in a lot of patients.
And that's in the patients where they do work.
There are a lot of patients where these drugs don't work.
And that means now, in 2016, we still have no cures for any mood disorders, just drugs that suppress symptoms, which is kind of the difference between taking a painkiller for an infection versus an antibiotic.
A painkiller will make you feel better, but is not going to do anything to treat that underlying disease.
And it was this flexibility in our thinking that let us recognize that iproniazid and imipramine could be repurposed in this way, which led us to the serotonin hypothesis, which we then, ironically, fixated on.
This is brain signaling, serotonin, from an SSRI commercial.
In case you're not clear, this is a dramatization.
And in science, we try and remove our bias, right, by running double-blinded experiments or being statistically agnostic as to what our results will be.
But bias creeps in more insidiously in what we choose to study and how we choose to study it.
So we've focused on serotonin now for the past 30 years, often to the exclusion of other things.
We still have no cures, and what if serotonin isn't all there is to depression?
What if it's not even the key part of it?
That means no matter how much time or money or effort we put into it, it will never lead to a cure.
In the past few years, doctors have discovered probably what is the first truly new antidepressant since the SSRIs, Calypsol, and this drug works very quickly, within a few hours or a day, and it doesn't work on serotonin.
It works on glutamate, which is another neurotransmitter.
And it's also repurposed.
It was traditionally used as anesthesia in surgery.
But unlike those other drugs, which were recognized pretty quickly, it took us 20 years to realize that Calypsol was an antidepressant, despite the fact that it's actually a better antidepressant, probably, than those other drugs.
It's actually probably because of the fact that it's a better antidepressant that it was harder for us to recognize.
There was no mania to signal its effects.
So in 2013, up at Columbia University, I was working with my colleague, Dr. Christine Ann Denny, and we were studying Calypsol as an antidepressant in mice.
And Calypsol has, like, a really short half-life, which means it's out of your body within a few hours.
And we were just piloting.
So we would give an injection to mice, and then we'd wait a week, and then we'd run another experiment to save money.
And one of the experiments I was running, we would stress the mice, and we used that as a model of depression.
And at first it kind of just looked like it didn't really work at all.
So we could have stopped there.
But I have run this model of depression for years, and the data just looked kind of weird.
It didn't really look right to me.
So I went back, and we reanalyzed it based on whether or not they had gotten that one injection of Calypsol a week beforehand.
And it looked kind of like this.
So if you look at the far left, if you put a mouse in a new space, this is the box, it's very exciting, a mouse will walk around and explore, and you can see that pink line is actually the measure of them walking.
And we also give it another mouse in a pencil cup that it can decide to interact with.
This is also a dramatization, in case that's not clear.
And a normal mouse will explore.
It will be social.
Check out what's going on.
If you stress a mouse in this depression model, which is the middle box, they aren't social, they don't explore.
They mostly just kind of hide in that back corner, behind a cup.
Yet the mice that had gotten that one injection of Calypsol, here on your right, they were exploring, they were social.
They looked like they had never been stressed at all, which is impossible.
So we could have just stopped there, but Christine had also used Calypsol before as anesthesia, and a few years ago she had seen that it seemed to have some weird effects on cells and some other behavior that also seemed to last long after the drug, maybe a few weeks.
So we were like, OK, maybe this is not completely impossible, but we were really skeptical.
So we did what you do in science when you're not sure, and we ran it again.
And I remember being in the animal room, moving mice from box to box to test them, and Christine was actually sitting on the floor with the computer in her lap so the mice couldn't see her, and she was analyzing the data in real time.
And I remember us yelling, which you're not supposed to do in an animal room where you're testing, because it had worked.
It seemed like these mice were protected against stress, or they were inappropriately happy, however you want to call it.
And we were really excited.
And then we were really skeptical, because it was too good to be true.
So we ran it again.
And then we ran it again in a PTSD model, and we ran it again in a physiological model, where all we did was give stress hormones.
And we had our undergrads run it.
And then we had our collaborators halfway across the world in France run it.
And every time someone ran it, they confirmed the same thing.
It seemed like this one injection of Calypsol was somehow protecting against stress for weeks.
And we only published this a year ago, but since then other labs have independently confirmed this effect.
So we don't know what causes depression, but we do know that stress is the initial trigger in 80 percent of cases, and depression and PTSD are different diseases, but this is something they share in common.
Right? It is traumatic stress like active combat or natural disasters or community violence or sexual assault that causes post-traumatic stress disorder, and not everyone that is exposed to stress develops a mood disorder.
And this ability to experience stress and be resilient and bounce back and not develop depression or PTSD is known as stress resilience, and it varies between people.
And we have always thought of it as just sort of this passive property.
It's the absence of susceptibility factors and risk factors for these disorders.
But what if it were active?
Maybe we could enhance it, sort of akin to putting on armor.
We had accidentally discovered the first resilience-enhancing drug.
And like I said, we only gave a tiny amount of the drug, and it lasted for weeks, and that's not like anything you see with antidepressants.
But it is actually kind of similar to what you see in immune vaccines.
So in immune vaccines, you'll get your shots, and then weeks, months, years later, when you're actually exposed to bacteria, it's not the vaccine in your body that protects you.
It's your own immune system that's developed resistance and resilience to this bacteria that fights it off, and you actually never get the infection, which is very different from, say, our treatments. Right?
In that case, you get the infection, you're exposed to the bacteria, you're sick, and then you take, say, an antibiotic which cures it, and those drugs are actually working to kill the bacteria.
Or similar to as I said before, with this palliative, you'll take something that will suppress the symptoms, but it won't treat the underlying infection, and you'll only feel better during the time in which you're taking it, which is why you have to keep taking it.
And in depression and PTSD -- here we have your stress exposure -- we only have palliative care.
Antidepressants only suppress symptoms, and that is why you basically have to keep taking them for the life of the disease, which is often the length of your own life.
So we're calling our resilience-enhancing drugs "paravaccines," which means vaccine-like, because it seems like they might have the potential to protect against stress and prevent mice from developing depression and post-traumatic stress disorder.
Also, not all antidepressants are also paravaccines.
We tried Prozac as well, and that had no effect.
So if this were to translate into humans, we might be able to protect people who are predictably at risk against stress-induced disorders like depression and PTSD.
So that's first responders and firefighters, refugees, prisoners and prison guards, soldiers, you name it.
And to give you a sense of the scale of these diseases, in 2010, the global burden of disease was estimated at 2.5 trillion dollars, and since they are chronic, that cost is compounding and is therefore expected to rise up to six trillion dollars in just the next 15 years.
As I mentioned before, repurposing can be challenging because of our prior biases.
Calypsol has another name, ketamine, which also goes by another name, Special K, which is a club drug and drug of abuse.
It's still used across the world as an anesthetic.
It's used in children. We use it on the battlefield.
It's actually the drug of choice in a lot of developing nations, because it doesn't affect breathing.
It is on the World Health Organization list of most essential medicines.
If we had discovered ketamine as a paravaccine first, it'd be pretty easy for us to develop it, but as is, we have to compete with our functional fixedness and mental set that kind of interfere.
Fortunately, it's not the only compound we have discovered that has these prophylactic, paravaccine qualities, but all of the other drugs we've discovered, or compounds if you will, they're totally new, they have to go through the entire FDA approval process -- if they make it before they can ever be used in humans.
And that will be years.
So if we wanted something sooner, ketamine is already FDA-approved.
It's generic, it's available.
We could develop it for a fraction of the price and a fraction of the time.
But actually, beyond functional fixedness and mental set, there's a real other challenge to repurposing drugs, which is policy.
There are no incentives in place once a drug is generic and off patent and no longer exclusive to encourage pharma companies to develop them, because they don't make money.
And that's not true for just ketamine. That is true for all drugs.
Regardless, the idea itself is completely novel in psychiatry, to use drugs to prevent mental illness as opposed to just treat it.
It is possible that 20, 50, 100 years from now, we will look back now at depression and PTSD the way we look back at tuberculosis sanitoriums as a thing of the past.
This could be the beginning of the end of the mental health epidemic.
But as a great scientist once said, "Only a fool is sure of anything.
A wise man keeps on guessing."
Thank you, guys.
(Applause)
Tell your daughters of this year, how we woke needing coffee but discovered instead cadavers strewn about our morning papers, waterlogged facsimiles of our sisters, spouses, small children.
Say to your baby of this year when she asks, as she certainly should, tell her it was too late coming.
Admit even in the year we leased freedom, we didn't own it outright.
There were still laws for every way we used our privates while they pawed at the soft folds of us, grabbed with no concern for consent, no laws made for the men that enforced them.
We were trained to dodge, to wait, to cower and cover, to wait more, still, wait.
We were told to be silent.
But speak to your girls of this wartime, a year preceded by a score of the same, so as in two decades before, we wiped our eyes, laced caskets with flags, evacuated the crime scene of the club, caterwauled in the street, laid our bodies on the concrete against the outlines of our fallen, cried, "Of course we mattered," chanted for our disappeared.
The women wept this year.
They did.
In the same year, we were ready.
The year we lost our inhibition and moved with courageous abandon was also the year we stared down barrels, sang of cranes in skies, ducked and parried, caught gold in hijab, collected death threats, knew ourselves as patriots, said, "We're 35 now, time we settled down and found a running mate," made road maps for infant joy, shamed nothing but fear, called ourselves fat and meant, of course, impeccable.
This year, we were women, not brides or trinkets, not an off-brand gender, not a concession, but women.
Instruct your babies.
Remind them that the year has passed to be docile or small.
Some of us said for the first time that we were women, took this oath of solidarity seriously.
Some of us bore children and some of us did not, and none of us questioned whether that made us real or appropriate or true.
When she asks you of this year, your daughter, whether your offspring or heir to your triumph, from her comforted side of history teetering towards woman, she will wonder and ask voraciously, though she cannot fathom your sacrifice, she will hold your estimation of it holy, curiously probing, "Where were you?
Did you fight? Were you fearful or fearsome?
What colored the walls of your regret?
What did you do for women in the year it was time?
This path you made for me, which bones had to break?
Did you do enough, and are you OK, momma?
And are you a hero?"
She will ask the difficult questions.
She will not care about the arc of your brow, the weight of your clutch.
She will not ask of your mentions.
Your daughter, for whom you have already carried so much, wants to know what you brought, what gift, what light did you keep from extinction?
When they came for victims in the night, did you sleep through it or were you roused?
What was the cost of staying woke?
What, in the year we said time's up, what did you do with your privilege?
Did you sup on others' squalor?
Did you look away or directly into the flame?
Did you know your skill or treat it like a liability?
Were you fooled by the epithets of "nasty" or "less than"?
Did you teach with an open heart or a clenched fist?
Where were you?
Tell her the truth. Make it your life.
Confirm it. Say, "Daughter, I stood there with the moment drawn on my face like a dagger, and flung it back at itself, slicing space for you."
Tell her the truth, how you lived in spite of crooked odds.
Tell her you were brave, and always, always in the company of courage, mostly the days when you just had yourself.
Tell her she was born as you were, as your mothers before, and the sisters beside them, in the age of legends, like always.
Tell her she was born just in time, just in time to lead.
(Applause)
Let me ask you all a question.
How much weapons-grade nuclear material do you think it would take to level a city the size of San Francisco?
How many of you think it would be an amount about the size of this suitcase?
OK. And how about this minibus?
All right.
Well actually, under the right circumstances, an amount of highly enriched uranium about the size of your morning latte would be enough to kill 100,000 people instantly.
Hundreds of thousands of others would become horribly ill, and parts of the city would be uninhabitable for years, if not for decades.
But you can forget that nuclear latte, because today's nuclear weapons are hundreds of times more powerful even than those we dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
And even a limited nuclear war involving, say, tens of nuclear weapons, could lead to the end of all life on the planet.
So it's really important that you know that right now we have over 15,000 nuclear weapons in the hands of nine nations.
And if you live in a city or near a military facility, one is likely pointed right at you.
In fact, if you live in any of the rural areas where nuclear weapons are stored globally, one is likely pointed at you.
About 1,800 of these weapons are on high alert, which means they can be launched within 15 minutes of a presidential command.
So I know this is a bummer of an issue, and maybe you have that -- what was it? -- psychic fatigue that we heard about a little bit earlier.
So I'm going to switch gears for just a second, and I'm going to talk about my imaginary friend, who I like to think of as Jasmine, just for a moment.
Jasmine, at the age of 25, is part of a generation that is more politically and socially engaged than anything we've seen in 50 years.
She and her friends think of themselves as change agents and leaders and activists.
I think of them as Generation Possible.
They regularly protest about the issues they care about, but nuclear weapons are not one of them, which makes sense, because Jasmine was born in 1991, at the end of the Cold War.
So she didn't grow up hearing a lot about nuclear weapons.
She never had to duck and cover under her desk at school.
For Jasmine, a fallout shelter is an app in the Android store.
Nuclear weapons help win games.
And that is really a shame, because right now, we need Generation Possible to help us make some really important decisions about nuclear weapons.
For instance, will we further reduce our nuclear arsenals globally, or will we spend billions, maybe a trillion dollars, to modernize them so they last throughout the 21st century, so that by the time Jasmine is my age, she's talking to her children and maybe even her grandchildren about the threat of nuclear holocaust?
And if you're paying any attention at all to cyberthreats, or, for instance, if you've read about the Stuxnet virus or, for God's sake, if you've ever had an email account or a Yahoo account or a phone hacked, you can imagine the whole new world of hurt that could be triggered by modernization in a period of cyberwarfare.
Now, if you're paying attention to the money, a trillion dollars could go a long way to feeding and educating and employing people, all of which could reduce the threat of nuclear war to begin with.
So -- (Applause) This is really crucial right now, because nuclear weapons -- they're vulnerable.
We have solid evidence that terrorists are trying to get ahold of them.
Just this last spring, when four retirees and two taxi drivers were arrested in the Republic of Georgia for trying to sell nuclear materials for 200 million dollars, they demonstrated that the black market for this stuff is alive and well.
And it's really important, because there have been dozens of accidents involving nuclear weapons, and I bet most of us have never heard anything about them.
Just here in the United States, we've dropped nuclear weapons on the Carolinas twice.
In one case, one of the bombs, which fell out of an Air Force plane, didn't detonate because the nuclear core was stored somewhere else on the plane.
In another case, the weapon did arm when it hit the ground, and five of the switches designed to keep it from detonating failed.
Luckily, the sixth one didn't.
But if that's not enough to get your attention, there was the 1995 Black Brant incident.
That's when Russian radar technicians saw what they thought was a US nuclear missile streaking towards Russian airspace.
It later turned out to be a Norwegian rocket collecting data about the northern lights.
But at that time, Russian President Boris Yeltsin came within five minutes of launching a full-scale retaliatory nuclear attack against the United States.
So, most of the world's nuclear nations have committed to getting rid of these weapons of mass destruction.
But consider this: the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which is the most widely adopted arms control treaty in history with 190 signatories, sets no specific date by which the world's nuclear-armed nations will get rid of their nuclear weapons.
Now, when John F. Kennedy sent a man to the moon and decided to bring him back, or decided to do both those things, he didn't say, "Hey, whenever you guys get to it."
He gave us a deadline.
He gave us a challenge that would have been incredible just a few years earlier.
And with that challenge, he inspired scientists and marketers, astronauts and schoolteachers.
He gave us a vision.
But along with that vision, he also tried to give us -- and most people don't know this, either -- he tried to give us a partner in the form of our fiercest Cold War rival, the Soviet Union.
Because part of Kennedy's vision for the Apollo program was that it be a cooperation, not a competition, with the Soviets.
And apparently, Nikita Khrushchev, the Soviet Premier, agreed.
But before that cooperation could be realized, Kennedy was assassinated, and that part of the vision was deferred.
But the promise of joint innovation between these two nuclear superpowers wasn't totally extinguished.
Because in 1991, which is the year that Jasmine was born and the Soviet Union fell, these two nations engaged in a project that genuinely does seem incredible today in the truest sense of that word, which is that the US sent cash to the Russians when they needed it most, to secure loose nuclear materials and to employ out-of-work nuclear scientists.
They worked alongside American scientists to convert weapons-grade uranium into the type of fuel that can be used for nuclear power instead.
They called it, "Megatons to Megawatts."
So the result is that for over 20 years, our two nations had a program that meant that one in 10 lightbulbs in the United States was essentially fueled by former Russian warheads.
So, together these two nations did something truly audacious.
But the good news is, the global community has the chance to do something just as audacious today.
To get rid of nuclear weapons and to end the supply of the materials required to produce them, some experts tell me would take 30 years.
It would take a renaissance of sorts, the kinds of innovation that, for better or worse, underpinned both the Manhattan Project, which gave rise to nuclear weapons, and the Megatons to Megawatts program.
It would take design constraints.
These are fundamental to creativity, things like a platform for international collaboration; a date certain, which is a forcing mechanism; and a positive vision that inspires action.
It would take us to 2045.
Now, 2045 happens to be the 100th anniversary of the birth of nuclear weapons in the New Mexico desert.
But it's also an important date for another reason.
It's predicted to be the advent of the singularity, a new moment in human development, where the lines between artificial intelligence and human intelligence blur, where computing and consciousness become almost indistinguishable and advanced technologies help us solve the 21st century's greatest problems: hunger, energy, poverty, ushering in an era of abundance.
And we all get to go to space on our way to becoming a multi-planetary species.
Now, the people who really believe this vision are the first to say they don't yet know precisely how we're going to get there.
But the values behind their vision and the willingness to ask "How might we?"
have inspired a generation of innovators.
They're working backward from the outcomes they want, using the creative problem-solving methods of collaborative design.
They're busting through obstacles.
They're redefining what we all consider possible.
But here's the thing: that vision of abundance isn't compatible with a world that still relies on a 20th-century nuclear doctrine called "mutually assured destruction."
It has to be about building the foundations for the 22nd century.
It has to be about strategies for mutually assured prosperity or, at the very least, mutually assured survival.
Now, every day, I get to meet people who are real pioneers in the field of nuclear threats.
As you can see, many of them are young women, and they're doing fiercely interesting stuff, like Mareena Robinson Snowden here, who is developing new ways, better ways, to detect nuclear warheads, which will help us overcome a critical hurdle to international disarmament.
Or Melissa Hanham, who is using satellite imaging to make sense of what's going on around far-flung nuclear sites.
Or we have Beatrice Fihn in Europe, who has been campaigning to make nuclear weapons illegal in international courts of law, and just won a big victory at the UN last week.
(Applause) And yet, and yet, with all of our talk in this culture about moon shots, too few members of Generation Possible and those of us who mentor them are taking on nuclear weapons.
It's as if there's a taboo.
But I remember something Kennedy said that has really stuck with me, and that is something to the effect that humans can be as big as the solutions to all the problems we've created.
No problem of human destiny, he said, is beyond human beings.
I believe that.
And I bet a lot of you here believe that, too.
And I know Generation Possible believes it.
So it's time to commit to a date.
Let's end the nuclear weapons chapter on the 100th anniversary of its inception.
After all, by 2045, we will have held billions of people hostage to the threat of nuclear annihilation.
Surely, 100 years will have been enough.
Surely, a century of economic development and the development of military strategy will have given us better ways to manage global conflict.
Surely, if ever there was a global moon shot worth supporting, this is it.
Now, in the face of real threats -- for instance, North Korea's recent nuclear weapons tests, which fly in the face of sanctions -- reasonable people disagree about whether we should maintain some number of nuclear weapons to deter aggression.
But the question is: What's the magic number?
Is it a thousand?
Is it a hundred? Ten?
And then we have to ask: Who should be responsible for them?
I think we can agree, however, that having 15,000 of them represents a greater global threat to Jasmine's generation than a promise.
So it's time we make a promise of a world in which we've broken the stranglehold that nuclear weapons have on our imaginations; in which we invest in the creative solutions that come from working backward from the future we desperately want, rather than plodding forward from a present that brings all of the mental models and biases of the past with it.
It's time we pledge our resources as leaders across the spectrum to work on this old problem in new ways, to ask, "How might we?"
How might we make good on a promise of greater security for Jasmine's generation in a world beyond nuclear weapons?
I truly hope you will join us.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
So what if I could make for you a designer baby?
What if you as a parent-to-be and I as a scientist decided to go down that road together?
What if we thought, "That's a bad idea," but many of our family, friends and coworkers did make that decision?
Let's fast-forward just 15 years from now.
Let's pretend it's the year 2030, and you're a parent.
You have your daughter, Marianne, next to you, and in 2030, she is what we call a natural because she has no genetic modifications.
And because you and your partner consciously made that decision, many in your social circle, they kind of look down on you.
They think you're, like, a Luddite or a technophobe.
Marianne's best friend Jenna, who lives right next door, is a very different story.
She was born a genetically modified designer baby with numerous upgrades.
Yeah. Upgrades.
And these enhancements were introduced using a new genetic modification technology that goes by the funny name CRISPR, you know, like something's crisp, this is CRISPR.
The scientist that Jenna's parents hired to do this for several million dollars introduced CRISPR into a whole panel of human embryos.
And then they used genetic testing, and they predicted that that little tiny embryo, Jenna's embryo, would be the best of the bunch.
And now, Jenna is an actual, real person.
She's sitting on the carpet in your living room playing with your daughter Marianne.
And your families have known each other for years now, and it's become very clear to you that Jenna is extraordinary.
She's incredibly intelligent.
If you're honest with yourself, she's smarter than you, and she's five years old.
She's beautiful, tall, athletic, and the list goes on and on.
And in fact, there's a whole new generation of these GM kids like Jenna.
And so far it looks like they're healthier than their parents' generation, than your generation.
And they have lower health care costs.
They're immune to a host of health conditions, including HIV/AIDS and genetic diseases.
It all sounds so great, but you can't help but have this sort of unsettling feeling, a gut feeling, that there's something just not quite right about Jenna, and you've had the same feeling about other GM kids that you've met.
You were also reading in the newspaper earlier this week that a study of these children who were born as designer babies indicates they may have some issues, like increased aggressiveness and narcissism.
But more immediately on your mind is some news that you just got from Jenna's family.
She's so smart, she's now going to be going to a special school, a different school than your daughter Marianne, and this is kind of throwing your family into a disarray.
Marianne's been crying, and last night when you took her to bed to kiss her goodnight, she said, "Daddy, will Jenna even be my friend anymore?"
So now, as I've been telling you this imagined 2030 story, I have a feeling that I may have put some of you into this sci-fi frame of reference. Right?
You think you're reading a sci-fi book.
Or maybe, like, in Halloween mode of thinking.
But this is really a possible reality for us, just 15 years from now.
I'm a stem cell and genetics researcher and I can see this new CRISPR technology and its potential impact.
And we may find ourselves in that reality, and a lot will depend on what we decide to do today.
And if you're still kind of thinking in sci-fi mode, consider that the world of science had a huge shock earlier this year, and the public largely doesn't even know about it.
Researchers in China just a few months ago reported the creation of genetically modified human embryos.
This was the first time in history.
And they did it using this new CRISPR technology.
It didn't work perfectly, but I still think they sort of cracked the door ajar on a Pandora's box here.
And I think some people are going to run with this technology and try to make designer babies.
Now, before I go on, some of you may hold up your hands and say, "Stop, Paul, wait a minute.
Wouldn't that be illegal?
You can't just go off and create a designer baby."
And in fact, to some extent, you're right.
In some countries, you couldn't do that.
But in many other countries, including my country, the US, there's actually no law on this, so in theory, you could do it.
And there was another development this year that resonates in this area, and that happened not so far from here over in the UK.
And the UK traditionally has been the strictest country when it comes to human genetic modification.
It was illegal there, but just a few months ago, they carved out an exception to that rule.
They passed a new law allowing the creation of genetically modified humans with the noble goal of trying to prevent a rare kind of genetic disease.
But still I think in combination these events are pushing us further towards an acceptance of human genetic modification.
So I've been talking about this CRISPR technology.
What actually is CRISPR?
So if you think about the GMOs that we're all more familiar with, like GMO tomatoes and wheat and things like that, this technology is similar to the technologies that were used to make those, but it's dramatically better, cheaper and faster.
So what is it?
It's actually like a genetic Swiss army knife.
We can pretend this is a Swiss army knife with different tools in it, and one of the tools is kind of like a magnifying glass or a GPS for our DNA, so it can home in on a certain spot.
And the next tool is like scissors that can cut the DNA right in that spot.
And finally we have a pen where we can literally rewrite the genetic code in that location.
It's really that simple.
And this technology, which came on the scene just three years ago, has taken science by storm.
It's evolving so fast, and it's so freaking exciting to scientists, and I admit I'm fascinated by it and we use it in my own lab, that I think someone is going to go that extra step and continue the GM human embryo work and maybe make designer babies.
This is so ubiquitous now.
It just came on the scene three years ago.
Thousands of labs literally have this in hand today, and they're doing important research.
Most of them are not interested in designer babies.
They're studying human disease and other important elements of science.
So there's a lot of good research going on with CRISPR.
And the fact that we can now do genetic modifications that used to take years and cost millions of dollars in a few weeks for a couple thousand bucks, to me as a scientist that's fantastic, but again, at the same time, it opens the door to people going too far.
And I think for some people the focus is not going to be so much on science.
That's not what's going to be driving them.
It's going to be ideology or the chase for a profit.
And they're going to go for designer babies.
So why should we be concerned about this?
We know from Darwin, if we go back two centuries, that evolution and genetics profoundly have impacted humanity, who we are today.
And some think there's like a social Darwinism at work in our world, and maybe even a eugenics as well.
Imagine those trends, those forces, with a booster rocket of this CRISPR technology that is so powerful and so ubiquitous.
And in fact, we can just go back one century to the last century to see the power that eugenics can have.
So my father, Peter Knoepfler, was actually born right here in Vienna.
He was Viennese, and he was born here in 1929.
And when my grandparents had little baby Peter, the world was very different. Right?
It was a different Vienna.
The United States was different.
The world was different.
There was a eugenics rising, and my grandparents realized, pretty quickly I think, that they were on the wrong side of the eugenics equation.
And so despite this being their home and their whole extended family's home, and this area being their family's home for generations, they decided because of eugenics that they had to leave.
And they survived, but they were heartbroken, and I'm not sure my dad ever really got over leaving Vienna.
He left when he was just eight years old in 1938.
So today, I see a new eugenics kind of bubbling to the surface.
It's supposed to be a kinder, gentler, positive eugenics, different than all that past stuff.
But I think even though it's focused on trying to improve people, it could have negative consequences, and it really worries me that some of the top proponents of this new eugenics, they think CRISPR is the ticket to make it happen.
So I have to admit, you know, eugenics, we talk about making better people.
It's a tough question.
What is better when we're talking about a human being?
But I admit I think maybe a lot of us could agree that human beings, maybe we could use a little betterment.
Look at our politicians here, you know, back in the US -- God forbid we go there right now.
Maybe even if we just look in the mirror, there might be ways we think we could be better.
I might wish, honestly, that I had more hair here, instead of baldness.
Some people might wish they were taller, have a different weight, a different face.
If we could do those things, we could make those things happen, or we could make them happen in our children, it would be very seductive.
And yet coming with it would be these risks.
I talked about eugenics, but there would be risks to individuals as well.
So if we forget about enhancing people and we just try to make them healthier using genetic modification, this technology is so new and so powerful, that by accident we could make them sicker.
That easily could happen.
And there's another risk, and that is that all of the legitimate, important genetic modification research going on just in the lab -- again, no interest in designer babies -- a few people going the designer baby route, things go badly, that entire field could be damaged.
I also think it's not that unlikely that governments might start taking an interest in genetic modification.
So for example our imagined GM Jenna child who is healthier, if there's a generation that looks like they have lower health care costs, it's possible that governments may start trying to compel their citizens to go the GM route.
Look at China's one-child policy.
It's thought that that prevented the birth of 400 million human beings.
So it's not beyond the realm of possible that genetic modification could be something that governments push.
And if designer babies become popular, in our digital age -- viral videos, social media -- what if designer babies are thought to be fashionable, and they kind of become the new glitterati, the new Kardashians or something?
(Laughter) You know, are those trends that we really could control?
I'm not convinced that we could.
So again, today it's Halloween and when we talk about genetic modification, there's one Halloween-associated character that is talked about or invoked more than anything else, and that is Frankenstein.
Mostly that's been Frankenfoods and all this other stuff.
But if we think about this now and we think about it in the human context on a day like Halloween, if parents can in essence costume their children genetically, are we going to be talking about a Frankenstein 2.0 kind of situation?
I don't think so. I don't think it's going to get to that extreme.
But when we are going about hacking the human code, I think all bets are off in terms of what might come of that.
There would still be dangers.
And we can look in the past to other elements of transformative science and see how they can basically go out of control and permeate society.
So I'll just give you one example, and that is in vitro fertilization.
Almost exactly 40 years ago, test tube baby number one Louise Brown was born, and that's a great thing, and I think since then five million IVF babies have been born, bringing immeasurable happiness.
A lot of parents now can love those kids.
But if you think about it, in four decades, five million babies being born from a new technology is pretty remarkable, and the same kind of thing could happen with human genetic modification and designer babies.
So depending on the decisions we make in the next few months, the next year or so, if designer baby number one is born, within a few decades, there could well be millions of genetically modified humans.
And there's a difference there too, because if we, you in the audience, or I, if we decide to have a designer baby, then their children will also be genetically modified, and so on, because it's heritable.
So that's a big difference.
So with all of this in mind, what should we do?
There's actually going to be a meeting a month from tomorrow in Washington, D.C.
by the US National Academy of Sciences to tackle that exact question.
What is the right path forward with human genetic modification?
I believe at this time we need a moratorium.
We have to ban this.
We should not allow creating genetically modified people, because it's just too dangerous and too unpredictable.
But there's a lot of people -- (Applause) Thanks.
(Applause) And let me say, just as a scientist, it's a little bit scary for me to say that in public, because science generally doesn't like self-regulation and things like that.
So I think we need to put a hold on this, but there are many people who not only disagree with me, they feel the exact opposite.
They're like, step on the gas, full speed ahead, let's make designer babies.
And so in the meeting in December and other meetings that are likely to follow in the next few months, it's very possible there may be no moratorium.
And I think part of the problem that we have is that all of this trend, this revolution in genetic modification applying to humans, the public hasn't known about it.
Nobody has been saying, look, this is a big deal, this is a revolution, and this could affect you in very personal ways.
And so part of my goal is actually to change that and to educate and engage with the public and get you guys talking about this.
And so I hope at these meetings that there will be a role for the public to bring their voice to bear as well.
So if we kind of circle back now to 2030 again, that imagined story, and depending on the decisions we make, again, today -- literally we don't have a lot of time -- in the next few months, the next year or so, because this technology is spreading like wildfire.
Let's pretend we're back in that reality.
We're at a park, and our kid is swinging on the swing.
Is that kid a regular old kid, or did we decide to have a designer baby?
And let's say we went the sort of traditional route, and there's our kid swinging on the swing, and frankly, they're kind of a mess.
Their hair is all over the place like mine.
They have a stuffy nose.
They're not the best student in the world.
They're adorable, you love them, but there on the swing next to them, their best friend is a GM kid, and the two of them are kind of swinging like this, and you can't help but compare them, right?
And the GM kid is swinging higher, they look better, they're a better student, they don't have that stuffy nose you need to wipe.
How is that going to make you feel and what decision might you make next time?
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want you to look around the room for a minute and try to find the most paranoid person here -- (Laughter) And then I want you to point at that person for me.
(Laughter) OK, don't actually do it.
(Laughter) But, as an organizational psychologist, I spend a lot of time in workplaces, and I find paranoia everywhere.
Paranoia is caused by people that I call "takers."
Takers are self-serving in their interactions.
It's all about what can you do for me.
The opposite is a giver.
It's somebody who approaches most interactions by asking, "What can I do for you?"
I wanted to give you a chance to think about your own style.
We all have moments of giving and taking.
Your style is how you treat most of the people most of the time, your default.
I have a short test you can take to figure out if you're more of a giver or a taker, and you can take it right now.
[The Narcissist Test] [Step 1: Take a moment to think about yourself.] (Laughter) [Step 2: If you made it to Step 2, you are not a narcissist.] (Laughter) This is the only thing I will say today that has no data behind it, but I am convinced the longer it takes for you to laugh at this cartoon, the more worried we should be that you're a taker.
(Laughter) Of course, not all takers are narcissists.
Some are just givers who got burned one too many times.
Then there's another kind of taker that we won't be addressing today, and that's called a psychopath.
(Laughter) I was curious, though, about how common these extremes are, and so I surveyed over 30,000 people across industries around the world's cultures.
And I found that most people are right in the middle between giving and taking.
They choose this third style called "matching."
If you're a matcher, you try to keep an even balance of give and take: quid pro quo -- I'll do something for you if you do something for me.
And that seems like a safe way to live your life.
But is it the most effective and productive way to live your life?
The answer to that question is a very definitive ...
maybe.
(Laughter) I studied dozens of organizations, thousands of people.
I had engineers measuring their productivity.
(Laughter) I looked at medical students' grades -- even salespeople's revenue.
(Laughter) And, unexpectedly, the worst performers in each of these jobs were the givers.
The engineers who got the least work done were the ones who did more favors than they got back.
They were so busy doing other people's jobs, they literally ran out of time and energy to get their own work completed.
In medical school, the lowest grades belong to the students who agree most strongly with statements like, "I love helping others," which suggests the doctor you ought to trust is the one who came to med school with no desire to help anybody.
(Laughter) And then in sales, too, the lowest revenue accrued in the most generous salespeople.
I actually reached out to one of those salespeople who had a very high giver score.
And I asked him, "Why do you suck at your job --" I didn't ask it that way, but -- (Laughter) "What's the cost of generosity in sales?"
And he said, "Well, I just care so deeply about my customers that I would never sell them one of our crappy products."
(Laughter) So just out of curiosity, how many of you self-identify more as givers than takers or matchers?
Raise your hands.
OK, it would have been more before we talked about these data.
But actually, it turns out there's a twist here, because givers are often sacrificing themselves, but they make their organizations better.
We have a huge body of evidence -- many, many studies looking at the frequency of giving behavior that exists in a team or an organization -- and the more often people are helping and sharing their knowledge and providing mentoring, the better organizations do on every metric we can measure: higher profits, customer satisfaction, employee retention -- even lower operating expenses.
So givers spend a lot of time trying to help other people and improve the team, and then, unfortunately, they suffer along the way.
I want to talk about what it takes to build cultures where givers actually get to succeed.
So I wondered, then, if givers are the worst performers, who are the best performers?
Let me start with the good news: it's not the takers.
Takers tend to rise quickly but also fall quickly in most jobs.
And they fall at the hands of matchers.
If you're a matcher, you believe in "An eye for an eye" -- a just world.
And so when you meet a taker, you feel like it's your mission in life to just punish the hell out of that person.
(Laughter) And that way justice gets served.
Well, most people are matchers.
And that means if you're a taker, it tends to catch up with you eventually; what goes around will come around.
And so the logical conclusion is: it must be the matchers who are the best performers.
But they're not.
In every job, in every organization I've ever studied, the best results belong to the givers again.
Take a look at some data I gathered from hundreds of salespeople, tracking their revenue.
What you can see is that the givers go to both extremes.
They make up the majority of people who bring in the lowest revenue, but also the highest revenue.
The same patterns were true for engineers' productivity and medical students' grades.
Givers are overrepresented at the bottom and at the top of every success metric that I can track.
Which raises the question: How do we create a world where more of these givers get to excel?
I want to talk about how to do that, not just in businesses, but also in nonprofits, schools -- even governments.
Are you ready?
(Cheers) I was going to do it anyway, but I appreciate the enthusiasm.
(Laughter) The first thing that's really critical is to recognize that givers are your most valuable people, but if they're not careful, they burn out.
So you have to protect the givers in your midst.
And I learned a great lesson about this from Fortune's best networker.
It's the guy, not the cat.
(Laughter) His name is Adam Rifkin.
He's a very successful serial entrepreneur who spends a huge amount of his time helping other people.
And his secret weapon is the five-minute favor.
Adam said, "You don't have to be Mother Teresa or Gandhi to be a giver.
You just have to find small ways to add large value to other people's lives."
That could be as simple as making an introduction between two people who could benefit from knowing each other.
It could be sharing your knowledge or giving a little bit of feedback.
Or It might be even something as basic as saying, "You know, I'm going to try and figure out if I can recognize somebody whose work has gone unnoticed."
And those five-minute favors are really critical to helping givers set boundaries and protect themselves.
The second thing that matters if you want to build a culture where givers succeed, is you actually need a culture where help-seeking is the norm; where people ask a lot.
This may hit a little too close to home for some of you.
[So in all your relationships, you always have to be the giver?] (Laughter) What you see with successful givers is they recognize that it's OK to be a receiver, too.
If you run an organization, we can actually make this easier.
We can make it easier for people to ask for help.
A couple colleagues and I studied hospitals.
We found that on certain floors, nurses did a lot of help-seeking, and on other floors, they did very little of it.
The factor that stood out on the floors where help-seeking was common, where it was the norm, was there was just one nurse whose sole job it was to help other nurses on the unit.
When that role was available, nurses said, "It's not embarrassing, it's not vulnerable to ask for help -- it's actually encouraged."
Help-seeking isn't important just for protecting the success and the well-being of givers.
It's also critical to getting more people to act like givers, because the data say that somewhere between 75 and 90 percent of all giving in organizations starts with a request.
But a lot of people don't ask.
They don't want to look incompetent, they don't know where to turn, they don't want to burden others.
Yet if nobody ever asks for help, you have a lot of frustrated givers in your organization who would love to step up and contribute, if they only knew who could benefit and how.
But I think the most important thing, if you want to build a culture of successful givers, is to be thoughtful about who you let onto your team.
I figured, you want a culture of productive generosity, you should hire a bunch of givers.
But I was surprised to discover, actually, that that was not right -- that the negative impact of a taker on a culture is usually double to triple the positive impact of a giver.
Think about it this way: one bad apple can spoil a barrel, but one good egg just does not make a dozen.
I don't know what that means -- (Laughter) But I hope you do.
No -- let even one taker into a team, and you will see that the givers will stop helping.
They'll say, "I'm surrounded by a bunch of snakes and sharks.
Why should I contribute?"
Whereas if you let one giver into a team, you don't get an explosion of generosity.
More often, people are like, "Great! That person can do all our work."
So, effective hiring and screening and team building is not about bringing in the givers; it's about weeding out the takers.
If you can do that well, you'll be left with givers and matchers.
The givers will be generous because they don't have to worry about the consequences.
And the beauty of the matchers is that they follow the norm.
So how do you catch a taker before it's too late?
We're actually pretty bad at figuring out who's a taker, especially on first impressions.
There's a personality trait that throws us off.
It's called agreeableness, one the major dimensions of personality across cultures.
Agreeable people are warm and friendly, they're nice, they're polite.
You find a lot of them in Canada -- (Laughter) Where there was actually a national contest to come up with a new Canadian slogan and fill in the blank, "As Canadian as ..."
I thought the winning entry was going to be, "As Canadian as maple syrup," or, "... ice hockey."
But no, Canadians voted for their new national slogan to be -- I kid you not -- "As Canadian as possible under the circumstances."
(Laughter) Now for those of you who are highly agreeable, or maybe slightly Canadian, you get this right away.
How could I ever say I'm any one thing when I'm constantly adapting to try to please other people?
Disagreeable people do less of it.
They're more critical, skeptical, challenging, and far more likely than their peers to go to law school.
(Laughter) That's not a joke, that's actually an empirical fact.
(Laughter) So I always assumed that agreeable people were givers and disagreeable people were takers.
But then I gathered the data, and I was stunned to find no correlation between those traits, because it turns out that agreeableness-disagreeableness is your outer veneer: How pleasant is it to interact with you?
Whereas giving and taking are more of your inner motives: What are your values? What are your intentions toward others?
If you really want to judge people accurately, you have to get to the moment every consultant in the room is waiting for, and draw a two-by-two.
(Laughter) The agreeable givers are easy to spot: they say yes to everything.
The disagreeable takers are also recognized quickly, although you might call them by a slightly different name.
(Laughter) We forget about the other two combinations.
There are disagreeable givers in our organizations.
There are people who are gruff and tough on the surface but underneath have others' best interests at heart.
Or as an engineer put it, "Oh, disagreeable givers -- like somebody with a bad user interface but a great operating system."
(Laughter) If that helps you.
(Laughter) Disagreeable givers are the most undervalued people in our organizations, because they're the ones who give the critical feedback that no one wants to hear but everyone needs to hear.
We need to do a much better job valuing these people as opposed to writing them off early, and saying, "Eh, kind of prickly, must be a selfish taker."
The other combination we forget about is the deadly one -- the agreeable taker, also known as the faker.
This is the person who's nice to your face, and then will stab you right in the back.
(Laughter) And my favorite way to catch these people in the interview process is to ask the question, "Can you give me the names of four people whose careers you have fundamentally improved?"
The takers will give you four names, and they will all be more influential than them, because takers are great at kissing up and then kicking down.
Givers are more likely to name people who are below them in a hierarchy, who don't have as much power, who can do them no good.
And let's face it, you all know you can learn a lot about character by watching how someone treats their restaurant server or their Uber driver.
So if we do all this well, if we can weed takers out of organizations, if we can make it safe to ask for help, if we can protect givers from burnout and make it OK for them to be ambitious in pursuing their own goals as well as trying to help other people, we can actually change the way that people define success.
Instead of saying it's all about winning a competition, people will realize success is really more about contribution.
I believe that the most meaningful way to succeed is to help other people succeed.
And if we can spread that belief, we can actually turn paranoia upside down.
There's a name for that.
It's called "pronoia."
Pronoia is the delusional belief that other people are plotting your well-being.
(Laughter) That they're going around behind your back and saying exceptionally glowing things about you.
The great thing about a culture of givers is that's not a delusion -- it's reality.
I want to live in a world where givers succeed, and I hope you will help me create that world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Growing up in Kenya, I knew I always wanted to study biochemistry.
See, I had seen the impact of the high prevalence of diseases like malaria, and I wanted to make medicines that would cure the sick.
So I worked really hard, got a scholarship to the United States, where I became a cancer researcher, and I loved it.
For someone who wants to cure diseases, there is no higher calling.
Ten years later, I returned to Kenya to do just that.
A freshly minted PhD, ready to take on this horrific illness, which in Kenya was almost certainly a death sentence.
But instead of landing a job in a pharmaceutical company or a hospital, I found myself drawn to a different kind of lab, working with a different kind of patient -- a patient whose illness was so serious it impacted every single person in my country; a patient who needed to get healthy fast.
That patient was my government.
(Laughter) See, many of us will agree that lots of governments are unhealthy today.
(Laughter) (Applause) And Kenya was no exception.
When I returned to Kenya in 2014, there was 17 percent youth unemployment.
And Nairobi, the major business hub, was rated 177th on the quality of living index.
It was bad.
Now, an economy is only as healthy as the entities that make it up.
So when government -- one of its most vital entities -- is weak or unhealthy, everyone and everything suffers.
Sometimes you might put a Band-Aid in place to try and temporarily stop the pain.
Maybe some of you here have participated in a Band-Aid operation to an African country -- setting up alternative schools, building hospitals, digging wells -- because governments there either weren't or couldn't provide the services to their citizens.
We all know this is a temporary solution.
There are just some things Band-Aids can't fix, like providing an environment where businesses feel secure that they'll have an equal opportunity to be able to run and start their businesses successfully.
Or there are systems in place that would protect the private property that they create.
I would argue, only government is capable of creating these necessary conditions for economies to thrive.
Economies thrive when business are able to quickly and easily set up shop.
Business owners create new sources of income for themselves, new jobs get added into the economy and then more taxes are paid to fund public projects.
New business is good for everyone.
And it's such an important measure of economic growth, the World Bank has a ranking called the "Ease of Doing Business Ranking," which measures how easy or difficult it is to start a business in any given country.
And as you can imagine, starting or running a business in a country with an ailing government -- almost impossible.
The President of Kenya knew this, which is why in 2014, he came to our lab and asked us to partner with him to be able to help Kenya to jump-start business growth.
He set an ambitious goal: he wanted Kenya to be ranked top 50 in this World Bank ranking.
In 2014 when he came, Kenya was ranked 136 out of 189 countries.
We had our work cut out for us.
Fortunately, he came to the right place.
We're not just a Band-Aid kind of team.
We're a group of computer scientists, mathematicians, engineers and a cancer researcher, who understood that in order to cure the sickness of a system as big as government, we needed to examine the whole body, and then we needed to drill down all the way from the organs, into the tissues, all the way to single cells, so that we could properly make a diagnosis.
So with our marching orders from the President himself, we embarked on the purest of the scientific method: collecting data -- all the data we could get our hands on -- making hypotheses, creating solutions, one after the other.
So we met with hundreds of individuals who worked at government agencies, from the tax agency, the lands office, utilities company, the agency that's responsible for registering companies, and with each of them, we observed them as they served customers, we documented their processes -- most of them were manual.
We also just went back and looked at a lot of their previous paperwork to try and really understand; to try and diagnose what bodily malfunctions had occurred that lead to that 136th spot on the World Bank list.
What did we find?
Well, in Kenya it was taking 72 days for a business owner to register their property, compared to just one day in New Zealand, which was ranked second on the World Bank list.
It took 158 days to get a new electric connection.
In Korea it took 18 days.
If you wanted to get a construction permit so you could put up a building, in Kenya, it was going to take you 125 days.
In Singapore, which is ranked first, that would only take you 26 days.
God forbid you had to go to court to get help in being able to settle a dispute to enforce a contract, because that process alone would take you 465 days.
And if that wasn't bad enough, you would lose 40 percent of your claim in just fees -- legal fees, enforcement fees, court fees.
Now, I know what you're thinking: for there to exist such inefficiencies in an African country, there must be corruption.
The very cells that run the show must be corrupt to the bone.
I thought so, too, actually.
When we started out, I thought I was going to find so much corruption, I was literally going to either die or get killed in the process.
(Laughter) But when we dug deeper, we didn't find corruption in the classic sense: slimy gangsters lurking in the darkness, waiting to grease the palms of their friends.
What we found was an overwhelming sense of helplessness.
Our government was sick, because government employees felt helpless.
They felt that they were not empowered to drive change.
And when people feel stuck and helpless, they stop seeing their role in a bigger system.
They start to think the work they do doesn't matter in driving change.
And when that happens, things slow down, fall through the cracks and inefficiencies flourish.
Now imagine with me, if you had a process you had to go through -- had no other alternative -- and this process was inefficient, complex and very, very slow.
What would you do?
I think you might start by trying to find somebody to outsource it to, so that they can just take care of that for you.
If that doesn't work, maybe you'd consider paying somebody to just "unofficially" take care of it on your behalf -- especially if you thought nobody was going to catch you.
Not out of malice or greed, just trying to make sure that you get something to work for you so you can move on.
Unfortunately, that is the beginning of corruption.
And if left to thrive and grow, it seeps into the whole system, and before you know it, the whole body is sick.
Knowing this, we had to start by making sure that every single stakeholder we worked with had a shared vision for what we wanted to do.
So we met with everyone, from the clerk whose sole job is to remove staples from application packets, to the legal drafters at the attorney general's office, to the clerks who are responsible for serving business owners when they came to access government services.
And with them, we made sure that they understood how their day-to-day actions were impacting our ability as a country to create new jobs and to attract investments.
No one's role was too small; everyone's role was vital.
Now, guess what we started to see?
A coalition of government employees who are excited and ready to drive change, began to grow and form.
And together we started to implement changes that impacted the service delivery of our country.
The result?
In just two years, Kenya's ranking moved from 136 to 92.
(Applause) And in recognition of the significant reforms we've been able to implement in such a short time, Kenya was recognized to be among the top three global reformers in the world two years in a row.
(Applause) Are we fully healthy?
No.
We have some serious work still to do.
I like to think about these two years like a weight-loss program.
(Laughter) It's that time after months of hard, grueling work at the gym, and then you get your first time to weigh yourself, and you've lost 20 pounds.
You're feeling unstoppable.
Now, some of you may think this doesn't apply to you.
You're not from Kenya.
You don't intend to be an entrepreneur.
But think with me for just a moment.
When is the last time you accessed a government service?
Maybe applied for your driver's license, tried to do your taxes on your own.
It's easy in this political and global economy to want to give up when we think about transforming government.
We can easily resign to the fact or to the thinking that government is too inefficient, too corrupt, unfixable.
We might even rarely get some key government responsibilities to other sectors, to Band-Aid solutions, or to just give up and feel helpless.
But just because a system is sick doesn't mean it's dying.
We cannot afford to give up when it comes to the challenges of fixing our governments.
In the end, what really makes a government healthy is when healthy cells -- that's you and I -- get to the ground, roll up our sleeves, refuse to be helpless and believe that sometimes, all it takes is for us to create some space for healthy cells to grow and thrive.
Thank you.
(Applause)
There is something about physics that has been really bothering me since I was a little kid.
And it's related to a question that scientists have been asking for almost 100 years, with no answer.
How do the smallest things in nature, the particles of the quantum world, match up with the largest things in nature -- planets and stars and galaxies held together by gravity?
As a kid, I would puzzle over questions just like this.
I would fiddle around with microscopes and electromagnets, and I would read about the forces of the small and about quantum mechanics and I would marvel at how well that description matched up to our observation.
Then I would look at the stars, and I would read about how well we understand gravity, and I would think surely, there must be some elegant way that these two systems match up.
But there's not.
And the books would say, yeah, we understand a lot about these two realms separately, but when we try to link them mathematically, everything breaks.
And for 100 years, none of our ideas as to how to solve this basically physics disaster, has ever been supported by evidence.
And to little old me -- little, curious, skeptical James -- this was a supremely unsatisfying answer.
So, I'm still a skeptical little kid.
Flash-forward now to December of 2015, when I found myself smack in the middle of the physics world being flipped on its head.
It all started when we at CERN saw something intriguing in our data: a hint of a new particle, an inkling of a possibly extraordinary answer to this question.
So I'm still a skeptical little kid, I think, but I'm also now a particle hunter.
I am a physicist at CERN's Large Hadron Collider, the largest science experiment ever mounted.
It's a 27-kilometer tunnel on the border of France and Switzerland buried 100 meters underground.
And in this tunnel, we use superconducting magnets colder than outer space to accelerate protons to almost the speed of light and slam them into each other millions of times per second, collecting the debris of these collisions to search for new, undiscovered fundamental particles.
Its design and construction took decades of work by thousands of physicists from around the globe, and in the summer of 2015, we had been working tirelessly to switch on the LHC at the highest energy that humans have ever used in a collider experiment.
Now, higher energy is important because for particles, there is an equivalence between energy and particle mass, and mass is just a number put there by nature.
To discover new particles, we need to reach these bigger numbers.
And to do that, we have to build a bigger, higher energy collider, and the biggest, highest energy collider in the world is the Large Hadron Collider.
And then, we collide protons quadrillions of times, and we collect this data very slowly, over months and months.
And then new particles might show up in our data as bumps -- slight deviations from what you expect, little clusters of data points that make a smooth line not so smooth.
For example, this bump, after months of data-taking in 2012, led to the discovery of the Higgs particle -- the Higgs boson -- and to a Nobel Prize for the confirmation of its existence.
This jump up in energy in 2015 represented the best chance that we as a species had ever had of discovering new particles -- new answers to these long-standing questions, because it was almost twice as much energy as we used when we discovered the Higgs boson.
Many of my colleagues had been working their entire careers for this moment, and frankly, to little curious me, this was the moment I'd been waiting for my entire life.
So 2015 was go time.
So June 2015, the LHC is switched back on.
My colleagues and I held our breath and bit our fingernails, and then finally we saw the first proton collisions at this highest energy ever.
Applause, champagne, celebration.
This was a milestone for science, and we had no idea what we would find in this brand-new data.
And then a few weeks later, we found a bump.
It wasn't a very big bump, but it was big enough to make you raise your eyebrow.
But on a scale of one to 10 for eyebrow raises, if 10 indicates that you've discovered a new particle, this eyebrow raise is about a four.
(Laughter) I spent hours, days, weeks in secret meetings, arguing with my colleagues over this little bump, poking and prodding it with our most ruthless experimental sticks to see if it would withstand scrutiny.
But even after months of working feverishly -- sleeping in our offices and not going home, candy bars for dinner, coffee by the bucketful -- physicists are machines for turning coffee into diagrams -- (Laughter) This little bump would not go away.
So after a few months, we presented our little bump to the world with a very clear message: this little bump is interesting but it's not definitive, so let's keep an eye on it as we take more data.
So we were trying to be extremely cool about it.
And the world ran with it anyway.
The news loved it.
People said it reminded them of the little bump that was shown on the way toward the Higgs boson discovery.
Better than that, my theorist colleagues -- I love my theorist colleagues -- my theorist colleagues wrote 500 papers about this little bump.
(Laughter) The world of particle physics had been flipped on its head.
But what was it about this particular bump that caused thousands of physicists to collectively lose their cool?
This little bump was unique.
This little bump indicated that we were seeing an unexpectedly large number of collisions whose debris consisted of only two photons, two particles of light.
And that's rare.
Particle collisions are not like automobile collisions.
They have different rules.
When two particles collide at almost the speed of light, the quantum world takes over.
And in the quantum world, these two particles can briefly create a new particle that lives for a tiny fraction of a second before splitting into other particles that hit our detector.
Imagine a car collision where the two cars vanish upon impact, a bicycle appears in their place -- (Laughter) And then that bicycle explodes into two skateboards, which hit our detector.
(Laughter) Hopefully, not literally.
They're very expensive.
Events where only two photons hit out detector are very rare.
And because of the special quantum properties of photons, there's a very small number of possible new particles -- these mythical bicycles -- that can give birth to only two photons.
But one of these options is huge, and it has to do with that long-standing question that bothered me as a tiny little kid, about gravity.
Gravity may seem super strong to you, but it's actually crazily weak compared to the other forces of nature.
I can briefly beat gravity when I jump, but I can't pick a proton out of my hand.
The strength of gravity compared to the other forces of nature?
It's 10 to the minus 39.
That's a decimal with 39 zeros after it.
Worse than that, all of the other known forces of nature are perfectly described by this thing we call the Standard Model, which is our current best description of nature at its smallest scales, and quite frankly, one of the most successful achievements of humankind -- except for gravity, which is absent from the Standard Model.
It's crazy.
It's almost as though most of gravity has gone missing.
We feel a little bit of it, but where's the rest of it?
No one knows.
But one theoretical explanation proposes a wild solution.
You and I -- even you in the back -- we live in three dimensions of space.
I hope that's a non-controversial statement.
(Laughter) All of the known particles also live in three dimensions of space.
In fact, a particle is just another name for an excitation in a three-dimensional field; a localized wobbling in space.
More importantly, all the math that we use to describe all this stuff assumes that there are only three dimensions of space.
But math is math, and we can play around with our math however we want.
And people have been playing around with extra dimensions of space for a very long time, but it's always been an abstract mathematical concept.
I mean, just look around you -- you at the back, look around -- there's clearly only three dimensions of space.
But what if that's not true?
What if the missing gravity is leaking into an extra-spatial dimension that's invisible to you and I?
What if gravity is just as strong as the other forces if you were to view it in this extra-spatial dimension, and what you and I experience is a tiny slice of gravity make it seem very weak?
If this were true, we would have to expand our Standard Model of particles to include an extra particle, a hyperdimensional particle of gravity, a special graviton that lives in extra-spatial dimensions.
I see the looks on your faces.
You should be asking me the question, "How in the world are we going to test this crazy, science fiction idea, stuck as we are in three dimensions?"
The way we always do, by slamming together two protons -- (Laughter) Hard enough that the collision reverberates into any extra-spatial dimensions that might be there, momentarily creating this hyperdimensional graviton that then snaps back into the three dimensions of the LHC and spits off two photons, two particles of light.
And this hypothetical, extra-dimensional graviton is one of the only possible, hypothetical new particles that has the special quantum properties that could give birth to our little, two-photon bump.
So, the possibility of explaining the mysteries of gravity and of discovering extra dimensions of space -- perhaps now you get a sense as to why thousands of physics geeks collectively lost their cool over our little, two-photon bump.
A discovery of this type would rewrite the textbooks.
But remember, the message from us experimentalists that actually were doing this work at the time, was very clear: we need more data.
With more data, the little bump will either turn into a nice, crisp Nobel Prize -- (Laughter) Or the extra data will fill in the space around the bump and turn it into a nice, smooth line.
So we took more data, and with five times the data, several months later, our little bump turned into a smooth line.
The news reported on a "huge disappointment," on "faded hopes," and on particle physicists "being sad."
Given the tone of the coverage, you'd think that we had decided to shut down the LHC and go home.
(Laughter) But that's not what we did.
But why not?
I mean, if I didn't discover a particle -- and I didn't -- if I didn't discover a particle, why am I here talking to you?
Why didn't I just hang my head in shame and go home?
Particle physicists are explorers.
And very much of what we do is cartography.
Let me put it this way: forget about the LHC for a second.
Imagine you are a space explorer arriving at a distant planet, searching for aliens.
What is your first task?
To immediately orbit the planet, land, take a quick look around for any big, obvious signs of life, and report back to home base.
That's the stage we're at now.
We took a first look at the LHC for any new, big, obvious-to-spot particles, and we can report that there are none.
We saw a weird-looking alien bump on a distant mountain, but once we got closer, we saw it was a rock.
But then what do we do? Do we just give up and fly away?
Absolutely not; we would be terrible scientists if we did.
No, we spend the next couple of decades exploring, mapping out the territory, sifting through the sand with a fine instrument, peeking under every stone, drilling under the surface.
New particles can either show up immediately as big, obvious-to-spot bumps, or they can only reveal themselves after years of data taking.
Humanity has just begun its exploration at the LHC at this big high energy, and we have much searching to do.
But what if, even after 10 or 20 years, we still find no new particles?
We build a bigger machine.
(Laughter) We search at higher energies.
We search at higher energies.
Planning is already underway for a 100-kilometer tunnel that will collide particles at 10 times the energy of the LHC.
We don't decide where nature places new particles.
We only decide to keep exploring.
But what if, even after a 100-kilometer tunnel or a 500-kilometer tunnel or a 10,000-kilometer collider floating in space between the Earth and the Moon, we still find no new particles?
Then perhaps we're doing particle physics wrong.
(Laughter) Perhaps we need to rethink things.
Maybe we need more resources, technology, expertise than what we currently have.
We already use artificial intelligence and machine learning techniques in parts of the LHC, but imagine designing a particle physics experiment using such sophisticated algorithms that it could teach itself to discover a hyperdimensional graviton.
But what if?
What if the ultimate question: What if even artificial intelligence can't help us answer our questions?
What if these open questions, for centuries, are destined to be unanswered for the foreseeable future?
What if the stuff that's bothered me since I was a little kid is destined to be unanswered in my lifetime?
Then that ...
will be even more fascinating.
We will be forced to think in completely new ways.
We'll have to go back to our assumptions, and determine if there was a flaw somewhere.
And we'll need to encourage more people to join us in studying science since we need fresh eyes on these century-old problems.
I don't have the answers, and I'm still searching for them.
But someone -- maybe she's in school right now, maybe she's not even born yet -- could eventually guide us to see physics in a completely new way, and to point out that perhaps we're just asking the wrong questions.
Which would not be the end of physics, but a novel beginning.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Here's a startling fact: in the 45 years since the introduction of the automated teller machine, those vending machines that dispense cash, the number of human bank tellers employed in the United States has roughly doubled, from about a quarter of a million to a half a million.
A quarter of a million in 1970 to about a half a million today, with 100,000 added since the year 2000.
These facts, revealed in a recent book by Boston University economist James Bessen, raise an intriguing question: what are all those tellers doing, and why hasn't automation eliminated their employment by now?
If you think about it, many of the great inventions of the last 200 years were designed to replace human labor.
Tractors were developed to substitute mechanical power for human physical toil.
Assembly lines were engineered to replace inconsistent human handiwork with machine perfection.
Computers were programmed to swap out error-prone, inconsistent human calculation with digital perfection.
These inventions have worked.
We no longer dig ditches by hand, pound tools out of wrought iron or do bookkeeping using actual books.
And yet, the fraction of US adults employed in the labor market is higher now in 2016 than it was 125 years ago, in 1890, and it's risen in just about every decade in the intervening 125 years.
This poses a paradox.
Our machines increasingly do our work for us.
Why doesn't this make our labor redundant and our skills obsolete?
Why are there still so many jobs?
(Laughter) I'm going to try to answer that question tonight, and along the way, I'm going to tell you what this means for the future of work and the challenges that automation does and does not pose for our society.
Why are there so many jobs?
There are actually two fundamental economic principles at stake.
One has to do with human genius and creativity.
The other has to do with human insatiability, or greed, if you like.
I'm going to call the first of these the O-ring principle, and it determines the type of work that we do.
The second principle is the never-get-enough principle, and it determines how many jobs there actually are.
Let's start with the O-ring.
ATMs, automated teller machines, had two countervailing effects on bank teller employment.
As you would expect, they replaced a lot of teller tasks.
The number of tellers per branch fell by about a third.
But banks quickly discovered that it also was cheaper to open new branches, and the number of bank branches increased by about 40 percent in the same time period.
The net result was more branches and more tellers.
But those tellers were doing somewhat different work.
As their routine, cash-handling tasks receded, they became less like checkout clerks and more like salespeople, forging relationships with customers, solving problems and introducing them to new products like credit cards, loans and investments: more tellers doing a more cognitively demanding job.
There's a general principle here.
Most of the work that we do requires a multiplicity of skills, and brains and brawn, technical expertise and intuitive mastery, perspiration and inspiration in the words of Thomas Edison.
In general, automating some subset of those tasks doesn't make the other ones unnecessary.
In fact, it makes them more important.
It increases their economic value.
Let me give you a stark example.
In 1986, the space shuttle Challenger exploded and crashed back down to Earth less than two minutes after takeoff.
The cause of that crash, it turned out, was an inexpensive rubber O-ring in the booster rocket that had frozen on the launchpad the night before and failed catastrophically moments after takeoff.
In this multibillion dollar enterprise that simple rubber O-ring made the difference between mission success and the calamitous death of seven astronauts.
An ingenious metaphor for this tragic setting is the O-ring production function, named by Harvard economist Michael Kremer after the Challenger disaster.
The O-ring production function conceives of the work as a series of interlocking steps, links in a chain.
Every one of those links must hold for the mission to succeed.
If any of them fails, the mission, or the product or the service, comes crashing down.
This precarious situation has a surprisingly positive implication, which is that improvements in the reliability of any one link in the chain increases the value of improving any of the other links.
Concretely, if most of the links are brittle and prone to breakage, the fact that your link is not that reliable is not that important.
Probably something else will break anyway.
But as all the other links become robust and reliable, the importance of your link becomes more essential.
In the limit, everything depends upon it.
The reason the O-ring was critical to space shuttle Challenger is because everything else worked perfectly.
If the Challenger were kind of the space era equivalent of Microsoft Windows 2000 -- (Laughter) the reliability of the O-ring wouldn't have mattered because the machine would have crashed.
(Laughter) Here's the broader point.
In much of the work that we do, we are the O-rings.
Yes, ATMs could do certain cash-handling tasks faster and better than tellers, but that didn't make tellers superfluous.
It increased the importance of their problem-solving skills and their relationships with customers.
The same principle applies if we're building a building, if we're diagnosing and caring for a patient, or if we are teaching a class to a roomful of high schoolers.
As our tools improve, technology magnifies our leverage and increases the importance of our expertise and our judgment and our creativity.
And that brings me to the second principle: never get enough.
You may be thinking, OK, O-ring, got it, that says the jobs that people do will be important.
They can't be done by machines, but they still need to be done.
But that doesn't tell me how many jobs there will need to be.
If you think about it, isn't it kind of self-evident that once we get sufficiently productive at something, we've basically worked our way out of a job?
In 1900, 40 percent of all US employment was on farms.
Today, it's less than two percent.
Why are there so few farmers today?
It's not because we're eating less.
(Laughter) A century of productivity growth in farming means that now, a couple of million farmers can feed a nation of 320 million.
That's amazing progress, but it also means there are only so many O-ring jobs left in farming.
So clearly, technology can eliminate jobs.
Farming is only one example.
There are many others like it.
But what's true about a single product or service or industry has never been true about the economy as a whole.
Many of the industries in which we now work -- health and medicine, finance and insurance, electronics and computing -- were tiny or barely existent a century ago.
Many of the products that we spend a lot of our money on -- air conditioners, sport utility vehicles, computers and mobile devices -- were unattainably expensive, or just hadn't been invented a century ago.
As automation frees our time, increases the scope of what is possible, we invent new products, new ideas, new services that command our attention, occupy our time and spur consumption.
You may think some of these things are frivolous -- extreme yoga, adventure tourism, Pokmon GO -- and I might agree with you.
But people desire these things, and they're willing to work hard for them.
The average worker in 2015 wanting to attain the average living standard in 1915 could do so by working just 17 weeks a year, one third of the time.
But most people don't choose to do that.
They are willing to work hard to harvest the technological bounty that is available to them.
Material abundance has never eliminated perceived scarcity.
In the words of economist Thorstein Veblen, invention is the mother of necessity.
Now ...
So if you accept these two principles, the O-ring principle and the never-get-enough principle, then you agree with me.
There will be jobs.
Does that mean there's nothing to worry about?
Automation, employment, robots and jobs -- it'll all take care of itself?
No.
That is not my argument.
Automation creates wealth by allowing us to do more work in less time.
There is no economic law that says that we will use that wealth well, and that is worth worrying about.
Consider two countries, Norway and Saudi Arabia.
Both oil-rich nations, it's like they have money spurting out of a hole in the ground.
(Laughter) But they haven't used that wealth equally well to foster human prosperity, human prospering.
Norway is a thriving democracy.
By and large, its citizens work and play well together.
It's typically numbered between first and fourth in rankings of national happiness.
Saudi Arabia is an absolute monarchy in which many citizens lack a path for personal advancement.
It's typically ranked 35th among nations in happiness, which is low for such a wealthy nation.
Just by way of comparison, the US is typically ranked around 12th or 13th.
The difference between these two countries is not their wealth and it's not their technology.
It's their institutions.
Norway has invested to build a society with opportunity and economic mobility.
Saudi Arabia has raised living standards while frustrating many other human strivings.
Two countries, both wealthy, not equally well off.
And this brings me to the challenge that we face today, the challenge that automation poses for us.
The challenge is not that we're running out of work.
The US has added 14 million jobs since the depths of the Great Recession.
The challenge is that many of those jobs are not good jobs, and many citizens cannot qualify for the good jobs that are being created.
Employment growth in the United States and in much of the developed world looks something like a barbell with increasing poundage on either end of the bar.
On the one hand, you have high-education, high-wage jobs like doctors and nurses, programmers and engineers, marketing and sales managers.
Employment is robust in these jobs, employment growth.
Similarly, employment growth is robust in many low-skill, low-education jobs like food service, cleaning, security, home health aids.
Simultaneously, employment is shrinking in many middle-education, middle-wage, middle-class jobs, like blue-collar production and operative positions and white-collar clerical and sales positions.
The reasons behind this contracting middle are not mysterious.
Many of those middle-skill jobs use well-understood rules and procedures that can increasingly be codified in software and executed by computers.
The challenge that this phenomenon creates, what economists call employment polarization, is that it knocks out rungs in the economic ladder, shrinks the size of the middle class and threatens to make us a more stratified society.
On the one hand, a set of highly paid, highly educated professionals doing interesting work, on the other, a large number of citizens in low-paid jobs whose primary responsibility is to see to the comfort and health of the affluent.
That is not my vision of progress, and I doubt that it is yours.
But here is some encouraging news.
We have faced equally momentous economic transformations in the past, and we have come through them successfully.
In the late 1800s and early 1900s, when automation was eliminating vast numbers of agricultural jobs -- remember that tractor? -- the farm states faced a threat of mass unemployment, a generation of youth no longer needed on the farm but not prepared for industry.
Rising to this challenge, they took the radical step of requiring that their entire youth population remain in school and continue their education to the ripe old age of 16.
This was called the high school movement, and it was a radically expensive thing to do.
Not only did they have to invest in the schools, but those kids couldn't work at their jobs.
It also turned out to be one of the best investments the US made in the 20th century.
It gave us the most skilled, the most flexible and the most productive workforce in the world.
To see how well this worked, imagine taking the labor force of 1899 and bringing them into the present.
Despite their strong backs and good characters, many of them would lack the basic literacy and numeracy skills to do all but the most mundane jobs.
Many of them would be unemployable.
What this example highlights is the primacy of our institutions, most especially our schools, in allowing us to reap the harvest of our technological prosperity.
It's foolish to say there's nothing to worry about.
Clearly we can get this wrong.
If the US had not invested in its schools and in its skills a century ago with the high school movement, we would be a less prosperous, a less mobile and probably a lot less happy society.
But it's equally foolish to say that our fates are sealed.
That's not decided by the machines.
It's not even decided by the market.
It's decided by us and by our institutions.
Now, I started this talk with a paradox.
Our machines increasingly do our work for us.
Why doesn't that make our labor superfluous, our skills redundant?
Isn't it obvious that the road to our economic and social hell is paved with our own great inventions?
History has repeatedly offered an answer to that paradox.
The first part of the answer is that technology magnifies our leverage, increases the importance, the added value of our expertise, our judgment and our creativity.
That's the O-ring.
The second part of the answer is our endless inventiveness and bottomless desires means that we never get enough, never get enough.
There's always new work to do.
Adjusting to the rapid pace of technological change creates real challenges, seen most clearly in our polarized labor market and the threat that it poses to economic mobility.
Rising to this challenge is not automatic.
It's not costless.
It's not easy.
But it is feasible.
And here is some encouraging news.
Because of our amazing productivity, we're rich.
Of course we can afford to invest in ourselves and in our children as America did a hundred years ago with the high school movement.
Arguably, we can't afford not to.
Now, you may be thinking, Professor Autor has told us a heartwarming tale about the distant past, the recent past, maybe the present, but probably not the future.
Because everybody knows that this time is different.
Right? Is this time different?
Of course this time is different.
Every time is different.
On numerous occasions in the last 200 years, scholars and activists have raised the alarm that we are running out of work and making ourselves obsolete: for example, the Luddites in the early 1800s; US Secretary of Labor James Davis in the mid-1920s; Nobel Prize-winning economist Wassily Leontief in 1982; and of course, many scholars, pundits, technologists and media figures today.
These predictions strike me as arrogant.
These self-proclaimed oracles are in effect saying, "If I can't think of what people will do for work in the future, then you, me and our kids aren't going to think of it either."
I don't have the guts to take that bet against human ingenuity.
Look, I can't tell you what people are going to do for work a hundred years from now.
But the future doesn't hinge on my imagination.
If I were a farmer in Iowa in the year 1900, and an economist from the 21st century teleported down to my field and said, "Hey, guess what, farmer Autor, in the next hundred years, agricultural employment is going to fall from 40 percent of all jobs to two percent purely due to rising productivity.
What do you think the other 38 percent of workers are going to do?"
I would not have said, "Oh, we got this.
We'll do app development, radiological medicine, yoga instruction, Bitmoji."
(Laughter) I wouldn't have had a clue.
But I hope I would have had the wisdom to say, "Wow, a 95 percent reduction in farm employment with no shortage of food.
That's an amazing amount of progress.
I hope that humanity finds something remarkable to do with all of that prosperity."
And by and large, I would say that it has.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So when you look out at the stars at night, it's amazing what you can see.
It's beautiful.
But what's more amazing is what you can't see, because what we know now is that around every star or almost every star, there's a planet, or probably a few.
So what this picture isn't showing you are all the planets that we know about out there in space.
But when we think about planets, we tend to think of faraway things that are very different from our own.
But here we are on a planet, and there are so many things that are amazing about Earth that we're searching far and wide to find things that are like that.
And when we're searching, we're finding amazing things.
But I want to tell you about an amazing thing here on Earth.
And that is that every minute, 400 pounds of hydrogen and almost seven pounds of helium escape from Earth into space.
And this is gas that is going off and never coming back.
So hydrogen, helium and many other things make up what's known as the Earth's atmosphere.
The atmosphere is just these gases that form a thin blue line that's seen here from the International Space Station, a photograph that some astronauts took.
And this tenuous veneer around our planet is what allows life to flourish.
It protects our planet from too many impacts, from meteorites and the like.
And it's such an amazing phenomenon that the fact that it's disappearing should frighten you, at least a little bit.
So this process is something that I study and it's called atmospheric escape.
So atmospheric escape is not specific to planet Earth.
It's part of what it means to be a planet, if you ask me, because planets, not just here on Earth but throughout the universe, can undergo atmospheric escape.
And the way it happens actually tells us about planets themselves.
Because when you think about the solar system, you might think about this picture here.
And you would say, well, there are eight planets, maybe nine.
So for those of you who are stressed by this picture, I will add somebody for you.
(Laughter) Courtesy of New Horizons, we're including Pluto.
And the thing here is, for the purposes of this talk and atmospheric escape, Pluto is a planet in my mind, in the same way that planets around other stars that we can't see are also planets.
So fundamental characteristics of planets include the fact that they are bodies that are bound together by gravity.
So it's a lot of material just stuck together with this attractive force.
And these bodies are so big and have so much gravity.
That's why they're round.
So when you look at all of these, including Pluto, they're round.
So you can see that gravity is really at play here.
But another fundamental characteristic about planets is what you don't see here, and that's the star, the Sun, that all of the planets in the solar system are orbiting around.
And that's fundamentally driving atmospheric escape.
The reason that fundamentally stars drive atmospheric escape from planets is because stars offer planets particles and light and heat that can cause the atmospheres to go away.
So if you think of a hot-air balloon, or you look at this picture of lanterns in Thailand at a festival, you can see that hot air can propel gasses upward.
And if you have enough energy and heating, which our Sun does, that gas, which is so light and only bound by gravity, it can escape into space.
And so this is what's actually causing atmospheric escape here on Earth and also on other planets -- that interplay between heating from the star and overcoming the force of gravity on the planet.
So I've told you that it happens at the rate of 400 pounds a minute for hydrogen and almost seven pounds for helium.
But what does that look like?
Well, even in the '80s, we took pictures of the Earth in the ultraviolet using NASA's Dynamic Explorer spacecraft.
So these two images of the Earth show you what that glow of escaping hydrogen looks like, shown in red.
And you can also see other features like oxygen and nitrogen in that white glimmer in the circle showing you the auroras and also some wisps around the tropics.
So these are pictures that conclusively show us that our atmosphere isn't just tightly bound to us here on Earth but it's actually reaching out far into space, and at an alarming rate, I might add.
But the Earth is not alone in undergoing atmospheric escape.
Mars, our nearest neighbor, is much smaller than Earth, so it has much less gravity with which to hold on to its atmosphere.
And so even though Mars has an atmosphere, we can see it's much thinner than the Earth's.
Just look at the surface.
You see craters indicating that it didn't have an atmosphere that could stop those impacts.
Also, we see that it's the "red planet," and atmospheric escape plays a role in Mars being red.
That's because we think Mars used to have a wetter past, and when water had enough energy, it broke up into hydrogen and oxygen, and hydrogen being so light, it escaped into space, and the oxygen that was left oxidized or rusted the ground, making that familiar rusty red color that we see.
So it's fine to look at pictures of Mars and say that atmospheric escape probably happened, but NASA has a probe that's currently at Mars called the MAVEN satellite, and its actual job is to study atmospheric escape.
It's the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution spacecraft.
And results from it have already shown pictures very similar to what you've seen here on Earth.
We've long known that Mars was losing its atmosphere, but we have some stunning pictures.
Here, for example, you can see in the red circle is the size of Mars, and in blue you can see the hydrogen escaping away from the planet.
So it's reaching out more than 10 times the size of the planet, far enough away that it's no longer bound to that planet.
It's escaping off into space.
And this helps us confirm ideas, like why Mars is red, from that lost hydrogen.
But hydrogen isn't the only gas that's lost.
I mentioned helium on Earth and some oxygen and nitrogen, and from MAVEN we can also look at the oxygen being lost from Mars.
And you can see that because oxygen is heavier, it can't get as far as the hydrogen, but it's still escaping away from the planet.
You don't see it all confined into that red circle.
So the fact that we not only see atmospheric escape on our own planet but we can study it elsewhere and send spacecraft allows us to learn about the past of planets but also about planets in general and Earth's future.
So one way we actually can learn about the future is by planets so far away that we can't see.
And I should just note though, before I go on to that, I'm not going to show you photos like this of Pluto, which might be disappointing, but that's because we don't have them yet.
But the New Horizons mission is currently studying atmospheric escape being lost from the planet.
So stay tuned and look out for that.
But the planets that I did want to talk about are known as transiting exoplanets.
So any planet orbiting a star that's not our Sun is called an exoplanet, or extrasolar planet.
And these planets that we call transiting have the special feature that if you look at that star in the middle, you'll see that actually it's blinking.
And the reason that it's blinking is because there are planets that are going past it all the time, and it's that special orientation where the planets are blocking the light from the star that allows us to see that light blinking.
And by surveying the stars in the night sky for this blinking motion, we are able to find planets.
This is how we've now been able to detect over 5,000 planets in our own Milky Way, and we know there are many more out there, like I mentioned.
So when we look at the light from these stars, what we see, like I said, is not the planet itself, but you actually see a dimming of the light that we can record in time.
So the light drops as the planet decreases in front of the star, and that's that blinking that you saw before.
So not only do we detect the planets but we can look at this light in different wavelengths.
So I mentioned looking at the Earth and Mars in ultraviolet light.
If we look at transiting exoplanets with the Hubble Space Telescope, we find that in the ultraviolet, you see much bigger blinking, much less light from the star, when the planet is passing in front.
And we think this is because you have an extended atmosphere of hydrogen all around the planet that's making it look puffier and thus blocking more of the light that you see.
So using this technique, we've actually been able to discover a few transiting exoplanets that are undergoing atmospheric escape.
And these planets can be called hot Jupiters, for some of the ones we've found.
And that's because they're gas planets like Jupiter, but they're so close to their star, about a hundred times closer than Jupiter.
And because there's all this lightweight gas that's ready to escape, and all this heating from the star, you have completely catastrophic rates of atmospheric escape.
So unlike our 400 pounds per minute of hydrogen being lost on Earth, for these planets, you're losing 1.3 billion pounds of hydrogen every minute.
So you might think, well, does this make the planet cease to exist?
And this is a question that people wondered when they looked at our solar system, because planets closer to the Sun are rocky, and planets further away are bigger and more gaseous.
Could you have started with something like Jupiter that was actually close to the Sun, and get rid of all the gas in it?
We now think that if you start with something like a hot Jupiter, you actually can't end up with Mercury or the Earth.
But if you started with something smaller, it's possible that enough gas would have gotten away that it would have significantly impacted it and left you with something very different than what you started with.
So all of this sounds sort of general, and we might think about the solar system, but what does this have to do with us here on Earth?
Well, in the far future, the Sun is going to get brighter.
And as that happens, the heating that we find from the Sun is going to become very intense.
In the same way that you see gas streaming off from a hot Jupiter, gas is going to stream off from the Earth.
And so what we can look forward to, or at least prepare for, is the fact that in the far future, the Earth is going to look more like Mars.
Our hydrogen, from water that is broken down, is going to escape into space more rapidly, and we're going to be left with this dry, reddish planet.
So don't fear, it's not for a few billion years, so there's some time to prepare.
(Laughter) But I wanted you to be aware of what's going on, not just in the future, but atmospheric escape is happening as we speak.
So there's a lot of amazing science that you hear about happening in space and planets that are far away, and we are studying these planets to learn about these worlds.
But as we learn about Mars or exoplanets like hot Jupiters, we find things like atmospheric escape that tell us a lot more about our planet here on Earth.
So consider that the next time you think that space is far away.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why do cats do that?
They're cute, they're lovable, and judging by the 26 billions views of over 2 million YouTube videos of them pouncing, bouncing, climbing, cramming, stalking, clawing, chattering, and purring, one thing is certain: cats are very entertaining.
These somewhat strange feline behaviors, both amusing and baffling, leave many of us asking, "Why do cats do that?"
Throughout time, cats were simultaneously solitary predators of smaller animals and prey for larger carnivores.
As both predator and prey, survival of their species depended on crucial instinctual behaviors which we still observe in wild and domestic cats today.
While the feline actions of your house cat Grizmo might seem perplexing, in the wild, these same behaviors, naturally bred into cats for millions of years, would make Grizmo a super cat.
Enabled by their unique muscular structure and keen balancing abilities, cats climbed to high vantage points to survey their territory and spot prey in the wild.
Grizmo doesn't need these particular skills to find and hunt down dinner in her food bowl today, but instinctually, viewing the living room from the top of the bookcase is exactly what she has evolved to do.
As wild predators, cats are opportunistic and hunt whenever prey is available.
Since most cat prey are small, cats in the wild needed to eat many times each day, and use a stalk, pounce, kill, eat strategy to stay fed.
This is why Grizmo prefers to chase and pounce on little toys and eat small meals over the course of the day and night.
Also, small prey tend to hide in tiny spaces in their natural environments, so one explanation for Grizmo's propensity to reach into containers and openings is that she is compelled by the same curiosity that helped ensure the continuation of her species for millions of years before.
In the wild, cats needed sharp claws for climbing, hunting, and self-defense.
Sharpening their claws on nearby surfaces kept them conditioned and ready, helped stretch their back and leg muscles, and relieve some stress, too.
So, it's not that Grizmo hates your couch, chair, ottoman, pillows, curtains, and everything else you put in her environment.
She's ripping these things to shreds and keeping her claws in tip-top shape because this is exactly what her ancestors did in order to survive.
As animals that were preyed upon, cats evolved to not get caught, and in the wild, the cats that were the best at avoiding predators thrived.
So at your house today, Grizmo is an expert at squeezing into small spaces and seeking out and hiding in unconventional spots.
It also explains why she prefers a clean and odor-free litter box.
That's less likely to give away her location to any predators that may be sniffing around nearby.
Considering everything we do know about cats, it seems that one of their most predominate behaviors is still one of the most mysterious.
Cats may purr for any number of reasons, such as happiness, stress, and hunger.
But curiously, the frequency of their purrs, between 25 and 150 hertz, is within a range that can promote tissue regeneration.
So while her purring makes Grizmo an excellent nap companion, it is also possible that her purr is healing her muscles and bones, and maybe even yours, too.
They developed through time as both solitary predators that hunted and killed to eat, and stealthy prey that hid and escaped to survive.
So cats today retain many of the same instincts that allowed them to thrive in the wild for millions of years.
This explains some of their seemingly strange behaviors.
To them, our homes are their jungles.
But if this is the case, in our own cat's eyes, who are we?
Big, dumb, hairless cats competing with them for resources?
Terribly stupid predators they're able to outsmart every day?
Or maybe they think we're the prey.
Me Too and Time's Up have highlighted that harassment and discrimination are a shockingly common part of many people's lived reality, and that this reality extends into the workplace.
Whether in tech or finance, sports or the service industry, every day we seem to hear another story about an abuse of power or another grossly inappropriate workplace behavior.
People are furious.
They're taking to Twitter and social media to voice that this must change.
But it's time to move beyond the hashtag.
It's time for us to report harassment and discrimination to those who can fix this mess.
And it's time for us to talk about harassment in a more inclusive way: not just about sexual harassment, but to encourage people to come forward about harassment and discrimination based on other characteristics such as age, disability or ethnicity.
Because only together can we fix the underlying causes and consequences of harassment.
You see, most of us will, at some point in our lives, experience workplace harassment or discrimination.
Research shows that particularly women, people of color and people who openly identify as LGBTQI are likely to be targeted, and for some people, this is a pervasive and persistent part of their reality.
And for most of these people -- 98 percent according to some studies -- most of these people will never speak up and tell their employer.
Too often, harassment and discrimination is a lonely and isolating experience, but we need to help people out from under their desks.
We need to empower people to have a voice.
The reasonable first question that everybody asks once they've been harassed is "What do I do now?"
And this is what I want to help you with.
Navigating the barriers to reporting can be absolutely dizzying.
How can we speak up in a society that too often discredits or diminishes our experiences?
How can we speak up in a society that is likely to be retributive towards us?
How can we deal with the silencing that goes on all around us?
Making matters worse, often our memories are the only evidence we have of what happened.
Now, here's where I can come in.
I'm a memory scientist, and I specialize in how we remember important emotional events.
I've particularly focused on how the memory interview process can severely impact the evidentiary quality of reports that we produce.
A bad interview can lead you to forget details or misremember them while a good interview can forever change your life for the better.
After looking at lab reports and working, studying this issue both in the courtroom and in research settings, I've dissected all the different things that can go wrong with our memories that can really threaten your case.
And now I'm turning my attention to helping people tackle recording and reporting of workplace harassment and discrimination.
There's three things that I've learned from my research on this that you can immediately apply if you've been harassed or discriminated against at work.
I want to help you turn your memory into evidence -- evidence that even a memory skeptic like me is unlikely to find fault with.
First of all, James Comey had it right.
The former head of the FBI used to sit in his car, lock himself in after meetings with the president and write down absolutely everything he could remember about what happened.
The now-famous recordings proved to be quite useful later on.
Be like Comey.
Now, you don't need to lock yourself into your car to do this, but please, immediately after something happens, I want you to contemporaneously record what happened.
And do this before talking to anyone else about it.
Because as soon as your share your story with friends or family or colleagues or therapists, you have the potential to distort or change your memory of the event.
Uncontaminated, contemporaneous evidence is worth gold.
Second: the type of evidence matters.
Sure, you can do a handwritten note of what happens, but how do you prove when you wrote it?
Instead, pull out your computer or smartphone and make a note that's time-stamped, where you can prove this was recorded at this time.
Contemporaneous, time-stamped evidence is better.
Finally, make sure what you're writing down is actually relevant.
Too often, we see that people bring out Facebook messages, they bring out time-stamped pieces of evidence, but sure, they're not particularly relevant, they're not particularly useful.
It's easy to write an emotional, unstructured account of what happened -- understandable because it's an emotional experience -- but those might not actually be the details that matter later on for an investigation.
Write down this list.
I want you to keep track of this and simply fill in the blanks.
First of all, what happened?
In as much detail as possible, describe the situation, and do it on the day it happened if at all possible.
Second, who was there?
This becomes crucial potentially later on.
What exact time and date did this happen?
What location? Where did this happen?
Who did you tell after the event?
How did it make you feel during and after it happened?
And is there any other evidence such as WhatsApps, photos or emails that might lend more credibility to your case.
These are all details that are incredibly easy to record contemporaneously but are also incredibly easy to forget later on.
Humans, according to research, often overestimate their ability to remember important emotional details later on.
Assume that you're going to forget.
Assume you have to write it down.
Now, these three pieces of advice are a good start, but of course they don't overcome a lot of the other barriers to reporting.
According to the Equality and Human Rights Commission, which published a report in 2018, there's one key recommendation to overcome some of the other fears often associated with reporting these kinds of incidents to your employer.
One piece of advice that they made?
Have an online, anonymous reporting tool.
Only that way, they say, can you truly overcome many of the fears associated with reporting.
Now, in line with this, and informed by what was happening all around me and taking and applying the memory science, the science that I had been doing for many years, I sat down with a number of people and we together created TalkToSpot.com.
Spot is an online, anonymous reporting tool that helps you record and report workplace harassment and discrimination.
It allows you to do it anonymously, it allows you to do it for free, and it's completely evidence-based.
You don't have to talk to a person, there's no fear of judgment, and you can do it whenever and wherever you need.
Now you have the power to walk through an evidence-based memory interview.
Now, this is called a cognitive interview.
This is the same technique that police use when they're doing their job properly.
So in best-case scenarios, people who are being asked about important emotional events are being asked in line with the cognitive interview.
Now, this walks you through all the relevant information so that at the end, after you've talked to the bot -- which is an automatic messaging system -- after you've talked to the bot, it generates a PDF record that's time-stamped and securely signed that you can keep for yourself as evidence in case you want to share it later, or you can submit it to your employer right away.
And in line with recommendations, you can submit it to your employer anonymously.
But a reporting tool is only as useful as the audience that's listening.
So if your employer is truly committed to change, we've decided to also offer them the tool to respond.
So if organizations work with us and are truly committed to doing something about workplace harassment and discrimination, they're also able to respond to you even if you've chosen to stay anonymous.
We think it's important that you can work together with your employer to tackle this issue.
We think that everybody wins when we bring light into this dark issue.
Whether it happens to you or to someone you know, recording and reporting what happened can really improve how we talk about these issues.
And if you're an organization, this is a call to give your employees access to better and more effective reporting mechanisms.
We know that the current methods that are used in most organizations don't work effectively.
It's time to change that if you're committed to inclusion and diversity.
It's time for us to celebrate our diversity.
It's time for us to give a voice to those who have for too long been denied one.
It's time for us to celebrate those who come forward, even if they feel they need to stay anonymous -- to stay masked to do so.
It's time for a reporting revolution.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We're going to share a lot of secrets today, you and I, and in doing so, I hope that we can lift some of the shame many of us feel about sex.
How many here have ever been catcalled by a stranger?
Lots of women.
For me, the time I remember best is when that stranger was a student of mine.
He came up to me after class that night and his words confirmed what I already knew: "I am so sorry, professor.
If I had known it was you, I would never have said those things."
(Laughter) I wasn't a person to him until I was his professor.
This concept, called objectification, is the foundation of sexism, and we see it reinforced through every aspect of our lives.
We see it in the government that refuses to punish men for raping women.
We see it in advertisements.
How many of you have seen an advertisement that uses a woman's breast to sell an entirely unrelated product?
Or movie after movie after movie that portrays women as only love interests?
These examples might seem inconsequential and harmless, but they're insidious, slowly building into a culture that refuses to see women as people.
We see this in the school that sends home a 10-year-old girl because her clothes were a distraction to boys trying to learn, or the government that refuses to punish men for raping women over and over, or the woman who is killed because she asked a man to stop grinding on her on the dance floor.
Media plays a large role in perpetuating the objectification of women.
Let's consider the classic romantic comedy.
We're typically introduced to two kinds of women in these movies, two kinds of desirable women, anyway.
The first is the sexy bombshell.
This is the unbelievably gorgeous woman with the perfect body.
Our leading man has no trouble identifying her and even less trouble having sex with her.
The second is our leading lady, the beautiful but demure woman our leading man falls in love with despite not noticing her at first or not liking her if he did.
The first is the slut.
She is to be consumed and forgotten.
She is much too available.
The second is desirable but modest, and therefore worthy of our leading man's future babies.
Marriage material.
We're actually told that women have two roles, but these two roles have a difficult time existing within the same woman.
On the rare occasion that I share with a new acquaintance that I study sex, if they don't end the conversation right then, they're usually pretty intrigued.
"Oh. Tell me more."
So I do.
"I'm really interested in studying the sexual behaviors of pregnant and postpartum couples."
At this point I get a different kind of response.
(Laughter) "Oh. Huh.
Do pregnant people even have sex?
Have you thought about studying sexual desire or orgasms?
That would be interesting, and sexy."
Tell me. What are the first words that come to mind when you picture a pregnant woman?
I asked this question in a survey of over 500 adults, and most responded with "belly" or "round" and "cute."
This didn't surprise me too much.
What else do we label as cute?
Babies. Puppies. Kittens.
The elderly. Right?
(Laughter) When we label an adult as cute, though, we take away a lot of their intelligence, their complexity.
We reduce them to childlike qualities.
I also asked heterosexual men to imagine a woman that they're partnered with is pregnant, and then asked women to imagine that they are pregnant, and then tell me the first words that come to mind when they imagine having sex.
Most of the responses were negative.
"Gross."
"Awkward."
"Not sexy." "Odd."
"Uncomfortable."
"How?"
(Laughter) "Not worth the trouble." "Not worth the risk."
That last one really stuck with me.
We might think that because we divorce pregnant women and moms from sexuality, we are removing the constraints of sexual objectification.
They experience less sexism. Right?
Not exactly.
What happens instead is a different kind of objectification.
In my efforts to explain this to others, one conversation led to the Venus of Willendorf, a Paleolithic figurine scholars assumed was a goddess of love and beauty, hence the name Venus.
This theory was later revised, though, when scholars noted the sculptor's obvious focus on the figurine's reproductive features: large breasts, considered ideal for nursing; a round, possibly pregnant belly; the remnants of red dye, alluding to menstruation or birth.
They also assumed that she was meant to be held or placed lying down because her tiny feet don't allow her to be freestanding.
She also had no face.
For this reason, it was assumed that she was a representation of fertility and not a portrait of a person.
She was an object.
In the history of her interpretation, she went from object of ideal beauty and love to object of reproduction.
I think this transition speaks more about the scholars who have interpreted her purpose than the actual purpose of the figurine herself.
When a woman becomes pregnant, she leaves the realm of men's sexual desire and slides into her reproductive and child-rearing role.
In doing so, she also becomes the property of the community, considered very important but only because she's pregnant. Right?
I've taken to calling this the Willendorf effect, and once again we see it reinforced in many aspects of her life.
Has anyone here ever been visibly pregnant?
(Laughter) Yeah. Lots of you, right?
So how many of you ever had a stranger touch your belly during pregnancy, maybe without even asking your permission first?
Or told what you can and cannot eat by somebody who is not your doctor, your medical care provider?
Or asked private questions about your birth plan?
And then told why those choices are all wrong?
Yeah, me too.
Or had a server refuse to bring you a glass of wine?
This one might give you pause, I know, but stay with me.
This is a huge secret.
It is actually safe to drink in moderation during pregnancy.
Many of us don't know this because doctors don't trust pregnant women with this secret -- (Laughter) especially if she's less educated or a woman of color.
What this tells us is, this Willendorf effect, it's also classist and racist.
It's present when the government reminds women with every new anti-choice bill that the contents of her uterus are not her own, or when an ob-gyn says, "While it's safe to have sex during pregnancy, sometimes you never know.
Better safe than sorry, right?"
She's denied basic privacy and bodily autonomy under the guise of "be a good mother."
We don't trust her to make her own decisions.
She's cute, remember?
When we tell women that sexual pleasure -- excuse me.
When we tell women that sex isn't worth the risk during pregnancy, what we're telling her is that her sexual pleasure doesn't matter.
So what we are telling her is that she in fact doesn't matter, even though the needs of her fetus are not at odds with her own needs.
So medical providers, such as the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists have the opportunity to educate about the safety of sex during pregnancy.
So what do the experts say?
ACOG actually has no public official statement about the safety of sex during pregnancy.
Guidance from the Mayo Clinic is generally positive but presented with a caveat: "Although most women can safely have sex throughout pregnancy, sometimes it's best to be cautious."
Some women don't want to have sex during pregnancy, and that's OK.
Some women do want to have sex during pregnancy, and that's OK, too.
What needs to stop is society telling women what they can and cannot do with their bodies.
(Applause) Pregnant women are not faceless, identity-less vessels of reproduction who can't stand on their own two feet.
But the truth is, the real secret is, we tell all women that their sexual pleasure doesn't matter.
We refuse to even acknowledge that women who have sex with women or women who don't want children even exist.
"Oh, it's just a phase ...
she just needs the right man to come along."
Every time a woman has sex simply because it feels good, it is revolutionary.
She is revolutionary.
She is pushing back against society's insistence that she exist simply for men's pleasure or for reproduction.
A woman who prioritizes her sexual needs is scary, because a woman who prioritizes her sexual needs prioritizes herself.
(Applause) That is a woman demanding that she be treated as an equal.
That is a woman who insists that you make room for her at the table of power, and that is the most terrifying of all because we can't make room for her without some of us giving up the extra space we hold.
(Applause) I have one last secret for you.
I am the mother of two boys and we could use your help.
Even though my boys hear me say regularly that it's important for men to recognize women as equals and they see their father modeling this, we need what happens in the world to reinforce what happens in our home.
This is not a men's problem or a women's problem.
This is everyone's problem, and we all play a role in dismantling systems of inequality.
For starters, we have got to stop telling women what they can and cannot do with their bodies.
(Applause) This includes not treating pregnant women like community property.
If you don't know her, don't even ask to touch her belly.
You wouldn't anybody else.
Don't tell her what she can and cannot eat.
Don't ask her private details about her medical decisions.
This also includes understanding that even if you are personally against abortion, you can still fight for a woman's right to choose.
When it comes to women's equality, the two need not oppose one another.
If you're somebody who has sex with women, prioritize her pleasure.
If you don't know how, ask.
If you have children -- (Laughter) have conversations about sex as early as possible, because kids don't look up s-e-x in the dictionary anymore.
They look it up on the internet.
And when you're having those conversations about sex, don't center them on reproduction only.
People have sex for many reasons, some because they want a baby, but most of us have sex because it feels good.
Admit it.
And regardless of whether you have children or not, support comprehensive sex education that doesn't shame our teenagers.
(Applause) Nothing positive comes from shaming teens for their sexual desires, behaviors, other than positive STD and pregnancy tests.
Every single day, we are all given the opportunity to disrupt patterns of inequality.
I think we can all agree that it's worth the trouble to do so.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a chef and a food policy guy, but I come from a whole family of teachers.
My sister is a special ed teacher in Chicago.
My father just retired after 25 years teaching fifth grade.
My aunt and uncle were professors.
My cousins all teach.
Everybody in my family, basically, teaches except for me.
They taught me that the only way to get the right answers is to ask the right questions.
So what are the right questions when it comes to improving the educational outcomes for our children?
There's obviously many important questions, but I think the following is a good place to start: What do we think the connection is between a child's growing mind and their growing body?
What can we expect our kids to learn if their diets are full of sugar and empty of nutrients?
What can they possibly learn if their bodies are literally going hungry?
And with all the resources that we are pouring into schools, we should stop and ask ourselves: Are we really setting our kids up for success?
Now, a few years ago, I was a judge on a cooking competition called "Chopped."
Four chefs compete with mystery ingredients to see who can cook the best dishes.
Except for this episode -- it was a very special one.
Instead of four overzealous chefs trying to break into the limelight -- something that I would know nothing about -- (Laughter) these chefs were school chefs; you know, the women that you used to call "lunch ladies," but the ones I insist we call "school chefs."
Now, these women -- God bless these women -- spend their day cooking for thousands of kids, breakfast and lunch, with only $2.68 per lunch, with only about a dollar of that actually going to the food.
In this episode, the main-course mystery ingredient was quinoa.
Now, I know it's been a long time since most of you have had a school lunch, and we've made a lot of progress on nutrition, but quinoa still is not a staple in most school cafeterias.
(Laughter) So this was a challenge.
But the dish that I will never forget was cooked by a woman named Cheryl Barbara.
Cheryl was the nutrition director at High School in the Community in Connecticut.
She cooked this delicious pasta.
It was amazing.
It was a pappardelle with Italian sausage, kale, Parmesan cheese.
It was delicious, like, restaurant-quality good, except -- she basically just threw the quinoa, pretty much uncooked, into the dish.
It was a strange choice, and it was super crunchy.
(Laughter) So I took on the TV accusatory judge thing that you're supposed to do, and I asked her why she did that.
Cheryl responded, "Well, first, I don't know what quinoa is."
(Laughter) "But I do know that it's a Monday, and that in my school, at High School in the Community, I always cook pasta."
See, Cheryl explained that for many of her kids, there were no meals on the weekends.
No meals on Saturday.
No meals on Sunday, either.
So she cooked pasta because she wanted to make sure she cooked something she knew her children would eat.
Something that would stick to their ribs, she said.
Something that would fill them up.
Cheryl talked about how, by the time Monday came, her kids' hunger pangs were so intense that they couldn't even begin to think about learning.
Food was the only thing on their mind.
The only thing.
And unfortunately, the stats -- they tell the same story.
So, let's put this into the context of a child.
And we're going to focus on the most important meal of the day, breakfast.
Meet Allison.
She's 12 years old, she's smart as a whip and she wants to be a physicist when she grows up.
If Allison goes to a school that serves a nutritious breakfast to all of their kids, here's what's going to follow.
Her chances of getting a nutritious meal, one with fruit and milk, one lower in sugar and salt, dramatically increase.
Allison will have a lower rate of obesity than the average kid.
She'll have to visit the nurse less.
She'll have lower levels of anxiety and depression.
She'll have better behavior.
She'll have better attendance, and she'll show up on time more often.
Why?
Well, because there's a good meal waiting for her at school.
Overall, Allison is in much better health than the average school kid.
So what about that kid who doesn't have a nutritious breakfast waiting for him?
Well, meet Tommy.
He's also 12. He's a wonderful kid.
He wants to be a doctor.
By the time Tommy is in kindergarten, he's already underperforming in math.
By the time he's in third grade, he's got lower math and reading scores.
By the time he's 11, it's more likely that Tommy will have to have repeated a grade.
Research shows that kids who do not have consistent nourishment, particularly at breakfast, have poor cognitive function overall.
So how widespread is this problem?
Well, unfortunately, it's pervasive.
Let me give you two stats that seem like they're on opposite ends of the issue, but are actually two sides of the same coin.
On the one hand, one in six Americans are food insecure, including 16 million children -- almost 20 percent -- are food insecure.
In this city alone, in New York City, 474,000 kids under the age of 18 face hunger every year.
It's crazy.
On the other hand, diet and nutrition is the number one cause of preventable death and disease in this country, by far.
And fully a third of the kids that we've been talking about tonight are on track to have diabetes in their lifetime.
Now, what's hard to put together but is true is that, many times, these are the same children.
So they fill up on the unhealthy and cheap calories that surround them in their communities and that their families can afford.
But then by the end of the month, food stamps run out or hours get cut at work, and they don't have the money to cover the basic cost of food.
But we should be able to solve this problem, right?
We know what the answers are.
As part of my work at the White House, we instituted a program that for all schools that had 40 percent more low-income kids, we could serve breakfast and lunch to every kid in that school.
For free.
This program has been incredibly successful, because it helped us overcome a very difficult barrier when it came to getting kids a nutritious breakfast.
And that was the barrier of stigma.
See, schools serve breakfast before school, and it was only available for the poor kids.
So everybody knew who was poor and who needed government help.
Now, all kids, no matter how much or how little their parents make, have a lot of pride.
So what happened?
Well, the schools that have implemented this program saw an increase in math and reading scores by 17.5 percent.
17.5 percent.
And research shows that when kids have a consistent, nutritious breakfast, their chances of graduating increase by 20 percent.
20 percent.
When we give our kids the nourishment they need, we give them the chance to thrive, both in the classroom and beyond.
Now, you don't have to trust me on this, but you should talk to Donna Martin.
I love Donna Martin.
Donna Martin is the school nutrition director at Burke County in Waynesboro, Georgia.
Burke County is one of the poorest districts in the fifth-poorest state in the country, and about 100 percent of Donna's students live at or below the poverty line.
A few years ago, Donna decided to get out ahead of the new standards that were coming, and overhaul her nutrition standards.
She improved and added fruit and vegetables and whole grains.
She served breakfast in the classroom to all of her kids.
And she implemented a dinner program.
Why?
Well, many of her kids didn't have dinner when they went home.
So how did they respond?
Well, the kids loved the food.
They loved the better nutrition, and they loved not being hungry.
But Donna's biggest supporter came from an unexpected place.
His name from Eric Parker, and he was the head football coach for the Burke County Bears.
Now, Coach Parker had coached mediocre teams for years.
The Bears often ended in the middle of the pack -- a big disappointment in one of the most passionate football states in the Union.
But the year Donna changed the menus, the Bears not only won their division, they went on to win the state championship, beating the Peach County Trojans 28-14.
(Laughter) And Coach Parker, he credited that championship to Donna Martin.
When we give our kids the basic nourishment, they're going to thrive.
And it's not just up to the Cheryl Barbaras and the Donna Martins of the world.
It's on all of us.
And feeding our kids the basic nutrition is just the starting point.
What I've laid out is really a model for so many of the most pressing issues that we face.
If we focus on the simple goal of properly nourishing ourselves, we could see a world that is more stable and secure; we could dramatically improve our economic productivity; we could transform our health care and we could go a long way in ensuring that the Earth can provide for generations to come.
Food is that place where our collective efforts can have the greatest impact.
So we have to ask ourselves: What is the right question?
What would happen if we fed ourselves more nutritious, more sustainably grown food?
What would be the impact?
Cheryl Barbara, Donna Martin, Coach Parker and the Burke County Bears -- I think they know the answer.
Thank you guys so very much.
(Applause)
Being a child, and sort of crawling around the house, I remember these Turkish carpets, and there were these scenes, these battle scenes, these love scenes.
I mean, look, this animal is trying to fight back this spear from this soldier.
And my mom took these pictures actually, last week, of our carpets, and I remember this to this day.
There was another object, this sort of towering piece of furniture with creatures and gargoyles and nudity -- pretty scary stuff, when you're a little kid.
What I remember today from this is that objects tell stories, so storytelling has been a really strong influence in my work.
And then there was another influence.
I was a teenager, and at 15 or 16, I guess like all teenagers, we want to just do what we love and what we believe in.
And so, I fused together the two things I loved the most, which was skiing and windsurfing.
Those are pretty good escapes from the drab weather in Switzerland.
So, I created this compilation of the two: I took my skis and I took a board and I put a mast foot in there, and some foot straps, and some metal fins, and here I was, going really fast on frozen lakes.
It was really a death trap. I mean, it was incredible, it worked incredibly well, but it was really dangerous.
And I realized then I had to go to design school.
(Laughter) I mean, look at those graphics there.
(Laughter) So, I went to design school, and it was the early '90s when I finished.
And I saw something extraordinary happening in Silicon Valley, so I wanted to be there, and I saw that the computer was coming into our homes, that it had to change in order to be with us in our homes.
And so I got myself a job and I was working for a consultancy, and we would get in to these meetings, and these managers would come in, and they would say, "Well, what we're going to do here is really important, you know."
And they would give the projects code names, you know, mostly from "Star Wars," actually: things like C3PO, Yoda, Luke.
So, in anticipation, I would be this young designer in the back of the room, and I would raise my hand, and I would ask questions.
I mean, in retrospect, probably stupid questions, but things like, "What's this Caps Lock key for?"
or "What's this Num Lock key for?" You know, that thing?
"You know, do people really use it?
Do they need it? Do they want it in their homes?"
(Laughter) What I realized then is, they didn't really want to change the legacy stuff; they didn't want to change the insides.
They were really looking for us, the designers, to create the skins, to put some pretty stuff outside of the box.
And I didn't want to be a colorist.
It wasn't what I wanted to do.
I didn't want to be a stylist in this way.
And then I saw this quote: "advertising is the price companies pay for being unoriginal."
(Laughter) So, I had to start on my own. So I moved to San Francisco, and I started a little company, fuseproject.
And what I wanted to work on is important stuff.
And I wanted to really not just work on the skins, but I wanted to work on the entire human experience.
And so the first projects were sort of humble, but they took technology and maybe made it into things that people would use in a new way, and maybe finding some new functionality.
This is a watch we made for Mini Cooper, the car company, right when it launched, and it's the first watch that has a display that switches from horizontal to vertical.
And that allows me to check my timer discretely, here, without bending my elbow.
And other projects, which were really about transformation, about matching the human need.
This is a little piece of furniture for an Italian manufacturer, and it ships completely flat, and then it folds into a coffee table and a stool and whatnot.
And something a little bit more experimental: this is a light fixture for Swarovski, and what it does is, it changes shape.
So, it goes from a circle, to a round, to a square, to a figure eight.
And just by drawing on a little computer tablet, the entire light fixture adjusts to what shape you want.
And then finally, the leaf lamp for Herman Miller.
This is a pretty involved process; it took us about four and a half years.
But I really was looking for creating a unique experience of light, a new experience of light.
So, we had to design both the light and the light bulb.
And that's a unique opportunity, I would say, in design.
And the new experience I was looking for is giving the choice for the user to go from a warm, sort of glowing kind of mood light, all the way to a bright work light.
So, the light bulb actually does that.
It allows the person to switch, and to mix these two colorations.
And it's done in a very simple way: one just touches the base of the light, and on one side, you can mix the brightness, and on the other, the coloration of the light.
So, all of these projects have a humanistic sense to them, and I think as designers we need to really think about how we can create a different relationship between our work and the world, whether it's for business, or, as I'm going to show, on some civic-type projects.
Because I think everybody agrees that as designers we bring value to business, value to the users also, but I think it's the values that we put into these projects that ultimately create the greater value.
And the values we bring can be about environmental issues, about sustainability, about lower power consumption.
You know, they can be about function and beauty; they can be about business strategy.
But designers are really the glue that brings these things together.
So Jawbone is a project that you're familiar with, and it has a humanistic technology.
It feels your skin. It rests on your skin, and it knows when it is you're talking.
And by knowing when it is you're talking, it gets rid of the other noises that it knows about, which is the environmental noises.
But the other thing that is humanistic about Jawbone is that we really decided to take out all the techie stuff, and all the nerdy stuff out of it, and try to make it as beautiful as we can.
I mean, think about it: the care we take in selecting sunglasses, or jewelry, or accessories is really important, so if it isn't beautiful, it really doesn't belong on your face.
And this is what we're pursuing here.
But how we work on Jawbone is really unique.
I want to point at something here, on the left.
This is the board, this is one of the things that goes inside that makes this technology work.
But this is the design process: there's somebody changing the board, putting tracers on the board, changing the location of the ICs, as the designers on the other side are doing the work.
So, it's not about slapping skins, anymore, on a technology.
It's really about designing from the inside out.
And then, on the other side of the room, the designers are making small adjustments, sketching, drawing by hand, putting it in the computer.
And it's what I call being design driven.
You know, there is some push and pull, but design is really helping define the whole experience from the inside out.
And then, of course, design is never done.
And this is -- the other new way that is unique in how we work is, because it's never done, you have to do all this other stuff.
The packaging, and the website, and you need to continue to really touch the user, in many ways.
But how do you retain somebody, when it's never done?
And Hosain Rahman, the CEO of Aliph Jawbone, you know, really understands that you need a different structure.
So, in a way, the different structure is that we're partners, it's a partnership. We can continue to work and dedicate ourselves to this project, and then we also share in the rewards.
And here's another project, another partnership-type approach.
This is called Y Water, and it's this guy from Los Angeles, Thomas Arndt, Austrian originally, who came to us, and all he wanted to do was to create a healthy drink, or an organic drink for his kids, to replace the high-sugar-content sodas that he's trying to get them away from.
So, we worked on this bottle, and it's completely symmetrical in every dimension.
And this allows the bottle to turn into a game.
The bottles connect together, and you can create different shapes, different forms.
(Laughter) (Applause) Thank you.
(Applause) And then while we were doing this, the shape of the bottle upside down reminded us of a Y, and then we thought, well these words, "why" and "why not," are probably the most important words that kids ask.
So we called it Y Water. And so this is another place where it all comes together in the same room: the three-dimensional design, the ideas, the branding, it all becomes deeply connected.
And then the other thing about this project is, we bring intellectual property, we bring a marketing approach, we bring all this stuff, but I think, at the end of the day, what we bring is these values, and these values create a soul for the companies we work with.
And it's especially rewarding when your design work becomes a creative endeavor, when others can be creative and do more with it.
Here's another project, which I think really emulates that.
This is the One Laptop per Child, the $100 laptop.
This picture is incredible.
In Nigeria, people carry their most precious belongings on their heads.
This girl is going to school with a laptop on her head.
I mean, to me, it just means so much.
But when Nicholas Negroponte -- and he has spoken about this project a lot, he's the founder of OLPC -- came to us about two and a half years ago, there were some clear ideas.
He wanted to bring education and he wanted to bring technology, and those are pillars of his life, but also pillars of the mission of One Laptop per Child.
But the third pillar that he talked about was design.
And at the time, I wasn't really working on computers.
I didn't really want to, from the previous adventure.
But what he said was really significant, is that design was going to be why the kids were going to love this product, how we were going to make it low cost, robust.
And plus, he said he was going to get rid of the Caps Lock key -- (Laughter) -- and the Num Lock key, too.
So, I was convinced. We designed it to be iconic, to look different. To look like it's for a kid, but not like a toy.
And then the integration of all these great technologies, which you've heard about, the Wi-Fi antennas that allow the kids to connect; the screen, which you can read in sunlight; the keyboard, which is made out of rubber, and it's protected from the environment.
You know, all these great technologies really happened because of the passion and the OLPC people and the engineers.
They fought the suppliers, they fought the manufacturers.
I mean, they fought like animals for this to remain they way it is.
And in a way, it is that will that makes projects like this one -- allows the process from not destroying the original idea.
And I think this is something really important.
So, now you get these pictures -- you get up in the morning, and you see the kids in Nigeria and you see them in Uruguay with their computers, and in Mongolia.
And we went away from obviously the beige.
I mean it's colorful, it's fun.
In fact, you can see each logo is a little bit different.
It's because we were able to run, during the manufacturing process, 20 colors for the X and the O, which is the name of the computer, and by mixing them on the manufacturing floor, you get 20 times 20: you get 400 different options there.
So, the lessons from seeing the kids using them in the developing world are incredible.
But this is my nephew, Anthony, in Switzerland, and he had the laptop for an afternoon, and I had to take it back. It was hard.
(Laughter) And it was a prototype. And a month and a half later, I come back to Switzerland, and there he is playing with his own version.
(Laughter) Like paper, paper and cardboard.
So, I'm going to finish with one last project, and this is a little bit more of adult play.
(Laughter) Some of you might have heard about the New York City condom.
It's actually just launched, actually launched on Valentine's Day, February 14, about 10 days ago.
So, the Department of Health in New York came to us, and they needed a way to distribute 36 million condoms for free to the citizens of New York.
So a pretty big endeavor, and we worked on the dispensers.
These are the dispensers. There's this friendly shape.
It's a little bit like designing a fire hydrant, and it has to be easily serviceable: you have to know where it is and what it does.
And we also designed the condoms themselves.
And I was just in New York at the launch, and I went to see all these places where they're installed: this is at a Puerto Rican little mom-and-pop store; at a bar in Christopher Street; at a pool hall.
I mean, they're being installed in homeless clinics -- everywhere.
Of course, clubs and discos, too.
And here's the public service announcement for this project.
(Music) (Laughter) Get some.
(Applause) So, this is really where design is able to create a conversation.
I was in these venues, and people were, you know, really into getting them. They were excited.
It was breaking the ice, it was getting over a stigma, and I think that's also what design can do.
So, I was going to throw some condoms in the room and whatnot, but I'm not sure it's the etiquette here.
(Laughter) Yeah? All right, all right. I have only a few.
(Laughter) (Applause) So, I have more, you can always ask me for some more later.
(Laughter) And if anybody asks why you're carrying a condom, you can just say you like the design.
(Laughter) So, I'll finish with just one thought: if we all work together on creating value, but if we really keep in mind the values of the work that we do, I think we can change the work that we do.
We can change these values, can change the companies we work with, and eventually, together, maybe we can change the world.
So, thank you.
(Applause)
Let's imagine a sculptor building a statue, just chipping away with his chisel.
Michelangelo had this elegant way of describing it when he said, "Every block of stone has a statue inside of it, and it's the task of the sculptor to discover it."
But what if he worked in the opposite direction?
Not from a solid block of stone, but from a pile of dust, somehow gluing millions of these particles together to form a statue.
I know that's an absurd notion.
It's probably impossible.
The only way you get a statue from a pile of dust is if the statue built itself -- if somehow we could compel millions of these particles to come together to form the statue.
Now, as odd as that sounds, that is almost exactly the problem I work on in my lab.
I don't build with stone, I build with nanomaterials.
They're these just impossibly small, fascinating little objects.
They're so small that if this controller was a nanoparticle, a human hair would be the size of this entire room.
And they're at the heart of a field we call nanotechnology, which I'm sure we've all heard about, and we've all heard how it is going to change everything.
When I was a graduate student, it was one of the most exciting times to be working in nanotechnology.
There were scientific breakthroughs happening all the time.
The conferences were buzzing, there was tons of money pouring in from funding agencies.
And the reason is when objects get really small, they're governed by a different set of physics that govern ordinary objects, like the ones we interact with.
We call this physics quantum mechanics.
And what it tells you is that you can precisely tune their behavior just by making seemingly small changes to them, like adding or removing a handful of atoms, or twisting the material.
It's like this ultimate toolkit.
You really felt empowered; you felt like you could make anything.
And we were doing it -- and by we I mean my whole generation of graduate students.
We were trying to make blazing fast computers using nanomaterials.
We were constructing quantum dots that could one day go in your body and find and fight disease.
There were even groups trying to make an elevator to space using carbon nanotubes.
You can look that up, that's true.
Anyways, we thought it was going to affect all parts of science and technology, from computing to medicine.
And I have to admit, I drank all of the Kool-Aid.
I mean, every last drop.
But that was 15 years ago, and -- fantastic science was done, really important work.
We've learned a lot.
We were never able to translate that science into new technologies -- into technologies that could actually impact people.
And the reason is, these nanomaterials -- they're like a double-edged sword.
The same thing that makes them so interesting -- their small size -- also makes them impossible to work with.
It's literally like trying to build a statue out of a pile of dust.
And we just don't have the tools that are small enough to work with them.
But even if we did, it wouldn't really matter, because we couldn't one by one place millions of particles together to build a technology.
So because of that, all of the promise and all of the excitement has remained just that: promise and excitement.
We don't have any disease-fighting nanobots, there's no elevators to space, and the thing that I'm most interested in, no new types of computing.
Now that last one, that's a really important one.
We just have come to expect the pace of computing advancements to go on indefinitely.
We've built entire economies on this idea.
And this pace exists because of our ability to pack more and more devices onto a computer chip.
And as those devices get smaller, they get faster, they consume less power and they get cheaper.
And it's this convergence that gives us this incredible pace.
As an example: if I took the room-sized computer that sent three men to the moon and back and somehow compressed it -- compressed the world's greatest computer of its day, so it was the same size as your smartphone -- your actual smartphone, that thing you spent 300 bucks on and just toss out every two years, would blow this thing away.
You would not be impressed.
It couldn't do anything that your smartphone does.
It would be slow, you couldn't put any of your stuff on it, you could possibly get through the first two minutes of a "Walking Dead" episode if you're lucky -- (Laughter) The point is the progress -- it's not gradual.
The progress is relentless.
It's exponential.
It compounds on itself year after year, to the point where if you compare a technology from one generation to the next, they're almost unrecognizable.
And we owe it to ourselves to keep this progress going.
We want to say the same thing 10, 20, 30 years from now: look what we've done over the last 30 years.
Yet we know this progress may not last forever.
In fact, the party's kind of winding down.
It's like "last call for alcohol," right?
If you look under the covers, by many metrics like speed and performance, the progress has already slowed to a halt.
So if we want to keep this party going, we have to do what we've always been able to do, and that is to innovate.
So our group's role and our group's mission is to innovate by employing carbon nanotubes, because we think that they can provide a path to continue this pace.
They are just like they sound.
They're tiny, hollow tubes of carbon atoms, and their nanoscale size, that small size, gives rise to these just outstanding electronic properties.
And the science tells us if we could employ them in computing, we could see up to a ten times improvement in performance.
It's like skipping through several technology generations in just one step.
So there we have it.
We have this really important problem and we have what is basically the ideal solution.
The science is screaming at us, "This is what you should be doing to solve your problem."
So, all right, let's get started, let's do this.
But you just run right back into that double-edged sword.
This "ideal solution" contains a material that's impossible to work with.
I'd have to arrange billions of them just to make one single computer chip.
It's that same conundrum, it's like this undying problem.
At this point, we said, "Let's just stop.
Let's not go down that same road.
Let's just figure out what's missing.
What are we not dealing with?
What are we not doing that needs to be done?"
It's like in "The Godfather," right?
When Fredo betrays his brother Michael, we all know what needs to be done.
Fredo's got to go.
(Laughter) But Michael -- he puts it off.
Fine, I get it.
Their mother's still alive, it would make her upset.
We just said, "What's the Fredo in our problem?"
What are we not dealing with?
What are we not doing, but needs to be done to make this a success?"
And the answer is that the statue has to build itself.
We have to find a way, somehow, to compel, to convince billions of these particles to assemble themselves into the technology.
We can't do it for them. They have to do it for themselves.
And it's the hard way, and this is not trivial, but in this case, it's the only way.
Now, as it turns out, this is not that alien of a problem.
We just don't build anything this way.
People don't build anything this way.
But if you look around -- and there's examples everywhere -- Mother Nature builds everything this way.
Everything is built from the bottom up.
You can go to the beach, you'll find these simple organisms that use proteins -- basically molecules -- to template what is essentially sand, just plucking it from the sea and building these extraordinary architectures with extreme diversity.
And nature's not crude like us, just hacking away.
She's elegant and smart, building with what's available, molecule by molecule, making structures with a complexity and a diversity that we can't even approach.
And she's already at the nano.
She's been there for hundreds of millions of years.
We're the ones that are late to the party.
So we decided that we're going to use the same tool that nature uses, and that's chemistry.
Chemistry is the missing tool.
And chemistry works in this case because these nanoscale objects are about the same size as molecules, so we can use them to steer these objects around, much like a tool.
That's exactly what we've done in our lab.
We've developed chemistry that goes into the pile of dust, into the pile of nanoparticles, and pulls out exactly the ones we need.
Then we can use chemistry to arrange literally billions of these particles into the pattern we need to build circuits.
And because we can do that, we can build circuits that are many times faster than what anyone's been able to make using nanomaterials before.
Chemistry's the missing tool, and every day our tool gets sharper and gets more precise.
And eventually -- and we hope this is within a handful of years -- we can deliver on one of those original promises.
Now, computing is just one example.
It's the one that I'm interested in, that my group is really invested in, but there are others in renewable energy, in medicine, in structural materials, where the science is going to tell you to move towards the nano.
That's where the biggest benefit is.
But if we're going to do that, the scientists of today and tomorrow are going to need new tools -- tools just like the ones I described.
And they will need chemistry. That's the point.
The beauty of science is that once you develop these new tools, they're out there.
They're out there forever, and anyone anywhere can pick them up and use them, and help to deliver on the promise of nanotechnology.
Thank you so much for your time. I appreciate it.
(Applause)
OK, so today I want to talk about how we talk about love.
And specifically, I want to talk about what's wrong with how we talk about love.
Most of us will probably fall in love a few times over the course of our lives, and in the English language, this metaphor, falling, is really the main way that we talk about that experience.
I don't know about you, but when I conceptualize this metaphor, what I picture is straight out of a cartoon -- like there's a man, he's walking down the sidewalk, without realizing it, he crosses over an open manhole, and he just plummets into the sewer below.
And I picture it this way because falling is not jumping.
Falling is accidental, it's uncontrollable.
It's something that happens to us without our consent.
And this -- this is the main way we talk about starting a new relationship.
I am a writer and I'm also an English teacher, which means I think about words for a living.
You could say that I get paid to argue that the language we use matters, and I would like to argue that many of the metaphors we use to talk about love -- maybe even most of them -- are a problem.
So, in love, we fall.
We're struck.
We are crushed.
We swoon.
We burn with passion.
Love makes us crazy, and it makes us sick.
Our hearts ache, and then they break.
So our metaphors equate the experience of loving someone to extreme violence or illness.
(Laughter) They do.
And they position us as the victims of unforeseen and totally unavoidable circumstances.
My favorite one of these is "smitten," which is the past participle of the word "smite."
And if you look this word up in the dictionary -- (Laughter) you will see that it can be defined as both "grievous affliction," and, "to be very much in love."
I tend to associate the word "smite" with a very particular context, which is the Old Testament.
In the Book of Exodus alone, there are 16 references to smiting, which is the word that the Bible uses for the vengeance of an angry God.
(Laughter) Here we are using the same word to talk about love that we use to explain a plague of locusts.
(Laughter) Right?
So, how did this happen?
How have we come to associate love with great pain and suffering?
And why do we talk about this ostensibly good experience as if we are victims?
These are difficult questions, but I have some theories.
And to think this through, I want to focus on one metaphor in particular, which is the idea of love as madness.
When I first started researching romantic love, I found these madness metaphors everywhere.
The history of Western culture is full of language that equates love to mental illness.
These are just a few examples.
William Shakespeare: "Love is merely a madness," from "As You Like It."
Friedrich Nietzsche: "There is always some madness in love."
"Got me looking, got me looking so crazy in love -- " (Laughter) from the great philosopher, Beyonc Knowles.
(Laughter) I fell in love for the first time when I was 20, and it was a pretty turbulent relationship right from the start.
And it was long distance for the first couple of years, so for me that meant very high highs and very low lows.
I can remember one moment in particular.
I was sitting on a bed in a hostel in South America, and I was watching the person I love walk out the door.
And it was late, it was nearly midnight, we'd gotten into an argument over dinner, and when we got back to our room, he threw his things in the bag and stormed out.
While I can no longer remember what that argument was about, I very clearly remember how I felt watching him leave.
I was 22, it was my first time in the developing world, and I was totally alone.
I had another week until my flight home, and I knew the name of the town that I was in, and the name of the city that I needed to get to to fly out, but I had no idea how to get around.
I had no guidebook and very little money, and I spoke no Spanish.
Someone more adventurous than me might have seen this as a moment of opportunity, but I just froze.
I just sat there.
And then I burst into tears.
But despite my panic, some small voice in my head thought, "Wow. That was dramatic.
I must really be doing this love thing right."
(Laughter) Because some part of me wanted to feel miserable in love.
And it sounds so strange to me now, but at 22, I longed to have dramatic experiences, and in that moment, I was irrational and furious and devastated, and weirdly enough, I thought that this somehow legitimized the feelings I had for the guy who had just left me.
I think on some level I wanted to feel a little bit crazy, because I thought that that was how love worked.
This really should not be surprising, considering that according to Wikipedia, there are eight films, 14 songs, two albums and one novel with the title "Crazy Love."
About half an hour later, he came back to our room.
We made up.
We spent another mostly happy week traveling together.
And then, when I got home, I thought, "That was so terrible and so great.
This must be a real romance."
I expected my first love to feel like madness, and of course, it met that expectation very well.
But loving someone like that -- as if my entire well-being depended on him loving me back -- was not very good for me or for him.
But I suspect this experience of love is not that unusual.
Most of us do feel a bit mad in the early stages of romantic love.
In fact, there is research to confirm that this is somewhat normal, because, neurochemically speaking, romantic love and mental illness are not that easily distinguished.
This is true.
This study from 1999 used blood tests to confirm that the serotonin levels of the newly in love very closely resembled the serotonin levels of people who had been diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive disorder.
(Laughter) Yes, and low levels of serotonin are also associated with seasonal affective disorder and depression.
So there is some evidence that love is associated with changes to our moods and our behaviors.
And there are other studies to confirm that most relationships begin this way.
Researchers believe that the low levels of serotonin is correlated with obsessive thinking about the object of love, which is like this feeling that someone has set up camp in your brain.
And most of us feel this way when we first fall in love.
But the good news is, it doesn't always last that long -- usually from a few months to a couple of years.
When I got back from my trip to South America, I spent a lot of time alone in my room, checking my email, desperate to hear from the guy I loved.
I decided that if my friends could not understand my grievous affliction, then I did not need their friendship.
So I stopped hanging out with most of them.
And it was probably the most unhappy year of my life.
But I think I felt like it was my job to be miserable, because if I could be miserable, then I would prove how much I loved him.
And if I could prove it, then we would have to end up together eventually.
This is the real madness, because there is no cosmic rule that says that great suffering equals great reward, but we talk about love as if this is true.
Our experiences of love are both biological and cultural.
Our biology tells us that love is good by activating these reward circuits in our brain, and it tells us that love is painful when, after a fight or a breakup, that neurochemical reward is withdrawn.
And in fact -- and maybe you've heard this -- neurochemically speaking, going through a breakup is a lot like going through cocaine withdrawal, which I find reassuring.
(Laughter) And then our culture uses language to shape and reinforce these ideas about love.
In this case, we're talking about metaphors about pain and addiction and madness.
It's kind of an interesting feedback loop.
Love is powerful and at times painful, and we express this in our words and stories, but then our words and stories prime us to expect love to be powerful and painful.
What's interesting to me is that all of this happens in a culture that values lifelong monogamy.
It seems like we want it both ways: we want love to feel like madness, and we want it to last an entire lifetime.
That sounds terrible.
(Laughter) To reconcile this, we need to either change our culture or change our expectations.
So, imagine if we were all less passive in love.
If we were more assertive, more open-minded, more generous and instead of falling in love, we stepped into love.
I know that this is asking a lot, but I'm not actually the first person to suggest this.
In their book, "Metaphors We Live By," linguists Mark Johnson and George Lakoff suggest a really interesting solution to this dilemma, which is to change our metaphors.
They argue that metaphors really do shape the way we experience the world, and that they can even act as a guide for future actions, like self-fulfilling prophecies.
Johnson and Lakoff suggest a new metaphor for love: love as a collaborative work of art.
I really like this way of thinking about love.
Linguists talk about metaphors as having entailments, which is essentially a way of considering all the implications of, or ideas contained within, a given metaphor.
And Johnson and Lakoff talk about everything that collaborating on a work of art entails: effort, compromise, patience, shared goals.
These ideas align nicely with our cultural investment in long-term romantic commitment, but they also work well for other kinds of relationships -- short-term, casual, polyamorous, non-monogamous, asexual -- because this metaphor brings much more complex ideas to the experience of loving someone.
So if love is a collaborative work of art, then love is an aesthetic experience.
Love is unpredictable, love is creative, love requires communication and discipline, it is frustrating and emotionally demanding.
And love involves both joy and pain.
Ultimately, each experience of love is different.
When I was younger, it never occurred to me that I was allowed to demand more from love, that I didn't have to just accept whatever love offered.
When 14-year-old Juliet first meets -- or, when 14-year-old Juliet cannot be with Romeo, whom she has met four days ago, she does not feel disappointed or angsty.
Where is she?
She wants to die.
Right?
And just as a refresher, at this point in the play, act three of five, Romeo is not dead.
He's alive, he's healthy, he's just been banished from the city.
I understand that 16th-century Verona is unlike contemporary North America, and yet when I first read this play, also at age 14, Juliet's suffering made sense to me.
Reframing love as something I get to create with someone I admire, rather than something that just happens to me without my control or consent, is empowering.
It's still hard.
Love still feels totally maddening and crushing some days, and when I feel really frustrated, I have to remind myself: my job in this relationship is to talk to my partner about what I want to make together.
This isn't easy, either.
But it's just so much better than the alternative, which is that thing that feels like madness.
This version of love is not about winning or losing someone's affection.
Instead, it requires that you trust your partner and talk about things when trusting feels difficult, which sounds so simple, but is actually a kind of revolutionary, radical act.
This is because you get to stop thinking about yourself and what you're gaining or losing in your relationship, and you get to start thinking about what you have to offer.
This version of love allows us to say things like, "Hey, we're not very good collaborators. Maybe this isn't for us."
Or, "That relationship was shorter than I had planned, but it was still kind of beautiful."
The beautiful thing about the collaborative work of art is that it will not paint or draw or sculpt itself.
This version of love allows us to decide what it looks like.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When I was a child, I knew I had superpowers.
That's right.
(Laughter) I thought I was absolutely amazing because I could understand and relate to the feelings of brown people, like my grandfather, a conservative Muslim guy.
And also, I could understand my Afghan mother, my Pakistani father, not so religious but laid-back, fairly liberal.
And of course, I could understand and relate to the feelings of white people.
The white Norwegians of my country.
You know, white, brown, whatever -- I loved them all.
I understood them all, even if they didn't always understand each other; they were all my people.
My father, though, was always really worried.
He kept saying that even with the best education, I was not going to get a fair shake.
I would still face discrimination, according to him.
And that the only way to be accepted by white people would be to become famous.
Now, mind you, he had this conversation with me when I was seven years old.
So while I'm seven years old, he said, "Look, so it's either got to be sports, or it's got to be music."
He didn't know anything about sports -- bless him -- so it was music.
So when I was seven years old, he gathered all my toys, all my dolls, and he threw them all away.
In exchange he gave me a crappy little Casio keyboard and -- (Laughter) Yeah. And singing lessons.
And he forced me, basically, to practice for hours and hours every single day.
Very quickly, he also had me performing for larger and larger audiences, and bizarrely, I became almost a kind of poster child for Norwegian multiculturalism.
I felt very proud, of course.
Because even the newspapers at this point were starting to write nice things about brown people, so I could feel that my superpower was growing.
So when I was 12 years old, walking home from school, I took a little detour because I wanted to buy my favorite sweets called "salty feet."
I know they sound kind of awful, but I absolutely love them.
They're basically these little salty licorice bits in the shape of feet.
And now that I say it out loud, I realize how terrible that sounds, but be that as it may, I absolutely love them.
So on my way into the store, there was this grown white guy in the doorway blocking my way.
So I tried to walk around him, and as I did that, he stopped me and he was staring at me, and he spit in my face, and he said, "Get out of my way you little black bitch, you little Paki bitch, go back home where you came from."
I was absolutely horrified.
I was staring at him.
I was too afraid to wipe the spit off my face, even as it was mixing with my tears.
I remember looking around, hoping that any minute now, a grown-up is going to come and make this guy stop.
But instead, people kept hurrying past me and pretended not to see me.
I was very confused because I was thinking, well, "My white people, come on! Where are they? What's going on?
How come they're not coming and rescuing me?"
So, needless to say, I didn't buy the sweets.
I just ran home as fast as I could.
Things were still OK, though, I thought.
As time went on, the more successful I became, I eventually started also attracting harassment from brown people.
Some men in my parent's community felt that it was unacceptable and dishonorable for a woman to be involved in music and to be so present in the media.
So very quickly, I was starting to become attacked at my own concerts.
I remember one of the concerts, I was onstage, I lean into the audience and the last thing I see is a young brown face, and the next thing I know is some sort of chemical is thrown in my eyes and I remember I couldn't really see and my eyes were watering but I kept singing anyway.
I was spit in the face in the streets of Oslo, this time by brown men.
They even tried to kidnap me at one point.
The death threats were endless.
I remember one older bearded guy stopped me in the street one time, and he said, "The reason I hate you so much is because you make our daughters think they can do whatever they want."
A younger guy warned me to watch my back.
He said music is un-Islamic and the job of whores, and if you keep this up, you are going to be raped and your stomach will be cut out so that another whore like you will not be born.
Again, I was so confused.
I couldn't understand what was going on.
My brown people now starting to treat me like this -- how come?
Instead of bridging the worlds, the two worlds, I felt like I was falling between my two worlds.
I suppose, for me, spit was kryptonite.
So by the time I was 17 years old, the death threats were endless, and the harassment was constant.
It got so bad, at one point my mother sat me down and said, "Look, we can no longer protect you, we can no longer keep you safe, so you're going to have to go."
So I bought a one-way ticket to London, I packed my suitcase and I left.
My biggest heartbreak at that point was that nobody said anything.
I had a very public exit from Norway.
My brown people, my white people -- nobody said anything.
Nobody said, "Hold on, this is wrong.
Support this girl, protect this girl, because she is one of us."
Nobody said that.
Instead, I felt like -- you know at the airport, on the baggage carousel you have these different suitcases going around and around, and there's always that one suitcase left at the end, the one that nobody wants, the one that nobody comes to claim.
I felt like that.
I'd never felt so alone. I'd never felt so lost.
So, after coming to London, I did eventually resume my music career.
Different place, but unfortunately the same old story.
I remember a message sent to me saying that I was going to be killed and that rivers of blood were going to flow and that I was going to be raped many times before I died.
By this point, I have to say, I was actually getting used to messages like this, but what became different was that now they started threatening my family.
So once again, I packed my suitcase, I left music and I moved to the US.
I'd had enough.
I didn't want to have anything to do with this anymore.
And I was certainly not going to be killed for something that wasn't even my dream -- it was my father's choice.
So I kind of got lost.
I kind of fell apart.
But I decided that what I wanted to do is spend the next however many years of my life supporting young people and to try to be there in some small way, whatever way that I could.
I started volunteering for various organizations that were working with young Muslims inside of Europe.
And, to my surprise, what I found was so many of these young people were suffering and struggling.
They were facing so many problems with their families and their communities who seemed to care more about their honor and their reputation than the happiness and the lives of their own kids.
I started feeling like maybe I wasn't so alone, maybe I wasn't so weird.
Maybe there are more of my people out there.
The thing is, what most people don't understand is that there are so many of us growing up in Europe who are not free to be ourselves.
We're not allowed to be who we are.
We are not free to marry or to be in relationships with people that we choose.
We can't even pick our own career.
This is the norm in the Muslim heartlands of Europe.
Even in the freest societies in the world, we're not free.
Our lives, our dreams, our future does not belong to us, it belongs to our parents and their community.
I found endless stories of young people who are lost to all of us, who are invisible to all of us but who are suffering, and they are suffering alone.
Kids we are losing to forced marriages, to honor-based violence and abuse.
Eventually, I realized after several years of working with these young people, that I will not be able to keep running.
I can't spend the rest of my life being scared and hiding and that I'm actually going to have to do something.
And I also realized that my silence, our silence, allows abuse like this to continue.
So I decided that I wanted to put my childhood superpower to some use by trying to make people on the different sides of these issues understand what it's like to be a young person stuck between your family and your country.
So I started making films, and I started telling these stories.
And I also wanted people to understand the deadly consequences of us not taking these problems seriously.
So the first film I made was about Banaz.
She was a 17-year-old Kurdish girl in London.
She was obedient, she did whatever her parents wanted.
She tried to do everything right.
She married some guy that her parents chose for her, even though he beat and raped her constantly.
And when she tried to go to her family for help, they said, "Well, you got to go back and be a better wife."
Because they didn't want a divorced daughter on their hands because, of course, that would bring dishonor on the family.
She was beaten so badly her ears would bleed, and when she finally left and she found a young man that she chose and she fell in love with, the community and the family found out and she disappeared.
She was found three months later.
She'd been stuffed into a suitcase and buried underneath the house.
She had been strangled, she had been beaten to death by three men, three cousins, on the orders of her father and uncle.
The added tragedy of Banaz's story is that she had gone to the police in England five times asking for help, telling them that she was going to be killed by her family.
The police didn't believe her so they didn't do anything.
And the problem with this is that not only are so many of our kids facing these problems within their families and within their families' communities, but they're also meeting misunderstandings and apathy in the countries that they grow up in.
When their own families betray them, they look to the rest of us, and when we don't understand, we lose them.
So while I was making this film, several people said to me, "Well, Deeyah, you know, this is just their culture, this is just what those people do to their kids and we can't really interfere."
I can assure you being murdered is not my culture.
You know?
And surely people who look like me, young women who come from backgrounds like me, should be subject to the same rights, the same protections as anybody else in our country, why not?
So, for my next film, I wanted to try and understand why some of our young Muslim kids in Europe are drawn to extremism and violence.
But with that topic, I also recognized that I was going to have to face my worst fear: the brown men with beards.
The same men, or similar men, to the ones that have hounded me for most of my life.
Men that I've been afraid of most of my life.
Men that I've also deeply disliked, for many, many years.
So I spent the next two years interviewing convicted terrorists, jihadis and former extremists.
What I already knew, what was very obvious already, was that religion, politics, Europe's colonial baggage, also Western foreign policy failures of recent years, were all a part of the picture.
But what I was more interested in finding out was what are the human, what are the personal reasons why some of our young people are susceptible to groups like this.
And what really surprised me was that I found wounded human beings.
Instead of the monsters that I was looking for, that I was hoping to find -- quite frankly because it would have been very satisfying -- I found broken people.
Just like Banaz, I found that these young men were torn apart from trying to bridge the gaps between their families and the countries that they were born in.
And what I also learned is that extremist groups, terrorist groups are taking advantage of these feelings of our young people and channeling that -- cynically -- channeling that toward violence.
"Come to us," they say.
"Reject both sides, your family and your country because they reject you.
For your family, their honor is more important than you and for your country, a real Norwegian, Brit or a French person will always be white and never you."
They're also promising our young people the things that they crave: significance, heroism, a sense of belonging and purpose, a community that loves and accepts them.
They make the powerless feel powerful.
The invisible and the silent are finally seen and heard.
This is what they're doing for our young people.
Why are these groups doing this for our young people and not us?
The thing is, I'm not trying to justify or excuse any of the violence.
What I am trying to say is that we have to understand why some of our young people are attracted to this.
I would like to also show you, actually -- these are childhood photos of some of the guys in the film.
What really struck me is that so many of them -- I never would have thought this -- but so many of them have absent or abusive fathers.
And several of these young guys ended up finding caring and compassionate father figures within these extremist groups.
I also found men brutalized by racist violence, but who found a way to stop feeling like victims by becoming violent themselves.
In fact, I found something, to my horror, that I recognized.
I found the same feelings that I felt as a 17-year-old as I fled from Norway.
The same confusion, the same sorrow, the same feeling of being betrayed and not belonging to anyone.
The same feeling of being lost and torn between cultures.
Having said that, I did not choose destruction, I chose to pick up a camera instead of a gun.
And the reason I did that is because of my superpower.
I could see that understanding is the answer, instead of violence.
Seeing human beings with all their virtues and all their flaws instead of continuing the caricatures: the us and them, the villains and victims.
I'd also finally come to terms with the fact that my two cultures didn't have to be on a collision course but instead became a space where I found my own voice.
I stopped feeling like I had to pick a side, but this took me many, many years.
There are so many of our young people today who are struggling with these same issues, and they're struggling with this alone.
And this leaves them open like wounds.
And for some, the worldview of radical Islam becomes the infection that festers in these open wounds.
There's an African proverb that says, "If the young are not initiated into the village, they will burn it down just to feel its warmth."
I would like to ask -- to Muslim parents and Muslim communities, will you love and care for your children without forcing them to meet your expectations?
Can you choose them instead of your honor?
Can you understand why they're so angry and alienated when you put your honor before their happiness?
Can you try to be a friend to your child so that they can trust you and want to share with you their experiences, rather than having to seek it somewhere else?
And to our young people tempted by extremism, can you acknowledge that your rage is fueled by pain?
Will you find the strength to resist those cynical old men who want to use your blood for their own profits?
Can you find a way to live?
Can you see that the sweetest revenge is for you to live a happy, full and free life?
A life defined by you and nobody else.
Why do you want to become just another dead Muslim kid?
And for the rest of us, when will we start listening to our young people?
How can we support them in redirecting their pain into something more constructive?
They think we don't like them.
They think we don't care what happens to them.
They think we don't accept them.
Can we find a way to make them feel differently?
What will it take for us to see them and notice them before they become either the victims or the perpetrators of violence?
Can we make ourselves care about them and consider them to be our own?
And not just be outraged when the victims of violence look like ourselves?
Can we find a way to reject hatred and heal the divisions between us?
The thing is we cannot afford to give up on each other or on our kids, even if they've given up on us.
We are all in this together.
And in the long term, revenge and violence will not work against extremists.
Terrorists want us to huddle in our houses in fear, closing our doors and our hearts.
They want us to tear open more wounds in our societies so that they can use them to spread their infection more widely.
They want us to become like them: intolerant, hateful and cruel.
The day after the Paris attacks, a friend of mine sent this photo of her daughter.
This is a white girl and an Arab girl.
They're best friends.
This image is the kryptonite for extremists.
These two little girls with their superpowers are showing the way forward towards a society that we need to build together, a society that includes and supports, rather than rejects our kids.
Thank you for listening.
(Applause)
For the past few years, I've been spending my summers in the marine biological laboratory in Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
And there, what I've been doing is essentially renting a boat.
What I would like to do is ask you to come on a boat ride with me tonight.
So, we ride off from Eel Pond into Vineyard Sound, right off the coast of Martha's Vineyard, equipped with a drone to identify potential spots from which to peer into the Atlantic.
Earlier, I was going to say into the depths of the Atlantic, but we don't have to go too deep to reach the unknown.
Here, barely two miles away from what is arguably the greatest marine biology lab in the world, we lower a simple plankton net into the water and bring up to the surface things that humanity rarely pays any attention to, and oftentimes has never seen before.
Here's one of the organisms that we caught in our net.
This is a jellyfish.
But look closely, and living inside of this animal is another organism that is very likely entirely new to science.
A complete new species.
Or how about this other transparent beauty with a beating heart, asexually growing on top of its head, progeny that will move on to reproduce sexually.
Let me say that again: this animal is growing asexually on top of its head, progeny that is going to reproduce sexually in the next generation.
A weird jellyfish?
Not quite.
This is an ascidian.
This is a group of animals that now we know we share extensive genomic ancestry with, and it is perhaps the closest invertebrate species to our own.
Meet your cousin, Thalia democratica.
(Laughter) I'm pretty sure you didn't save a spot at your last family reunion for Thalia, but let me tell you, these animals are profoundly related to us in ways that we're just beginning to understand.
So, next time you hear anybody derisively telling you that this type of research is a simple fishing expedition, I hope that you'll remember the trip that we just took.
Today, many of the biological sciences only see value in studying deeper what we already know -- in mapping already-discovered continents.
But some of us are much more interested in the unknown.
We want to discover completely new continents, and gaze at magnificent vistas of ignorance.
We crave the experience of being completely baffled by something we've never seen before.
And yes, I agree there's a lot of little ego satisfaction in being able to say, "Hey, I was the first one to discover that."
But this is not a self-aggrandizing enterprise, because in this type of discovery research, if you don't feel like a complete idiot most of the time, you're just not sciencing hard enough.
(Laughter) So every summer I bring onto the deck of this little boat of ours more and more things that we know very little about.
I would like tonight to tell you a story about life that rarely gets told in an environment like this.
From the vantage point of our 21st-century biological laboratories, we have begun to illuminate many mysteries of life with knowledge.
We sense that after centuries of scientific research, we're beginning to make significant inroads into understanding some of the most fundamental principles of life.
Our collective optimism is reflected by the growth of biotechnology across the globe, striving to utilize scientific knowledge to cure human diseases.
Things like cancer, aging, degenerative diseases; these are but some of the undesirables we wish to tame.
I often wonder: Why is it that we are having so much trouble trying to solve the problem of cancer?
Is it that we're trying to solve the problem of cancer, and not trying to understand life?
Life on this planet shares a common origin, and I can summarize 3.5 billion years of the history of life on this planet in a single slide.
What you see here are representatives of all known species in our planet.
In this immensity of life and biodiversity, we occupy a rather unremarkable position.
(Laughter) Homo sapiens.
The last of our kind.
And though I don't really want to disparage at all the accomplishments of our species, as much as we wish it to be so and often pretend that it is, we are not the measure of all things.
We are, however, the measurers of many things.
We relentlessly quantify, analyze and compare, and some of this is absolutely invaluable and indeed necessary.
But this emphasis today on forcing biological research to specialize and to produce practical outcomes is actually restricting our ability to interrogate life to unacceptably narrow confines and unsatisfying depths.
We are measuring an astonishingly narrow sliver of life, and hoping that those numbers will save all of our lives.
How narrow do you ask?
Well, let me give you a number.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration recently estimated that about 95 percent of our oceans remain unexplored.
Now let that sink in for a second.
95 percent of our oceans remain unexplored.
I think it's very safe to say that we don't even know how much about life we do not know.
So, it's not surprising that every week in my field we begin to see the addition of more and more new species to this amazing tree of life.
This one for example -- discovered earlier this summer, new to science, and now occupying its lonely branch in our family tree.
What is even more tragic is that we know about a bunch of other species of animals out there, but their biology remains sorely under-studied.
I'm sure some of you have heard about the fact that a starfish can actually regenerate its arm after it's lost.
But some of you might not know that the arm itself can actually regenerate a complete starfish.
And there are animals out there that do truly astounding things.
I'm almost willing to bet that many of you have never heard of the flatworm, Schmidtea mediterranea.
This little guy right here does things that essentially just blow my mind.
You can grab one of these animals and cut it into 18 different fragments, and each and every one of those fragments will go on to regenerate a complete animal in under two weeks.
18 heads, 18 bodies, 18 mysteries.
For the past decade and a half or so, I've been trying to figure out how these little dudes do what they do, and how they pull this magic trick off.
But like all good magicians, they're not really releasing their secrets readily to me.
(Laughter) So here we are, after 20 years of essentially studying these animals, genome mapping, chin scratching, and thousands of amputations and thousands of regenerations, we still don't fully understand how these animals do what they do.
Each planarian an ocean unto itself, full of unknowns.
One of the common characteristics of all of these animals I've been talking to you about is that they did not appear to have received the memo that they need to behave according to the rules that we have derived from a handful of randomly selected animals that currently populate the vast majority of biomedical laboratories across the world.
Meet our Nobel Prize winners.
Seven species, essentially, that have produced for us the brunt of our understanding of biological behavior today.
This little guy right here -- three Nobel Prizes in 12 years.
And yet, after all the attention they have garnered, and all the knowledge they have generated, as well as the lion's share of the funding, here we are standing [before] the same litany of intractable problems and many new challenges.
And that's because, unfortunately, these seven animals essentially correspond to 0.0009 percent of all of the species that inhabit the planet.
So I'm beginning to suspect that our specialization is beginning to impede our progress at best, and at worst, is leading us astray.
That's because life on this planet and its history is the history of rule breakers.
Life started on the face of this planet as single-cell organisms, swimming for millions of years in the ocean, until one of those creatures decided, "I'm going to do things differently today; today I would like to invent something called multicellularity, and I'm going to do this."
And I'm sure it wasn't a popular decision at the time -- (Laughter) but somehow, it managed to do it.
And then, multicellular organisms began to populate all these ancestral oceans, and they thrived.
And we have them here today.
Land masses began to emerge from the surface of the oceans, and another creature thought, "Hey, that looks like a really nice piece of real estate.
I'd like to move there."
"Are you crazy?
You're going to desiccate out there. Nothing can live out of water."
But life found a way, and there are organisms now that live on land.
Once on land, they may have looked up into the sky and said, "It would be nice to go to the clouds, I'm going to fly."
"You can't break the law of gravity, there's no way you can fly."
And yet, nature has invented -- multiple and independent times -- ways to fly.
I love to study these animals that break the rules, because every time they break a rule, they invent something new that made it possible for us to be able to be here today.
These animals did not get the memo.
They break the rules.
So if we're going to study animals that break the rules, shouldn't how we study them also break the rules?
I think we need to renew our spirit of exploration.
Rather than bring nature into our laboratories and interrogate it there, we need to bring our science into the majestic laboratory that is nature, and there, with our modern technological armamentarium, interrogate every new form of life we find, and any new biological attribute that we may find.
We actually need to bring all of our intelligence to becoming stupid again -- clueless [before] the immensity of the unknown.
Because after all, science is not really about knowledge.
Science is about ignorance.
That's what we do.
Once, Antoine de Saint-Exupry wrote, "If you want to build a ship, don't drum up people to collect wood and don't assign them tasks and work, but rather teach them to long for the endless immensity of the sea ..."
As a scientist and a teacher, I like to paraphrase this to read that we scientists need to teach our students to long for the endless immensity of the sea that is our ignorance.
We Homo sapiens are the only species we know of that is driven to scientific inquiry.
We, like all other species on this planet, are inextricably woven into the history of life on this planet.
And I think I'm a little wrong when I say that life is a mystery, because I think that life is actually an open secret that has been beckoning our species for millennia to understand it.
So I ask you: Aren't we the best chance that life has to know itself?
And if so, what the heck are we waiting for?
Thank you.
(Applause)
How many of you have used an electronic spreadsheet, like Microsoft Excel?
Very good.
Now, how many of you have run a business with a spreadsheet by hand, like my dad did for his small printing business in Philadelphia?
A lot less.
Well, that's the way it was done for hundreds of years.
In early 1978, I started working on an idea that eventually became VisiCalc.
And the next year it shipped running on something new called an Apple II personal computer.
You could tell that things had really changed when, six years later, the Wall Street Journal ran an editorial that assumed you knew what VisiCalc was and maybe even were using it.
Steve Jobs back in 1990 said that "spreadsheets propelled the industry forward."
"VisiCalc propelled the success of Apple more than any other single event."
On a more personal note, Steve said, "If VisiCalc had been written for some other computer, you'd be interviewing somebody else right now."
So, VisiCalc was instrumental in getting personal computers on business desks.
How did it come about?
What was it? What did I go through to make it be what it was?
Well, I first learned to program back in 1966, when I was 15 -- just a couple months after this photo was taken.
Few high schoolers had access to computers in those days.
But through luck and an awful lot of perseverance, I was able to get computer time around the city.
After sleeping in the mud at Woodstock, I went off to MIT to go to college, where to make money, I worked on the Multics Project.
Multics was a trailblazing interactive time-sharing system.
Have you heard of the Linux and Unix operating systems?
They came from Multics.
I worked on the Multics versions of what are known as interpreted computer languages, that are used by people in noncomputer fields to do their calculations while seated at a computer terminal.
After I graduated from MIT, I went to work for Digital Equipment Corporation.
At DEC, I worked on software for the new area of computerized typesetting.
I helped newspapers replace their reporters' typewriters with computer terminals.
I'd write software and then I'd go out in the field to places like the Kansas City Star, where I would train users and get feedback.
This was real-world experience that is quite different than what I saw in the lab at MIT.
After that, I was project leader of the software for DEC's first word processor, again a new field.
Like with typesetting, the important thing was crafting a user interface that was both natural and efficient for noncomputer people to use.
After I was at DEC, I went to work for a small company that made microprocessor-based electronic cash registers for the fast-food industry.
But I had always wanted to start a company with my friend Bob Frankston that I met on the Multics project at MIT.
So I decided to go back to school to learn as much as I could about business.
And in the fall of 1977, I entered the MBA program at Harvard Business School.
I was one of the few percentage of students who had a background in computer programming.
There's a picture of me from the yearbook sitting in the front row.
(Laughter) Now, at Harvard, we learned by the case method.
We'd do about three cases a day.
Cases consist of up to a few dozen pages describing particular business situations.
They often have exhibits, and exhibits often have words and numbers laid out in ways that make sense for the particular situation.
They're usually all somewhat different.
Here's my homework.
Again, numbers, words, laid out in ways that made sense.
Lots of calculations -- we got really close to our calculators.
In fact, here's my calculator.
For Halloween, I went dressed up as a calculator.
(Laughter) At the beginning of each class, the professor would call on somebody to present the case.
What they would do is they would explain what was going on and then dictate information that the professor would transcribe onto the many motorized blackboards in the front of the class, and then we'd have a discussion.
One of the really frustrating things is when you've done all your homework, you come in the next day only to find out that you made an error and all of the other numbers you did were wrong.
And you couldn't participate as well.
And we were marked by class participation.
So, sitting there with 87 other people in the class, I got to daydream a lot.
Most programmers in those days worked on mainframes, building things like inventory systems, payroll systems and bill-paying systems.
But I had worked on interactive word processing and on-demand personal computation.
Instead of thinking about paper printouts and punch cards, I imagined a magic blackboard that if you erased one number and wrote a new thing in, all of the other numbers would automatically change, like word processing with numbers.
I imagined that my calculator had mouse hardware on the bottom of it and a head-up display, like in a fighter plane.
And I could type some numbers in, and circle it, and press the sum button.
And right in the middle of a negotiation I'd be able to get the answer.
Now I just had to take my fantasy and turn it into reality.
My father taught me about prototyping.
He showed me mock-ups that he'd make to figure out the placement on the page for the things for brochures that he was printing.
And he'd use it to get feedback from customers and OKs before he sent the job off to the presses.
The act of making a simple, working version of what you're trying to build forces you to uncover key problems.
And it lets you find solutions to those problems much less expensively.
So I decided to build a prototype.
I went to a video terminal connected to Harvard's time-sharing system and got to work.
One of the first problems that I ran into was: How do you represent values in formulas?
Let me show you what I mean.
I thought that you would point somewhere, type in some words, then type in some somewhere else, put in some numbers and some more numbers, point where you want the answer.
And then point to the first, press minus, point to the second, and get the result.
The problem was: What should I put in the formula?
It had to be something the computer knew what to put in.
And if you looked at the formula, you needed to know where on the screen it referred to.
The first thing I thought was the programmer way of doing it.
The first time you pointed to somewhere, the computer would ask you to type in a unique name.
It became pretty clear pretty fast that that was going to be too tedious.
The computer had to automatically make up the name and put it inside.
So I thought, why not make it be the order in which you create them?
I tried that. Value 1, value 2.
Pretty quickly I saw that if you had more than a few values you'd never remember on the screen where things were.
Then I said, why not instead of allowing you to put values anywhere, I'll restrict you to a grid?
Then when you pointed to a cell, the computer could put the row and column in as a name.
And, if I did it like a map and put ABC across the top and numbers along the side, if you saw B7 in a formula, you'd know exactly where it was on the screen.
And if you had to type the formula in yourself, you'd know what to do.
Restricting you to a grid helped solve my problem.
It also opened up new capabilities, like the ability to have ranges of cells.
But it wasn't too restrictive -- you could still put any value, any formula, in any cell.
And that's the way we do it to this day, almost 40 years later.
My friend Bob and I decided that we were going to build this product together.
I did more work figuring out exactly how the program was supposed to behave.
I wrote a reference card to act as documentation.
It also helped me ensure that the user interface I was defining could be explained concisely and clearly to regular people.
Bob worked in the attic of the apartment he rented in Arlington, Massachusetts.
This is the inside of the attic.
Bob bought time on the MIT Multics System to write computer code on a terminal like this.
And then he would download test versions to a borrowed Apple II over a phone line using an acoustic coupler, and then we would test.
For one of these tests I prepared for this case about the Pepsi Challenge.
Print wasn't working yet, so I had to copy everything down.
Save wasn't working, so every time it crashed, I had to type in all of the formulas again, over and over again.
The next day in class, I raised my hand; I got called on, and I presented the case.
I did five-year projections. I did all sorts of different scenarios.
I aced the case. VisiCalc was already useful.
The professor said, "How did you do it?"
Well, I didn't want to tell him about our secret program.
(Laughter) So I said, "I took this and added this and multiplied by this and subtracted that."
He said, "Well, why didn't you use a ratio?"
I said, "Hah! A ratio -- that wouldn't have been as exact!"
What I didn't say was, "Divide isn't working yet."
(Laughter) Eventually, though, we did finish enough of VisiCalc to be able to show it to the public.
My dad printed up a sample reference card that we could use as marketing material.
In June of 1979, our publisher announced VisiCalc to the world, in a small booth at the giant National Computer Conference in New York City.
The New York Times had a humorous article about the conference.
"The machines perform what seem religious rites ...
Even as the believers gather, the painters in the Coliseum sign room are adding to the pantheon, carefully lettering 'VISICALC' in giant black on yellow.
All hail VISICALC!"
(Gasp) New York Times: "All hail VISICALC."
(Laughter) That was the last mention of the electronic spreadsheet in the popular business press for about two years.
Most people didn't get it yet.
But some did.
In October of 1979, we shipped VisiCalc.
It came in packaging that looked like this.
And it looked like this running on the Apple II.
And the rest, as they say, is history.
Now, there's an awful lot more to this story, but that'll have to wait for another day.
One thing, though, Harvard remembers.
Here's that classroom.
They put up a plaque to commemorate what happened there.
(Applause) But it also serves as a reminder that you, too, should take your unique backgrounds, skills and needs and build prototypes to discover and work out the key problems, and through that, change the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So earlier this year, I was informed that I would be doing a TED Talk.
So I was excited, then I panicked, then I was excited, then I panicked, and in between the excitement and the panicking, I started to do my research, and my research primarily consisted of Googling how to give a great TED Talk.
(Laughter) And interspersed with that, I was Googling Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie.
How many of you know who that is?
(Cheers) So I was Googling her because I always Google her because I'm just a fan, but also because she always has important and interesting things to say.
And the combination of those searches kept leading me to her talk on the dangers of a single story, on what happens when we have a solitary lens through which to understand certain groups of people, and it is the perfect talk.
It's the talk that I would have given if I had been famous first.
(Laughter) You know, and you know, like, she's African and I'm African, and she's a feminist and I'm a feminist, and she's a storyteller and I'm a storyteller, so I really felt like it's my talk.
(Laughter) So I decided that I was going to learn how to code, and then I was going to hack the internet and I would take down all the copies of that talk that existed, and then I would memorize it, and then I would come here and deliver it as if it was my own speech.
So that plan was going really well, except the coding part, and then one morning a few months ago, I woke up to the news that the wife of a certain presidential candidate had given a speech that -- (Laughter) (Applause) that sounded eerily like a speech given by one of my other faves, Michelle Obama.
(Cheers) And so I decided that I should probably write my own TED Talk, and so that is what I am here to do.
I'm here to talk about my own observations about storytelling.
I want to talk to you about the power of stories, of course, but I also want to talk about their limitations, particularly for those of us who are interested in social justice.
So since Adichie gave that talk seven years ago, there has been a boom in storytelling.
Stories are everywhere, and if there was a danger in the telling of one tired old tale, then I think there has got to be lots to celebrate about the flourishing of so many stories and so many voices.
Stories are the antidote to bias.
In fact, today, if you are middle class and connected via the internet, you can download stories at the touch of a button or the swipe of a screen.
You can listen to a podcast about what it's like to grow up Dalit in Kolkata.
You can hear an indigenous man in Australia talk about the trials and triumphs of raising his children in dignity and in pride.
Stories make us fall in love.
They heal rifts and they bridge divides.
Stories can even make it easier for us to talk about the deaths of people in our societies who don't matter, because they make us care.
Right?
I'm not so sure, and I actually work for a place called the Centre for Stories.
And my job is to help to tell stories that challenge mainstream narratives about what it means to be black or a Muslim or a refugee or any of those other categories that we talk about all the time.
But I come to this work after a long history as a social justice activist, and so I'm really interested in the ways that people talk about nonfiction storytelling as though it's about more than entertainment, as though it's about being a catalyst for social action.
It's not uncommon to hear people say that stories make the world a better place.
Increasingly, though, I worry that even the most poignant stories, particularly the stories about people who no one seems to care about, can often get in the way of action towards social justice.
Now, this is not because storytellers mean any harm.
Quite the contrary.
Storytellers are often do-gooders like me and, I suspect, yourselves.
And the audiences of storytellers are often deeply compassionate and empathetic people.
Still, good intentions can have unintended consequences, and so I want to propose that stories are not as magical as they seem.
So three -- because it's always got to be three -- three reasons why I think that stories don't necessarily make the world a better place.
Firstly, stories can create an illusion of solidarity.
There is nothing like that feel-good factor you get from listening to a fantastic story where you feel like you climbed that mountain, right, or that you befriended that death row inmate.
But you didn't.
You haven't done anything.
Listening is an important but insufficient step towards social action.
Secondly, I think often we are drawn towards characters and protagonists who are likable and human.
And this makes sense, of course, right?
Because if you like someone, then you care about them.
But the inverse is also true.
If you don't like someone, then you don't care about them.
And if you don't care about them, you don't have to see yourself as having a moral obligation to think about the circumstances that shaped their lives.
I learned this lesson when I was 14 years old.
I learned that actually, you don't have to like someone to recognize their wisdom, and you certainly don't have to like someone to take a stand by their side.
So my bike was stolen while I was riding it -- (Laughter) which is possible if you're riding slowly enough, which I was.
(Laughter) So one minute I'm cutting across this field in the Nairobi neighborhood where I grew up, and it's like a very bumpy path, and so when you're riding a bike, you don't want to be like, you know -- (Laughter) And so I'm going like this, slowly pedaling, and all of a sudden, I'm on the floor.
I'm on the ground, and I look up, and there's this kid peddling away in the getaway vehicle, which is my bike, and he's about 11 or 12 years old, and I'm on the floor, and I'm crying because I saved a lot of money for that bike, and I'm crying and I stand up and I start screaming.
Instinct steps in, and I start screaming, "Mwizi, mwizi!"
which means "thief" in Swahili.
And out of the woodworks, all of these people come out and they start to give chase.
This is Africa, so mob justice in action.
Right?
And I round the corner, and they've captured him, they've caught him.
The suspect has been apprehended, and they make him give me my bike back, and they also make him apologize.
Again, you know, typical African justice, right?
And so they make him say sorry.
And so we stand there facing each other, and he looks at me, and he says sorry, but he looks at me with this unbridled fury.
He is very, very angry.
And it is the first time that I have been confronted with someone who doesn't like me simply because of what I represent.
He looks at me with this look as if to say, "You, with your shiny skin and your bike, you're angry at me?"
So it was a hard lesson that he didn't like me, but you know what, he was right.
I was a middle-class kid living in a poor country.
I had a bike, and he barely had food.
Sometimes, it's the messages that we don't want to hear, the ones that make us want to crawl out of ourselves, that we need to hear the most.
For every lovable storyteller who steals your heart, there are hundreds more whose voices are slurred and ragged, who don't get to stand up on a stage dressed in fine clothes like this.
There are a million angry-boy-on-a-bike stories and we can't afford to ignore them simply because we don't like their protagonists or because that's not the kid that we would bring home with us from the orphanage.
The third reason that I think that stories don't necessarily make the world a better place is that too often we are so invested in the personal narrative that we forget to look at the bigger picture.
And so we applaud someone when they tell us about their feelings of shame, but we don't necessarily link that to oppression.
We nod understandingly when someone says they felt small, but we don't link that to discrimination.
The most important stories, especially for social justice, are those that do both, that are both personal and allow us to explore and understand the political.
But it's not just about the stories we like versus the stories we choose to ignore.
Increasingly, we are living in a society where there are larger forces at play, where stories are actually for many people beginning to replace the news.
Yeah?
We live in a time where we are witnessing the decline of facts, when emotions rule and analysis, it's kind of boring, right?
Where we value what we feel more than what we actually know.
A recent report by the Pew Center on trends in America indicates that only 10 percent of young adults under the age of 30 "place a lot of trust in the media."
Now, this is significant.
It means that storytellers are gaining trust at precisely the same moment that many in the media are losing the confidence in the public.
This is not a good thing, because while stories are important and they help us to have insights in many ways, we need the media.
From my years as a social justice activist, I know very well that we need credible facts from media institutions combined with the powerful voices of storytellers.
That's what pushes the needle forward in terms of social justice.
In the final analysis, of course, it is justice that makes the world a better place, not stories. Right?
And so if it is justice that we are after, then I think we mustn't focus on the media or on storytellers.
We must focus on audiences, on anyone who has ever turned on a radio or listened to a podcast, and that means all of us.
So a few concluding thoughts on what audiences can do to make the world a better place.
So firstly, the world would be a better place, I think, if audiences were more curious and more skeptical and asked more questions about the social context that created those stories that they love so much.
Secondly, the world would be a better place if audiences recognized that storytelling is intellectual work.
And I think it would be important for audiences to demand more buttons on their favorite websites, buttons for example that say, "If you liked this story, click here to support a cause your storyteller believes in."
Or "click here to contribute to your storyteller's next big idea."
Often, we are committed to the platforms, but not necessarily to the storytellers themselves.
And then lastly, I think that audiences can make the world a better place by switching off their phones, by stepping away from their screens and stepping out into the real world beyond what feels safe.
Alice Walker has said, "Look closely at the present you are constructing.
It should look like the future you are dreaming."
Storytellers can help us to dream, but it's up to all of us to have a plan for justice.
Thank you.
(Applause)
If I asked you to picture the air, what do you imagine?
Most people think about either empty space or clear blue sky or sometimes trees dancing in the wind.
And then I remember my high school chemistry teacher with really long socks at the blackboard, drawing diagrams of bubbles connected to other bubbles, and describing how they vibrate and collide in a kind of frantic soup.
But really, we tend not to think about the air that much at all.
We notice it mostly when there's some kind of unpleasant sensory intrusion upon it, like a terrible smell or something visible like smoke or mist.
But it's always there.
It's touching all of us right now.
It's even inside us.
Our air is immediate, vital and intimate.
And yet, it's so easily forgotten.
So what is the air?
It's the combination of the invisible gases that envelop the Earth, attracted by the Earth's gravitational pull.
And even though I'm a visual artist, I'm interested in the invisibility of the air.
I'm interested in how we imagine it, how we experience it and how we all have an innate understanding of its materiality through breathing.
All life on Earth changes the air through gas exchange, and we're all doing it right now.
Actually, why don't we all right now together take one big, collective, deep breath in.
Ready? In. (Inhales) And out. (Exhales) That air that you just exhaled, you enriched a hundred times in carbon dioxide.
So roughly five liters of air per breath, 17 breaths per minute of the 525,600 minutes per year, comes to approximately 45 million liters of air, enriched 100 times in carbon dioxide, just for you.
Now, that's equivalent to about 18 Olympic-sized swimming pools.
For me, air is plural.
It's simultaneously as small as our breathing and as big as the planet.
And it's kind of hard to picture.
Maybe it's impossible, and maybe it doesn't matter.
Through my visual arts practice, I try to make air, not so much picture it, but to make it visceral and tactile and haptic.
I try to expand this notion of the aesthetic, how things look, so that it can include things like how it feels on your skin and in your lungs, and how your voice sounds as it passes through it.
I explore the weight, density and smell, but most importantly, I think a lot about the stories we attach to different kinds of air.
This is a work I made in 2014.
It's called "Different Kinds of Air: A Plant's Diary," where I was recreating the air from different eras in Earth's evolution, and inviting the audience to come in and breathe them with me.
And it's really surprising, so drastically different.
Now, I'm not a scientist, but atmospheric scientists will look for traces in the air chemistry in geology, a bit like how rocks can oxidize, and they'll extrapolate that information and aggregate it, such that they can pretty much form a recipe for the air at different times.
Then I come in as the artist and take that recipe and recreate it using the component gases.
I was particularly interested in moments of time that are examples of life changing the air, but also the air that can influence how life will evolve, like Carboniferous air.
It's from about 300 to 350 million years ago.
It's an era known as the time of the giants.
So for the first time in the history of life, lignin evolves.
That's the hard stuff that trees are made of.
So trees effectively invent their own trunks at this time, and they get really big, bigger and bigger, and pepper the Earth, releasing oxygen, releasing oxygen, releasing oxygen, such that the oxygen levels are about twice as high as what they are today.
And this rich air supports massive insects -- huge spiders and dragonflies with a wingspan of about 65 centimeters.
To breathe, this air is really clean and really fresh.
It doesn't so much have a flavor, but it does give your body a really subtle kind of boost of energy.
It's really good for hangovers.
(Laughter) Or there's the air of the Great Dying -- that's about 252.5 million years ago, just before the dinosaurs evolve.
It's a really short time period, geologically speaking, from about 20- to 200,000 years.
Really quick.
This is the greatest extinction event in Earth's history, even bigger than when the dinosaurs died out.
Eighty-five to 95 percent of species at this time die out, and simultaneous to that is a huge, dramatic spike in carbon dioxide, that a lot of scientists agree comes from a simultaneous eruption of volcanoes and a runaway greenhouse effect.
Oxygen levels at this time go to below half of what they are today, so about 10 percent.
So this air would definitely not support human life, but it's OK to just have a breath.
And to breathe, it's oddly comforting.
It's really calming, it's quite warm and it has a flavor a little bit like soda water.
It has that kind of spritz, quite pleasant.
So with all this thinking about air of the past, it's quite natural to start thinking about the air of the future.
And instead of being speculative with air and just making up what I think might be the future air, I discovered this human-synthesized air.
That means that it doesn't occur anywhere in nature, but it's made by humans in a laboratory for application in different industrial settings.
Why is it future air?
Well, this air is a really stable molecule that will literally be part of the air once it's released, for the next 300 to 400 years, before it's broken down.
So that's about 12 to 16 generations.
And this future air has some very sensual qualities.
It's very heavy.
It's about eight times heavier than the air we're used to breathing.
It's so heavy, in fact, that when you breathe it in, whatever words you speak are kind of literally heavy as well, so they dribble down your chin and drop to the floor and soak into the cracks.
It's an air that operates quite a lot like a liquid.
Now, this air comes with an ethical dimension as well.
Humans made this air, but it's also the most potent greenhouse gas that has ever been tested.
Its warming potential is 24,000 times that of carbon dioxide, and it has that longevity of 12 to 16 generations.
So this ethical confrontation is really central to my work.
(In a lowered voice) It has another quite surprising quality.
It changes the sound of your voice quite dramatically.
(Laughter) So when we start to think -- ooh! It's still there a bit.
(Laughter) When we think about climate change, we probably don't think about giant insects and erupting volcanoes or funny voices.
The images that more readily come to mind are things like retreating glaciers and polar bears adrift on icebergs.
We think about pie charts and column graphs and endless politicians talking to scientists wearing cardigans.
But perhaps it's time we start thinking about climate change on the same visceral level that we experience the air.
Like air, climate change is simultaneously at the scale of the molecule, the breath and the planet.
It's immediate, vital and intimate, as well as being amorphous and cumbersome.
And yet, it's so easily forgotten.
Climate change is the collective self-portrait of humanity.
It reflects our decisions as individuals, as governments and as industries.
And if there's anything I've learned from looking at air, it's that even though it's changing, it persists.
It may not support the kind of life that we'd recognize, but it will support something.
And if we humans are such a vital part of that change, I think it's important that we can feel the discussion.
Because even though it's invisible, humans are leaving a very vibrant trace in the air.
Thank you.
(Applause)
One of the kingdoms most prosperous merchants has been exposed for his corrupt dealings.
Nearly all of his riches are invested in a collection of 30 exquisite Burmese rubies, and the crowd in the square is clamoring for their confiscation to reimburse his victims.
But the scoundrel and his allies at court have made a convincing case that at least some of his wealth was obtained legitimately, and through good service to the crown.
The king ponders for a minute and announces his judgment.
Because theres no way to know which portion of the rubies were bought with ill-gotten wealth, the fine will be determined through a game of wits between the merchant and the kings most clever advisor  you.
Youre both told the rules in advance.
The merchant will be allowed to discreetly divide his rubies among three boxes, which will then be placed in front of you.
You will be given three cards, and must write a number between 1 and 30 on each, before putting a card in front of each of the boxes.
The boxes will then all be opened.
For each box, you will receive exactly as many rubies as the number written on the corresponding card, if the box has that many.
But if your number is greater than the number of rubies actually there, the scoundrel gets to keep the entire box.
The king puts just two constraints on how the scoundrel distributes his rubies.
Each box must contain at least two rubies and one of the boxes must contain exactly six more rubies than another but you wont know which boxes those are.
After a few minutes of deliberation, the merchant hides the gems, and the boxes are brought in front of you.
Which numbers should you choose in order to guarantee the largest possible fine for the scoundrel and the greatest compensation for his victims?
Pause the video now if you want to figure it out for yourself.
Answer in 3 Answer in 2 Answer in 1 You dont want to overshoot by being too greedy.
But there is a way you can guarantee to get more than half of the scoundrels stash.
The situation resembles an adversarial game like chess  only here you cant see the opponents position.
To figure out the minimum number of rubies youre guaranteed to win, you need to look for the worst case scenario, as if the merchant already knew your move and could arrange the rubies to minimize your winnings.
Because you have no way of knowing which boxes will have more or fewer rubies, you should pick the same number for each.
Suppose you write three 9s.
The scoundrel might have allocated the rubies as 8, 14 and 8.
In that case, youd receive 9 from the middle box and no others.
On the other hand, you can be sure that at least two boxes have a minimum of 8 rubies.
Heres why.
Well start by assuming the opposite, that two boxes have 7 or fewer.
Those could not be the two that differ by 6, because every box must have at least 2 rubies.
In that case, the third box would have at most 13 rubiesthats 7 plus 6.
Add up all three of those boxes, and the most that could equal is 27.
Since thats less than 30, this scenario isnt possible.
You now know, by whats called a proof by contradiction, that two of the boxes have 8 or more rubies.
If you ask for 8 from all three boxes youll receive at least 16 and thats the best you can guarantee, as you can see by thinking again about the 8, 14, 8 scenario.
Youve recovered more than half the scoundrels fortune as restitution for the public.
And though hes managed to hold on to some of his rubies, his fortune has definitely lost some of its shine.
Cybercrime is out of control.
It's everywhere.
We hear about it every single day.
This year, over two billion records lost or stolen.
And last year, 100 million of us, mostly Americans, lost our health insurance data to thieves -- myself included.
What's particularly concerning about this is that in most cases, it was months before anyone even reported that these records were stolen.
So if you watch the evening news, you would think that most of this is espionage or nation-state activity.
And, well, some of it is.
Espionage, you see, is an accepted international practice.
But in this case, it is only a small portion of the problem that we're dealing with.
How often do we hear about a breach followed by, "... it was the result of a sophisticated nation-state attack?"
Well, often that is companies not being willing to own up to their own lackluster security practices.
There is also a widely held belief that by blaming an attack on a nation-state, you are putting regulators at bay -- at least for a period of time.
So where is all of this coming from?
The United Nations estimates that 80 percent of it is from highly organized and ultrasophisticated criminal gangs.
To date, this represents one of the largest illegal economies in the world, topping out at, now get this, 445 billion dollars.
Let me put that in perspective for all of you: 445 billion dollars is larger than the GDP of 160 nations, including Ireland, Finland, Denmark and Portugal, to name a few.
So how does this work?
How do these criminals operate?
Well, let me tell you a little story.
About a year ago, our security researchers were tracking a somewhat ordinary but sophisticated banking Trojan called the Dyre Wolf.
The Dyre Wolf would get on your computer via you clicking on a link in a phishing email that you probably shouldn't have.
It would then sit and wait.
It would wait until you logged into your bank account.
And when you did, the bad guys would reach in, steal your credentials, and then use that to steal your money.
This sounds terrible, but the reality is, in the security industry, this form of attack is somewhat commonplace.
However, the Dyre Wolf had two distinctly different personalities -- one for these small transactions, but it took on an entirely different persona if you were in the business of moving large-scale wire transfers.
Here's what would happen.
You start the process of issuing a wire transfer, and up in your browser would pop a screen from your bank, indicating that there's a problem with your account, and that you need to call the bank immediately, along with the number to the bank's fraud department.
So you pick up the phone and you call.
And after going through the normal voice prompts, you're met with an English-speaking operator.
"Hello, Altoro Mutual Bank. How can I help you?"
And you go through the process like you do every time you call your bank, of giving them your name and your account number, going through the security checks to verify you are who you said you are.
Most of us may not know this, but in many large-scale wire transfers, it requires two people to sign off on the wire transfer, so the operator then asks you to get the second person on the line, and goes through the same set of verifications and checks.
Sounds normal, right?
Only one problem: you're not talking to the bank.
You're talking to the criminals.
They had built an English-speaking help desk, fake overlays to the banking website.
And this was so flawlessly executed that they were moving between a half a million and a million and a half dollars per attempt into their criminal coffers.
These criminal organizations operate like highly regimented, legitimate businesses.
Their employees work Monday through Friday.
They take the weekends off.
How do we know this?
We know this because our security researchers see repeated spikes of malware on a Friday afternoon.
The bad guys, after a long weekend with the wife and kids, come back in to see how well things went.
The Dark Web is where they spend their time.
That is a term used to describe the anonymous underbelly of the internet, where thieves can operate with anonymity and without detection.
Here they peddle their attack software and share information on new attack techniques.
You can buy everything there, from a base-level attack to a much more advanced version.
In fact, in many cases, you even see gold, silver and bronze levels of service.
You can check references.
You can even buy attacks that come with a money-back guarantee -- (Laughter) if you're not successful.
Now, these environments, these marketplaces -- they look like an Amazon or an eBay.
You see products, prices, ratings and reviews.
Of course, if you're going to buy an attack, you're going to buy from a reputable criminal with good ratings, right?
(Laughter) This isn't any different than checking on Yelp or TripAdvisor before going to a new restaurant.
So, here is an example.
This is an actual screenshot of a vendor selling malware.
Notice they're a vendor level four, they have a trust level of six.
They've had 400 positive reviews in the last year, and only two negative reviews in the last month.
We even see things like licensing terms.
Here's an example of a site you can go to if you want to change your identity.
They will sell you a fake ID, fake passports.
But note the legally binding terms for purchasing your fake ID.
Give me a break.
What are they going to do -- sue you if you violate them?
(Laughter) This occurred a couple of months ago.
One of our security researchers was looking at a new Android malware application that we had discovered.
It was called Bilal Bot.
In a blog post, she positioned Bilal Bot as a new, inexpensive and beta alternative to the much more advanced GM Bot that was commonplace in the criminal underground.
This review did not sit well with the authors of Bilal Bot.
So they wrote her this very email, pleading their case and making the argument that they felt she had evaluated an older version.
They asked her to please update her blog with more accurate information and even offered to do an interview to describe to her in detail how their attack software was now far better than the competition.
So look, you don't have to like what they do, but you do have to respect the entrepreneurial nature of their endeavors.
(Laughter) So how are we going to stop this?
It's not like we're going to be able to identify who's responsible -- remember, they operate with anonymity and outside the reach of the law.
We're certainly not going to be able to prosecute the offenders.
I would propose that we need a completely new approach.
And that approach needs to be centered on the idea that we need to change the economics for the bad guys.
And to give you a perspective on how this can work, let's think of the response we see to a healthcare pandemic: SARS, Ebola, bird flu, Zika.
What is the top priority?
It's knowing who is infected and how the disease is spreading.
Now, governments, private institutions, hospitals, physicians -- everyone responds openly and quickly.
This is a collective and altruistic effort to stop the spread in its tracks and to inform anyone not infected how to protect or inoculate themselves.
Unfortunately, this is not at all what we see in response to a cyber attack.
Organizations are far more likely to keep information on that attack to themselves.
Why?
Because they're worried about competitive advantage, litigation or regulation.
We need to effectively democratize threat intelligence data.
We need to get all of these organizations to open up and share what is in their private arsenal of information.
The bad guys are moving fast; we've got to move faster.
And the best way to do that is to open up and share data on what's happening.
Let's think about this in the construct of security professionals.
Remember, they're programmed right into their DNA to keep secrets.
We've got to turn that thinking on its head.
We've got to get governments, private institutions and security companies willing to share information at speed.
And here's why: because if you share the information, it's equivalent to inoculation.
And if you're not sharing, you're actually part of the problem, because you're increasing the odds that other people could be impacted by the same attack techniques.
But there's an even bigger benefit.
By destroying criminals' devices closer to real time, we break their plans.
We inform the people they aim to hurt far sooner than they had ever anticipated.
We ruin their reputations, we crush their ratings and reviews.
We make cybercrime not pay.
We change the economics for the bad guys.
But to do this, a first mover was required -- someone to change the thinking in the security industry overall.
About a year ago, my colleagues and I had a radical idea.
What if IBM were to take our data -- we had one of the largest threat intelligence databases in the world -- and open it up?
It had information not just on what had happened in the past, but what was happening in near-real time.
What if we were to publish it all openly on the internet?
As you can imagine, this got quite a reaction.
First came the lawyers: What are the legal implications of doing that?
Then came the business: What are the business implications of doing that?
And this was also met with a good dose of a lot of people just asking if we were completely crazy.
But there was one conversation that kept floating to the surface in every dialogue that we would have: the realization that if we didn't do this, then we were part of the problem.
So we did something unheard of in the security industry.
We started publishing.
Over 700 terabytes of actionable threat intelligence data, including information on real-time attacks that can be used to stop cybercrime in its tracks.
And to date, over 4,000 organizations are leveraging this data, including half of the Fortune 100.
And our hope as a next step is to get all of those organizations to join us in the fight, and do the same thing and share their information on when and how they're being attacked as well.
We all have the opportunity to stop it, and we already all know how.
All we have to do is look to the response that we see in the world of health care, and how they respond to a pandemic.
Simply put, we need to be open and collaborative.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So you probably have the sense, as most people do, that polarization is getting worse in our country, that the divide between the left and the right is as bad as it's been in really any of our lifetimes.
But you might also reasonably wonder if research backs up your intuition.
And in a nutshell, the answer is sadly yes.
In study after study, we find that liberals and conservatives have grown further apart.
They increasingly wall themselves off in these ideological silos, consuming different news, talking only to like-minded others and more and more choosing to live in different parts of the country.
And I think that most alarming of all of it is seeing this rising animosity on both sides.
Liberals and conservatives, Democrats and Republicans, more and more they just don't like one another.
You see it in many different ways.
They don't want to befriend one another. They don't want to date one another.
If they do, if they find out, they find each other less attractive, and they more and more don't want their children to marry someone who supports the other party, a particularly shocking statistic.
You know, in my lab, the students that I work with, we're talking about some sort of social pattern -- I'm a movie buff, and so I'm often like, what kind of movie are we in here with this pattern?
So what kind of movie are we in with political polarization?
Well, it could be a disaster movie.
It certainly seems like a disaster.
Could be a war movie.
Also fits.
But what I keep thinking is that we're in a zombie apocalypse movie.
(Laughter) Right? You know the kind.
There's people wandering around in packs, not thinking for themselves, seized by this mob mentality trying to spread their disease and destroy society.
And you probably think, as I do, that you're the good guy in the zombie apocalypse movie, and all this hate and polarization, it's being propagated by the other people, because we're Brad Pitt, right?
Free-thinking, righteous, just trying to hold on to what we hold dear, you know, not foot soldiers in the army of the undead.
Not that.
Never that.
But here's the thing: what movie do you suppose they think they're in?
Right?
Well, they absolutely think that they're the good guys in the zombie apocalypse movie. Right?
And you'd better believe that they think that they're Brad Pitt and that we, we are the zombies.
And who's to say that they're wrong?
I think that the truth is that we're all a part of this.
And the good side of that is that we can be a part of the solution.
So what are we going to do?
What can we do to chip away at polarization in everyday life?
What could we do to connect with and communicate with our political counterparts?
Well, these were exactly the questions that I and my colleague, Matt Feinberg, became fascinated with a few years ago, and we started doing research on this topic.
And one of the first things that we discovered that I think is really helpful for understanding polarization is to understand that the political divide in our country is undergirded by a deeper moral divide.
So one of the most robust findings in the history of political psychology is this pattern identified by Jon Haidt and Jesse Graham, psychologists, that liberals and conservatives tend to endorse different values to different degrees.
So for example, we find that liberals tend to endorse values like equality and fairness and care and protection from harm more than conservatives do.
And conservatives tend to endorse values like loyalty, patriotism, respect for authority and moral purity more than liberals do.
And Matt and I were thinking that maybe this moral divide might be helpful for understanding how it is that liberals and conservatives talk to one another and why they so often seem to talk past one another when they do.
So we conducted a study where we recruited liberals to a study where they were supposed to write a persuasive essay that would be compelling to a conservative in support of same-sex marriage.
And what we found was that liberals tended to make arguments in terms of the liberal moral values of equality and fairness.
So they said things like, "Everyone should have the right to love whoever they choose," and, "They" -- they being gay Americans -- "deserve the same equal rights as other Americans."
Overall, we found that 69 percent of liberals invoked one of the more liberal moral values in constructing their essay, and only nine percent invoked one of the more conservative moral values, even though they were supposed to be trying to persuade conservatives.
And when we studied conservatives and had them make persuasive arguments in support of making English the official language of the US, a classically conservative political position, we found that they weren't much better at this.
59 percent of them made arguments in terms of one of the more conservative moral values, and just eight percent invoked a liberal moral value, even though they were supposed to be targeting liberals for persuasion.
Now, you can see right away why we're in trouble here. Right?
People's moral values, they're their most deeply held beliefs.
People are willing to fight and die for their values.
Why are they going to give that up just to agree with you on something that they don't particularly want to agree with you on anyway?
If that persuasive appeal that you're making to your Republican uncle means that he doesn't just have to change his view, he's got to change his underlying values, too, that's not going to go very far.
So what would work better?
Well, we believe it's a technique that we call moral reframing, and we've studied it in a series of experiments.
In one of these experiments, we recruited liberals and conservatives to a study where they read one of three essays before having their environmental attitudes surveyed.
And the first of these essays was a relatively conventional pro-environmental essay that invoked the liberal values of care and protection from harm.
It said things like, "In many important ways we are causing real harm to the places we live in," and, "It is essential that we take steps now to prevent further destruction from being done to our Earth."
Another group of participants were assigned to read a really different essay that was designed to tap into the conservative value of moral purity.
It was a pro-environmental essay as well, and it said things like, "Keeping our forests, drinking water, and skies pure is of vital importance."
"We should regard the pollution of the places we live in to be disgusting."
And, "Reducing pollution can help us preserve what is pure and beautiful about the places we live."
And then we had a third group that were assigned to read just a nonpolitical essay.
It was just a comparison group so we could get a baseline.
And what we found when we surveyed people about their environmental attitudes afterwards, we found that liberals, it didn't matter what essay they read.
They tended to have highly pro-environmental attitudes regardless.
Liberals are on board for environmental protection.
Conservatives, however, were significantly more supportive of progressive environmental policies and environmental protection if they had read the moral purity essay than if they read one of the other two essays.
We even found that conservatives who read the moral purity essay were significantly more likely to say that they believed in global warming and were concerned about global warming, even though this essay didn't even mention global warming.
That's just a related environmental issue.
But that's how robust this moral reframing effect was.
And we've studied this on a whole slew of different political issues.
So if you want to move conservatives on issues like same-sex marriage or national health insurance, it helps to tie these liberal political issues to conservative values like patriotism and moral purity.
And we studied it the other way, too.
If you want to move liberals to the right on conservative policy issues like military spending and making English the official language of the US, you're going to be more persuasive if you tie those conservative policy issues to liberal moral values like equality and fairness.
All these studies have the same clear message: if you want to persuade someone on some policy, it's helpful to connect that policy to their underlying moral values.
And when you say it like that it seems really obvious. Right?
Like, why did we come here tonight?
Why -- (Laughter) It's incredibly intuitive.
And even though it is, it's something we really struggle to do.
You know, it turns out that when we go to persuade somebody on a political issue, we talk like we're speaking into a mirror.
We don't persuade so much as we rehearse our own reasons for why we believe some sort of political position.
We kept saying when we were designing these reframed moral arguments, "Empathy and respect, empathy and respect."
If you can tap into that, you can connect and you might be able to persuade somebody in this country.
So thinking again about what movie we're in, maybe I got carried away before.
Maybe it's not a zombie apocalypse movie.
Maybe instead it's a buddy cop movie.
(Laughter) Just roll with it, just go with it please.
(Laughter) You know the kind: there's a white cop and a black cop, or maybe a messy cop and an organized cop.
Whatever it is, they don't get along because of this difference.
But in the end, when they have to come together and they cooperate, the solidarity that they feel, it's greater because of that gulf that they had to cross. Right?
And remember that in these movies, it's usually worst in the second act when our leads are further apart than ever before.
And so maybe that's where we are in this country, late in the second act of a buddy cop movie -- (Laughter) torn apart but about to come back together.
It sounds good, but if we want it to happen, I think the responsibility is going to start with us.
So this is my call to you: let's put this country back together.
Let's do it despite the politicians and the media and Facebook and Twitter and Congressional redistricting and all of it, all the things that divide us.
Let's do it because it's right.
And let's do it because this hate and contempt that flows through all of us every day makes us ugly and it corrupts us, and it threatens the very fabric of our society.
We owe it to one another and our country to reach out and try to connect.
We can't afford to hate them any longer, and we can't afford to let them hate us either.
Empathy and respect.
Empathy and respect.
If you think about it, it's the very least that we owe our fellow citizens.
Thank you.
(Applause)
A few words about how I got started, and it has a lot to do with happiness, actually.
When I was a very young child, I was extremely introverted and very much to myself.
And, kind of as a way of surviving, I would go into my own very personal space, and I would make things.
I would make things for people as a way of, you know, giving, showing them my love.
I would go into these private places, and I would put my ideas and my passions into objects -- and sort of learning how to speak with my hands.
So, the whole activity of working with my hands and creating objects is very much connected with not only the idea realm, but also with very much the feeling realm.
And the ideas are very disparate.
I'm going to show you many different kinds of pieces, and there's no real connection between one or the other, except that they sort of come out of my brain, and they're all different sort of thoughts that are triggered by looking at life, and seeing nature and seeing objects, and just having kind of playful random thoughts about things.
When I was a child, I started to explore motion.
I fell in love with the way things moved, so I started to explore motion by making little flipbooks.
And this is one that I did, probably like when I was around seventh grade, and I remember when I was doing this, I was thinking about that little rock there, and the pathway of the vehicles as they would fly through the air, and how the characters -- (Laughter) -- would come shooting out of the car, so, on my mind, I was thinking about the trajectory of the vehicles.
And of course, when you're a little kid, there's always destruction.
So, it has to end with this -- (Laughter) -- gratuitous violence.
(Laughter) So that was how I first started to explore the way things moved, and expressed it.
Now, when I went to college, I found myself making fairly complicated, fragile machines.
And this really came about from having many different kinds of interests.
When I was in high school, I loved to program computers, so I sort of liked the logical flow of events.
I was also very interested in perhaps going into surgery and becoming a surgeon, because it meant working with my hands in a very focused, intense way.
So, I started taking art courses, and I found a way to make sculpture that brought together my love for being very precise with my hands, with coming up with different kinds of logical flows of energy through a system.
And also, working with wire -- everything that I did was both a visual and a mechanical engineering decision at the same time.
So, I was able to sort of exercise all of that.
Now, this kind of machine is as close as I can get to painting.
And it's full of many little trivial end points, like there's a little foot here that just drags around in circles and it doesn't really mean anything.
It's really just for the sort of joy of its own triviality.
The connection I have with engineering is the same as any other engineer, in that I love to solve problems.
I love to figure things out, but the end result of what I'm doing is really completely ambiguous.
(Laughter) That's pretty ambiguous.
(Laughter) The next piece that is going to come up is an example of a kind of machine that is fairly complex.
I gave myself the problem.
Since I'm always liking to solve problems, I gave myself the problem of turning a crank in one direction, and solving all of the mechanical problems for getting this little man to walk back and forth.
So, when I started this, I didn't have an overall plan for the machine, but I did have a sense of the gesture, and a sense of the shape and how it would occupy space.
And then it was a matter of starting from one point and sort of building to that final point.
That little gear there switches back and forth to change direction.
And that's a little found object.
So a lot of the pieces that I've made, they involve found objects.
And it really -- it's almost like doing visual puns all the time.
When I see objects, I imagine them in motion.
I imagine what can be said with them.
This next one here, "Machine with Wishbone," it came about from playing with this wishbone after dinner.
You know, they say, never play with your food -- but I always play with things.
So, I had this wishbone, and I thought, it's kind of like a cowboy who's been on his horse for too long.
(Laughter) And I started to make him walk across the table, and I thought, "Oh, I can make a little machine that will do that."
So, I made this device, linked it up, and the wishbone walks.
And because the wishbone is bone -- it's animal -- it's sort of a point where I think we can enter into it.
And that's the whole piece.
(Laughter) That's about that big.
(Applause) This kind of work is also very much like puppetry, where the found object is, in a sense, the puppet, and I'm the puppeteer at first, because I'm playing with an object.
But then I make the machine, which is sort of the stand-in for me, and it is able to achieve the action that I want.
The next piece I'll show you is a much more conceptual thought, and it's a little piece called "Cory's Yellow Chair."
I had this image in my mind, when I saw my son's little chair, and I saw it explode up and out.
And -- so the way I saw this in my mind at first, was that the pieces would explode up and out with infinite speed, and the pieces would move far out, and then they would begin to be pulled back with a kind of a gravitational feel, to the point where they would approach infinite speed back to the center.
And they would coalesce for just a moment, so you could perceive that there was a chair there.
For me, it's kind of a feeling about the fleetingness of the present moment, and I wanted to express that.
Now, the machine is -- in this case, it's a real approximation of that, because obviously you can't move physical matter infinitely with infinite speed and have it stop instantaneously.
This whole thing is about four feet wide, and the chair itself is only about a few inches.
(Applause) Now, this is a funny sort of conceptual thing, and yesterday we were talking about Danny Hillis' "10,000 Year Clock."
So, we have a motor here on the left, and it goes through a gear train.
There are 12 pairs of 50:1 reductions, so that means that the final speed of that gear on the end is so slow that it would take two trillion years to turn once.
So I've invented it in concrete, because it doesn't really matter.
(Laughter) Because it could run all the time.
(Laughter) Now, a completely different thought.
I'm always imagining myself in different situations.
I'm imagining myself as a machine.
What would I love?
I would love to be bathed in oil.
(Laughter) So, this machine does nothing but just bathe itself in oil.
(Laughter) (Applause) And it's really, just sort of -- for me, it was just really about the lusciousness of oil.
(Laughter) And then, I got a call from a friend who wanted to have a show of erotic art, and I didn't have any pieces.
But when she suggested to be in the show, this piece came to mind.
So, it's sort of related, but you can see it's much more overtly erotic.
And this one I call "Machine with Grease."
It's just continually ejaculating, and it's -- (Laughter) -- this is a happy machine, I'll tell you.
(Laughter) It's definitely happy.
From an engineering point of view, this is just a little four-bar linkage.
And then again, this is a found object, a little fan that I found.
And I thought, what about the gesture of opening the fan, and how simply could I state something.
And, in a case like this, I'm trying to make something which is clear but also not suggestive of any particular kind of animal or plant.
For me, the process is very important, because I'm inventing machines, but I'm also inventing tools to make machines, and the whole thing is all sort of wrapped up from the beginning.
So this is a little wire-bending tool.
After many years of bending gears with a pair of pliers, I made that tool, and then I made this other tool for sort of centering gears very quickly -- sort of developing my own little world of technology.
My life completely changed when I found a spot welder.
(Laughter) And that was that tool.
It completely changed what I could do.
Now here, I'm going to do a very poor job of silver soldering.
This is not the way they teach you to silver solder when you're in school.
I just like, throw it in.
I mean, real jewelers put little bits of solder in.
So, that's a finished gear.
When I moved to Boston, I joined a group called the World Sculpture Racing Society.
(Laughter) And the idea, their premise was that we wanted to show pieces of sculpture on the street, and there'd be no subjective decision about what was the best.
It would be -- whatever came across the finish line first would be the winner.
(Laughter) So I made -- this is my first racing sculpture, and I thought, "Oh, I'm going to make a cart, and I'm going to have it -- I'm going to have my hand writing 'faster,' so as I run down the street, the cart's going to talk to me and it's going to go, 'Faster, faster!' " So, that's what it does.
(Laughter) But then in the end, what I decided was every time you finish writing the word, I would stop and I would give the card to somebody on the side of the road.
So I would never win the race because I'm always stopping.
But I had a lot of fun.
(Applause) Now, I only have two and a half minutes -- I'm going to play this.
This is a piece that, for me, is in some ways the most complete kind of piece.
Because when I was a kid, I also played a lot of guitar.
And when I had this thought, I was imagining that I would make -- I would have a whole machine theater evening, where I would -- you would have an audience, the curtain would open, and you'd be entertained by machines on stage.
So, I imagined a very simple gestural dance that would be between a machine and just a very simple chair, and ...
When I'm making these pieces, I'm always trying to find a point where I'm saying something very clearly and it's very simple, but also at the same time it's very ambiguous.
And I think there's a point between simplicity and ambiguity which can allow a viewer to perhaps take something from it.
And that leads me to the thought that all of these pieces start off in my own mind, in my heart, and I do my best at finding ways to express them with materials, and it always feels really crude.
It's always a struggle, but somehow I manage to sort of get this thought out into an object, and then it's there, OK.
It means nothing at all.
The object itself just means nothing.
Once it's perceived, and someone brings it into their own mind, then there's a cycle that has been completed.
And to me, that's the most important thing because, ever since being a kid, I've wanted to communicate my passion and love.
And that means the complete cycle of coming from inside, out to the physical, to someone perceiving it.
So I'll just let this chair come down.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm a relationship builder.
When you think of a relationship builder, don't you just automatically think "architect?"
Probably not.
That's because most people think architects design buildings and cities, but what we really design are relationships, because cities are about people.
They're places where people come together for all kinds of exchange.
And besides, skylines are highly specific urban habitats with their own insects, plants and animals, and even their own weather.
But today, urban habitats are out of balance.
Climate change, together with political and economic troubles, are having an impact; they're adding up and stressing out cities and us, the people who live in them.
For me, the field of ecology has provided important insight, because ecologists don't just look at individual species on their own, they look at the relationships between living things and their environment.
They look at how all the diverse parts of the ecosystem are interconnected, and it's actually this balance, this web of life, that sustains life.
My team and I have been applying insights from ecology to architecture to see how physical space can help build stronger relationships.
The projects I'm going to show you today use the idea of building relationships as the key driver for design.
Here's an example of what I mean.
Recently, we were asked to design a center for social justice leadership called the Arcus Center.
They asked us for a building that could break down traditional barriers between different groups and in doing so, create possibilities for meaningful conversations around social justice.
The students wanted a place for cultural exchange.
They thought a place for preparing food together could do that.
And they wanted to be welcoming to the outside community.
They thought a fireplace could draw people in and help start conversations.
And everybody wanted the work of social justice to be visible to the outside world.
There really wasn't a precedent for this kind of space, so we looked around the globe and found examples of community meeting houses.
Community meeting houses are places where there's very specific relationships between people, like this one in Mali, where the elders gather.
The low roof keeps everybody seated and at equal eye level.
It's very egalitarian.
I mean, you can't stand up and take over the meeting.
You'd actually bump your head.
(Laughter) In meeting houses, there's always a central space where you can sit around a circle and see each other.
So we designed a space just like that right in the middle of the Arcus Center, and we anchored it with a fireplace and a kitchen.
It's pretty hard to get a kitchen and a fireplace in a building like this with the building codes, but it was so important to the concept, we got it done.
And now the central space works for big social gatherings and a place to meet one-on-one for the very first time.
It's almost like this three-way intersection that encourages bumping into people and starting a conversation.
Now you can always pass the kitchen and see something going on.
You can sit by the fireplace and share stories.
You can study together in big groups or in small ones, because the architecture sets up these opportunities.
Even the construction is about building relationships.
It's made of cordwood masonry, which is using logs the way you would use bricks.
It's super low-tech and easy to do and anyone can do it -- and that's the entire point.
The act of making is a social activity.
And it's good for the planet, too: the trees absorbed carbon when they were growing up, and they gave off oxygen, and now that carbon is trapped inside the walls and it's not being released into the atmosphere.
So making the walls is equivalent to taking cars right off the road.
We chose the building method because it connects people to each other and to the environment.
But is it working?
Is it creating relationships and nurturing them?
How can we know?
Well, more and more people are coming here, for one, and as a result of the fireside chats and a full calendar of programming, people are applying for the Arcus Fellowships.
In fact, applications have increased tenfold for the Arcus Fellowship since the building opened.
It's working. It's bringing people together.
So I've shown how architecture can connect people on this kind of horizontal campus scale.
But we wondered if social relationships could be scaled up -- or rather, upward -- in tall buildings.
Tall buildings don't necessarily lend themselves to being social buildings.
They can seem isolating and inward.
You might only see people in those awkward elevator rides.
But in several major cities, I've been designing tall buildings that are based on creating relationships between people.
This is Aqua.
It's a residential high-rise in Chicago aimed at young urban professionals and empty nesters, many of them new to the city.
With over 700 apartments, we wanted to see if we could use architecture to help people get to know their neighbors, even when their homes are organized in the vertical dimension.
So we invented a way to use balconies as the new social connectors.
The shapes of the floor slabs vary slightly and they transition as you go up the tower.
The result of this is that you can actually see people from your balcony.
The balconies are misregistered.
You can lean over your balcony and say, "Hey!"
just like you would across the backyard.
To make the balconies more comfortable for a longer period of time during the year, we studied the wind with digital simulations, so the effect of the balcony shapes breaks up the wind and confuses the wind and makes the balconies more comfortable and less windy.
Now, just by being able to go outside on your balcony or on the third floor roof terrace, you can be connected to the outdoors, even when you're way above the ground plane.
So the building acts to create community within the building and the city at the same time.
It's working.
And people are starting to meet each other on the building surface and we've heard -- (Laughter) they've even starting getting together as couples.
But besides romantic relationships, the building has a positive social effect on the community, as evidenced by people starting groups together and starting big projects together, like this organic community garden on the building's roof terrace.
So I've shown how tall buildings can be social connectors, but what about public architecture?
How can we create better social cohesion in public buildings and civic spaces, and why is it important?
Public architecture is just not as successful if it comes from the top down.
About 15 years ago in Chicago, they started to replace old police stations, and they built this identical model all over the city.
And even though they had good intentions of treating all neighborhoods equally, the communities didn't feel invested in the process or feel a sense of ownership of these buildings.
It was equality in the sense that everybody gets the same police station, but it wasn't equity in the sense of responding to each community's individual needs.
And equity is the key issue here.
You know, in my field, there's a debate about whether architecture can even do anything to improve social relationships.
But I believe that we need architecture and every tool in our tool kit to improve these relationships.
In the US, policy reforms have been recommended in order to rebuild trust.
But my team and I wondered if design and a more inclusive design process could help add something positive to this policy conversation.
We asked ourselves simply: Can design help rebuild trust?
So we reached out to community members and police officers in North Lawndale; it's a neighborhood in Chicago where the police station is perceived as a scary fortress surrounded by a parking lot.
In North Lawndale, people are afraid of police and of going anywhere near the police station, even to report a crime.
So we organized this brainstorming session with both groups participating, and we came up with this whole new idea for the police station.
It's called "Polis Station."
"Polis" is a Greek word that means a place with a sense of community.
It's based on the idea that if you can increase opportunities for positive social interactions between police and community members, you can rebuild that relationship and activate the neighborhood at the same time.
Instead of the police station as a scary fortress, you get highly active spaces on the public side of the station -- places that spark conversation, like a barbershop, a coffee shop or sports courts as well.
Both cops and kids said they love sports.
These insights came directly from the community members and the police officers themselves, and as designers, our role was just to connect the dots and suggest the first step.
So with the help of the city and the parks, we were able to raise funds and design and build a half-court, right on the police station parking lot.
It's a start.
But is it rebuilding trust?
The people in North Lawndale say the kids are using the courts every day and they even organize tournaments like this one shown here, and once in a while an officer joins in.
But now, they even have basketballs inside the station that kids can borrow.
And recently they've asked us to expand the courts and build a park on the site.
And parents report something astonishing.
Before, there was fear of going anywhere the station, and now they say there's a sense that the court is safer than other courts nearby, and they prefer their kids to play here.
So maybe in the future, on the public side of the station, you might be able to drop in for a haircut at the barbershop or reserve the community room for a birthday party or renew your driver's license or get money out of an ATM.
It can be a place for neighbors to meet each other and to get to know the officers, and vice versa.
This is not a utopian fantasy.
It's about how do you design to rebuild trust, trusting relationships?
You know, every city has parks, libraries, schools and other public buildings that have the potential to be reimagined as social connectors.
But reimagining the buildings for the future is going to require engaging the people who live there.
Engaging the public can be intimidating, and I've felt that, too.
But maybe that's because in architecture school, we don't really learn how to engage the public in the act of design.
We're taught to defend our design against criticism.
But I think that can change, too.
So if we can focus the design mind on creating positive, reinforcing relationships in architecture and through architecture, I believe we can do much more than create individual buildings.
We can reduce the stress and the polarization in our urban habitats.
We can create relationships.
We can help steady this planet we all share.
See?
Architects really are relationship builders.
(Laughter) Thank you very much.
(Applause)
So, let me thank you for the opportunity to talk about the biggest international story of your professional lifetime, which is also the most important international challenge the world will face for as far as the eye can see.
The story, of course, is the rise of China.
Never before have so many people risen so far so fast, on so many different dimensions.
The challenge is the impact of China's rise -- the discombobulation this will cause the Unites States and the international order, of which the US has been the principal architect and guardian.
The past 100 years have been what historians now call an "American Century."
Americans have become accustomed to their place at the top of every pecking order.
So the very idea of another country that could be as big and strong as the US -- or bigger -- strikes many Americans as an assault on who they are.
For perspective on what we're now seeing in this rivalry, it's useful to locate it on the larger map of history.
The past 500 years have seen 16 cases in which a rising power threatened to displace a ruling power.
Twelve of those ended in war.
So just in November, we'll all pause to mark the 100th anniversary of the final day of a war that became so encompassing, that it required historians to create an entirely new category: world war.
So, on the 11th hour of the 11th day of the 11th month in 1918, the guns of World War I fell silent, but 20 million individuals lay dead.
I know that this is a sophisticated audience, so you know about the rise of China.
I'm going to focus, therefore, on the impact of China's rise, on the US, on the international order and on the prospects for war and peace.
But having taught at Harvard over many years, I've learned that from time to time, it's useful to take a short pause, just to make sure we're all on the same page.
The way I do this is, I call a time-out, I give students a pop quiz -- ungraded, of course.
So, let's try this. Time-out, pop quiz.
Question: forty years ago, 1978, China sets out on its march to the market.
At that point, what percentage of China's one billion citizens were struggling to survive on less than two dollars a day?
Take a guess -- 25 percent?
Fifty?
Seventy-five?
Ninety.
What do you think?
Ninety.
Nine out of every 10 on less than two dollars a day.
Twenty eighteen, 40 years later.
What about the numbers?
What's your bet?
Take a look.
Fewer than one in 100 today.
And China's president has promised that within the next three years, those last tens of millions will have been raised up above that threshold.
So it's a miracle, actually, in our lifetime.
Hard to believe.
But brute facts are even harder to ignore.
A nation that didn't even appear on any of the international league tables 25 years ago has soared, to rival -- and in some areas, surpass -- the United States.
Thus, the challenge that will shape our world: a seemingly unstoppable rising China accelerating towards an apparently immovable ruling US, on course for what could be the grandest collision in history.
To help us get our minds around this challenge, I'm going to introduce you to a great thinker, I'm going to present a big idea, and I'm going to pose a most consequential question.
The great thinker is Thucydides.
Now, I know his name is a mouthful, and some people have trouble pronouncing it.
So, let's do it, one, two, three, together: Thucydides.
One more time: Thucydides.
So who was Thucydides?
He was the father and founder of history.
He wrote the first-ever history book.
It's titled "The History of the Peloponnesian War," about the war in Greece, 2500 years ago.
So if nothing else today, you can tweet your friends, "I met a great thinker.
And I can even pronounce his name: Thucydides."
So, about this war that destroyed classical Greece, Thucydides wrote famously: "It was the rise of Athens and the fear that this instilled in Sparta that made the war inevitable."
So the rise of one and the reaction of the other create a toxic cocktail of pride, arrogance, paranoia, that drug them both to war.
Which brings me to the big idea: Thucydides's Trap.
"Thucydides's Trap" is a term I coined several years ago, to make vivid Thucydides's insight.
Thucydides's Trap is the dangerous dynamic that occurs when a rising power threatens to displace a ruling power, like Athens -- or Germany 100 years ago, or China today -- and their impact on Sparta, or Great Britain 100 years ago, or the US today.
As Henry Kissinger has said, once you get this idea, this concept of Thucydides's Trap in your head, it will provide a lens for helping you look through the news and noise of the day to understand what's actually going on.
So, to the most consequential question about our world today: Are we going to follow in the footsteps of history?
Or can we, through a combination of imagination and common sense and courage find a way to manage this rivalry without a war nobody wants, and everybody knows would be catastrophic?
Give me five minutes to unpack this, and later this afternoon, when the next news story pops up for you about China doing this, or the US reacting like that, you will be able to have a better understanding of what's going on and even to explain it to your friends.
So as we saw with this flipping the pyramid of poverty, China has actually soared.
It's meteoric.
Former Czech president, Vaclav Havel, I think, put it best.
He said, "All this has happened so fast, we haven't yet had time to be astonished."
(Laughter) To remind myself how astonished I should be, I occasionally look out the window in my office in Cambridge at this bridge, which goes across the Charles River, between the Kennedy School and Harvard Business School.
In 2012, the State of Massachusetts said they were going to renovate this bridge, and it would take two years.
In 2014, they said it wasn't finished.
In 2015, they said it would take one more year.
In 2016, they said it's not finished, we're not going to tell you when it's going to be finished.
Finally, last year, it was finished -- three times over budget.
Now, compare this to a similar bridge that I drove across last month in Beijing.
It's called the Sanyuan Bridge.
In 2015, the Chinese decided they wanted to renovate that bridge.
It actually has twice as many lanes of traffic.
How long did it take for them to complete the project?
Twenty fifteen, what do you bet?
Take a guess -- OK, three -- Take a look.
(Laughter) The answer is 43 hours.
(Audience: Wow!) (Laughter) Graham Allison: Now, of course, that couldn't happen in New York.
(Laughter) Behind this speed in execution is a purpose-driven leader and a government that works.
The most ambitious and most competent leader on the international stage today is Chinese President Xi Jinping.
And he's made no secret about what he wants.
As he said when he became president six years ago, his goal is to make China great again -- (Laughter) a banner he raised long before Donald Trump picked up a version of this.
To that end, Xi Jinping has announced specific targets for specific dates: 2025, 2035, 2049.
By 2025, China means to be the dominant power in the major market in 10 leading technologies, including driverless cars, robots, artificial intelligence, quantum computing.
By 2035, China means to be the innovation leader across all the advanced technologies.
And by 2049, which is the 100th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic, China means to be unambiguously number one, including, [says] Xi Jinping, an army that he calls "Fight and Win."
So these are audacious goals, but as you can see, China is already well on its way to these objectives.
And we should remember how fast our world is changing.
Thirty years ago, the World Wide Web had not yet even been invented.
Who will feel the impact of this rise of China most directly?
Obviously, the current number one.
As China gets bigger and stronger and richer, technologically more advanced, it will inevitably bump up against American positions and prerogatives.
Now, for red-blooded Americans -- and especially for red-necked Americans like me; I'm from North Carolina -- there's something wrong with this picture.
The USA means number one, that's who we are.
But again, to repeat: brute facts are hard to ignore.
Four years ago, Senator John McCain asked me to testify about this to his Senate Armed Services Committee.
And I made for them a chart that you can see, that said, compare the US and China to kids on opposite ends of a seesaw on a playground, each represented by the size of their economy.
As late as 2004, China was just half our size.
By 2014, its GDP was equal to ours.
And on the current trajectory, by 2024, it will be half again larger.
The consequences of this tectonic change will be felt everywhere.
For example, in the current trade conflict, China is already the number one trading partner of all the major Asian countries.
Which brings us back to our Greek historian.
Harvard's "Thucydides's Trap Case File" has reviewed the last 500 years of history and found 16 cases in which a rising power threatened to displace a ruling power.
Twelve of these ended in war.
And the tragedy of this is that in very few of these did either of the protagonists want a war; few of these wars were initiated by either the rising power or the ruling power.
So how does this work?
What happens is, a third party's provocation forces one or the other to react, and that sets in motion a spiral, which drags the two somewhere they don't want to go.
If that seems crazy, it is.
But it's life.
Remember World War I.
The provocation in that case was the assassination of a second-level figure, Archduke Franz Ferdinand, which then led the Austro-Hungarian emperor to issue an ultimatum to Serbia, they dragged in the various allies, within two months, all of Europe was at war.
So imagine if Thucydides were watching planet Earth today.
What would he say?
Could he find a more appropriate leading man for the ruling power than Donald J Trump?
(Laughter) Or a more apt lead for the rising power than Xi Jinping?
And he would scratch his head and certainly say he couldn't think of more colorful provocateur than North Korea's Kim Jong-un.
Each seems determined to play his assigned part and is right on script.
So finally, we conclude again with the most consequential question, the question that will have the gravest consequences for the rest of our lives: Are Americans and Chinese going to let the forces of history drive us to a war that would be catastrophic for both?
Or can we summon the imagination and courage to find a way to survive together, to share the leadership in the 21st century, or, as Xi Jinping [said], to create a new form of great power relations?
That's the issue I've been pursuing passionately for the last two years.
I've had the opportunity to talk and, indeed, to listen to leaders of all the relevant governments -- Beijing, Washington, Seoul, Tokyo -- and to thought leaders across the spectrum of both the arts and business.
I wish I had more to report.
The good news is that leaders are increasingly aware of this Thucydidean dynamic and the dangers that it poses.
The bad news is that nobody has a feasible plan for escaping history as usual.
So it's clear to me that we need some ideas outside the box of conventional statecraft -- indeed, from another page or another space -- which is what brings me to TED today and which brings me to a request.
This audience includes many of the most creative minds on the planet, who get up in the morning and think not only about how to manage the world we have, but how to create worlds that should be.
So I'm hopeful that as this sinks in and as you reflect on it, some of you are going to have some bold ideas, actually some wild ideas, that when we find, will make a difference in this space.
And just to remind you if you do, this won't be the first time.
Let me remind you of what happened right after World War II.
A remarkable group of Americans and Europeans and others, not just from government, but from the world of culture and business, engaged in a collective surge of imagination.
And what they imagined and what they created was a new international order, the order that's allowed you and me to live our lives, all of our lives, without great power war and with more prosperity than was ever seen before on the planet.
So, a remarkable story.
Interestingly, every pillar of this project that produced these results, when first proposed, was rejected by the foreign policy establishment as naive or unrealistic.
My favorite is the Marshall Plan.
After World War II, Americans felt exhausted.
They had demobilized 10 million troops, they were focused on an urgent domestic agenda.
But as people began to appreciate how devastated Europe was and how aggressive Soviet communism was, Americans eventually decided to tax themselves a percent and a half of GDP every year for four years and send that money to Europe to help reconstruct these countries, including Germany and Italy, whose troops had just been killing Americans.
Amazing.
This also created the United Nations.
Amazing.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The World Bank.
NATO.
All of these elements of an order for peace and prosperity.
So, in a word, what we need to do is do it again.
And I think now we need a surge of imagination, creativity, informed by history, for, as the philosopher Santayana reminded us, in the end, only those who refuse to study history are condemned to repeat it.
Thank you.
(Applause)
How many of you are creatives, designers, engineers, entrepreneurs, artists, or maybe you just have a really big imagination?
Show of hands? (Cheers) That's most of you.
I have some news for us creatives.
Over the course of the next 20 years, more will change around the way we do our work than has happened in the last 2,000.
In fact, I think we're at the dawn of a new age in human history.
Now, there have been four major historical eras defined by the way we work.
The Hunter-Gatherer Age lasted several million years.
And then the Agricultural Age lasted several thousand years.
The Industrial Age lasted a couple of centuries.
And now the Information Age has lasted just a few decades.
And now today, we're on the cusp of our next great era as a species.
Welcome to the Augmented Age.
In this new era, your natural human capabilities are going to be augmented by computational systems that help you think, robotic systems that help you make, and a digital nervous system that connects you to the world far beyond your natural senses.
Let's start with cognitive augmentation.
How many of you are augmented cyborgs?
(Laughter) I would actually argue that we're already augmented.
Imagine you're at a party, and somebody asks you a question that you don't know the answer to.
If you have one of these, in a few seconds, you can know the answer.
But this is just a primitive beginning.
Even Siri is just a passive tool.
In fact, for the last three-and-a-half million years, the tools that we've had have been completely passive.
They do exactly what we tell them and nothing more.
Our very first tool only cut where we struck it.
The chisel only carves where the artist points it.
And even our most advanced tools do nothing without our explicit direction.
In fact, to date, and this is something that frustrates me, we've always been limited by this need to manually push our wills into our tools -- like, manual, literally using our hands, even with computers.
But I'm more like Scotty in "Star Trek."
(Laughter) I want to have a conversation with a computer.
I want to say, "Computer, let's design a car," and the computer shows me a car.
And I say, "No, more fast-looking, and less German," and bang, the computer shows me an option.
(Laughter) That conversation might be a little ways off, probably less than many of us think, but right now, we're working on it.
Tools are making this leap from being passive to being generative.
Generative design tools use a computer and algorithms to synthesize geometry to come up with new designs all by themselves.
All it needs are your goals and your constraints.
I'll give you an example.
In the case of this aerial drone chassis, all you would need to do is tell it something like, it has four propellers, you want it to be as lightweight as possible, and you need it to be aerodynamically efficient.
Then what the computer does is it explores the entire solution space: every single possibility that solves and meets your criteria -- millions of them.
It takes big computers to do this.
But it comes back to us with designs that we, by ourselves, never could've imagined.
And the computer's coming up with this stuff all by itself -- no one ever drew anything, and it started completely from scratch.
And by the way, it's no accident that the drone body looks just like the pelvis of a flying squirrel.
(Laughter) It's because the algorithms are designed to work the same way evolution does.
What's exciting is we're starting to see this technology out in the real world.
We've been working with Airbus for a couple of years on this concept plane for the future.
It's a ways out still.
But just recently we used a generative-design AI to come up with this.
This is a 3D-printed cabin partition that's been designed by a computer.
It's stronger than the original yet half the weight, and it will be flying in the Airbus A320 later this year.
So computers can now generate; they can come up with their own solutions to our well-defined problems.
But they're not intuitive.
They still have to start from scratch every single time, and that's because they never learn.
Unlike Maggie.
(Laughter) Maggie's actually smarter than our most advanced design tools.
What do I mean by that?
If her owner picks up that leash, Maggie knows with a fair degree of certainty it's time to go for a walk.
And how did she learn?
Well, every time the owner picked up the leash, they went for a walk.
And Maggie did three things: she had to pay attention, she had to remember what happened and she had to retain and create a pattern in her mind.
Interestingly, that's exactly what computer scientists have been trying to get AIs to do for the last 60 or so years.
Back in 1952, they built this computer that could play Tic-Tac-Toe.
Big deal.
Then 45 years later, in 1997, Deep Blue beats Kasparov at chess.
2011, Watson beats these two humans at Jeopardy, which is much harder for a computer to play than chess is.
In fact, rather than working from predefined recipes, Watson had to use reasoning to overcome his human opponents.
And then a couple of weeks ago, DeepMind's AlphaGo beats the world's best human at Go, which is the most difficult game that we have.
In fact, in Go, there are more possible moves than there are atoms in the universe.
So in order to win, what AlphaGo had to do was develop intuition.
And in fact, at some points, AlphaGo's programmers didn't understand why AlphaGo was doing what it was doing.
And things are moving really fast.
I mean, consider -- in the space of a human lifetime, computers have gone from a child's game to what's recognized as the pinnacle of strategic thought.
What's basically happening is computers are going from being like Spock to being a lot more like Kirk.
(Laughter) Right? From pure logic to intuition.
Would you cross this bridge?
Most of you are saying, "Oh, hell no!"
(Laughter) And you arrived at that decision in a split second.
You just sort of knew that bridge was unsafe.
And that's exactly the kind of intuition that our deep-learning systems are starting to develop right now.
Very soon, you'll literally be able to show something you've made, you've designed, to a computer, and it will look at it and say, "Sorry, homie, that'll never work. You have to try again."
Or you could ask it if people are going to like your next song, or your next flavor of ice cream.
Or, much more importantly, you could work with a computer to solve a problem that we've never faced before.
For instance, climate change.
We're not doing a very good job on our own, we could certainly use all the help we can get.
That's what I'm talking about, technology amplifying our cognitive abilities so we can imagine and design things that were simply out of our reach as plain old un-augmented humans.
So what about making all of this crazy new stuff that we're going to invent and design?
I think the era of human augmentation is as much about the physical world as it is about the virtual, intellectual realm.
How will technology augment us?
In the physical world, robotic systems.
OK, there's certainly a fear that robots are going to take jobs away from humans, and that is true in certain sectors.
But I'm much more interested in this idea that humans and robots working together are going to augment each other, and start to inhabit a new space.
This is our applied research lab in San Francisco, where one of our areas of focus is advanced robotics, specifically, human-robot collaboration.
And this is Bishop, one of our robots.
As an experiment, we set it up to help a person working in construction doing repetitive tasks -- tasks like cutting out holes for outlets or light switches in drywall.
(Laughter) So, Bishop's human partner can tell what to do in plain English and with simple gestures, kind of like talking to a dog, and then Bishop executes on those instructions with perfect precision.
We're using the human for what the human is good at: awareness, perception and decision making.
And we're using the robot for what it's good at: precision and repetitiveness.
Here's another cool project that Bishop worked on.
The goal of this project, which we called the HIVE, was to prototype the experience of humans, computers and robots all working together to solve a highly complex design problem.
The humans acted as labor.
They cruised around the construction site, they manipulated the bamboo -- which, by the way, because it's a non-isomorphic material, is super hard for robots to deal with.
But then the robots did this fiber winding, which was almost impossible for a human to do.
And then we had an AI that was controlling everything.
It was telling the humans what to do, telling the robots what to do and keeping track of thousands of individual components.
What's interesting is, building this pavilion was simply not possible without human, robot and AI augmenting each other.
OK, I'll share one more project. This one's a little bit crazy.
We're working with Amsterdam-based artist Joris Laarman and his team at MX3D to generatively design and robotically print the world's first autonomously manufactured bridge.
So, Joris and an AI are designing this thing right now, as we speak, in Amsterdam.
And when they're done, we're going to hit "Go," and robots will start 3D printing in stainless steel, and then they're going to keep printing, without human intervention, until the bridge is finished.
So, as computers are going to augment our ability to imagine and design new stuff, robotic systems are going to help us build and make things that we've never been able to make before.
But what about our ability to sense and control these things?
What about a nervous system for the things that we make?
Our nervous system, the human nervous system, tells us everything that's going on around us.
But the nervous system of the things we make is rudimentary at best.
For instance, a car doesn't tell the city's public works department that it just hit a pothole at the corner of Broadway and Morrison.
A building doesn't tell its designers whether or not the people inside like being there, and the toy manufacturer doesn't know if a toy is actually being played with -- how and where and whether or not it's any fun.
Look, I'm sure that the designers imagined this lifestyle for Barbie when they designed her.
(Laughter) But what if it turns out that Barbie's actually really lonely?
(Laughter) If the designers had known what was really happening in the real world with their designs -- the road, the building, Barbie -- they could've used that knowledge to create an experience that was better for the user.
What's missing is a nervous system connecting us to all of the things that we design, make and use.
What if all of you had that kind of information flowing to you from the things you create in the real world?
With all of the stuff we make, we spend a tremendous amount of money and energy -- in fact, last year, about two trillion dollars -- convincing people to buy the things we've made.
But if you had this connection to the things that you design and create after they're out in the real world, after they've been sold or launched or whatever, we could actually change that, and go from making people want our stuff, to just making stuff that people want in the first place.
The good news is, we're working on digital nervous systems that connect us to the things we design.
We're working on one project with a couple of guys down in Los Angeles called the Bandito Brothers and their team.
And one of the things these guys do is build insane cars that do absolutely insane things.
These guys are crazy -- (Laughter) in the best way.
And what we're doing with them is taking a traditional race-car chassis and giving it a nervous system.
So we instrumented it with dozens of sensors, put a world-class driver behind the wheel, took it out to the desert and drove the hell out of it for a week.
And the car's nervous system captured everything that was happening to the car.
We captured four billion data points; all of the forces that it was subjected to.
And then we did something crazy.
We took all of that data, and plugged it into a generative-design AI we call "Dreamcatcher."
So what do get when you give a design tool a nervous system, and you ask it to build you the ultimate car chassis?
You get this.
This is something that a human could never have designed.
Except a human did design this, but it was a human that was augmented by a generative-design AI, a digital nervous system and robots that can actually fabricate something like this.
So if this is the future, the Augmented Age, and we're going to be augmented cognitively, physically and perceptually, what will that look like?
What is this wonderland going to be like?
I think we're going to see a world where we're moving from things that are fabricated to things that are farmed.
Where we're moving from things that are constructed to that which is grown.
We're going to move from being isolated to being connected.
And we'll move away from extraction to embrace aggregation.
I also think we'll shift from craving obedience from our things to valuing autonomy.
Thanks to our augmented capabilities, our world is going to change dramatically.
We're going to have a world with more variety, more connectedness, more dynamism, more complexity, more adaptability and, of course, more beauty.
The shape of things to come will be unlike anything we've ever seen before.
Why?
Because what will be shaping those things is this new partnership between technology, nature and humanity.
That, to me, is a future well worth looking forward to.
Thank you all so much.
(Applause)
Every summer, my family and I travel across the world, 3,000 miles away to the culturally diverse country of India.
Now, India is a country infamous for its scorching heat and humidity.
For me, the only relief from this heat is to drink plenty of water.
Now, while in India, my parents always remind me to only drink boiled or bottled water, because unlike here in America, where I can just turn on a tap and easily get clean, potable water, in India, the water is often contaminated.
So my parents have to make sure that the water we drink is safe.
However, I soon realized that not everyone is fortunate enough to enjoy the clean water we did.
Outside my grandparents' house in the busy streets of India, I saw people standing in long lines under the hot sun filling buckets with water from a tap.
I even saw children, who looked the same age as me, filling up these clear plastic bottles with dirty water from streams on the roadside.
Watching these kids forced to drink water that I felt was too dirty to touch changed my perspective on the world.
This unacceptable social injustice compelled me to want to find a solution to our world's clean water problem.
I wanted to know why these kids lacked water, a substance that is essential for life.
And I learned that we are facing a global water crisis.
Now, this may seem surprising, as 75 percent of our planet is covered in water, but only 2.5 percent of that is freshwater, and less than one percent of Earth's freshwater supply is available for human consumption.
With rising populations, industrial development and economic growth, our demand for clean water is increasing, yet our freshwater resources are rapidly depleting.
According to the World Health Organization, 660 million people in our world lack access to a clean water source.
Lack of access to clean water is a leading cause of death in children under the age of five in developing countries, and UNICEF estimates that 3,000 children die every day from a water-related disease.
So after returning home one summer in eighth grade, I decided that I wanted to combine my passion for solving the global water crisis with my interest in science.
So I decided that the best thing to do would be to convert my garage into a laboratory.
(Laughter) Actually, at first I converted my kitchen into a laboratory, but my parents didn't really approve and kicked me out.
I also read a lot of journal papers on water-related research, and I learned that currently in developing countries, something called solar disinfection, or SODIS, is used to purify water.
In SODIS, clear plastic bottles are filled with contaminated water and then exposed to sunlight for six to eight hours.
The UV radiation from the sun destroys the DNA of these harmful pathogens and decontaminates the water.
Now, while SODIS is really easy to use and energy-efficient, as it only uses solar energy, it's really slow, as it can take up to two days when it's cloudy.
So in order to make the SODIS process faster, this new method called photocatalysis has recently been used.
So what exactly is this photocatalysis?
Let's break it down: "photo" means from the sun, and a catalyst is something that speeds up a reaction.
So what photocatalysis is doing is it's just speeding up this solar disinfection process.
When sunlight comes in and strikes a photocatalyst, like TiO2, or titanium dioxide, it creates these really reactive oxygen species, like superoxides, hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radicals.
These reactive oxygen species are able to remove bacteria and organics and a whole lot of contaminants from drinking water.
But unfortunately, there are several disadvantages to the way photocatalytic SODIS is currently deployed.
See, what they do is they take the clear plastic bottles and they coat the inside with this photocatalytic coating.
But photocatalysts like titanium dioxide are actually commonly used in sunscreens to block UV radiation.
So when they're coated on the inside of these bottles, they're actually blocking some of the UV radiation and diminishing the efficiency of the process.
Also, these photocatalytic coatings are not tightly bound to the plastic bottle, which means they wash off, and people end up drinking the catalyst.
While TiO2 is safe and inert, it's really inefficient if you keep drinking the catalyst, because then you have to continue to replenish it, even after a few uses.
So my goal was to overcome the disadvantages of these current treatment methods and create a safe, sustainable, cost-effective and eco-friendly method of purifying water.
What started off as an eighth grade science fair project is now my photocatalytic composite for water purification.
The composite combines titanium dioxide with cement.
The cement-like composite can be formed into several different shapes, which results in an extremely versatile range of deployment methods.
For example, you could create a rod that can easily be placed inside water bottles for individual use or you could create a porous filter that can filter water for families.
You can even coat the inside of an existing water tank to purify larger amounts of water for communities over a longer period of time.
Now, over the course of this, my journey hasn't really been easy.
You know, I didn't have access to a sophisticated laboratory.
I was 14 years old when I started, but I didn't let my age deter me in my interest in pursuing scientific research and wanting to solve the global water crisis.
See, water isn't just the universal solvent.
Water is a universal human right.
And for that reason, I'm continuing to work on this science fair project from 2012 to bring it from the laboratory into the real world.
And this summer, I founded Catalyst for World Water, a social enterprise aimed at catalyzing solutions to the global water crisis.
(Applause) Alone, a single drop of water can't do much, but when many drops come together, they can sustain life on our planet.
Just as water drops come together to form oceans, I believe that we all must come together when tackling this global problem.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
My inbox is full of hate mails and personal abuse and has been for years.
In 2010, I started answering those mails and suggesting to the writer that we might meet for coffee and a chat.
I have had hundreds of encounters.
They have taught me something important that I want to share with you.
I was born in Turkey from Kurdish parents and we moved to Denmark when I was a young child.
In 2007, I ran for a seat in the Danish parliament as one of the first women with a minority background.
I was elected, but I soon found out that not everyone was happy about it as I had to quickly get used to finding hate messages in my inbox.
Those emails would begin with something like this: "What's a raghead like you doing in our parliament?"
I never answered.
I'd just delete the emails.
I just thought that the senders and I had nothing in common.
They didn't understand me, and I didn't understand them.
Then one day, one of my colleagues in the parliament said that I should save the hate mails.
"When something happens to you, it will give the police a lead."
(Laughter) I noticed that she said, "When something happens" and not "if."
(Laughter) Sometimes hateful letters were also sent to my home address.
The more I became involved in public debate, the more hate mail and threats I received.
After a while, I got a secret address and I had to take extra precautions to protect my family.
Then in 2010, a Nazi began to harass me.
It was a man who had attacked Muslim women on the street.
Over time, it became much worse.
I was at the zoo with my children, and the phone was ringing constantly.
It was the Nazi.
I had the impression that he was close.
We headed home.
When we got back, my son asked, "Why does he hate you so much, Mom, when he doesn't even know you?"
"Some people are just stupid," I said.
And at the time, I actually thought that was a pretty clever answer.
And I suspect that that is the answer most of us would give.
The others -- they are stupid, brainwashed, ignorant.
We are the good guys and they are the bad guys, period.
Several weeks later I was at a friend's house, and I was very upset and angry about all the hate and racism I had met.
It was he who suggested that I should call them up and visit them.
"They will kill me," I said.
"They would never attack a member of the Danish Parliament," he said.
"And anyway, if they killed you, you would become a martyr."
(Laughter) "So it's pure win-win situation for you."
(Laughter) His advice was so unexpected, when I got home, I turned on my computer and opened the folder where I had saved all the hate mail.
There were literally hundreds of them.
Emails that started with words like "terrorist," "raghead," "rat," "whore."
I decided to contact the one who had sent me the most.
His name was Ingolf.
I decided to contact him just once so I could say at least I had tried.
To my surprise and shock, he answered the phone.
I blurted out, "Hello, my name is zlem. You have sent me so many hate mails.
You don't know me, I don't know you.
I was wondering if I could come around and we can drink a coffee together and talk about it?"
(Laughter) There was silence on the line.
And then he said, "I have to ask my wife."
(Laughter) What?
The racist has a wife?
(Laughter) A couple of days later, we met at his house.
I will never forget when he opened his front door and reached out to shake my hand.
I felt so disappointed.
(Laughter) because he looked nothing like I'd imagined.
I had expected a horrible person -- dirty, messy house.
It was not.
His house smelled of coffee which was served from a coffee set identical to the one my parents used.
I ended up staying for two and a half hours.
And we had so many things in common.
Even our prejudices were alike.
(Laughter) Ingolf told me that when he waits for the bus and the bus stops 10 meters away from him, it was because the driver was a "raghead."
I recognized that feeling.
When I was young and I waited for the bus and it stopped 10 meters away from me, I was sure that the driver was a racist.
When I got home, I was very ambivalent about my experience.
On the one hand, I really liked Ingolf.
He was easy and pleasant to talk to, but on the other hand, I couldn't stand the idea of having so much in common with someone who had such clearly racist views.
Gradually, and painfully, I came to realize that I had been just as judgmental of those who had sent me hate mails as they had been of me.
This was the beginning of what I call #dialoguecoffee.
Basically, I sit down for coffee with people who have said the most terrible things to me to try to understand why they hate people like me when they don't even know me.
I have been doing this the last eight years.
The vast majority of people I approach agree to meet me.
Most of them are men, but I have also met women.
I have made it a rule to always meet them in their house to convey from the outset that I trust them.
I always bring food because when we eat together, it is easier to find what we have in common and make peace together.
Along the way, I have learned some valuable lessons.
The people who sent hate mails are workers, husbands, wives, parents like you and me.
I'm not saying that their behavior is acceptable, but I have learned to distance myself from the hateful views without distancing myself from the person who's expressing those views.
And I have discovered that the people I visit are just as afraid of people they don't know as I was afraid of them before I started inviting myself for coffee.
During these meetings, a specific theme keeps coming up.
It shows up regardless whether I'm talking to a humanist or a racist, a man, a woman, a Muslim or an atheist.
They all seem to think that other people are to blame for the hate and for the generalization of groups.
They all believe that other people have to stop demonizing.
They point at politicians, the media, their neighbor or the bus driver who stops 10 meters away.
But when I asked, "What about you?
What can you do?", the reply is usually, "What can I do?
I have no influence.
I have no power."
I know that feeling.
For a large part of my life, I also thought that I didn't have any power or influence -- even when I was a member of the Danish parliament.
But today I know the reality is different.
We all have power and influence where we are, so we must never, never underestimate our own potential.
The #dialoguecoffee meetings have taught me that people of all political convictions can be caught demonizing the others with different views.
I know what I'm talking about.
As a young child, I hated different population groups.
And at the time, my religious views were very extreme.
But my friendship with Turks, with Danes, with Jews and with racists has vaccinated me against my own prejudices.
I grew up in a working-class family, and on my journey I have met many people who have insisted on speaking to me.
They have changed my views.
They have formed me as a democratic citizen and a bridge builder.
If you want to prevent hate and violence, we have to talk to as many people as possible for as long as possible while being as open as possible.
That can only be achieved through debate, critical conversation and insisting on dialogue that doesn't demonize people.
I'm going to ask you a question.
I invite you to think about it when you get home and in the coming days, but you have to be honest with yourself.
It should be easy, no one else will know it.
The question is this ...
who do you demonize?
Do you think supporters of American President Trump are deplorables?
Or that those who voted for Turkish President Erdoan are crazy Islamists?
Or that those who voted for Le Pen in France are stupid fascists?
Or perhaps you think that Americans who voted for Bernie Sanders are immature hippies.
(Laughter) All those words have been used to vilify those groups.
Maybe at this point, do you think I am an idealist?
I want to give you a challenge.
Before the end of this year, I challenge you to invite someone who you demonize -- someone who you disagree with politically and/or culturally and don't think you have anything in common with.
I challenge you to invite someone like this to #dialoguecoffee.
Remember Ingolf?
Basically, I'm asking you to find an Ingolf in your life, contact him or her and suggest that you can meet for #dialoguecofee.
When you start at #dialoguecoffee, you have to remember this: first, don't give up if the person refuses at first.
Sometimes it's taken me nearly one year to arrange a #dialoguecoffee meeting.
Two: acknowledge the other person's courage.
It isn't just you who's brave.
The one who's inviting you into their home is just as brave.
Three: don't judge during the conversation.
Make sure that most of the conversation focuses on what you have in common.
As I said, bring food.
And finally, remember to finish the conversation in a positive way because you are going to meet again.
A bridge can't be built in one day.
We are living in a world where many people hold definitive and often extreme opinions about the others without knowing much about them.
We notice of course the prejudices on the other side than in our own bases.
And we ban them from our lives.
We delete the hate mails.
We hang out only with people who think like us and talk about the others in a category of disdain.
We unfriend people on Facebook, and when we meet people who are discriminating or dehumanizing people or groups, we don't insist on speaking with them to challenge their opinions.
That's how healthy democratic societies break down -- when we don't check the personal responsibility for the democracy.
We take the democracy for granted.
It is not.
Conversation is the most difficult thing in a democracy and also the most important.
So here's my challenge.
Find your Ingolf.
(Laughter) Start a conversation.
Trenches have been dug between people, yes, but we all have the ability to build the bridges that cross the trenches.
And let me end by quoting my friend, Sergeot Uzan, who lost his son, Dan Uzan, in a terror attack on a Jewish synagogue in Copenhagen, 2015.
Sergio rejected any suggestion of revenge and instead said this ...
"Evil can only be defeated by kindness between people.
Kindness demands courage."
Dear friends, let's be courageous.
Thank you.
(Applause)
As an archaeologist, I'm most often asked what my favorite discovery is.
The answer's easy: my husband, Greg.
(Laughter) We met in Egypt on my first dig.
It was my first lesson in finding unexpected, wonderful things.
This began an incredible archaeological partnership.
Years later, I proposed to him in front of our favorite pair statue of the Prince and Princess Rahotep and Nofret, in the Cairo Museum, dating to 4,600 years ago.
I thought if I was going to ask Greg to spend the rest of this life with me, then I should ask him in front of two people who had pledged to be together for eternity.
These symbols endure because when we look at them, we're looking at mirrors.
They are powerful reminders that our common humanity has not changed.
The thrill of archaeological discovery is as powerful as love, because ancient history is the most seductive mistress imaginable.
Many archaeologists have devoted their lives to unraveling the mysteries of the past under hot suns and Arctic winds and in dense rainforests.
Many seek.
Some discover.
All worship at the temple of possibility that one discovery might change history.
On my first day in Egypt, I worked at a site in the Northeast Egyptian Delta called Mendes, dating to 4,200 years ago, in a cemetery.
That's a picture of me -- I'm just in my bliss.
