This was from a thesis of a student, Bill Butow, now at Intel, who wondered why, instead of making bigger and bigger chips, you don't make small chips, put them in a viscous medium, and pour out computing by the pound or by the square inch.
And that's what you see here.
On the left was postscript being rendered by a conventional computer; on the right is postscript being rendered from the first prototype we made, but there's no frame buffer, IO processor, any of that stuff -- it's just this material.
Unlike this screen where the dots are placed carefully, this is a raw material.
If you add twice as much of it, you have twice as much display.
If you shoot a gun through the middle, nothing happens.
If you need more resource, you just apply more computer.
So, that's the step after this -- of computing as a raw material.
That's still conventional bits, the step after that is -- this is an earlier prototype in the lab; this is high-speed video slowed down.
Now, integrating chemistry in computation, where the bits are bubbles.
This is showing making bits, this is showing -- once again, slowed down so you can see it, bits interacting to do logic and multiplexing and de-multiplexing.
So, now we can compute that the output arranges material as well as information. And, ultimately, these are some slides from an early project I did, computing where the bits are stored quantum-mechanically in the nuclei of atoms, so programs rearrange the nuclear structure of molecules.
All of these are in the lab pushing further and further and further, not as metaphor but literally integrating bits and atoms, and they lead to the following recognition.
We all know we've had a digital revolution, but what is that?
Well, Shannon took us, in the '40s, from here to here: from a telephone being a speaker wire that degraded with distance to the Internet. And he proved the first threshold theorem, that shows if you add information and remove it to a signal, you can compute perfectly with an imperfect device.
And that's when we got the Internet.
Von Neumann, in the '50s, did the same thing for computing; he showed you can have an unreliable computer but restore its state to make it perfect. This was the last great analog computer at MIT: a differential analyzer, and the more you ran it, the worse the answer got.
After Von Neumann, we have the Pentium, where the billionth transistor is as reliable as the first one.
But all our fabrication is down in this lower left corner.
A state-of-the-art airplane factory rotating metal wax at fixed metal, or you maybe melt some plastic. A 10-billion-dollar chip fab uses a process a village artisan would recognize -- you spread stuff around and bake it.
All the intelligence is external to the system; the materials don't have information.
Yesterday you heard about molecular biology, which fundamentally computes to build.
It's an information processing system.
We've had digital revolutions in communication and computation, but precisely the same idea, precisely the same math Shannon and Von Neuman did, hasn't yet come out to the physical world. So, inspired by that, colleagues in this program -- the Center for Bits and Atoms at MIT -- which is a group of people, like me, who never understood the boundary between physical science and computer science. I would even go further and say computer science is one of the worst things that ever happened to either computers or to science -- (Laughter) -- because the canon -- computer science -- many of them are great but the canon of computer science prematurely froze a model of computation based on technology that was available in 1950, and nature's a much more powerful computer than that.
So, you'll hear, tomorrow, from Saul Griffith. He was one of the first students to emerge from this program.
We started to figure out how you can compute to fabricate.
This was just a proof of principle he did of tiles that interact magnetically, where you write a code, much like protein folding, that specifies their structure.
So, there's no feedback to a tool metrology; the material itself codes for its structure in just the same ways that protein are fabricated. So, you can, for example, do that.
You can do other things. That's in 2D. It works in 3D.
The video on the upper right -- I won't show for time -- shows self-replication, templating so something can make something that can make something, and we're doing that now over, maybe, nine orders of magnitude. Those ideas have been used to show the best fidelity and direct rate DNA to make an organism, in functionalizing nanoclusters with peptide tails that code for their assembly -- so, much like the magnets, but now on nanometer scales.
Laser micro-machining: essentially 3D printers that digitally fabricate functional systems, all the way up to building buildings, not by having blueprints, but having the parts code for the structure of the building.
So, these are early examples in the lab of emerging technologies to digitize fabrication. Computers that don't control tools but computers that are tools, where the output of a program rearranges atoms as well as bits.
Now, to do that -- with your tax dollars, thank you -- I bought all these machines. We made a modest proposal to the NSF. We wanted to be able to make anything on any length scale, all in one place, because you can't segregate digital fabrication by a discipline or a length scale.
So we put together focused nano beam writers and supersonic water jet cutters and excimer micro-machining systems.
But I had a problem. Once I had all these machines, I was spending too much time teaching students to use them.
So I started teaching a class, modestly called, "How To Make Almost Anything." And that wasn't meant to be provocative; it was just for a few research students.
But the first day of class looked like this.
You know, hundreds of people came in begging, all my life I've been waiting for this class; I'll do anything to do it.
Then they'd ask, can you teach it at MIT? It seems too useful?
And then the next -- (Laughter) -- surprising thing was they weren't there to do research.
They were there because they wanted to make stuff.
They had no conventional technical background.
At the end of a semester they integrated their skills.
I'll show an old video. Kelly was a sculptor, and this is what she did with her semester project.
(Video): Kelly: Hi, I'm Kelly and this is my scream buddy.
Do you ever find yourself in a situation where you really have to scream, but you can't because you're at work, or you're in a classroom, or you're watching your children, or you're in any number of situations where it's just not permitted?
Well, scream buddy is a portable space for screaming.
When a user screams into scream buddy, their scream is silenced.
It is also recorded for later release where, when and how the user chooses.
(Scream) (Laughter) (Applause) So, Einstein would like this.
This student made a web browser for parrots -- lets parrots surf the Net and talk to other parrots.
This student's made an alarm clock you wrestle to prove you're awake; this is one that defends -- a dress that defends your personal space.
This isn't technology for communication; it's technology to prevent it.
This is a device that lets you see your music.
This is a student who made a machine that makes machines, and he made it by making Lego bricks that do the computing.
Just year after year -- and I finally realized the students were showing the killer app of personal fabrication is products for a market of one person.
You don't need this for what you can get in Wal-Mart; you need this for what makes you unique.
Ken Olsen famously said, nobody needs a computer in the home.
But you don't use it for inventory and payroll; DEC is now twice bankrupt. You don't need personal fabrication in the home to buy what you can buy because you can buy it.
You need it for what makes you unique, just like personalization.
So, with that, in turn, 20 million dollars today does this; 20 years from now we'll make Star Trek replicators that make anything.
The students hijacked all the machines I bought to do personal fabrication.
Today, when you spend that much of your money, there's a government requirement to do outreach, which often means classes at a local school, a website -- stuff that's just not that exciting.
So, I made a deal with my NSF program managers that instead of talking about it, I'd give people the tools.
This wasn't meant to be provocative or important, but we put together these Fab Labs. It's about 20,000 dollars in equipment that approximate both what the 20 million dollars does and where it's going.
A laser cutter to do press-fit assembly with 3D from 2D, a sign cutter to plot in copper to do electromagnetics, a micron scale, numerically-controlled milling machine for precise structures, programming tools for less than a dollar, 100-nanosecond microcontrollers. It lets you work from microns and microseconds on up, and they exploded around the world.
This wasn't scheduled, but they went from inner-city Boston to Pobal in India, to Secondi-Takoradi on Ghana's coast to Soshanguve in a township in South Africa, to the far north of Norway, uncovering, or helping uncover, for all the attention to the digital divide, we would find unused computers in all these places.
A farmer in a rural village -- a kid needs to measure and modify the world, not just get information about it on a screen.
That there's really a fabrication and an instrumentation divide bigger than the digital divide.
And the way you close it is not IT for the masses but IT development for the masses.
So, in place after place we saw this same progression: that we'd open one of these Fab Labs, where we didn't -- this is too crazy to think of.
We didn't think this up, that we would get pulled to these places; we'd open it. The first step was just empowerment.
You can see it in their face, just this joy of, I can do it.
This is a girl in inner-city Boston who had just done a high-tech on-demand craft sale in the inner city community center.
It goes on from there to serious hands-on technical education informally, out of schools. In Ghana we had set up one of these labs.
We designed a network sensor, and kids would show up and refuse to leave the lab.
There was a girl who insisted we stay late at night -- (Video): Kids: I love the Fab Lab.
-- her first night in the lab because she was going to make the sensor.
So she insisted on fabbing the board, learning how to stuff it, learning how to program it. She didn't really know what she was doing or why she was doing it, but she knew she just had to do it. There was something electric about it.
This is late at, you know, 11 o'clock at night and I think I was the only person surprised when what she built worked the first time.
And I've shown this to engineers at big companies, and they say they can't do this. Any one thing she's doing, they can do better, but it's distributed over many people and many sites and they can't do in an afternoon what this little girl in rural Ghana is doing.
(Video): Girl: My name is Valentina Kofi; I am eight years old.
I made a stacking board.
And, again, that was just for the joy of it.
Then these labs started doing serious problem solving -- instrumentation for agriculture in India, steam turbines for energy conversion in Ghana, high-gain antennas in thin client computers.
And then, in turn, businesses started to grow, like making these antennas.
And finally, the lab started doing invention.
We're learning more from them than we're giving them.
I was showing my kids in a Fab Lab how to use it.
They invented a way to do a construction kit out of a cardboard box -- which, as you see up there, that's becoming a business -- but their design was better than Saul's design at MIT, so there's now three students at MIT doing their theses on scaling the work of eight-year-old children because they had better designs.
Real invention is happening in these labs.
And I still kept -- so, in the last year I've been spending time with heads of state and generals and tribal chiefs who all want this, and I keep saying, but this isn't the real thing.
Wait, like, 20 years and then we'll be done.
And I finally got what's been going on. This is Kernigan and Ritchie inventing UNIX on a PDP.
PDPs came between mainframes and minicomputers.
They were tens of thousands of dollars, hard to use, but they brought computing down to work groups, and everything we do today happened there.
These Fab Labs are the cost and complexity of a PDP.
The projection of digital fabrication isn't a projection for the future; we are now in the PDP era.
We talked in hushed tones about the great discoveries then.
It was very chaotic, it wasn't, sort of, clear what was going on.
In the same sense we are now, today, in the minicomputer era of digital fabrication.
The only problem with that is it breaks everybody's boundaries.
In DC, I go to every agency that wants to talk, you know; in the Bay Area, I go to every organization you can think of -- they all want to talk about it, but it breaks their organizational boundaries. In fact, it's illegal for them, in many cases, to equip ordinary people to create rather than consume technology.
And that problem is so severe that the ultimate invention coming from this community surprised me: it's the social engineering. That the lab in far north of Norway -- this is so far north its satellite dishes look at the ground rather than the sky because that's where the satellites are -- the lab outgrew the little barn that it was in.
It was there because they wanted to find animals in the mountains but it outgrew it, so they built this extraordinary village for the lab.
This isn't a university; it's not a company. It's essentially a village for invention; it's a village for the outliers in society, and those have been growing up around these Fab Labs all around the world.
So this program has split into an NGO foundation, a Fab Foundation to support the scaling, a micro VC fund.
The person who runs it nicely describes it as "machines that make machines need businesses that make businesses:" it's a cross between micro-finance and VC to do fan-out, and then the research partnerships back at MIT for what's making it possible.
So I'd like to leave you with two thoughts.
There's been a sea change in aid, from top-down mega-projects to bottom-up, grassroots, micro-finance investing in the roots, so that everybody's got that that's what works.
But we still look at technology as top-down mega-projects.
Computing, communication, energy for the rest of the planet are these top-down mega-projects.
If this room full of heroes is just clever enough, you can solve the problems.
The message coming from the Fab Labs is that the other five billion people on the planet aren't just technical sinks; they're sources.
The real opportunity is to harness the inventive power of the world to locally design and produce solutions to local problems.
I thought that's the projection 20 years hence into the future, but it's where we are today.
It breaks every organizational boundary we can think of.
The hardest thing at this point is the social engineering and the organizational engineering, but it's here today.
And, finally, any talk like this on the future of computing is required to show Moore's law, but my favorite version -- this is Gordon Moore's original one from his original paper -- and what's happened is, year after year after year, we've scaled and we've scaled and we've scaled and we've scaled, and we've scaled and we've scaled, and we've scaled and we've scaled, and there's this looming bug of what's going to happen at the end of Moore's law; this ultimate bug is coming.
But we're coming to appreciate, is the transition from 2D to 3D, from programming bits to programming atoms, turns the ends of Moore's law scaling from the ultimate bug to the ultimate feature.
So, we're just at the edge of this digital revolution in fabrication, where the output of computation programs the physical world.
So, together, these two projects answer questions I hadn't asked carefully. The class at MIT shows the killer app for personal fabrication in the developed world is technology for a market of one: personal expression in technology that touches a passion unlike anything I've seen in technology for a very long time.
And the killer app for the rest of the planet is the instrumentation and the fabrication divide: people locally developing solutions to local problems. Thank you.
It's a great honor today to share with you The Digital Universe, which was created for humanity to really see where we are in the universe.
And so I think we can roll the video that we have.
[The Himalayas.] (Music) The flat horizon that we've evolved with has been a metaphor for the infinite: unbounded resources and unlimited capacity for disposal of waste.
It wasn't until we really left Earth, got above the atmosphere and had seen the horizon bend back on itself, that we could understand our planet as a limited condition.
The Digital Universe Atlas has been built at the American Museum of Natural History over the past 12 years.
We maintain that, put that together as a project to really chart the universe across all scales.
What we see here are satellites around the Earth and the Earth in proper registration against the universe, as we see.
NASA supported this work 12 years ago as part of the rebuilding of the Hayden Planetarium so that we would share this with the world.
The Digital Universe is the basis of our space show productions that we do -- our main space shows in the dome.
But what you see here is the result of, actually, internships that we hosted with Linkoping University in Sweden.
I've had 12 students work on this for their graduate work, and the result has been this software called Uniview and a company called SCISS in Sweden.
This software allows interactive use, so this actual flight path and movie that we see here was actually flown live.
I captured this live from my laptop in a cafe called Earth Matters on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, where I live, and it was done as a collaborative project with the Rubin Museum of Himalayan Art for an exhibit on comparative cosmology.
And so as we move out, we see continuously from our planet all the way out into the realm of galaxies, as we see here, light-travel time, giving you a sense of how far away we are.
As we move out, the light from these distant galaxies have taken so long, we're essentially backing up into the past.
We back so far up we're finally seeing a containment around us -- the afterglow of the Big Bang.
This is the WMAP microwave background that we see.
We'll fly outside it here, just to see this sort of containment.
If we were outside this, it would almost be meaningless, in the sense as before time.
But this our containment of the visible universe.
We know the universe is bigger than that which we can see.
Coming back quickly, we see here the radio sphere that we jumped out of in the beginning, but these are positions, the latest positions of exoplanets that we've mapped, and our sun here, obviously, with our own solar system.
What you're going to see -- we're going to have to jump in here pretty quickly between several orders of magnitude to get down to where we see the solar system -- these are the paths of Voyager 1, Voyager 2, Pioneer 11 and Pioneer 10, the first four spacecraft to have left the solar system.
Coming in closer, picking up Earth, orbit of the Moon, and we see the Earth.
This map can be updated, and we can add in new data.
I know Dr. Carolyn Porco is the camera P.I.
for the Cassini mission.
But here we see the complex trajectory of the Cassini mission color coded for different mission phases, ingeniously developed so that 45 encounters with the largest moon, Titan, which is larger that the planet Mercury, diverts the orbit into different parts of mission phase.
This software allows us to come close and look at parts of this.
This software can also be networked between domes.
We have a growing user base of this, and we network domes.
And we can network between domes and classrooms.
We're actually sharing tours of the universe with the first sub-Saharan planetarium in Ghana as well as new libraries that have been built in the ghettos in Columbia and a high school in Cambodia.
And the Cambodians have actually controlled the Hayden Planetarium from their high school.
This is an image from Saturday, photographed by the Aqua satellite, but through the Uniview software.
So you're seeing the edge of the Earth.
This is Nepal.
This is, in fact, right here is the valley of Lhasa, right here in Tibet.
But we can see the haze from fires and so forth in the Ganges valley down below in India.
This is Nepal and Tibet.
And just in closing, I'd just like to say this beautiful world that we live on -- here we see a bit of the snow that some of you may have had to brave in coming out -- so I'd like to just say that what the world needs now is a sense of being able to look at ourselves in this much larger condition now and a much larger sense of what home is.
Because our home is the universe, and we are the universe, essentially.
We carry that in us.
And to be able to see our context in this larger sense at all scales helps us all, I think, in understanding where we are and who we are in the universe.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Why grow homes? Because we can.
Right now, America is in an unremitting state of trauma.
And there's a cause for that, all right.
We've got McPeople, McCars, McHouses.
As an architect, I have to confront something like this.
So what's a technology that will allow us to make ginormous houses?
Well, it's been around for 2,500 years.
It's called pleaching, or grafting trees together, or grafting inosculate matter into one contiguous, vascular system.
And we do something different than what we did in the past; we add kind of a modicum of intelligence to that.
We use CNC to make scaffolding to train semi-epithetic matter, plants, into a specific geometry that makes a home that we call a Fab Tree Hab.
It fits into the environment. It is the environment.
It is the landscape, right?
And you can have a hundred million of these homes, and it's great because they suck carbon.
They're perfect.
You can have 100 million families, or take things out of the suburbs, because these are homes that are a part of the environment.
Imagine pre-growing a village -- it takes about seven to 10 years -- and everything is green.
So not only do we do the veggie house, we also do the in-vitro meat habitat, or homes that we're doing research on now in Brooklyn, where, as an architecture office, we're for the first of its kind to put in a molecular cell biology lab and start experimenting with regenerative medicine and tissue engineering and start thinking about what the future would be if architecture and biology became one.
So we've been doing this for a couple of years, and that's our lab.
And what we do is we grow extracellular matrix from pigs.
We use a modified inkjet printer, and we print geometry.
We print geometry where we can make industrial design objects like, you know, shoes, leather belts, handbags, etc., where no sentient creature is harmed.
It's victimless. It's meat from a test tube.
So our theory is that eventually we should be doing this with homes.
So here is a typical stud wall, an architectural construction, and this is a section of our proposal for a meat house, where you can see we use fatty cells as insulation, cilia for dealing with wind loads and sphincter muscles for the doors and windows.
(Laughter) And we know it's incredibly ugly.
It could have been an English Tudor or Spanish Colonial, but we kind of chose this shape.
And there it is kind of grown, at least one particular section of it.
We had a big show in Prague, and we decided to put it in front of the cathedral so religion can confront the house of meat.
That's why we grow homes. Thanks very much.
(Applause)
Who here is fascinated by life under the sea?
Fantastic.
Now, what did we just do?
Let's dissect this for a second.
The simple action of an individual raising a hand led many others to do the same.
Now, it's true that when individuals in a social network have common priorities, it's often beneficial to copy one another.
Think back to grade school and dressing like the cool kids made you "cool."
But copying behavior is also common in wild animals.
For example, some birds copy the alarm calls of other birds to spread information about approaching predators.
But could copying behavior in wild animals affect entire ecosystems that we humans depend on?
I was led to this question while studying coral reefs, which support millions of people through fisheries and tourism here in Africa and around the world.
But coral reefs depend on fish that perform a critical job by eating algae.
Because if left unchecked, these algae can kill coral and take over entire coral reefs, a costly change that is difficult or impossible to reverse.
So to understand how fish may prevent this, I spy on them while they're eating algae, which can be difficult for them to do in open parts of the reef exposed to predators, some of which, on rare occasion, appear to realize I'm watching them.
(Laughter) So clearly, clearly, for reef fish, dining out can be scary.
But I wanted to understand how these fish do their job in risky situations.
So my colleagues and I put massive video camera stands in a coral reef to remotely monitor entire feeding grounds that produce a lot of algae but are exposed to predators.
And this perspective from above shows us the feeding behavior and precise movements of many different fish, shown here with colored dots.
And by analyzing thousands of fish movements to and from feeding grounds, we discovered a pattern.
These fish, despite being from different species and not swimming in schools, were copying one another, such that one fish entering these dangerous feeding grounds could lead many others to do the same.
And fish stayed for longer and ate more algae when they were surrounded by more feeding fish.
Now, this could be happening because even simple movements by individual fish can inadvertently communicate vital information.
For example, if even one fish sees a predator and flees, this can alert many others to danger.
And a fish safely entering feeding grounds can show others that the coast is clear.
So it turns out that even when these fish are different species, they are connected within social networks which can provide information on when it's safe to eat.
And our analyses indicate that fish simply copying other fish in their social network could account for over 60 percent of the algae eaten by the fish community, and thus could be critical to the flow of energy and resources through coral reef ecosystems.
But these findings also suggest that overfishing, a common problem in coral reefs, not only removes fish, but it could break up the social network of remaining fish, which may hide more and eat less algae because they're missing critical information.
And this would make coral reefs more vulnerable than we currently predict.
So remarkably, fish social networks allow the actions of one to spread to many and could affect entire coral reefs, which feed millions of us and support the global economy for all of us.
Now, our discovery points us towards better ways to sustainably manage coral reefs, but it also shows us, we humans are not just affected by the actions of other humans, but we could be affected by the actions of individual fish on a distant coral reef through their simple copying behavior.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So it's 1969, New York City, third grade music class, and our teacher brings us into a room with nothing but a piano and chairs.
And one by one, he calls us up, and he plays middle C, and he asks us to sing it.
(Singing) And you're either instructed to go to the right of the room or the left side of the room.
(Laughter) And when all 35 kids are done, the left side of the room, which I was a part of, was told to stand up and go back to home room.
(Laughter) And none of us ever received another music class again in elementary school.
An in club and an out club was established, and I didn't even know what the gating test was in the moment.
A few years later, English class ...
(Laughter) first paper of a new semester, and I get the paper back, and it's C+, with the comment, "Good as can be expected."
(Laughter) Now, honestly, I didn't mind a C+.
I was just happy it wasn't a C- or a D.
But the "good as can be expected" comment ...
even at that young age, it didn't seem right.
It seemed somehow limiting.
Now, how many people here have had an experience similar to that, either at school or the workplace?
We're not alone.
So I guess it might be ironic that my life path would lead me to a career of making music and writing for Blue Man Group (Laughter) and starting a school.
(Laughter) But school was torture for me.
As someone who didn't have a natural proclivity for academics, and my teachers never seemed to understand me, I didn't know how to navigate schools and schools didn't know what to do with me.
So I started to ask the question, even back then, if these environments didn't know what to do with people who didn't fit a standard mold, why weren't we reshaping the environments to take advantage of people's strengths?
What I've come to believe is that we need to cultivate safe and conducive conditions for new and innovative ideas to evolve and thrive.
We know that humans are innately innovative, because if we weren't, we'd all be using the same arrowheads that we were using 10,000 years ago.
So one of the things that I started to question is, are there ways to make innovation easier and happen more frequently?
Is there a way to take those aha moments, those breakthroughs that seem to happen randomly and occasionally, and have them happen intentionally and frequently?
When we started Blue Man Group in 1988, we had never done an off-Broadway show before.
We'd actually done almost no theater.
But we knew what we were passionate about, and it was a whole series of things that we had never seen onstage before, things like art and pop culture and technology and sociology and anthropology and percussion and comedy and following your bliss.
We established a rule that nothing made it onstage if we had seen it before, and we wanted to inspire creativity and connectedness in ourselves and our audiences; we wanted to do a little bit of social good, and we wanted to have fun doing it.
And in the office, we wanted to create an environment where people treated each other just a little bit better, just a little bit more respect and consideration than in the outside world.
And we continued to iterate and collaborate and find solutions to create things that hadn't been seen.
Over time, I've come to identify the optimal conditions for these types of creative and innovative environments are clear intent, purpose and passion: this is working on something bigger than ourselves.
Personal integrity: it's doing what we say we're going to do.
It's being our authentic self in all interactions.
Direct communication and clear expectations, even when the subject matter is difficult.
Grit and perseverance: iteration, iteration, iteration.
Establish collaborative teams.
Instill deep trust and mutual respect.
Everyone on your team is in.
There is no out club.
We rise as a team, we fall as a team, and decisions are decisions until they're not.
Embrace multiple perspectives.
This means all voices matter, all emotions matter.
Address disagreements head-on.
People should feel seen and heard.
Take risks and celebrate mistakes.
A commitment to being a learning organization, always trying to spiral upwards the innovation and learning curves.
And speak in one voice.
This is perhaps the glue that holds all these conditions together.
The concept is that we speak in the exact same manner about someone who's not in the room as if they are in the room.
Now this seems basic, but it's an aspirational practice that helps deal with difficult situations in a more respectful way.
Sewing this practice in can have a profound effect on raising the bar, on mutual respect, trust, reducing gossip and politics in the office and the classroom, and thus reducing the noise that gets in the way of the innovative process.
At Blue Man Group, iteration was essential for our creative process.
We were writing a piece where we were trying to illustrate the consumption / waste loop in a funny and creative and surprising way for our audiences.
Now, if you have yourselves thought about trying to do the same endeavor, I can save you a lot of time right here and now.
I can definitively tell you that oatmeal, Jell-O, Cream of Wheat, Gak, pudding, clay, tapioca, Silly Putty and tomato paste do not slide through a tube that's coiled up under your costumes that's meant to come out an orifice in your chest and spray towards the audience.
It won't happen.
(Laughter) After months of iteration, we finally happened upon bananas.
(Laughter) Who knew that bananas would have the exact right properties to stay solid even when pushed through a tube with forced air, yet slippery enough to have the dramatic oozing effect that we were looking for.
(Laughter) This piece became a signature of the Blue Man show.
But we didn't throw out all the rules of theater altogether.
We had set designs. We had lighting designs.
We had a stage manager calling the shows.
But I'm fairly sure we were one of the very first shows that was connecting with our audience in a respectful way, by hanging them upside down, (Laughter) dipping them in paint, slamming them against a canvas, (Laughter) putting their heads in 70 pounds of Jell-O, and then making them one of the heroes of the show.
(Laughter) Besides that, we didn't reinvent what didn't need to be reinvented.
(Laughter) Years later, we took all this learning and we created a school -- a school for our children that we wish we had gone to, a school where it was just as important what happened in the hallways between classes as what happened in the classes; a place where you got music class even when you couldn't sing middle C.
At Blue School, teachers and parents and students are equal collaborators at the table, intentionally creating a safe space where they can develop a lifelong, joyful passion for learning.
Again, we didn't try to reinvent the wheel when it didn't need to be reinvented.
We don't shy away from the more traditional methods like direct instruction, when it's the best way into a lesson.
But we balance it with an integrated learning across all subjects approach, and balance is the key.
In fact, Blue School was founded on a balance between academic mastery, creative thinking, and self and social intelligence.
I realize that this might sound like common sense, but in some circles, this is radical.
(Laughter) And these qualities have brought a lot of attention to Blue School as a truly innovative school.
Nearly 10 years in, we announced the expansion of the middle school.
Our faculty asked our sixth graders to participate in the development of middle school values.
Their process began with a question: What do you need from our community to be happy and productive at school?
Students moved through a six-week process of individual work, collaborative work, refinement, and consensus, and the list they came up with is really extraordinary.
Be engaged and present with each other.
Respect and support what others need in order to learn.
Be inclusive of our diversity -- the way we look, think and act.
Cultivate the practice of self-awareness and awareness of others.
Honor and make time for fun and joy.
And challenge ourselves, practice being OK, making mistakes, and support each other through them.
Remember, these kids were 11 years old when they came up with this.
They articulated what took us 20 years to identify.
One of the great by-products of creating these vibrant communities is that we become attractors for people who want to prioritize these values.
They want to prioritize it above things like money and prestige and tradition.
We can all be on this road together, you at your own values in your own companies, in your own communities and families.
For us, for me, it was about prioritizing children's voices to give them the tools to help build a harmonious and sustainable world.
I invite you to be on this exciting, passionate, joyful journey together.
And together, good as can be expected is limitless when the expectation is that by reshaping our environments, we can change the world.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Thank you very much.
Please excuse me for sitting; I'm very old.
(Laughter) Well, the topic I'm going to discuss is one which is, in a certain sense, very peculiar because it's very old.
Roughness is part of human life forever and forever, and ancient authors have written about it.
It was very much uncontrollable, and in a certain sense, it seemed to be the extreme of complexity, just a mess, a mess and a mess.
There are many different kinds of mess.
Now, in fact, by a complete fluke, I got involved many years ago in a study of this form of complexity, and to my utter amazement, I found traces -- very strong traces, I must say -- of order in that roughness.
And so today, I would like to present to you a few examples of what this represents.
I prefer the word roughness to the word irregularity because irregularity -- to someone who had Latin in my long-past youth -- means the contrary of regularity.
But it is not so.
Regularity is the contrary of roughness because the basic aspect of the world is very rough.
So let me show you a few objects.
Some of them are artificial.
Others of them are very real, in a certain sense.
Now this is the real. It's a cauliflower.
Now why do I show a cauliflower, a very ordinary and ancient vegetable?
Because old and ancient as it may be, it's very complicated and it's very simple, both at the same time.
If you try to weigh it -- of course it's very easy to weigh it, and when you eat it, the weight matters -- but suppose you try to measure its surface.
Well, it's very interesting.
If you cut, with a sharp knife, one of the florets of a cauliflower and look at it separately, you think of a whole cauliflower, but smaller.
And then you cut again, again, again, again, again, again, again, again, again, and you still get small cauliflowers.
So the experience of humanity has always been that there are some shapes which have this peculiar property, that each part is like the whole, but smaller.
Now, what did humanity do with that?
Very, very little.
(Laughter) So what I did actually is to study this problem, and I found something quite surprising.
That one can measure roughness by a number, a number, 2.3, 1.2 and sometimes much more.
One day, a friend of mine, to bug me, brought a picture and said, "What is the roughness of this curve?"
I said, "Well, just short of 1.5."
It was 1.48.
Now, it didn't take me any time.
I've been looking at these things for so long.
So these numbers are the numbers which denote the roughness of these surfaces.
I hasten to say that these surfaces are completely artificial.
They were done on a computer, and the only input is a number, and that number is roughness.
So on the left, I took the roughness copied from many landscapes.
To the right, I took a higher roughness.
So the eye, after a while, can distinguish these two very well.
Humanity had to learn about measuring roughness.
This is very rough, and this is sort of smooth, and this perfectly smooth.
Very few things are very smooth.
So then if you try to ask questions: "What's the surface of a cauliflower?"
Well, you measure and measure and measure.
Each time you're closer, it gets bigger, down to very, very small distances.
What's the length of the coastline of these lakes?
The closer you measure, the longer it is.
The concept of length of coastline, which seems to be so natural because it's given in many cases, is, in fact, complete fallacy; there's no such thing.
You must do it differently.
What good is that, to know these things?
Well, surprisingly enough, it's good in many ways.
To begin with, artificial landscapes, which I invented sort of, are used in cinema all the time.
We see mountains in the distance.
They may be mountains, but they may be just formulae, just cranked on.
Now it's very easy to do.
It used to be very time-consuming, but now it's nothing.
Now look at that. That's a real lung.
Now a lung is something very strange.
If you take this thing, you know very well it weighs very little.
The volume of a lung is very small, but what about the area of the lung?
Anatomists were arguing very much about that.
Some say that a normal male's lung has an area of the inside of a basketball [court].
And the others say, no, five basketball [courts].
Enormous disagreements.
Why so? Because, in fact, the area of the lung is something very ill-defined.
The bronchi branch, branch, branch and they stop branching, not because of any matter of principle, but because of physical considerations: the mucus, which is in the lung.
So what happens is that in a way you have a much bigger lung, but it branches and branches down to distances about the same for a whale, for a man and for a little rodent.
Now, what good is it to have that?
Well, surprisingly enough, amazingly enough, the anatomists had a very poor idea of the structure of the lung until very recently.
And I think that my mathematics, surprisingly enough, has been of great help to the surgeons studying lung illnesses and also kidney illnesses, all these branching systems, for which there was no geometry.
So I found myself, in other words, constructing a geometry, a geometry of things which had no geometry.
And a surprising aspect of it is that very often, the rules of this geometry are extremely short.
You have formulas that long.
And you crank it several times.
Sometimes repeatedly: again, again, again, the same repetition.
And at the end, you get things like that.
This cloud is completely, 100 percent artificial.
Well, 99.9.
And the only part which is natural is a number, the roughness of the cloud, which is taken from nature.
Something so complicated like a cloud, so unstable, so varying, should have a simple rule behind it.
Now this simple rule is not an explanation of clouds.
The seer of clouds had to take account of it.
I don't know how much advanced these pictures are. They're old.
I was very much involved in it, but then turned my attention to other phenomena.
Now, here is another thing which is rather interesting.
One of the shattering events in the history of mathematics, which is not appreciated by many people, occurred about 130 years ago, 145 years ago.
Mathematicians began to create shapes that didn't exist.
Mathematicians got into self-praise to an extent which was absolutely amazing, that man can invent things that nature did not know.
In particular, it could invent things like a curve which fills the plane.
A curve's a curve, a plane's a plane, and the two won't mix.
Well, they do mix.
A man named Peano did define such curves, and it became an object of extraordinary interest.
It was very important, but mostly interesting because a kind of break, a separation between the mathematics coming from reality, on the one hand, and new mathematics coming from pure man's mind.
Well, I was very sorry to point out that the pure man's mind has, in fact, seen at long last what had been seen for a long time.
And so here I introduce something, the set of rivers of a plane-filling curve.
And well, it's a story unto itself.
So it was in 1875 to 1925, an extraordinary period in which mathematics prepared itself to break out from the world.
And the objects which were used as examples, when I was a child and a student, as examples of the break between mathematics and visible reality -- those objects, I turned them completely around.
I used them for describing some of the aspects of the complexity of nature.
Well, a man named Hausdorff in 1919 introduced a number which was just a mathematical joke, and I found that this number was a good measurement of roughness.
When I first told it to my friends in mathematics they said, "Don't be silly. It's just something [silly]."
Well actually, I was not silly.
The great painter Hokusai knew it very well.
The things on the ground are algae.
He did not know the mathematics; it didn't yet exist.
And he was Japanese who had no contact with the West.
But painting for a long time had a fractal side.
I could speak of that for a long time.
The Eiffel Tower has a fractal aspect.
I read the book that Mr. Eiffel wrote about his tower, and indeed it was astonishing how much he understood.
This is a mess, mess, mess, Brownian loop.
One day I decided -- halfway through my career, I was held by so many things in my work -- I decided to test myself.
Could I just look at something which everybody had been looking at for a long time and find something dramatically new?
Well, so I looked at these things called Brownian motion -- just goes around.
I played with it for a while, and I made it return to the origin.
Then I was telling my assistant, "I don't see anything. Can you paint it?"
So he painted it, which means he put inside everything. He said: "Well, this thing came out ..." And I said, "Stop! Stop! Stop!
I see; it's an island."
And amazing.
So Brownian motion, which happens to have a roughness number of two, goes around.
I measured it, 1.33.
Again, again, again.
Long measurements, big Brownian motions, 1.33.
Mathematical problem: how to prove it?
It took my friends 20 years.
Three of them were having incomplete proofs.
They got together, and together they had the proof.
So they got the big [Fields] medal in mathematics, one of the three medals that people have received for proving things which I've seen without being able to prove them.
Now everybody asks me at one point or another, "How did it all start?
What got you in that strange business?"
What got you to be, at the same time, a mechanical engineer, a geographer and a mathematician and so on, a physicist?
Well actually I started, oddly enough, studying stock market prices.
And so here I had this theory, and I wrote books about it -- financial prices increments.
To the left you see data over a long period.
To the right, on top, you see a theory which is very, very fashionable.
It was very easy, and you can write many books very fast about it.
(Laughter) There are thousands of books on that.
Now compare that with real price increments.
Where are real price increments?
Well, these other lines include some real price increments and some forgery which I did.
So the idea there was that one must be able to -- how do you say? -- model price variation.
And it went really well 50 years ago.
For 50 years, people were sort of pooh-poohing me because they could do it much, much easier.
But I tell you, at this point, people listened to me.
(Laughter) These two curves are averages: Standard &amp; Poor, the blue one; and the red one is Standard &amp; Poor's from which the five biggest discontinuities are taken out.
Now discontinuities are a nuisance, so in many studies of prices, one puts them aside.
"Well, acts of God.
And you have the little nonsense which is left.
Acts of God." In this picture, five acts of God are as important as everything else.
In other words, it is not acts of God that we should put aside.
That is the meat, the problem.
If you master these, you master price, and if you don't master these, you can master the little noise as well as you can, but it's not important.
Well, here are the curves for it.
Now, I get to the final thing, which is the set of which my name is attached.
In a way, it's the story of my life.
My adolescence was spent during the German occupation of France.
Since I thought that I might vanish within a day or a week, I had very big dreams.
And after the war, I saw an uncle again.
My uncle was a very prominent mathematician, and he told me, "Look, there's a problem which I could not solve 25 years ago, and which nobody can solve.
This is a construction of a man named [Gaston] Julia and [Pierre] Fatou.
If you could find something new, anything, you will get your career made."
Very simple.
So I looked, and like the thousands of people that had tried before, I found nothing.
But then the computer came, and I decided to apply the computer, not to new problems in mathematics -- like this wiggle wiggle, that's a new problem -- but to old problems.
And I went from what's called real numbers, which are points on a line, to imaginary, complex numbers, which are points on a plane, which is what one should do there, and this shape came out.
This shape is of an extraordinary complication.
The equation is hidden there, z goes into z squared, plus c.
It's so simple, so dry.
It's so uninteresting.
Now you turn the crank once, twice: twice, marvels come out.
I mean this comes out.
I don't want to explain these things.
This comes out. This comes out.
Shapes which are of such complication, such harmony and such beauty.
This comes out repeatedly, again, again, again.
And that was one of my major discoveries, to find that these islands were the same as the whole big thing, more or less.
And then you get these extraordinary baroque decorations all over the place.
All that from this little formula, which has whatever, five symbols in it.
And then this one.
The color was added for two reasons.
First of all, because these shapes are so complicated that one couldn't make any sense of the numbers.
And if you plot them, you must choose some system.
And so my principle has been to always present the shapes with different colorings because some colorings emphasize that, and others it is that or that.
It's so complicated.
(Laughter) In 1990, I was in Cambridge, U.K.
to receive a prize from the university, and three days later, a pilot was flying over the landscape and found this thing.
So where did this come from?
Obviously, from extraterrestrials.
(Laughter) Well, so the newspaper in Cambridge published an article about that "discovery" and received the next day 5,000 letters from people saying, "But that's simply a Mandelbrot set very big."
Well, let me finish.
This shape here just came out of an exercise in pure mathematics.
Bottomless wonders spring from simple rules, which are repeated without end.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want to start with a story, a la Seth Godin, from when I was 12 years old.
My uncle Ed gave me a beautiful blue sweater -- at least I thought it was beautiful.
And it had fuzzy zebras walking across the stomach, and Mount Kilimanjaro and Mount Meru were kind of right across the chest, that were also fuzzy.
And I wore it whenever I could, thinking it was the most fabulous thing I owned.
Until one day in ninth grade, when I was standing with a number of the football players.
And my body had clearly changed, and Matt, who was undeniably my nemesis in high school, said in a booming voice that we no longer had to go far away to go on ski trips, but we could all ski on Mount Novogratz.
(Laughter) And I was so humiliated and mortified that I immediately ran home to my mother and chastised her for ever letting me wear the hideous sweater.
We drove to the Goodwill and we threw the sweater away somewhat ceremoniously, my idea being that I would never have to think about the sweater nor see it ever again.
Fast forward -- 11 years later, I'm a 25-year-old kid.
I'm working in Kigali, Rwanda, jogging through the steep slopes, when I see, 10 feet in front of me, a little boy -- 11 years old -- running toward me, wearing my sweater.
And I'm thinking, no, this is not possible.
But so, curious, I run up to the child -- of course scaring the living bejesus out of him -- grab him by the collar, turn it over, and there is my name written on the collar of this sweater.
I tell that story, because it has served and continues to serve as a metaphor to me about the level of connectedness that we all have on this Earth.
We so often don't realize what our action and our inaction does to people we think we will never see and never know.
I also tell it because it tells a larger contextual story of what aid is and can be.
That this traveled into the Goodwill in Virginia, and moved its way into the larger industry, which at that point was giving millions of tons of secondhand clothing to Africa and Asia.
Which was a very good thing, providing low cost clothing.
And at the same time, certainly in Rwanda, it destroyed the local retailing industry.
Not to say that it shouldn't have, but that we have to get better at answering the questions that need to be considered when we think about consequences and responses.
So, I'm going to stick in Rwanda, circa 1985, 1986, where I was doing two things.
I had started a bakery with 20 unwed mothers.
We were called the "Bad News Bears," and our notion was we were going to corner the snack food business in Kigali, which was not hard because there were no snacks before us.
And because we had a good business model, we actually did it, and I watched these women transform on a micro-level.
But at the same time, I started a micro-finance bank, and tomorrow Iqbal Quadir is going to talk about Grameen, which is the grandfather of all micro-finance banks, which now is a worldwide movement -- you talk about a meme -- but then it was quite new, especially in an economy that was moving from barter into trade.
We got a lot of things right.
We focused on a business model; we insisted on skin in the game.
The women made their own decisions at the end of the day as to how they would use this access to credit to build their little businesses, earn more income so they could take care of their families better.
What we didn't understand, what was happening all around us, with the confluence of fear, ethnic strife and certainly an aid game, if you will, that was playing into this invisible but certainly palpable movement inside Rwanda, that at that time, 30 percent of the budget was all foreign aid.
The genocide happened in 1994, seven years after these women all worked together to build this dream.
And the good news was that the institution, the banking institution, lasted.
In fact, it became the largest rehabilitation lender in the country.
The bakery was completely wiped out, but the lessons for me were that accountability counts -- got to build things with people on the ground, using business models where, as Steven Levitt would say, the incentives matter.
Understand, however complex we may be, incentives matter.
So when Chris raised to me how wonderful everything that was happening in the world, that we were seeing a shift in zeitgeist, on the one hand I absolutely agree with him, and I was so thrilled to see what happened with the G8 -- that the world, because of people like Tony Blair and Bono and Bob Geldof -- the world is talking about global poverty; the world is talking about Africa in ways I have never seen in my life.
It's thrilling.
And at the same time, what keeps me up at night is a fear that we'll look at the victories of the G8 -- 50 billion dollars in increased aid to Africa, 40 billion in reduced debt -- as the victory, as more than chapter one, as our moral absolution.
And in fact, what we need to do is see that as chapter one, celebrate it, close it, and recognize that we need a chapter two that is all about execution, all about the how-to.
And if you remember one thing from what I want to talk about today, it's that the only way to end poverty, to make it history, is to build viable systems on the ground that deliver critical and affordable goods and services to the poor, in ways that are financially sustainable and scaleable.
If we do that, we really can make poverty history.
And it was that -- that whole philosophy -- that encouraged me to start my current endeavor called "Acumen Fund," which is trying to build some mini-blueprints for how we might do that in water, health and housing in Pakistan, India, Kenya, Tanzania and Egypt.
And I want to talk a little bit about that, and some of the examples, so you can see what it is that we're doing.
But before I do this -- and this is another one of my pet peeves -- I want to talk a little bit about who the poor are.
Because we too often talk about them as these strong, huge masses of people yearning to be free, when in fact, it's quite an amazing story.
On a macro level, four billion people on Earth make less than four dollars a day.
That's who we talk about when we think about "the poor."
If you aggregate it, it's the third largest economy on Earth, and yet most of these people go invisible.
Where we typically work, there's people making between one and three dollars a day.
Who are these people?
They are farmers and factory workers.
They work in government offices. They're drivers.
They are domestics.
They typically pay for critical goods and services like water, like healthcare, like housing, and they pay 30 to 40 times what their middleclass counterparts pay -- certainly where we work in Karachi and Nairobi.
The poor also are willing to make, and do make, smart decisions, if you give them that opportunity.
So, two examples.
One is in India, where there are 240 million farmers, most of whom make less than two dollars a day.
Where we work in Aurangabad, the land is extraordinarily parched.
You see people on average making 60 cents to a dollar.
This guy in pink is a social entrepreneur named Ami Tabar.
What he did was see what was happening in Israel, larger approaches, and figure out how to do a drip irrigation, which is a way of bringing water directly to the plant stock.
But previously it's only been created for large-scale farms, so Ami Tabar took this and modularized it down to an eighth of an acre.
A couple of principles: build small.
Make it infinitely expandable and affordable to the poor.
This family, Sarita and her husband, bought a 15-dollar unit when they were living in a -- literally a three-walled lean-to with a corrugated iron roof.
After one harvest, they had increased their income enough to buy a second system to do their full quarter-acre.
A couple of years later, I meet them.
They now make four dollars a day, which is pretty much middle class for India, and they showed me the concrete foundation they had just laid to build their house.
And I swear, you could see the future in that woman's eyes.
Something I truly believe.
You can't talk about poverty today without talking about malaria bed nets, and I again give Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard huge kudos for bringing to the world this notion of his rage -- for five dollars you can save a life.
Malaria is a disease that kills one to three million people a year.
300 to 500 million cases are reported.
It's estimated that Africa loses about 13 billion dollars a year to the disease.
Five dollars can save a life.
We can send people to the moon; we can see if there's life on Mars -- why can't we get five-dollar nets to 500 million people?
The question, though, is not "Why can't we?"
The question is how can we help Africans do this for themselves?
A lot of hurdles.
One: production is too low. Two: price is too high.
Three: this is a good road in -- right near where our factory is located.
Distribution is a nightmare, but not impossible.
We started by making a 350,000-dollar loan to the largest traditional bed net manufacturer in Africa so that they could transfer technology from Japan and build these long-lasting, five-year nets.
Here are just some pictures of the factory.
Today, three years later, the company has employed another thousand women.
It contributes about 600,000 dollars in wages to the economy of Tanzania.
It's the largest company in Tanzania.
The throughput rate right now is 1.5 million nets, three million by the end of the year.
We hope to have seven million at the end of next year.
So the production side is working.
On the distribution side, though, as a world, we have a lot of work to do.
Right now, 95 percent of these nets are being bought by the U.N., and then given primarily to people around Africa.
We're looking at building on some of the most precious resources of Africa: people.
Their women.
And so I want you to meet Jacqueline, my namesake, 21 years old.
If she were born anywhere else but Tanzania, I'm telling you, she could run Wall Street.
She runs two of the lines, and has already saved enough money to put a down payment on her house.
She makes about two dollars a day, is creating an education fund, and told me she is not marrying nor having children until these things are completed.
And so, when I told her about our idea -- that maybe we could take a Tupperware model from the United States, and find a way for the women themselves to go out and sell these nets to others -- she quickly started calculating what she herself could make and signed up.
We took a lesson from IDEO, one of our favorite companies, and quickly did a prototyping on this, and took Jacqueline into the area where she lives.
She brought 10 of the women with whom she interacts together to see if she could sell these nets, five dollars apiece, despite the fact that people say nobody will buy one, and we learned a lot about how you sell things.
Not coming in with our own notions, because she didn't even talk about malaria until the very end.
First, she talked about comfort, status, beauty.
These nets, she said, you put them on the floor, bugs leave your house.
Children can sleep through the night; the house looks beautiful; you hang them in the window.
And we've started making curtains, and not only is it beautiful, but people can see status -- that you care about your children.
Only then did she talk about saving your children's lives.
A lot of lessons to be learned in terms of how we sell goods and services to the poor.
I want to end just by saying that there's enormous opportunity to make poverty history.
To do it right, we have to build business models that matter, that are scaleable and that work with Africans, Indians, people all over the developing world who fit in this category, to do it themselves.
Because at the end of the day, it's about engagement.
It's about understanding that people really don't want handouts, that they want to make their own decisions; they want to solve their own problems; and that by engaging with them, not only do we create much more dignity for them, but for us as well.
And so I urge all of you to think next time as to how to engage with this notion and this opportunity that we all have -- to make poverty history -- by really becoming part of the process and moving away from an us-and-them world, and realizing that it's about all of us, and the kind of world that we, together, want to live in and share.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm Ellen and I'm totally obsessed with food.
But I didn't start out obsessed with food.
I started out obsessed with global security policy, because I lived in New York during 9/11 and it was a very relevant thing.
I got from global security policy to food because I realized when I'm hungry, I'm really pissed off, and I'm assuming the rest of the world is too.
Especially if you and your kids are hungry and your neighbor's kids are hungry and your whole neighborhood is hungry.
And actually, it looks like the areas of the world that are hungry are also the areas of the world that are pretty insecure.
So I took a job at the United Nations World Food Programme as a way to try to address these security issues through food security issues.
There, I came across what I think is the most brilliant of their programs.
It's called School Feeding and it's a really simple idea to get in the middle of the cycle of poverty and hunger that continues for a lot of people around the world, and stop it.
A free school meal gets kids into school, which is education, the first step out of poverty, but it also gives them the micronutrients and the macronutrients they need to develop mentally and physically.
While I was working at the UN, I met this girl. Her name is Lauren Bush.
And she had this really awesome idea to sell the bag, called the "Feed Bag" -- which is really beautifully ironic because you can strap on the Feed Bag.
But each bag we'd sell would provide a year's worth of school meals for one kid.
It's so simple, and we thought, OK, it costs between 20 and 50 bucks to provide school feeding for a year.
We could sell these bags and raise a ton of money and awareness for the World Food Programme.
But at the UN, sometimes things move slowly and they basically said no.
And we thought, this is such a good idea, it's going to raise so much money.
So we said screw it, we'll start our own company, which we did, three years ago.
That was my first dream, to start this company called FEED, and here's a screenshot of our website.
We did a bag for Haiti just a month after the earthquake to provide school meals for kids in Haiti.
So FEED's doing great.
We've so far provided 55 million meals to kids around the world by selling now 550,000 bags, a ton of bags, a lot of bags.
All this time you're really -- hunger is a hard thing to think about, because what we think about is eating.
I think about eating a lot and I really love it.
And the thing that's strange about international hunger and talking about international issues is that most people want to know: "What are you doing for America's kids?"
There's definitely hunger in America: 49 million people and almost 16.7 million children.
I mean that's pretty dramatic for our own country.
Hunger definitely means something different in America than it does internationally, but it's incredibly important to address hunger in our own country.
But the bigger problem that we all know about is obesity, and it's dramatic.
The other thing that's dramatic is that both hunger and obesity have really risen in the last 30 years.
Unfortunately, obesity's not only an American problem.
It's actually been spreading all around the world and mainly through our kind of food systems that we're exporting.
The numbers are pretty crazy.
There's a billion people obese or overweight and a billion people hungry.
So those seem like two bifurcated problems, but I kind of started to think about, you know, what is obesity and hunger?
Well, they're both about food.
And when you think about food, the underpinning of food in both cases is potentially problematic agriculture.
And agriculture is where food comes from.
Agriculture in America's very interesting.
It's very consolidated and the foods that are produced lead to the foods that we eat.
The foods that are produced are, more or less, corn, soy and wheat.
And that's three-quarters of the food that we're eating: processed foods and fast foods.
Unfortunately, in our agricultural system, we haven't done a good job in the last three decades of exporting those technologies around the world.
So African agriculture, which is the place of most hunger in the world, has actually fallen precipitously as hunger has risen.
So somehow we're not making the connect between exporting a good agricultural system that will help feed people all around the world.
Who is farming? That's what I was wondering.
So I went and stood on a big grain bin in the Midwest, and that really didn't help me understand farming, but I think it's a really cool picture.
And the reality is that between farmers in America -- who actually, quite frankly, when I spend time in the Midwest, are pretty large in general.
And their farms are also large.
But farmers in the rest of the world are actually quite skinny, and that's because they're starving.
Most hungry people in the world are subsistence farmers.
And most of those people are women -- which is a totally other topic that I won't get on right now, but I'd love to do the feminist thing at some point.
I think it's really interesting to look at agriculture from these two sides.
There's this large, consolidated farming that's led to what we eat in America, and it's really been since around 1980, after the oil crisis, when, you know -- mass consolidation, mass exodus of small farmers in this country.
And then in the same time period, we've kind of left Africa's farmers to do their own thing.
Unfortunately, what is farmed ends up as what we eat.
And in America, a lot of what we eat has led to obesity and has led to a real change in sort of what our diet is, in the last 30 years.
It's crazy.
A fifth of kids under two drinks soda.
Hello! You don't put soda in bottles.
But people do, because it's so cheap, and so our whole food system in the last 30 years has really shifted.
I mean, you know, it's not just in our own country, but really we're exporting the system around the world, and when you look at the data of least developed countries -- especially in cities, which are growing really rapidly -- people are eating American processed foods.
And in one generation, they're going from hunger and all of the detrimental health effects of hunger to obesity and things like diabetes and heart disease in one generation.
So the problematic food system is affecting both hunger and obesity.
Not to beat a dead horse, but this is a global food system where there's a billion people hungry and a billion people obese.
I think that's the only way to look at it.
And instead of taking these two things as bifurcated problems that are very separate, it's really important to look at them as one system.
We get a lot of our food from all around the world and people from all around the world are importing our food system, so it's incredibly relevant to start a new way of looking at it.
I've learned -- and the technology people here, which I'm totally not one of -- but apparently, it really takes 30 years for a lot of technologies to become really endemic to us, like the mouse and the Internet and Windows.
You know, there's 30-year cycles.
I think 2010 can be a really interesting year because it is the end of the 30-year cycle, and it's the birthday of the global food system.
That's the first birthday I want to talk about.
If we really think that this is something that's happened in the last 30 years, there's hope in that.
It's the 30th anniversary of GMO crops and the Big Gulp, Chicken McNuggets, high-fructose corn syrup, the farm crisis in America and the change in how we've addressed agriculture internationally.
So there's a lot of reasons to take this 30-year time period as sort of the creation of this new food system.
I'm not the only one who's obsessed with this whole 30-year thing.
The icons like Michael Pollan and Jamie Oliver in his TED Prize wish both addressed this last three-decade time period as incredibly relevant for food system change.
Well, I really care about 1980 because it's also the 30th anniversary of me this year.
And so in my lifetime, a lot of what's happened in the world -- and being a person obsessed with food -- a lot of this has really changed.
So my second dream is that I think we can look to the next 30 years as a time to change the food system again.
And we know what's happened in the past, so if we start now and we look at technologies and improvements to the food system long-term, we might be able to recreate the food system so when I give my next talk and I'm 60 years old, I'll be able to say that it's been a success.
So I'm announcing today the start of a new organization, or a new fund within the FEED Foundation, called the 30 Project.
And the 30 Project is really focused on these long-term ideas for food system change.
And I think by aligning international advocates that are addressing hunger and domestic advocates that are addressing obesity, we might actually look for long-term solutions that will make the food system better for everyone.
We all tend to think that these systems are quite different and people argue whether or not organic can feed the world, but if we take a 30-year view, there's more hope in collaborative ideas.
So I'm hoping that by connecting really disparate organizations like the ONE campaign and Slow Food, which don't seem right now to have much in common, we can talk about holistic, long-term, systemic solutions that will improve food for everyone.
Some ideas I've had is like, look, the reality is -- kids in the South Bronx need apples and carrots and so do kids in Botswana.
And how are we going to get those kids those nutritious foods?
Another thing that's become incredibly global is production of meat and fish.
Understanding how to produce protein in a way that's healthy for the environment and healthy for people will be incredibly important to address things like climate change and how we use petrochemical fertilizers.
And, you know, these are really relevant topics that are long-term and important for both people in Africa who are small farmers and people in America who are farmers and eaters.
And I also think that thinking about processed foods in a new way, where we actually price the negative externalities like petrochemicals and like fertilizer runoff into the price of a bag of chips -- Well, if that bag of chips then becomes inherently more expensive than an apple, then maybe it's time for a different sense of personal responsibility in food choice because the choices are actually choices instead of three-quarters of the products being made just from corn, soy and wheat.
The 30Project.org is launched and I've gathered a coalition of a few organizations to start.
And it'll be growing over the next few months.
But I really hope that you will all think of ways that you can look long-term at things like the food system and make change.
(Applause)
Trees epitomize stasis.
Trees are rooted in the ground in one place for many human generations, but if we shift our perspective from the trunk to the twigs, trees become very dynamic entities, moving and growing.
And I decided to explore this movement by turning trees into artists.
I simply tied the end of a paintbrush onto a twig.
I waited for the wind to come up and held up a canvas, and that produced art.
The piece of art you see on your left is painted by a western red cedar and that on your right by a Douglas fir, and what I learned was that different species have different signatures, like a Picasso versus a Monet.
But I was also interested in the movement of trees and how this art might let me capture that and quantify it, so to measure the distance that a single vine maple tree -- which produced this painting -- moved in a single year, I simply measured and summed each of those lines.
I multiplied them by the number of twigs per branch and the number of branches per tree and then divided that by the number of minutes per year.
And so I was able to calculate how far a single tree moved in a single year.
You might have a guess.
The answer is actually 186,540 miles, or seven times around the globe.
And so simply by shifting our perspective from a single trunk to the many dynamic twigs, we are able to see that trees are not simply static entities, but rather extremely dynamic.
And I began to think about ways that we might consider this lesson of trees, to consider other entities that are also static and stuck, but which cry for change and dynamicism, and one of those entities is our prisons.
Prisons, of course, are where people who break our laws are stuck, confined behind bars.
And our prison system itself is stuck.
The United States has over 2.3 million incarcerated men and women.
That number is rising.
Of the 100 incarcerated people that are released, 60 will return to prison.
Funds for education, for training and for rehabilitation are declining, so this despairing cycle of incarceration continues.
I decided to ask whether the lesson I had learned from trees as artists could be applied to a static institution such as our prisons, and I think the answer is yes.
In the year 2007, I started a partnership with the Washington State Department of Corrections.
Working with four prisons, we began bringing science and scientists, sustainability and conservation projects to four state prisons.
We give science lectures, and the men here are choosing to come to our science lectures instead of watching television or weightlifting.
That, I think, is movement.
We partnered with the Nature Conservancy for inmates at Stafford Creek Correctional Center to grow endangered prairie plants for restoration of relic prairie areas in Washington state.
That, I think, is movement.
We worked with the Washington State Department of Fish and Wildlife to grow endangered frogs -- the Oregon spotted frog -- for later release into protected wetlands.
That, I think, is movement.
And just recently, we've begun to work with those men who are segregated in what we call Supermax facilities.
They've incurred violent infractions by becoming violent with guards and with other prisoners.
They're kept in bare cells like this for 23 hours a day.
When they have meetings with their review boards or mental health professionals, they're placed in immobile booths like this.
For one hour a day they're brought to these bleak and bland exercise yards.
Although we can't bring trees and prairie plants and frogs into these environments, we are bringing images of nature into these exercise yards, putting them on the walls, so at least they get contact with visual images of nature.
This is Mr. Lopez, who has been in solitary confinement for 18 months, and he's providing input on the types of images that he believes would make him and his fellow inmates more serene, more calm, less apt to violence.
And so what we see, I think, is that small, collective movements of change can perhaps move an entity such as our own prison system in a direction of hope.
We know that trees are static entities when we look at their trunks.
But if trees can create art, if they can encircle the globe seven times in one year, if prisoners can grow plants and raise frogs, then perhaps there are other static entities that we hold inside ourselves, like grief, like addictions, like racism, that can also change.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I still remember the day in school when our teacher told us that the world population had become three billion people, and that was in 1960.
I'm going to talk now about how world population has changed from that year and into the future, but I will not use digital technology, as I've done during my first five TEDTalks.
Instead, I have progressed, and I am, today, launching a brand new analog teaching technology that I picked up from IKEA: this box.
This box contains one billion people.
And our teacher told us that the industrialized world, 1960, had one billion people.
In the developing world, she said, they had two billion people.
And they lived away then.
There was a big gap between the one billion in the industrialized world and the two billion in the developing world.
In the industrialized world, people were healthy, educated, rich, and they had small families.
And their aspiration was to buy a car.
And in 1960, all Swedes were saving to try to buy a Volvo like this.
This was the economic level at which Sweden was.
But in contrast to this, in the developing world, far away, the aspiration of the average family there was to have food for the day.
They were saving to be able to buy a pair of shoes.
There was an enormous gap in the world when I grew up.
And this gap between the West and the rest has created a mindset of the world, which we still use linguistically when we talk about "the West" and "the Developing World."
But the world has changed, and it's overdue to upgrade that mindset and that taxonomy of the world, and to understand it.
And that's what I'm going to show you, because since 1960 what has happened in the world up to 2010 is that a staggering four billion people have been added to the world population.
Just look how many.
The world population has doubled since I went to school.
And of course, there's been economic growth in the West.
A lot of companies have happened to grow the economy, so the Western population moved over to here.
And now their aspiration is not only to have a car.
Now they want to have a holiday on a very remote destination and they want to fly.
So this is where they are today.
And the most successful of the developing countries, they have moved on, you know, and they have become emerging economies, we call them.
They are now buying cars.
And what happened a month ago was that the Chinese company, Geely, they acquired the Volvo company, and then finally the Swedes understood that something big had happened in the world.
(Laughter) So there they are.
And the tragedy is that the two billion over here that is struggling for food and shoes, they are still almost as poor as they were 50 years ago.
The new thing is that we have the biggest pile of billions, the three billions here, which are also becoming emerging economies, because they are quite healthy, relatively well-educated, and they already also have two to three children per woman, as those [richer also] have.
And their aspiration now is, of course, to buy a bicycle, and then later on they would like to have a motorbike also.
But this is the world we have today, no longer any gap.
But the distance from the poorest here, the very poorest, to the very richest over here is wider than ever.
But there is a continuous world from walking, biking, driving, flying -- there are people on all levels, and most people tend to be somewhere in the middle.
This is the new world we have today in 2010.
And what will happen in the future?
Well, I'm going to project into 2050.
I was in Shanghai recently, and I listened to what's happening in China, and it's pretty sure that they will catch up, just as Japan did.
All the projections [say that] this one [billion] will [only] grow with one to two or three percent.
[But this second] grows with seven, eight percent, and then they will end up here.
They will start flying.
And these lower or middle income countries, the emerging income countries, they will also forge forwards economically.
And if, but only if, we invest in the right green technology -- so that we can avoid severe climate change, and energy can still be relatively cheap -- then they will move all the way up here.
And they will start to buy electric cars.
This is what we will find there.
So what about the poorest two billion?
What about the poorest two billion here?
Will they move on?
Well, here population [growth] comes in because there [among emerging economies] we already have two to three children per woman, family planning is widely used, and population growth is coming to an end.
Here [among the poorest], population is growing.
So these [poorest] two billion will, in the next decades, increase to three billion, and they will thereafter increase to four billion.
There is nothing -- but a nuclear war of a kind we've never seen -- that can stop this [growth] from happening.
Because we already have this [growth] in process.
But if, and only if, [the poorest] get out of poverty, they get education, they get improved child survival, they can buy a bicycle and a cell phone and come [to live] here, then population growth will stop in 2050.
We cannot have people on this level looking for food and shoes because then we get continued population growth.
And let me show you why by converting back to the old-time digital technology.
Here I have on the screen my country bubbles.
Every bubble is a country. The size is population.
The colors show the continent.
The yellow on there is the Americas; dark blue is Africa; brown is Europe; green is the Middle East and this light blue is South Asia.
That's India and this is China. Size is population.
Here I have children per woman: two children, four children, six children, eight children -- big families, small families.
The year is 1960.
And down here, child survival, the percentage of children surviving childhood up to starting school: 60 percent, 70 percent, 80 percent, 90, and almost 100 percent, as we have today in the wealthiest and healthiest countries.
But look, this is the world my teacher talked about in 1960: one billion Western world here -- high child-survival, small families -- and all the rest, the rainbow of developing countries, with very large families and poor child survival.
What has happened? I start the world. Here we go.
Can you see, as the years pass by, child survival is increasing?
They get soap, hygiene, education, vaccination, penicillin and then family planning. Family size is decreasing.
[When] they get up to 90-percent child survival, then families decrease, and most of the Arab countries in the Middle East is falling down there [to small families].
Look, Bangladesh catching up with India.
The whole emerging world joins the Western world with good child survival and small family size, but we still have the poorest billion.
Can you see the poorest billion, those [two] boxes I had over here?
They are still up here.
And they still have a child survival of only 70 to 80 percent, meaning that if you have six children born, there will be at least four who survive to the next generation.
And the population will double in one generation.
So the only way of really getting world population [growth] to stop is to continue to improve child survival to 90 percent.
That's why investments by Gates Foundation, UNICEF and aid organizations, together with national government in the poorest countries, are so good; because they are actually helping us to reach a sustainable population size of the world.
We can stop at nine billion if we do the right things.
Child survival is the new green.
It's only by child survival that we will stop population growth.
And will it happen?
Well, I'm not an optimist, neither am I a pessimist.
I'm a very serious "possibilist."
It's a new category where we take emotion apart, and we just work analytically with the world.
It can be done.
We can have a much more just world.
With green technology and with investments to alleviate poverty, and global governance, the world can become like this.
And look at the position of the old West.
Remember when this blue box was all alone, leading the world, living its own life.
This will not happen [again].
The role of the old West in the new world is to become the foundation of the modern world -- nothing more, nothing less.
But it's a very important role.
Do it well and get used to it.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
A few years ago, I set out on a mission to find God.
Now, I'm going to tell you right up front that I failed, which, as a lawyer, is a really hard thing for me to admit.
But on that failed journey, a lot of what I found was enlightening.
And one thing in particular gave me a lot of hope.
It has to do with the magnitude and significance of our differences.
So, I was raised in America by Indian parents -- culturally Hindu, but practicing a strict and relatively unknown religion outside of India called Jainism.
To give you an idea of just how minority that makes me: people from India represent roughly one percent of the US population; Hindus, about 0.7 percent; Jains, at most .00046 percent.
To put that in context: more people visit the Vermont Teddy Bear Factory each year than are followers of the Jain religion in America.
To add to my minority mix, my parents then decided, "What a great idea! Let's send her to Catholic school" -- (Laughter) where my sister and I were the only non-white, non-Catholic students in the entire school.
At the Infant Jesus of Prague School in Flossmoor, Illinois -- yes, that's really what it was called -- we were taught to believe that there is a single Supreme Being who is responsible for everything, the whole shebang, from the creation of the Universe to moral shepherding to eternal life.
But at home, I was being taught something entirely different.
Followers of the Jain religion don't believe in a single Supreme Being or even a team of Supreme Beings.
Instead, we're taught that God manifests as the perfection of each of us as individuals, and that we're actually spending our entire lives striving to remove the bad karmas that stand in the way of us becoming our own godlike, perfect selves.
On top of that, one of the core principles of Jainism is something called "non-absolutism."
Non-absolutists believe that no single person can hold ownership or knowledge of absolute truth, even when it comes to religious beliefs.
Good luck testing that concept out on the priests and nuns in your Catholic school.
(Laughter) No wonder I was confused and hyperaware of how different I was from my peers.
Cut to 20-something years later, and I found myself to be a highly spiritual person, but I was floundering.
I was spiritually homeless.
I came to learn that I was a "None," which isn't an acronym or a clever play on words, nor is it one of these.
It's simply the painfully uninspired name given to everyone who checks off the box "none" when Pew Research asks them about their religious affiliation.
(Laughter) Now, a couple of interesting things about Nones are: there are a lot of us, and we skew young.
In 2014, there were over 56 million religiously unaffiliated Nones in the United States.
And Nones account for over one-third of adults between the ages of 18 to 33.
But the most interesting thing to me about Nones is that we're often spiritual.
In fact, 68 percent of us believe, with some degree of certainty, that there is a God.
We're just not sure who it is.
(Laughter) So the first takeaway for me when I realized I was a None and had found that information out was that I wasn't alone.
I was finally part of a group in America that had a lot of members, which felt really reassuring.
But then the second, not-so-reassuring takeaway was that, oh, man, there are a lot of us.
That can't be good, because if a lot of highly spiritual people are currently godless, maybe finding God is not going to be as easy as I had originally hoped.
So that is when I decided that on my spiritual journey, I was going to avoid the obvious places and skip the big-box religions altogether and instead venture out into the spiritual fringe of mediums and faith healers and godmen.
But remember, I'm a non-absolutist, which means I was pretty inclined to keep a fairly open mind, which turned out to be a good thing, because I went to a witch's potluck dinner at the LGBT Center in New York City, where I befriended two witches; drank a five-gallon jerrican full of volcanic water with a shaman in Peru; got a hug from a saint in the convention center -- she smelled really nice -- (Laughter) chanted for hours in a smoke-filled, heat-infused sweat lodge on the beaches of Mexico; worked with a tequila-drinking medium to convene with the dead, who oddly included both my deceased mother-in-law and the deceased manager of the hip-hop group The Roots.
(Laughter) Yeah, my mother-in-law told me she was really happy her son had chosen me for his wife.
Duh! But -- (Laughter) Yeah.
But the manager of The Roots said that maybe I should cut back on all the pasta I was eating.
I think we can all agree that it was lucky for my husband that it wasn't his dead mother who suggested I lay off carbs.
(Laughter) I also joined a laughing yoga group out of South Africa; witnessed a woman have a 45-minute orgasm -- I am not making this up -- as she tapped into the energy of the universe -- I think I'm going to go back there -- (Laughter) called God from a phone booth in the Nevada desert at Burning Man, wearing a unitard and ski goggles; and I had an old Indian guy lie on top of me, and no, he wasn't my husband.
This was a perfect stranger named Paramji, and he was chanting into my chakras as he tapped into the energy forces of the Universe to heal my "yoni," which is a Sanskrit word for "vagina."
(Laughter) I was going to have a slide here, but a few people suggested that a slide of my yoni at TED -- even TEDWomen -- not the best idea.
(Laughter) Very early in my quest, I also went to see the Brazilian faith healer John of God at his compound down in Brazil.
Now, John of God is considered a full-trance medium, which basically means he can talk to dead people.
But in his case, he claims to channel a very specific group of dead saints and doctors in order to heal whatever's wrong with you.
And although John of God does not have a medical degree or even a high school diploma, he actually performs surgery -- the real kind, with a scalpel, but no anesthesia.
Yeah, I don't know.
He also offers invisible surgery, where there is no cutting, and surrogate surgery, where he supposedly can treat somebody who is thousands of miles away by performing a procedure on a loved one.
Now, when you go to visit John of God, there are all kinds of rules and regulations.
It's a whole complicated thing, but the bottom line is that you can visit John of God and present him with three things that you would like fixed, and he will set the dead saints and doctors to work on your behalf to get the job done.
(Laughter) Now, before you snicker, consider that, at least according to his website, over eight million people -- including Oprah, the Goddess of Daytime TV -- have gone to see John of God, and I was pre-wired to keep an open mind.
But to be honest, the whole thing for me was kind of weird and inconclusive, and in the end, I flew home, even more confused than I already started out.
But that doesn't mean I came home empty-handed.
In the weeks leading up to my trip to Brazil, I mentioned my upcoming plans to some friends and to a couple of colleagues at Google, where I was a lawyer at the time.
And I might have mentioned it to a couple more people because I'm chatty, including my neighbor, the guy who works at the local coffee shop I go to each morning, the checkout lady at Whole Foods and a stranger who sat next to me on the subway.
I told each of them where I was going and why, and I offered to carry three wishes of theirs down to Brazil, explaining that anyone going to see John of God could act as a proxy for others and save them the trip.
And to my surprise, my in-box overflowed.
Friends told friends who told friends, and those friends apparently told more friends, other strangers and the guys at their coffee shops, until it seemed that days before I left for Brazil that there was no one who did not have my email address.
And at the time, all I could conclude was that I had offered too much to too many.
But when I actually reread those messages a few years later, I noticed something completely different.
Those emails actually shared three commonalities, the first of which was rather curious.
Almost everyone sent me meticulous details about how they could be reached.
I had told them, or their friends had told them, that along with the list of the three things they wanted fixed, I needed their photo, their name and their date of birth.
But they gave me full addresses, with, like, apartment numbers and zip codes, as if John of God was going to stop by their house and see them in person or send along a package.
It was as if, in the highly unlikely event that their wishes were granted by John of God, they just wanted to make sure that they weren't delivered to the wrong person or the wrong address.
Even if they didn't believe, they were hedging their bets.
The second commonality was just as curious, but far more humbling.
Virtually everyone -- the stranger on the subway, the guy at the coffee shop, the lawyer down the hall, the Jew, the atheist, the Muslim, the devout Catholic -- all asked for essentially the same three things.
OK, there were a couple of outliers, and yes, a few people asked for cash.
But when I eliminated what were ultimately a handful of anomalies, the similarities were staggering.
Almost every single person first asked for good health for themselves and their families.
Almost universally, they next asked for happiness and then love, in that order: health, happiness, love.
Sometimes they asked for a specific health issue to be fixed, but more often than not, they just asked for good health in general.
When it came to happiness, they each phrased it slightly differently, but they all asked for the same specific subtype of happiness, too -- the kind of happiness that sinks in and sets down roots in your soul; the kind of happiness that could sustain us, even if we were to lose absolutely everything else.
And for love, they all asked for the kind of romantic love, the soul mate that we read about in epic romantic novels, the kind of love that will stay with us till the end of our days.
Sorry, that's my husband.
Crap! Now I forgot my place.
(Laughter) (Applause) So by and large, all of these friends and strangers, regardless of their background, race or religion, all asked for the same things, and they were the same things that I really wanted, the simplified version of the basic human needs identified by social scientists like Abraham Maslow and Manfred Max-Neef.
No one asked for answers to the big existential questions or for proof of God or the meaning of life like I had set out to find.
They didn't even ask for an end to war or global hunger.
Even when they could have asked for absolutely anything, they all asked for health, happiness and love.
So now those emails had a third commonality as well.
Each of them ended in the exact same way.
Instead of thanking me for carting their wishes all the way to Brazil, everyone said, "Please don't tell anyone."
So I decided to tell everyone -- (Laughter) right here on this stage, not because I'm untrustworthy, but because the fact that we have so much in common feels especially important for us all to hear, especially now, when so many of the world's problems seem to be because we keep focusing on the things that make us different, not on what binds us together.
And look -- I am the first to admit that I am not a statistician, and that the data I presented to you that I just accumulated in my in-box is more anecdotal than scientific, more qualitative than quantitative.
It is, as anyone who works with data would tell you, hardly a statistically significant or demographically balanced sample.
But nonetheless, I find myself thinking about those emails every time I reflect back on the bias and prejudice that I've faced in my life, or when there's another hate crime or a senseless tragedy that underscores the disheartening sense that our differences might be insurmountable.
I then remind myself that I have evidence that the humbling, unifying commonality of our humanity is that, even when presented with the opportunity to ask for anything at all, most of us want the same things, and that this is true no matter who we are, what name we call our god, or which religion, if any, we call home.
I then also note that apparently some of us want these things so badly that we would email a None, a spiritually confused None like me -- some might say otherwise confused as well -- and that we would seek out this stranger and email her our deepest wishes, just in case there is the remote possibility that they might be granted by someone who is not a god, much less our god, someone who is not even a member of our chosen religion, someone who, when you look at him on paper, seems like an unlikely candidate to deliver.
And so now, when I reflect back on my spiritual quest, even though I did not find God, I found a home in this: even today, in a world fractured by religious, ethnic, political, philosophical, and racial divides, even with all of our obvious differences, at the end of the day, and the most fundamental level, we are all the same.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Nina Dlvik Brochmann: We grew up believing that the hymen is a proof of virginity.
But it turns out, we were wrong.
What we discovered is that the popular story we're told about female virginity is based on two anatomical myths.
The truth has been known in medical communities for over 100 years, yet somehow these two myths continue to make life difficult for women around the world.
Ellen Stkken Dahl: The first myth is about blood.
It tells us that the hymen breaks and bleeds the first time a woman has vaginal sex.
In other words, if there is no blood on the sheets afterwards, then the woman was simply not a virgin.
The second myth is a logical consequence of the first.
Since the hymen is thought to break and bleed, people also believe that it actually disappears or is in some way radically altered during a woman's first intercourse.
If that were true, one would easily be able to determine if a woman is a virgin or not by examining her genitals, by doing a virginity check.
NDB: So that's our two myths: virgins bleed, and hymens are lost forever.
Now, this may sound like a minor issue to you.
Why should you care about an obscure little skin fold on the female body?
But the truth is, this is about so much more than an anatomical misunderstanding.
The myths about the hymen have lived on for centuries because they have cultural significance.
They have been used as a powerful tool in the effort to control women's sexuality in about every culture, religion and historical decade.
Women are still mistrusted, shamed, harmed and, in the worst cases, subjected to honor killings if they don't bleed on their wedding night.
Other women are forced through degrading virginity checks, simply to obtain a job, to save their reputation or to get married.
ESD: Like in Indonesia, where women are systematically examined to enter military service.
After the Egyptian uprisings in 2011, a group of female protesters were forced to undergo virginity checks by their military.
In Oslo, doctors are examining the hymens of young girls to reassure parents that their children are not ruined.
And sadly, the list goes on.
Women are so afraid not to live up to the myths about the hymen that they choose to use different virginity quick fixes to assure a bleeding.
That could be plastic surgery, known as "revirgination," it could be vials of blood poured on the sheets after sex or fake hymens bought online, complete with theater blood and a promise to "kiss your deep, dark secret goodbye."
NDB: By telling girls that no deed can be kept secret, that their bodies will reveal them no matter what, we have endowed them with fear.
Girls are afraid of ruining themselves, either through sport, play, tampon use or a sexual activity.
We have curtailed their opportunities and their freedoms.
It's time we put an end to the virginity fraud.
It's time we break the myths about the hymen once and for all.
ESD: We are medical students, sexual health workers and the authors of "The Wonder Down Under."
(Laughter) That's a popular science book about the female genitals.
And in our experience, people seem to believe that the hymen is some kind of a seal covering the vaginal opening.
In Norwegian, it is even called "the virgin membrane."
And with this, we picture something fragile, something easily destructible, something you can rip through, perhaps like a sheet of plastic wrapping.
You may have wondered why we brought a hula hoop onstage today.
We'll show you.
(Laughter) Now, it is very hard to hide that something has happened to this hoop, right?
It is different before and after I punched it.
The seal is broken, and unless we change the plastic, it won't get back to its intact state.
So if we wanted to do a virginity check on this hoop right here, right now, that would be very easy.
It's easy to say that this hoop is not a virgin anymore.
(Laughter) NDB: But the hymen is nothing like a piece of plastic you can wrap around your food, or a seal.
In fact ...
it's more like this -- a scrunchie or a rubber band.
The hymen is a rim of tissue at the outer opening of the vagina.
And usually, it has a doughnut or a half-moon shape with a large, central hole.
But this varies a lot, and sometimes hymens can have fringes, it can have several holes, or it can consist of lobes.
In other words, hymens naturally vary a lot in looks, and that is what makes it so hard to do a virginity check.
ESD: Now that we know a bit more about the hymen's anatomy, it's time to get back to our two myths: virgins bleed, hymens are lost forever.
But the hymen doesn't have to break at all.
The hymen is like a scrunchie in function as well as in looks.
And you can stretch a scrunchie, right?
(Laughter) You can stretch a hymen, too.
In fact, it's very elastic.
And for a lot of women, the hymen will be elastic enough to handle a vaginal intercourse without sustaining any damage.
For other women, the hymen may tear a bit to make room for the penis, but that won't make it disappear.
But it may look a bit different from before.
It naturally follows that you can't examine the hymen to check for virginity status.
This was noted over 100 years ago in 1906 by the Norwegian doctor Marie Jeancet.
She examined a middle-aged sex worker and concluded that her genitalia were reminiscent of a teenage virgin.
But that makes sense, right?
Because if her hymen was never damaged during sex, then what were we expecting to see?
ESD: Since hymens come in every shape and form, it is difficult to know if a dent or a fold in it is there because of previous damage or if it's just a normal anatomical variant.
The absurdity of virgin testing is illustrated in a study done on 36 pregnant teenagers.
When doctors examined their hymens, they could only find clear signs of penetration in two out of the 36 girls.
So unless you believe in 34 cases of virgin births -- (Laughter) we must all agree that also our second myth has taken a vital blow.
You simply cannot look a woman between her legs and read her sexual story.
NDB: Like most myths, the myths about the hymen are untrue.
There is no virgin seal that magically disappears after sex, and half of virgins can easily have sex without bleeding.
We wish we could say that by removing these myths, everything would be OK, that shame, harm and honor killings would all just disappear.
But of course, it's not that simple.
Sexual oppression of women comes from something much deeper than a simple anatomical misunderstanding about the properties of the hymen.
It's a question of cultural and religious control of women's sexuality.
And that is much harder to change.
But we must try.
ESD: As medical professionals, this is our contribution.
We want every girl, parent and [future] husband to know what the hymen is and how it works.
We want them to know that the hymen can't be used as a proof of virginity.
And that way, we can remove one of the most powerful tools used to control young women today.
After telling you this, you may wonder what the alternative is, for if we cannot use the hymen as a proof of virginity for women, then what should we use?
We opt for using nothing.
(Cheering) If you -- (Applause) If you really want to know if a woman is a virgin or not, ask her.
(Laughter) But how she answers that question is her choice.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This is the ocean as I used to know it.
And I find that since I've been in the Gulf a couple of times, I really kind of am traumatized because whenever I look at the ocean now, no matter where I am, even where I know that none of the oil has gone, I sort of see slicks, and I'm finding that I'm very much haunted by it.
But what I want to talk to you about today is a lot of things that try to put all of this in context, not just about the oil eruption, but what it means and why it has happened.
First, just a little bit about me.
I'm basically just a guy that likes to go fishing ever since I was a little kid, and because I did, I wound up studying sea birds to try to stay in the coastal habitats that I so loved.
And now I mainly write books about how the ocean is changing, and the ocean is certainly changing very rapidly.
Now we saw this graphic earlier on, that we really live on a hard marble that has just a slight bit of wetness to it.
And the same thing with the atmosphere: If you took all the atmosphere and rolled it up in a ball, you would get that little sphere of gas on the right.
So we live on the most fragile little soap bubble you can imagine, a very sacred soap bubble, but one that is very, very easy to affect.
And all the burning of oil and coal and gas, all the fossil fuels, have changed the atmosphere greatly.
We're warming the climate.
So the blowout in the Gulf is just a little piece of a much larger problem that we have with the energy that we use to run civilization.
Beyond warming, we have the problem of the oceans getting more acidified -- and already measurably so, and already affecting animals.
Now in the laboratory, if you take a clam and you put it in the pH that is not 8.1, which is the normal pH of seawater, but 7.5, it dissolves in about three days.
If you take a sea urchin larva from 8.1, put it in a pH of 7.7 -- not a huge change -- it becomes deformed and dies.
Already, commercial oyster larvae are dying at large scales in some places.
Coral reefs are growing slower in some places because of this problem.
So this really matters.
Now, let's take a little tour around the Gulf a little bit.
One of the things that really impresses me about the people in the Gulf: They are really, really aquatic people.
And they can handle water.
They can handle a hurricane that comes and goes.
When the water goes down, they know what to do.
But when it's something other than water, and their water habitat changes, they don't have many options.
In fact, those entire communities really don't have many options.
They don't have another thing they can do.
They can't go and work in the local hotel business because there isn't one in their community.
If you go to the Gulf and you look around, you do see a lot of oil.
You see a lot of oil on the ocean.
If you go to the site of the blowout, it looks pretty unbelievable.
It looks like you just emptied the oil pan in your car, and you just dumped it in the ocean.
And one of the really most incredible things, I think, is that there's nobody out there trying to collect it at the site where it is densest.
Parts of the ocean there look just absolutely apocalyptic.
You go in along the shore, you can find it everywhere.
It's really messy.
If you go to the places where it's just arriving, like the eastern part of the Gulf, in Alabama, there's still people using the beach while there are people cleaning up the beach.
And they have a very strange way of cleaning up the beach.
They're not allowed to put more than 10 pounds of sand in a 50-gallon plastic bag.
They have thousands and thousands of plastic bags.
I don't know what they'll do with all that stuff.
They don't see the sign that says: "Stay out of the water."
Their kids are in the water; they're getting tar all over their clothes and their sandals-- It's a mess.
And there's basically nobody there anymore, a few people trying to keep using it.
You see people who are really shell-shocked.
They are very hardworking people.
All they know about life is they get up in the morning, and if their engine starts, they go to work.
They always felt that they could rely on the assurances that nature brought them through the ecosystem of the Gulf.
They're finding that their world is really collapsing.
And so you can see, literally, signs of their shock ...
signs of their outrage ...
signs of their anger ...
and signs of their grief.
These are the things that you can see.
There's a lot you can't see, also, underwater.
What's going on underwater?
Well, some people say there are oil plumes.
And Congressman Markey asks, you know, "Is it going to take a submarine ride to see if there are really oil plumes?"
But I couldn't take a submarine ride -- especially between the time I knew I was coming here and today -- so I had to do a little experiment myself to see if there was oil in the Gulf of Mexico.
So this is the Gulf of Mexico ...
sparkling place full of fish.
And I created a little oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
And I learned, in fact, I confirmed the hypothesis that oil and water don't mix ...
until you add a dispersant ...
they start mixing.
And you add a little energy from the wind and the waves, and you get a big mess, a big mess that you can't possibly clean, you can't touch, you can't extract and, I think most importantly -- this is what I think -- you can't see it.
I think it's being hidden on purpose.
Now this is such a catastrophe and such a mess that lots of stuff is leaking out on the edges of the information stream.
But as many people have said, there's a large attempt to suppress what's going on.
Personally, I think that the dispersants are a major strategy to hide the body, because we put the murderer in charge of the crime scene.
But you can see it.
You can see where the oil is concentrated at the surface, and then it is attacked, because they don't want the evidence, in my opinion.
OK.
We heard that bacteria eat oil?
So do sea turtles.
When it breaks up, it has a long way to go before it gets down to bacteria.
Turtles eat it. It gets in the gills of fish.
These guys have to swim around through it.
I heard the most incredible story today when I was on the train coming here.
A writer named Ted Williams called me, and he was asking me a couple of questions about what I saw, because he's writing an article for Audubon magazine.
He said that he had been in the Gulf a little while ago; like about a week ago, and a guy who had been a recreational fishing guide took him out to show him what's going on.
That guide's entire calendar year is canceled bookings.
Everybody wanted their deposit back, everybody is fleeing.
That's the story of thousands of people.
But he told Ted that on the last day he went out, a bottlenose dolphin suddenly appeared next to the boat, and it was splattering oil out its blowhole.
And he moved away because it was his last fishing trip, and he knew that the dolphins scare fish.
So he moved away from it, turned around a few minutes later, it was right next to the side of the boat again.
He said that in 30 years of fishing he had never seen a dolphin do that.
And he felt that -- (Sigh) he felt that it was coming to ask for help.
Now, in the Exxon Valdez spill, about 30 percent of the killer whales died in the first few months.
Their numbers have never recovered.
So the recovery rate of all this stuff is going to be variable.
It's going to take longer for some things.
And some things, I think, will probably come back a little faster.
The other thing about the Gulf that is important is that there are a lot of animals that concentrate in the Gulf at certain parts of the year.
So the Gulf is a really important piece of water -- more important than a similar volume of water in the open Atlantic Ocean.
These tuna swim the entire ocean.
When it comes time to spawn, they come inside, and these two tuna that were tagged, you can see them on the spawning grounds very much right in the area of the slick.
They're probably having, at the very least, a catastrophic spawning season this year.
I'm hoping that maybe the adults are avoiding that dirty water.
They don't usually like to go into water that is very cloudy anyway.
But these are really high-performance athletic animals.
I don't know what this kind of stuff will do in their gills.
I don't know if it'll affect the adults.
If it's not, it's certainly affecting their eggs and larvae, I would certainly think.
But if you look at that graph that goes down and down and down, that's what we've done to this species through overfishing over many decades.
So while the oil spill, the leak, the eruption, is a catastrophe, I think it's important to keep in mind that we've done a lot to affect what's in the ocean, for a very long time.
It's not like we're starting with something that's been OK.
We're starting with something that's had a lot of stresses and a lot of problems to begin with.
If you look around at the birds, there are a lot of birds in the Gulf that concentrate in the Gulf at certain times of the year, but then leave.
And they populate much larger areas.
For instance, most of the birds in this picture are migratory birds.
They were all on the Gulf in May, while oil was starting to come ashore in certain places.
Down on the lower left there are ruddy turnstones and sanderlings.
They breed in the High Arctic, and they winter down in southern South America.
But they concentrate in the Gulf and then fan out all across the Arctic.
I saw birds that breed in Greenland, in the Gulf.
So this is a hemispheric issue.
The economic effects go at least nationally in many ways.
The biological effects are certainly hemispheric.
I think that this is one of the most absolutely mind-boggling examples of total unpreparedness that I can even think of.
Even when the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor, at least they shot back.
And we just seem to be unable to figure out what to do.
There was nothing ready, and, you know, as we can see by what they're doing.
Mainly what they're doing is booms and dispersants.
The booms are absolutely not made for open water.
They don't even attempt to corral the oil where it is most concentrated.
They get near shore -- Look at these two boats.
And I think, you know, that's a great name for boats that think that they're going to do anything to make a dent in this, by dragging a boom between them when there are literally hundreds of thousands of square miles in the Gulf right now with oil at the surface.
The dispersants make the oil go right under the booms.
The booms are only about 13 inches in diameter.
So it's just absolutely crazy.
Here are shrimp boats employed.
There are hundreds of shrimp boats employed to drag booms instead of nets.
You can see easily that all the oily water just goes over the back of the boom.
All they're doing is stirring it.
It's just ridiculous.
Also, for all the shoreline that has booms -- hundreds and hundreds of miles of shoreline -- all of the shoreline that has booms, there's adjacent shoreline that doesn't have any booms.
There is ample opportunity for oil and dirty water to get in behind them.
And that lower photo, that's a bird colony that has been boomed.
Everybody's trying to protect the bird colonies there.
Well, as an ornithologist, I can tell you that birds fly, and that -- (Laughter) and that booming a bird colony doesn't do it; it doesn't do it.
These birds make a living by diving into the water.
In fact ...
really what I think they should do, if anything -- they're trying so hard to protect those nests -- actually, if they destroyed every single nest, some of the birds would leave, and that would be better for them this year.
As far as cleaning them ...
I don't mean to cast any aspersion on people cleaning birds.
It's really, really important that we express our compassion.
I think that's the most important thing that people have, is compassion.
It's really important to get those images and to show it.
But really, where are those birds going to get released to?
It's like taking somebody out of a burning building, treating them for smoke inhalation and sending them back into the building, because the oil is still gushing.
I refuse to acknowledge this as anything like an accident.
I think that this is the result of gross negligence.
(Applause) Not just BP.
BP operated very sloppily and very recklessly because they could.
And they were allowed to do so because of the absolute failure of oversight of the government that is supposed to be our government, protecting us.
It turns out that -- you see this sign on every commercial vessel in the United States -- you know, if you spilled a couple of gallons of oil, you would be in big trouble.
And you have to really wonder who are the laws made for, and who has gotten above the laws.
And there are things that we can do in the future.
We could have the kinds of equipment that we would really need.
It would not take an awful lot to anticipate that after making 30,000 holes in the sea floor of the Gulf of Mexico looking for oil, oil might start coming out of one of them.
And you'd have some idea of what to do.
But I think we have to understand where this leak really started from.
It really started from the destruction of the idea that the government is there because it's our government, meant to protect the larger public interest.
So I think that the oil blowout, the bank bailout, the mortgage crisis and all these things are absolutely symptoms of the same cause.
We still seem to understand that at least, we need the police to protect us from a few bad people.
And even though the police can be a little annoying at times -- giving us tickets and stuff like that -- nobody says that we should just get rid of them.
But in the entire rest of government right now and for the last at least 30 years, there has been a culture of deregulation that is caused directly by the people who we need to be protected from, buying the government out from under us.
(Applause) Now this has been a problem for a very, very long time.
You can see that corporations were illegal at the founding of America, and even Thomas Jefferson complained that they were already bidding defiance to the laws of our country.
OK, people who say they're conservative, if they really wanted to be really conservative and patriotic, they would tell these corporations to go to hell.
That's what it would really mean to be conservative.
So what we really need to do is regain the idea that it's our government safeguarding our interests, and regain a sense of unity and common cause in our country that really has been lost.
I think there are signs of hope.
The Glass-Steagall Act -- which was really to protect us from the kind of thing that caused the recession to happen, and the bank meltdown and all that stuff that required the bailouts -- that was put in effect in 1933, was systematically destroyed.
Now there's a mood to put some of that stuff back in place, but the lobbyists are already there trying to weaken the regulations after the legislation has just passed.
So it's a continued fight.
It's a historic moment right now.
We're either going to have an absolutely unmitigated catastrophe of this oil leak in the Gulf, or we will make the moment we need out of this, as many people have noted today.
There's certainly a common theme about needing to make the moment out of this.
We've been through this before with other ways of offshore drilling.
The first offshore wells were called whales.
The first offshore drills were called harpoons.
We emptied the ocean of the whales at that time.
Ever since we lived in caves, every time we wanted any energy, we lit something on fire, and that is still what we're doing.
We're still lighting something on fire every time we want energy.
And people say we can't have clean energy because it's too expensive.
Who says it's too expensive?
People who sell us fossil fuels.
We've been here before with energy, and people saying the economy cannot withstand a switch, because the cheapest energy was slavery.
Energy is always a moral issue.
It's a matter of right and wrong.
Thank you very much.
When I was a student here in Oxford in the 1970s, the future of the world was bleak.
The population explosion was unstoppable.
Global famine was inevitable.
A cancer epidemic caused by chemicals in the environment was going to shorten our lives.
The acid rain was falling on the forests.
The desert was advancing by a mile or two a year.
The oil was running out, and a nuclear winter would finish us off.
None of those things happened, (Laughter) and astonishingly, if you look at what actually happened in my lifetime, the average per-capita income of the average person on the planet, in real terms, adjusted for inflation, has tripled.
Lifespan is up by 30 percent in my lifetime.
Child mortality is down by two-thirds.
Per-capita food production is up by a third.
And all this at a time when the population has doubled.
How did we achieve that, whether you think it's a good thing or not?
How did we achieve that?
How did we become the only species that becomes more prosperous as it becomes more populous?
The size of the blob in this graph represents the size of the population, and the level of the graph represents GDP per capita.
I think to answer that question you need to understand how human beings bring together their brains and enable their ideas to combine and recombine, to meet and, indeed, to mate.
In other words, you need to understand how ideas have sex.
I want you to imagine how we got from making objects like this to making objects like this.
These are both real objects.
One is an Acheulean hand axe from half a million years ago of the kind made by Homo erectus.
The other is obviously a computer mouse.
They're both exactly the same size and shape to an uncanny degree.
I've tried to work out which is bigger, and it's almost impossible.
And that's because they're both designed to fit the human hand.
They're both technologies. In the end, their similarity is not that interesting.
It just tells you they were both designed to fit the human hand.
The differences are what interest me, because the one on the left was made to a pretty unvarying design for about a million years -- from one-and-a-half million years ago to half a million years ago.
Homo erectus made the same tool for 30,000 generations.
Of course there were a few changes, but tools changed slower than skeletons in those days.
There was no progress, no innovation.
It's an extraordinary phenomenon, but it's true.
Whereas the object on the right is obsolete after five years.
And there's another difference too, which is the object on the left is made from one substance.
The object on the right is made from a confection of different substances, from silicon and metal and plastic and so on.
And more than that, it's a confection of different ideas, the idea of plastic, the idea of a laser, the idea of transistors.
They've all been combined together in this technology.
And it's this combination, this cumulative technology, that intrigues me, because I think it's the secret to understanding what's happening in the world.
My body's an accumulation of ideas too: the idea of skin cells, the idea of brain cells, the idea of liver cells.
They've come together.
How does evolution do cumulative, combinatorial things?
Well, it uses sexual reproduction.
In an asexual species, if you get two different mutations in different creatures, a green one and a red one, then one has to be better than the other.
One goes extinct for the other to survive.
But if you have a sexual species, then it's possible for an individual to inherit both mutations from different lineages.
So what sex does is it enables the individual to draw upon the genetic innovations of the whole species.
It's not confined to its own lineage.
What's the process that's having the same effect in cultural evolution as sex is having in biological evolution?
And I think the answer is exchange, the habit of exchanging one thing for another.
It's a unique human feature.
No other animal does it.
You can teach them in the laboratory to do a little bit of exchange -- and indeed there's reciprocity in other animals -- But the exchange of one object for another never happens.
As Adam Smith said, "No man ever saw a dog make a fair exchange of a bone with another dog."
(Laughter) You can have culture without exchange.
You can have, as it were, asexual culture.
Chimpanzees, killer whales, these kinds of creatures, they have culture.
They teach each other traditions which are handed down from parent to offspring.
In this case, chimpanzees teaching each other how to crack nuts with rocks.
But the difference is that these cultures never expand, never grow, never accumulate, never become combinatorial, and the reason is because there is no sex, as it were, there is no exchange of ideas.
Chimpanzee troops have different cultures in different troops.
There's no exchange of ideas between them.
And why does exchange raise living standards?
Well, the answer came from David Ricardo in 1817.
And here is a Stone Age version of his story, although he told it in terms of trade between countries.
Adam takes four hours to make a spear and three hours to make an axe.
Oz takes one hour to make a spear and two hours to make an axe.
So Oz is better at both spears and axes than Adam.
He doesn't need Adam.
He can make his own spears and axes.
Well no, because if you think about it, if Oz makes two spears and Adam make two axes, and then they trade, then they will each have saved an hour of work.
And the more they do this, the more true it's going to be, because the more they do this, the better Adam is going to get at making axes and the better Oz is going to get at making spears.
So the gains from trade are only going to grow.
And this is one of the beauties of exchange, is it actually creates the momentum for more specialization, which creates the momentum for more exchange and so on.
Adam and Oz both saved an hour of time.
That is prosperity, the saving of time in satisfying your needs.
Ask yourself how long you would have to work to provide for yourself an hour of reading light this evening to read a book by.
If you had to start from scratch, let's say you go out into the countryside.
You find a sheep. You kill it. You get the fat out of it.
You render it down. You make a candle, etc. etc.
How long is it going to take you? Quite a long time.
How long do you actually have to work to earn an hour of reading light if you're on the average wage in Britain today?
And the answer is about half a second.
Back in 1950, you would have had to work for eight seconds on the average wage to acquire that much light.
And that's seven and a half seconds of prosperity that you've gained since 1950, as it were, because that's seven and a half seconds in which you can do something else, or you can acquire another good or service.
And back in 1880, it would have been 15 minutes to earn that amount of light on the average wage.
Back in 1800, you'd have had to work six hours to earn a candle that could burn for an hour.
In other words, the average person on the average wage could not afford a candle in 1800.
Go back to this image of the axe and the mouse, and ask yourself: "Who made them and for who?"
The stone axe was made by someone for himself.
It was self-sufficiency.
We call that poverty these days.
But the object on the right was made for me by other people.
How many other people?
Tens? Hundreds? Thousands?
You know, I think it's probably millions.
Because you've got to include the man who grew the coffee, which was brewed for the man who was on the oil rig, who was drilling for oil, which was going to be made into the plastic, etc.
They were all working for me, to make a mouse for me.
And that's the way society works.
That's what we've achieved as a species.
In the old days, if you were rich, you literally had people working for you.
That's how you got to be rich; you employed them.
Louis XIV had a lot of people working for him.
They made his silly outfits, like this, (Laughter) and they did his silly hairstyles, or whatever.
He had 498 people to prepare his dinner every night.
But a modern tourist going around the palace of Versailles and looking at Louis XIV's pictures, he has 498 people doing his dinner tonight too.
They're in bistros and cafes and restaurants and shops all over Paris, and they're all ready to serve you at an hour's notice with an excellent meal that's probably got higher quality than Louis XIV even had.
And that's what we've done, because we're all working for each other.
We're able to draw upon specialization and exchange to raise each other's living standards.
Now, you do get other animals working for each other too.
Ants are a classic example; workers work for queens and queens work for workers.
But there's a big difference, which is that it only happens within the colony.
There's no working for each other across the colonies.
And the reason for that is because there's a reproductive division of labor.
That is to say, they specialize with respect to reproduction.
The queen does it all.
In our species, we don't like doing that.
It's the one thing we insist on doing for ourselves, is reproduction.
(Laughter) Even in England, we don't leave reproduction to the Queen.
(Applause) So when did this habit start?
And how long has it been going on? And what does it mean?
Well, I think, probably, the oldest version of this is probably the sexual division of labor.
But I've got no evidence for that.
It just looks like the first thing we did was work male for female and female for male.
In all hunter-gatherer societies today, there's a foraging division of labor between, on the whole, hunting males and gathering females.
It isn't always quite that simple, but there's a distinction between specialized roles for males and females.
And the beauty of this system is that it benefits both sides.
The woman knows that, in the Hadzas' case here -- digging roots to share with men in exchange for meat -- she knows that all she has to do to get access to protein is to dig some extra roots and trade them for meat.
And she doesn't have to go on an exhausting hunt and try and kill a warthog.
And the man knows that he doesn't have to do any digging to get roots.
All he has to do is make sure that when he kills a warthog it's big enough to share some.
And so both sides raise each other's standards of living through the sexual division of labor.
When did this happen? We don't know, but it's possible that Neanderthals didn't do this.
They were a highly cooperative species.
They were a highly intelligent species.
Their brains on average, by the end, were bigger than yours and mine in this room today.
They were imaginative. They buried their dead.
They had language, probably, because we know they had the FOXP2 gene of the same kind as us, which was discovered here in Oxford.
And so it looks like they probably had linguistic skills.
They were brilliant people. I'm not dissing the Neanderthals.
But there's no evidence of a sexual division of labor.
There's no evidence of gathering behavior by females.
It looks like the females were cooperative hunters with the men.
And the other thing there's no evidence for is exchange between groups, because the objects that you find in Neanderthal remains, the tools they made, are always made from local materials.
For example, in the Caucasus there's a site where you find local Neanderthal tools.
They're always made from local chert.
In the same valley there are modern human remains from about the same date, 30,000 years ago, and some of those are from local chert, but more -- but many of them are made from obsidian from a long way away.
And when human beings began moving objects around like this, it was evidence that they were exchanging between groups.
Trade is 10 times as old as farming.
People forget that. People think of trade as a modern thing.
Exchange between groups has been going on for a hundred thousand years.
And the earliest evidence for it crops up somewhere between 80 and 120,000 years ago in Africa, when you see obsidian and jasper and other things moving long distances in Ethiopia.
You also see seashells -- as discovered by a team here in Oxford -- moving 125 miles inland from the Mediterranean in Algeria.
And that's evidence that people have started exchanging between groups.
And that will have led to specialization.
How do you know that long-distance movement means trade rather than migration?
Well, you look at modern hunter gatherers like aboriginals, who quarried for stone axes at a place called Mount Isa, which was a quarry owned by the Kalkadoon tribe.
They traded them with their neighbors for things like stingray barbs, and the consequence was that stone axes ended up over a large part of Australia.
So long-distance movement of tools is a sign of trade, not migration.
What happens when you cut people off from exchange, from the ability to exchange and specialize?
And the answer is that not only do you slow down technological progress, you can actually throw it into reverse.
An example is Tasmania.
When the sea level rose and Tasmania became an island 10,000 years ago, the people on it not only experienced slower progress than people on the mainland, they actually experienced regress.
They gave up the ability to make stone tools and fishing equipment and clothing because the population of about 4,000 people was simply not large enough to maintain the specialized skills necessary to keep the technology they had.
It's as if the people in this room were plonked on a desert island.
How many of the things in our pockets could we continue to make after 10,000 years?
It didn't happen in Tierra del Fuego -- similar island, similar people.
The reason: because Tierra del Fuego is separated from South America by a much narrower straight, and there was trading contact across that straight throughout 10,000 years.
The Tasmanians were isolated.
Go back to this image again and ask yourself, not only who made it and for who, but who knew how to make it.
In the case of the stone axe, the man who made it knew how to make it.
But who knows how to make a computer mouse?
Nobody, literally nobody.
There is nobody on the planet who knows how to make a computer mouse.
I mean this quite seriously.
The president of the computer mouse company doesn't know.
He just knows how to run a company.
The person on the assembly line doesn't know because he doesn't know how to drill an oil well to get oil out to make plastic, and so on.
We all know little bits, but none of us knows the whole.
I am of course quoting from a famous essay by Leonard Read, the economist in the 1950s, called "I, Pencil" in which he wrote about how a pencil came to be made, and how nobody knows even how to make a pencil, because the people who assemble it don't know how to mine graphite, and they don't know how to fell trees and that kind of thing.
And what we've done in human society, through exchange and specialization, is we've created the ability to do things that we don't even understand.
It's not the same with language.
With language we have to transfer ideas that we understand with each other.
But with technology, we can actually do things that are beyond our capabilities.
We've gone beyond the capacity of the human mind to an extraordinary degree.
And by the way, that's one of the reasons that I'm not interested in the debate about I.Q., about whether some groups have higher I.Q.s than other groups.
It's completely irrelevant.
What's relevant to a society is how well people are communicating their ideas, and how well they're cooperating, not how clever the individuals are.
So we've created something called the collective brain.
We're just the nodes in the network.
We're the neurons in this brain.
It's the interchange of ideas, the meeting and mating of ideas between them, that is causing technological progress, incrementally, bit by bit.
However, bad things happen.
And in the future, as we go forward, we will, of course, experience terrible things.
There will be wars; there will be depressions; there will be natural disasters.
Awful things will happen in this century, I'm absolutely sure.
But I'm also sure that, because of the connections people are making, and the ability of ideas to meet and to mate as never before, I'm also sure that technology will advance, and therefore living standards will advance.
Because through the cloud, through crowd sourcing, through the bottom-up world that we've created, where not just the elites but everybody is able to have their ideas and make them meet and mate, we are surely accelerating the rate of innovation.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm an American, which means, generally, I ignore football unless it involves guys my size or Bruno's size running into each other at extremely high speeds.
That said, it's been really hard to ignore football for the last couple of weeks.
I go onto Twitter, there are all these strange words that I've never heard before: FIFA, vuvuzela, weird jokes about octopi.
But the one that's really been sort of stressing me out, that I haven't been able to figure out, is this phrase "Cala a boca, Galvao."
If you've gone onto Twitter in the last couple of weeks, you've probably seen this.
It's been a major trending topic.
Being a monolingual American, I obviously don't know what the phrase means.
So I went onto Twitter, and I asked some people if they could explain to me "Cala a boca, Galvao."
And fortunately, my Brazilian friends were more than ready to help.
They explained that the Galvao bird is a rare and endangered parrot that's in terrible, terrible danger.
In fact, I'll let them tell you a bit more about it.
Narrator: A word about Galvao, a very rare kind of bird native to Brazil.
Every year, more than 300,000 Galvao birds are killed during Carnival parades.
Ethan Zuckerman: Obviously, this is a tragic situation, and it actually gets worse.
It turns out that, not only is the Galvao parrot very attractive, useful for headdresses, it evidently has certain hallucinogenic properties, which means that there's a terrible problem with Galvao abuse.
Some sick and twisted people have found themselves snorting Galvao.
And it's terribly endangered.
The good news about this is that the global community -- again, my Brazilian friends tell me -- is pitching in to help out.
It turns out that Lady Gaga has released a new single -- actually five or six new singles, as near as I can tell -- titled "Cala a boca, Galvao."
And my Brazilian friends tell me that if I just tweet the phrase "Cala a boca, Galvao," 10 cents will be given to a global campaign to save this rare and beautiful bird.
Now, most of you have figured out that this was a prank, and actually a very, very good one.
"Cala a boca, Galvao" actually means something very different.
In Portugese, it means "Shut your mouth, Galvao."
And it specifically refers to this guy, Galvao Bueno, who's the lead soccer commentator for Rede Globo.
And what I understand from my Brazilian friends is that this guy is just a cliche machine.
He can ruin the most interesting match by just spouting cliche again and again and again.
So Brazilians went to that first match against North Korea, put up this banner, started a Twitter campaign and tried to convince the rest of us to tweet the phrase: "Cala a boca, Galvao."
And in fact, were so successful at this that it topped Twitter for two weeks.
Now there's a couple -- there's a couple of lessons that you can take from this.
And the first lesson, which I think is a worthwhile one, is that you cannot go wrong asking people to be active online, so long as activism just means retweeting a phrase.
So as long as activism is that simple, it's pretty easy to get away with.
The other thing you can take from this, by the way, is that there are a lot of Brazilians on Twitter.
There's more than five million of them.
As far as national representation, 11 percent of Brazilian internet users are on Twitter.
That's a much higher number than in the U.S. or U.K.
Next to Japan, it's the second most represented by population.
Now if you're using Twitter or other social networks, and you didn't realize this was a space with a lot of Brazilians in it, you're like most of us.
Because what happens on a social network is you interact with the people that you have chosen to interact with.
And if you are like me, a big, geeky, white, American guy, you tend to interact with a lot of other geeky, white, American guys.
And you don't necessarily have the sense that Twitter is in fact a very heavily Brazilian space.
It's also extremely surprising to many Americans, a heavily African-American space.
Twitter recently did some research.
They looked at their local population.
They believe that 24 percent of American Twitter users are African-American.
That's about twice as high as African-Americans are represented in the population.
And again, that was very shocking to many Twitter users, but it shouldn't be.
And the reason it shouldn't be is that on any day you can go into Trending Topics.
And you tend to find topics that are almost entirely African-American conversations.
This was a visualization done by Fernando Viegas and Martin Wattenberg, two amazing visualization designers, who looked at a weekend's worth of Twitter traffic and essentially found that a lot of these trending topics were basically segregated conversations -- and in ways that you wouldn't expect.
It turns out that oil spill is a mostly white conversation, that cookout is a mostly black conversation.
And what's crazy about this is that if you wanted to mix up who you were seeing on Twitter, it's literally a quick click away.
You click on that cookout tag, there an entirely different conversation with different people participating in it.
But generally speaking, most of us don't.
We end up within these filter bubbles, as my friend Eli Pariser calls them, where we see the people we already know and the people who are similar to the people we already know.
And we tend not to see that wider picture.
Now for me, I'm surprised by this, because this wasn't how the internet was supposed to be.
If you go back into the early days of the internet, when cyber-utopians like Nick Negroponte were writing big books like "Being Digital," the prediction was that the internet was going to be an incredibly powerful force to smooth out cultural differences, to put us all on a common field of one fashion or another.
Negroponte started his book with a story about how hard it is to build connections in the world of atoms.
He's at a technology conference in Florida.
And he's looking at something really, truly absurd, which is bottles of Evian water on the table.
And Negroponte says this is crazy.
This is the old economy.
It's the economy of moving these heavy, slow atoms over long distances that's very difficult to do.
We're heading to the future of bits, where everything is speedy, it's weightless.
It can be anywhere in the world at any time.
And it's going to change the world as we know it.
Now, Negroponte has been right about a lot of things.
He's totally wrong about this one.
It turns out that in many cases atoms are much more mobile than bits.
If I walk into a store in the United States, it's very, very easy for me to buy water that's bottled in Fiji, shipped at great expense to the United States.
It's actually surprisingly hard for me to see a Fijian feature film.
It's really difficult for me to listen to Fijian music.
It's extremely difficult for me to get Fijian news, which is strange, because actually there's an enormous amount going on in Fiji.
There's a coup government. There's a military government.
There's crackdowns on the press.
It's actually a place that we probably should be paying attention to at the moment.
Here's what I think is going on.
I think that we tend to look a lot at the infrastructure of globalization.
We look at the framework that makes it possible to live in this connected world.
And that's a framework that includes things like airline routes.
It includes things like the Internet cables.
We look at a map like this one, and it looks like the entire world is flat because everything is a hop or two away.
You can get on a flight in London, you can end up in Bangalore later today.
Two hops, you're in Suva, the capitol of Fiji.
It's all right there.
When you start looking at what actually flows on top of these networks, you get a very different picture.
You start looking at how the global plane flights move, and you suddenly discover that the world isn't even close to flat.
It's extremely lumpy.
There are parts of the world that are very, very well connected.
There's basically a giant pathway in the sky between London and New York.
but look at this map, and you can watch this for, you know, two or three minutes.
You won't see very many planes go from South America to Africa.
And you'll discover that there are parts of the globe that are systematically cut off.
When we stop looking at the infrastructure that makes connection possible, and we look at what actually happens, we start realizing that the world doesn't work quite the same way that we think it does.
So here's the problem that I've been interested in in the last decade or so.
The world is, in fact, getting more global.
It's getting more connected.
More of problems are global in scale.
More of our economics is global in scale.
And our media is less global by the day.
If you watched a television broadcast in the United States in the 1970s, 35 to 40 percent of it would have been international news on a nightly new broadcast.
That's down to about 12 to 15 percent.
And this tends to give us a very distorted view of the world.
Here's a slide that Alisa Miller showed at a previous TED Talk.
Alisa's the president of Public Radio International.
And she made a cartogram, which is basically a distorted map based on what American television news casts looked at for a month.
And you see that when you distort a map based on attention, the world within American television news is basically reduced to this giant bloated U.S.
and a couple of other countries which we've invaded.
And that's basically what our media is about.
And before you conclude that this is just a function of American TV news -- which is dreadful, and I agree that it's dreadful -- I've been mapping elite media like the New York Times, and I get the same thing.
When you look at the New York Times, you look at other elite media, what you largely get are pictures of very wealthy nations and the nations we've invaded.
It turns out that new media isn't necessarily helping us all that much.
Here's a map made by Mark Graham who's down the street at the Oxford Internet Institute.
A this is a map of articles in Wikipedia that have been geo-coded.
And you'll notice that there's a very heavy bias towards North America and Western Europe.
Even within Wikipedias, where we're creating their own content online, there's a heavy bias towards the place where a lot of the Wikipedia authors are based, rather than to the rest of the world.
In the U.K., you can get up, you can pick up your computer when you get out of this session, you could read a newspaper from India or from Australia, from Canada, God forbid from the U.S.
You probably won't.
If you look at online media consumption -- in this case, in the top 10 users of the internet -- more than 95 percent of the news readership is on domestic news sites.
It's one of these rare cases where the U.S. is actually slightly better than [the U.K.], because we actually like reading your media, rather than vice versa.
So all of this starts leading me to think that we're in a state that I refer to as imaginary cosmopolitanism.
We look at the internet.
We think we're getting this wide view of the globe.
We occasionally stumble onto a page in Chinese, and we decide that we do in fact have the greatest technology ever built to connect us to the rest of the world.
And we forget that most of the time we're checking Boston Red Sox scores.
So this is a real problem -- not just because the Red Sox are having a bad year -- but it's a real problem because, as we're discussing here at TED, the real problems in the world the interesting problems to solve are global in scale and scope, they require global conversations to get to global solutions.
This is a problem we have to solve.
So here's the good news.
For six years, I've been hanging out with these guys.
This is a group called Global Voices.
This is a team of bloggers from around the world.
Our mission was to fix the world's media.
We started in 2004.
You might have noticed, we haven't done all that well so far.
Nor do I think we are by ourselves, actually going to solve the problem.
But the more that I think about it, the more that I think that a few things that we have learned along the way are interesting lessons for how we would rewire if we we wanted to use the web to have a wider world.
The first thing you have to consider is that there are parts of the world that are dark spots in terms of attention.
In this case -- the map of the world at night by NASA -- they're dark literally because of lack of electricity.
And I used to think that a dark spot on this map basically meant you're not going to get media from there because there are more basic needs.
What I'm starting to realize is that you can get media, it's just an enormous amount of work, and you need an enormous amount of encouragement.
One of those dark spots is Madagascar, a country which is generally better known for the Dreamworks film than it is actually known for the lovely people who live there.
And so the people who founded Foko Club in Madagascar weren't actually concerned with trying to change the image of their country.
They were doing something much simpler.
It was a club to learn English and to learn computers and the internet.
but what happened was that Madagascar went through a violent coup.
Most independent media was shut down.
And the high school students who were learning to blog through Foko Club suddenly found themselves talking to an international audience about the demonstrations, the violence, everything that was going on within this country.
So a very, very small program designed to get people in front of computers, publishing their own thoughts, publishing independent media, ended up having a huge impact on what we know about this country.
Now the trick with this is that I'm guessing most people here don't speak Malagasy.
I'm also guessing that most of you don't even speak Chinese -- which is sort of sad if you think about it, as it's now the most represented language on the internet.
Fortunately people are trying to figure out how to fix this.
If you're using Google Chrome and you go to a Chinese language site, you notice this really cute box at the top, which automatically detects that the page is in Chinese and very quickly at a mouse click will give you a translation of the page.
Unfortunately, it's a machine translation of the page.
And while Google is very, very good with some languages, it's actually pretty dreadful with Chinese.
And the results can be pretty funny.
What you really want -- what I really want, is eventually the ability to push a button and have this queued so a human being can translate this.
And if you think this is absurd, it's not.
There's a group right now in China called Yeeyan.
And Yeeyan is a group of 150,000 volunteers who get online every day.
They look for the most interesting content in the English language.
They translate roughly 100 articles a day from major newspapers, major websites.
They put it online for free.
It's the project of a guy named Zhang Lei, who was living in the United States during the Lhasa riots and who couldn't believe how biased American media coverage was.
And he said, "If there's one thing I can do, I can start translating, so that people between these countries start understanding each other a little bit better."
And my question to you is: if Yeeyan can line up 150,000 people to translate the English internet into Chinese, where's the English language Yeeyan?
Who's going after Chinese, which now has 400 million internet users out there?
My guess is at least one of them has something interesting to say.
So even if we can find a way to translate from Chinese, there's no guarantee that we're going to find it.
When we look for information online, we basically have two strategies.
We use a lot of search.
And search is terrific if you know what you're looking for.
But if what you're looking for is serendipity, if you want to stumble onto something that you didn't know you needed, our main philosophy is to look to our social networks, to look for our friends.
What are they looking at? Maybe we should be looking at it.
The problem with this is that essentially what you end up getting after a while is the wisdom of the flock.
You end up flocking with a lot of people who are probably similar to you, who have similar interests.
And it's very, very hard to get information from the other flocks, from the other parts of the world where people getting together and talking about their own interests.
To do this, at a certain point, you need someone to bump you out of your flock and into another flock.
You need a guide.
So this is Amira Al Hussaini. She is the Middle East editor for Global Voices.
She has one of the hardest jobs in the world.
Not only does she have to keep our Israeli and Palestinian contributors from killing each other, she has to figure out what is going to interest you about the Middle East.
And in that sense of trying to get you out of your normal orbit, and to try to get you to pay attention to a story about someone who's given up smoking for the month of Ramadan, she has to know something about a global audience.
She has to know something about what stories are available.
Basically, she's a deejay.
She's a skilled human curator who knows what material is available to her, who's able to listen to the audience, and who's able to make a selection and push people forward in one fashion or another.
I don't think this is necessarily an algorithmic process.
I think what's great about the internet is that it actually makes it much easier for deejays to reach a wider audience.
I know Amira.
I can ask her what to read.
But with the internet, she's in a position where she can tell a lot of people what to read.
And you can listen to her as well, if this is a way that you're interested in having your web widened.
So once you start widening like this, once you start lighting up voices in the dark spots, once you start translating, once you start curating, you end up in some really weird places.
This is an image from pretty much my favorite blog, which is AfriGadget.
And AfriGadget is a blog that looks at technology in an Africa context.
And specifically, it's looking at a blacksmith in Kibera in Nairobi, who is turning the shaft of a Landrover into a cold chisel.
And when you look at this image, you might find yourself going, "Why would I conceivably care about this?"
And the truth is, this guy can probably explain this to you.
This is Erik Hersman. You guys may have seen him around the conference.
He goes by the moniker White African.
He's both a very well known American geek, but he's also Kenyan; he was born in Sudan, grew up in Kenya.
He is a bridge figure.
He is someone who literally has feet in both worlds -- one in the world of the African technology community, one in the world of the American technology community.
And so he's able to tell a story about this blacksmith in Kibera and turn it into a story about repurposing technology, about innovating from constraint, about looking for inspiration based on reusing materials.
He knows one world, and he's finding a way to communicate it to another world, both of which he has deep connections to.
These bridge figures, I'm pretty well convinced, are the future of how we try to make the world wider through using the web.
But the trick with bridges is, ultimately, you need someone to cross them.
And that's where we start talking about xenophiles.
So if I found myself in the NFL, I suspect I would spend my off-season nursing my wounds, enjoying my house, so on and so forth -- possibly recording a hip-hop album.
Dhani Jones, who is the middle linebacker for the Cincinnati Bengals, has a slightly different approach to the off-season.
Dhani has a television show.
It's called "Dhani Tackles the Globe."
And every week on this television show, Dhani travels to a different nation of the world.
He finds a local sporting team.
He trains with them for a week, and he plays a match with them.
And his reason for this is not just that he wants to master Muay Thai boxing.
It's because, for him, sport is the language that allows him to encounter the full width and wonder of the world.
For some of us it might be music. For some of us it might be food.
For a lot of us it might be literature or writing.
But there are all these different techniques that allow you to go out and look at the world and find your place within it.
The goal of my Talk here is not to persuade the people in this room to embrace your xenophilia.
My guess -- given that you're at a conference called TEDGlobal -- is that most of you are xenophiles, whether or not you use that term.
My challenge instead is this.
It's not enough to make the personal decision that you want a wider world.
We have to figure out how to rewire the systems that we have.
We have to fix our media.
We have to fix the internet. We have to fix our education.
We have to fix our immigration policy.
We need to look at ways of creating serendipity, of making translation pervasive, and we need to find ways to embrace and celebrate these bridge figures.
And we need to figure out how to cultivate xenophiles.
That's what I'm trying to do. I need your help.
(Applause)
I'm a storyteller.
That's what I do in life -- telling stories, writing novels -- and today I would like to tell you a few stories about the art of storytelling and also some supernatural creatures called the djinni.
But before I go there, please allow me to share with you glimpses of my personal story.
I will do so with the help of words, of course, but also a geometrical shape, the circle, so throughout my talk, you will come across several circles.
I was born in Strasbourg, France to Turkish parents.
Shortly after, my parents got separated, and I came to Turkey with my mom.
From then on, I was raised as a single child by a single mother.
Now in the early 1970s, in Ankara, that was a bit unusual.
Our neighborhood was full of large families, where fathers were the heads of households, so I grew up seeing my mother as a divorcee in a patriarchal environment.
In fact, I grew up observing two different kinds of womanhood.
On the one hand was my mother, a well-educated, secular, modern, westernized, Turkish woman.
On the other hand was my grandmother, who also took care of me and was more spiritual, less educated and definitely less rational.
This was a woman who read coffee grounds to see the future and melted lead into mysterious shapes to fend off the evil eye.
Many people visited my grandmother, people with severe acne on their faces or warts on their hands.
Each time, my grandmother would utter some words in Arabic, take a red apple and stab it with as many rose thorns as the number of warts she wanted to remove.
Then one by one, she would encircle these thorns with dark ink.
A week later, the patient would come back for a follow-up examination.
Now, I'm aware that I should not be saying such things in front of an audience of scholars and scientists, but the truth is, of all the people who visited my grandmother for their skin conditions, I did not see anyone go back unhappy or unhealed.
I asked her how she did this. Was it the power of praying?
In response she said, "Yes, praying is effective, but also beware of the power of circles."
From her, I learned, amongst many other things, one very precious lesson -- that if you want to destroy something in this life, be it an acne, a blemish or the human soul, all you need to do is to surround it with thick walls.
It will dry up inside.
Now we all live in some kind of a social and cultural circle.
We all do.
We're born into a certain family, nation, class.
But if we have no connection whatsoever with the worlds beyond the one we take for granted, then we too run the risk of drying up inside.
Our imagination might shrink; our hearts might dwindle, and our humanness might wither if we stay for too long inside our cultural cocoons.
Our friends, neighbors, colleagues, family -- if all the people in our inner circle resemble us, it means we are surrounded with our mirror image.
Now one other thing women like my grandma do in Turkey is to cover mirrors with velvet or to hang them on the walls with their backs facing out.
It's an old Eastern tradition based on the knowledge that it's not healthy for a human being to spend too much time staring at his own reflection.
Ironically, [living in] communities of the like-minded is one of the greatest dangers of today's globalized world.
And it's happening everywhere, among liberals and conservatives, agnostics and believers, the rich and the poor, East and West alike.
We tend to form clusters based on similarity, and then we produce stereotypes about other clusters of people.
In my opinion, one way of transcending these cultural ghettos is through the art of storytelling.
Stories cannot demolish frontiers, but they can punch holes in our mental walls.
And through those holes, we can get a glimpse of the other, and sometimes even like what we see.
I started writing fiction at the age of eight.
My mother came home one day with a turquoise notebook and asked me if I'd be interested in keeping a personal journal.
In retrospect, I think she was slightly worried about my sanity.
I was constantly telling stories at home, which was good, except I told this to imaginary friends around me, which was not so good.
I was an introverted child, to the point of communicating with colored crayons and apologizing to objects when I bumped into them, so my mother thought it might do me good to write down my day-to-day experiences and emotions.
What she didn't know was that I thought my life was terribly boring, and the last thing I wanted to do was to write about myself.
Instead, I began to write about people other than me and things that never really happened.
And thus began my life-long passion for writing fiction.
So from the very beginning, fiction for me was less of an autobiographical manifestation than a transcendental journey into other lives, other possibilities.
And please bear with me: I'll draw a circle and come back to this point.
Now one other thing happened around this same time.
My mother became a diplomat.
So from this small, superstitious, middle-class neighborhood of my grandmother, I was zoomed into this posh, international school [in Madrid], where I was the only Turk.
It was here that I had my first encounter with what I call the "representative foreigner."
In our classroom, there were children from all nationalities, yet this diversity did not necessarily lead to a cosmopolitan, egalitarian classroom democracy.
Instead, it generated an atmosphere in which each child was seen -- not as an individual on his own, but as the representative of something larger.
We were like a miniature United Nations, which was fun, except whenever something negative, with regards to a nation or a religion, took place.
The child who represented it was mocked, ridiculed and bullied endlessly.
And I should know, because during the time I attended that school, a military takeover happened in my country, a gunman of my nationality nearly killed the Pope, and Turkey got zero points in [the] Eurovision Song Contest.
(Laughter) I skipped school often and dreamed of becoming a sailor during those days.
I also had my first taste of cultural stereotypes there.
The other children asked me about the movie "Midnight Express," which I had not seen; they inquired how many cigarettes a day I smoked, because they thought all Turks were heavy smokers, and they wondered at what age I would start covering my hair.
I came to learn that these were the three main stereotypes about my country: politics, cigarettes and the veil.
After Spain, we went to Jordan, Germany and Ankara again.
Everywhere I went, I felt like my imagination was the only suitcase I could take with me.
Stories gave me a sense of center, continuity and coherence, the three big Cs that I otherwise lacked.
In my mid-twenties, I moved to Istanbul, the city I adore.
I lived in a very vibrant, diverse neighborhood where I wrote several of my novels.
I was in Istanbul when the earthquake hit in 1999.
When I ran out of the building at three in the morning, I saw something that stopped me in my tracks.
There was the local grocer there -- a grumpy, old man who didn't sell alcohol and didn't speak to marginals.
He was sitting next to a transvestite with a long black wig and mascara running down her cheeks.
I watched the man open a pack of cigarettes with trembling hands and offer one to her, and that is the image of the night of the earthquake in my mind today -- a conservative grocer and a crying transvestite smoking together on the sidewalk.
In the face of death and destruction, our mundane differences evaporated, and we all became one even if for a few hours.
But I've always believed that stories, too, have a similar effect on us.
I'm not saying that fiction has the magnitude of an earthquake, but when we are reading a good novel, we leave our small, cozy apartments behind, go out into the night alone and start getting to know people we had never met before and perhaps had even been biased against.
Shortly after, I went to a women's college in Boston, then Michigan.
I experienced this, not so much as a geographical shift, as a linguistic one.
I started writing fiction in English.
I'm not an immigrant, refugee or exile -- they ask me why I do this -- but the commute between languages gives me the chance to recreate myself.
I love writing in Turkish, which to me is very poetic and very emotional, and I love writing in English, which to me is very mathematical and cerebral.
So I feel connected to each language in a different way.
For me, like millions of other people around the world today, English is an acquired language.
When you're a latecomer to a language, what happens is you live there with a continuous and perpetual frustration.
As latecomers, we always want to say more, you know, crack better jokes, say better things, but we end up saying less because there's a gap between the mind and the tongue.
And that gap is very intimidating.
But if we manage not to be frightened by it, it's also stimulating.
And this is what I discovered in Boston -- that frustration was very stimulating.
At this stage, my grandmother, who had been watching the course of my life with increasing anxiety, started to include in her daily prayers that I urgently get married so that I could settle down once and for all.
And because God loves her, I did get married.
(Laughter) But instead of settling down, I went to Arizona.
And since my husband is in Istanbul, I started commuting between Arizona and Istanbul -- the two places on the surface of earth that couldn't be more different.
I guess one part of me has always been a nomad, physically and spiritually.
Stories accompany me, keeping my pieces and memories together, like an existential glue.
Yet as much as I love stories, recently, I've also begun to think that they lose their magic if and when a story is seen as more than a story.
And this is a subject that I would love to think about together.
When my first novel written in English came out in America, I heard an interesting remark from a literary critic.
"I liked your book," he said, "but I wish you had written it differently."
(Laughter) I asked him what he meant by that.
He said, "Well, look at it. There's so many Spanish, American, Hispanic characters in it, but there's only one Turkish character and it's a man."
Now the novel took place on a university campus in Boston, so to me, it was normal that there be more international characters in it than Turkish characters, but I understood what my critic was looking for.
And I also understood that I would keep disappointing him.
He wanted to see the manifestation of my identity.
He was looking for a Turkish woman in the book because I happened to be one.
We often talk about how stories change the world, but we should also see how the world of identity politics affects the way stories are being circulated, read and reviewed.
Many authors feel this pressure, but non-Western authors feel it more heavily.
If you're a woman writer from the Muslim world, like me, then you are expected to write the stories of Muslim women and, preferably, the unhappy stories of unhappy Muslim women.
You're expected to write informative, poignant and characteristic stories and leave the experimental and avant-garde to your Western colleagues.
What I experienced as a child in that school in Madrid is happening in the literary world today.
Writers are not seen as creative individuals on their own, but as the representatives of their respective cultures: a few authors from China, a few from Turkey, a few from Nigeria.
We're all thought to have something very distinctive, if not peculiar.
The writer and commuter James Baldwin gave an interview in 1984 in which he was repeatedly asked about his homosexuality.
When the interviewer tried to pigeonhole him as a gay writer, Baldwin stopped and said, "But don't you see? There's nothing in me that is not in everybody else, and nothing in everybody else that is not in me."
When identity politics tries to put labels on us, it is our freedom of imagination that is in danger.
There's a fuzzy category called multicultural literature in which all authors from outside the Western world are lumped together.
I never forget my first multicultural reading, in Harvard Square about 10 years ago.
We were three writers, one from the Philippines, one Turkish and one Indonesian -- like a joke, you know.
(Laughter) And the reason why we were brought together was not because we shared an artistic style or a literary taste.
It was only because of our passports.
Multicultural writers are expected to tell real stories, not so much the imaginary.
A function is attributed to fiction.
In this way, not only the writers themselves, but also their fictional characters become the representatives of something larger.
But I must quickly add that this tendency to see a story as more than a story does not solely come from the West.
It comes from everywhere.
And I experienced this firsthand when I was put on trial in 2005 for the words my fictional characters uttered in a novel.
I had intended to write a constructive, multi-layered novel about an Armenian and a Turkish family through the eyes of women.
My micro story became a macro issue when I was prosecuted.
Some people criticized, others praised me for writing about the Turkish-Armenian conflict.
But there were times when I wanted to remind both sides that this was fiction.
It was just a story.
And when I say, "just a story," I'm not trying to belittle my work.
I want to love and celebrate fiction for what it is, not as a means to an end.
Writers are entitled to their political opinions, and there are good political novels out there, but the language of fiction is not the language of daily politics.
Chekhov said, "The solution to a problem and the correct way of posing the question are two completely separate things.
And only the latter is an artist's responsibility."
Identity politics divides us. Fiction connects.
One is interested in sweeping generalizations.
The other, in nuances.
One draws boundaries.
The other recognizes no frontiers.
Identity politics is made of solid bricks.
Fiction is flowing water.
In the Ottoman times, there were itinerant storytellers called "meddah."
They would go to coffee houses, where they would tell a story in front of an audience, often improvising.
With each new person in the story, the meddah would change his voice, impersonating that character.
Everybody could go and listen, you know -- ordinary people, even the sultan, Muslims and non-Muslims.
Stories cut across all boundaries, like "The Tales of Nasreddin Hodja," which were very popular throughout the Middle East, North Africa, the Balkans and Asia.
Today, stories continue to transcend borders.
When Palestinian and Israeli politicians talk, they usually don't listen to each other, but a Palestinian reader still reads a novel by a Jewish author, and vice versa, connecting and empathizing with the narrator.
Literature has to take us beyond.
If it cannot take us there, it is not good literature.
Books have saved the introverted, timid child that I was -- that I once was.
But I'm also aware of the danger of fetishizing them.
When the poet and mystic, Rumi, met his spiritual companion, Shams of Tabriz, one of the first things the latter did was to toss Rumi's books into water and watch the letters dissolve.
The Sufis say, "Knowledge that takes you not beyond yourself is far worse than ignorance."
The problem with today's cultural ghettos is not lack of knowledge -- we know a lot about each other, or so we think -- but knowledge that takes us not beyond ourselves: it makes us elitist, distant and disconnected.
There's a metaphor which I love: living like a drawing compass.
As you know, one leg of the compass is static, rooted in a place.
Meanwhile, the other leg draws a wide circle, constantly moving.
Like that, my fiction as well.
One part of it is rooted in Istanbul, with strong Turkish roots, but the other part travels the world, connecting to different cultures.
In that sense, I like to think of my fiction as both local and universal, both from here and everywhere.
Now those of you who have been to Istanbul have probably seen Topkapi Palace, which was the residence of Ottoman sultans for more than 400 years.
In the palace, just outside the quarters of the favorite concubines, there's an area called The Gathering Place of the Djinn.
It's between buildings.
I'm intrigued by this concept.
We usually distrust those areas that fall in between things.
We see them as the domain of supernatural creatures like the djinn, who are made of smokeless fire and are the symbol of elusiveness.
But my point is perhaps that elusive space is what writers and artists need most.
When I write fiction I cherish elusiveness and changeability.
I like not knowing what will happen 10 pages later.
I like it when my characters surprise me.
I might write about a Muslim woman in one novel, and perhaps it will be a very happy story, and in my next book, I might write about a handsome, gay professor in Norway.
As long as it comes from our hearts, we can write about anything and everything.
Audre Lorde once said, "The white fathers taught us to say, 'I think, therefore I am.'" She suggested, "I feel, therefore I am free."
I think it was a wonderful paradigm shift.
And yet, why is it that, in creative writing courses today, the very first thing we teach students is "write what you know"?
Perhaps that's not the right way to start at all.
Imaginative literature is not necessarily about writing who we are or what we know or what our identity is about.
We should teach young people and ourselves to expand our hearts and write what we can feel.
We should get out of our cultural ghetto and go visit the next one and the next.
In the end, stories move like whirling dervishes, drawing circles beyond circles.
They connect all humanity, regardless of identity politics, and that is the good news.
And I would like to finish with an old Sufi poem: "Come, let us be friends for once; let us make life easy on us; let us be lovers and loved ones; the earth shall be left to no one."
Thank you.
Chris Anderson: Julian, welcome.
It's been reported that WikiLeaks, your baby, has, in the last few years has released more classified documents than the rest of the world's media combined.
Can that possibly be true?
Julian Assange: Yeah, can it possibly be true?
It's a worry -- isn't it? -- that the rest of the world's media is doing such a bad job that a little group of activists is able to release more of that type of information than the rest of the world press combined.
CA: How does it work?
How do people release the documents?
And how do you secure their privacy?
JA: So these are -- as far as we can tell -- classical whistleblowers, and we have a number of ways for them to get information to us.
So we use this state-of-the-art encryption to bounce stuff around the Internet, to hide trails, pass it through legal jurisdictions like Sweden and Belgium to enact those legal protections.
We get information in the mail, the regular postal mail, encrypted or not, vet it like a regular news organization, format it -- which is sometimes something that's quite hard to do, when you're talking about giant databases of information -- release it to the public and then defend ourselves against the inevitable legal and political attacks.
CA: So you make an effort to ensure the documents are legitimate, but you actually almost never know who the identity of the source is?
JA: That's right, yeah. Very rarely do we ever know, and if we find out at some stage then we destroy that information as soon as possible.
(Phone ring) God damn it.
(Laughter) CA: I think that's the CIA asking what the code is for a TED membership.
(Laughter) So let's take [an] example, actually.
This is something you leaked a few years ago.
If we can have this document up ...
So this was a story in Kenya a few years ago.
Can you tell us what you leaked and what happened?
JA: So this is the Kroll Report.
This was a secret intelligence report commissioned by the Kenyan government after its election in 2004.
Prior to 2004, Kenya was ruled by Daniel arap Moi for about 18 years.
He was a soft dictator of Kenya.
And when Kibaki got into power -- through a coalition of forces that were trying to clean up corruption in Kenya -- they commissioned this report, spent about two million pounds on this and an associated report.
And then the government sat on it and used it for political leverage on Moi, who was the richest man -- still is the richest man -- in Kenya.
It's the Holy Grail of Kenyan journalism.
So I went there in 2007, and we managed to get hold of this just prior to the election -- the national election, December 28.
When we released that report, we did so three days after the new president, Kibaki, had decided to pal up with the man that he was going to clean out, Daniel arap Moi, so this report then became a dead albatross around President Kibaki's neck.
CA: And -- I mean, to cut a long story short -- word of the report leaked into Kenya, not from the official media, but indirectly, and in your opinion, it actually shifted the election.
JA: Yeah. So this became front page of the Guardian and was then printed in all the surrounding countries of Kenya, in Tanzanian and South African press.
And so it came in from the outside.
And that, after a couple of days, made the Kenyan press feel safe to talk about it.
And it ran for 20 nights straight on Kenyan TV, shifted the vote by 10 percent, according to a Kenyan intelligence report, which changed the result of the election.
CA: Wow, so your leak really substantially changed the world?
JA: Yep.
(Applause) CA: Here's -- We're going to just show a short clip from this Baghdad airstrike video.
The video itself is longer, but here's a short clip.
This is -- this is intense material, I should warn you.
Radio: ... just fuckin', once you get on 'em just open 'em up.
I see your element, uh, got about four Humvees, uh, out along ...
You're clear. All right. Firing.
Let me know when you've got them. Let's shoot.
Light 'em all up.
C'mon, fire!
(Machine gun fire) Keep shoot 'n. Keep shoot 'n.
(Machine gun fire) Keep shoot 'n.
Hotel ... Bushmaster Two-Six, Bushmaster Two-Six, we need to move, time now!
All right, we just engaged all eight individuals.
Yeah, we see two birds [helicopters], and we're still firing.
Roger. I got 'em.
Two-Six, this is Two-Six, we're mobile.
Oops, I'm sorry. What was going on?
God damn it, Kyle. All right, hahaha. I hit 'em.
CA: So, what was the impact of that?
JA: The impact on the people who worked on it was severe.
We ended up sending two people to Baghdad to further research that story.
So this is just the first of three attacks that occurred in that scene.
CA: So, I mean, 11 people died in that attack, right, including two Reuters employees?
JA: Yeah. Two Reuters employees, two young children were wounded.
There were between 18 and 26 people killed all together.
CA: And releasing this caused widespread outrage.
What was the key element of this that actually caused the outrage, do you think?
JA: I don't know. I guess people can see the gross disparity in force.
You have guys walking in a relaxed way down the street, and then an Apache helicopter sitting up at one kilometer firing 30-millimeter cannon shells on everyone -- looking for any excuse to do so -- and killing people rescuing the wounded.
And there was two journalists involved that clearly weren't insurgents because that's their full-time job.
CA: I mean, there's been this U.S. intelligence analyst, Bradley Manning, arrested, and it's alleged that he confessed in a chat room to have leaked this video to you, along with 280,000 classified U.S. embassy cables.
I mean, did he?
JA: We have denied receiving those cables.
He has been charged, about five days ago, with obtaining 150,000 cables and releasing 50.
Now, we had released, early in the year, a cable from the Reykjavik U.S. embassy, but this is not necessarily connected.
I mean, I was a known visitor of that embassy.
CA: I mean, if you did receive thousands of U.S. embassy diplomatic cables ...
JA: We would have released them. (CA: You would?) JA: Yeah. (CA: Because?) JA: Well, because these sort of things reveal what the true state of, say, Arab governments are like, the true human-rights abuses in those governments.
If you look at declassified cables, that's the sort of material that's there.
CA: So let's talk a little more broadly about this.
I mean, in general, what's your philosophy?
Why is it right to encourage leaking of secret information?
JA: Well, there's a question as to what sort of information is important in the world, what sort of information can achieve reform.
And there's a lot of information.
So information that organizations are spending economic effort into concealing, that's a really good signal that when the information gets out, there's a hope of it doing some good -- because the organizations that know it best, that know it from the inside out, are spending work to conceal it.
And that's what we've found in practice, and that's what the history of journalism is.
CA: But are there risks with that, either to the individuals concerned or indeed to society at large, where leaking can actually have an unintended consequence?
JA: Not that we have seen with anything we have released.
I mean, we have a harm immunization policy.
We have a way of dealing with information that has sort of personal -- personally identifying information in it.
But there are legitimate secrets -- you know, your records with your doctor; that's a legitimate secret -- but we deal with whistleblowers that are coming forward that are really sort of well-motivated.
CA: So they are well-motivated.
And what would you say to, for example, the, you know, the parent of someone whose son is out serving the U.S. military, and he says, "You know what, you've put up something that someone had an incentive to put out.
It shows a U.S. soldier laughing at people dying.
That gives the impression, has given the impression, to millions of people around the world that U.S. soldiers are inhuman people.
Actually, they're not. My son isn't. How dare you?"
What would you say to that?
JA: Yeah, we do get a lot of that.
But remember, the people in Baghdad, the people in Iraq, the people in Afghanistan -- they don't need to see the video; they see it every day.
So it's not going to change their opinion. It's not going to change their perception.
That's what they see every day.
It will change the perception and opinion of the people who are paying for it all, and that's our hope.
CA: So you found a way to shine light into what you see as these sort of dark secrets in companies and in government.
Light is good.
But do you see any irony in the fact that, in order for you to shine that light, you have to, yourself, create secrecy around your sources?
JA: Not really. I mean, we don't have any WikiLeaks dissidents yet.
We don't have sources who are dissidents on other sources.
Should they come forward, that would be a tricky situation for us, but we're presumably acting in such a way that people feel morally compelled to continue our mission, not to screw it up.
CA: I'd actually be interested, just based on what we've heard so far -- I'm curious as to the opinion in the TED audience.
You know, there might be a couple of views of WikiLeaks and of Julian.
You know, hero -- people's hero -- bringing this important light.
Dangerous troublemaker.
Who's got the hero view?
Who's got the dangerous troublemaker view?
JA: Oh, come on. There must be some.
CA: It's a soft crowd, Julian, a soft crowd.
We have to try better. Let's show them another example.
Now here's something that you haven't yet leaked, but I think for TED you are.
I mean it's an intriguing story that's just happened, right?
What is this?
JA: So this is a sample of what we do sort of every day.
So late last year -- in November last year -- there was a series of well blowouts in Albania, like the well blowout in the Gulf of Mexico, but not quite as big.
And we got a report -- a sort of engineering analysis into what happened -- saying that, in fact, security guards from some rival, various competing oil firms had, in fact, parked trucks there and blown them up.
And part of the Albanian government was in this, etc., etc.
And the engineering report had nothing on the top of it, so it was an extremely difficult document for us.
We couldn't verify it because we didn't know who wrote it and knew what it was about.
So we were kind of skeptical that maybe it was a competing oil firm just sort of playing the issue up.
So under that basis, we put it out and said, "Look, we're skeptical about this thing.
We don't know, but what can we do?
The material looks good, it feels right, but we just can't verify it."
And we then got a letter just this week from the company who wrote it, wanting to track down the source -- (Laughter) saying, "Hey, we want to track down the source."
And we were like, "Oh, tell us more.
What document is it, precisely, you're talking about?
Can you show that you had legal authority over that document?
Is it really yours?"
So they sent us this screen shot with the author in the Microsoft Word ID.
Yeah.
(Applause) That's happened quite a lot though.
This is like one of our methods of identifying, of verifying, what a material is, is to try and get these guys to write letters.
CA: Yeah. Have you had information from inside BP?
JA: Yeah, we have a lot, but I mean, at the moment, we are undergoing a sort of serious fundraising and engineering effort.
So our publication rate over the past few months has been sort of minimized while we're re-engineering our back systems for the phenomenal public interest that we have.
That's a problem.
I mean, like any sort of growing startup organization, we are sort of overwhelmed by our growth, and that means we're getting enormous quantity of whistleblower disclosures of a very high caliber but don't have enough people to actually process and vet this information.
CA: So that's the key bottleneck, basically journalistic volunteers and/or the funding of journalistic salaries?
JA: Yep. Yeah, and trusted people.
I mean, we're an organization that is hard to grow very quickly because of the sort of material we deal with, so we have to restructure in order to have people who will deal with the highest national security stuff, and then lower security cases.
CA: So help us understand a bit about you personally and how you came to do this.
And I think I read that as a kid you went to 37 different schools.
Can that be right?
JA: Well, my parents were in the movie business and then on the run from a cult, so the combination between the two ...
(Laughter) CA: I mean, a psychologist might say that's a recipe for breeding paranoia.
JA: What, the movie business?
(Laughter) (Applause) CA: And you were also -- I mean, you were also a hacker at an early age and ran into the authorities early on.
JA: Well, I was a journalist.
You know, I was a very young journalist activist at an early age.
I wrote a magazine, was prosecuted for it when I was a teenager.
So you have to be careful with hacker.
I mean there's like -- there's a method that can be deployed for various things.
Unfortunately, at the moment, it's mostly deployed by the Russian mafia in order to steal your grandmother's bank accounts.
So this phrase is not, not as nice as it used to be.
CA: Yeah, well, I certainly don't think you're stealing anyone's grandmother's bank account, but what about your core values?
Can you give us a sense of what they are and maybe some incident in your life that helped determine them?
JA: I'm not sure about the incident.
But the core values: well, capable, generous men do not create victims; they nurture victims.
And that's something from my father and something from other capable, generous men that have been in my life.
CA: Capable, generous men do not create victims; they nurture victims?
JA: Yeah. And you know, I'm a combative person, so I'm not actually so big on the nurture, but some way -- there is another way of nurturing victims, which is to police perpetrators of crime.
And so that is something that has been in my character for a long time.
CA: So just tell us, very quickly in the last minute, the story: what happened in Iceland?
You basically published something there, ran into trouble with a bank, then the news service there was injuncted from running the story.
Instead, they publicized your side.
That made you very high-profile in Iceland. What happened next?
JA: Yeah, this is a great case, you know.
Iceland went through this financial crisis.
It was the hardest hit of any country in the world.
Its banking sector was 10 times the GDP of the rest of the economy.
Anyway, so we release this report in July last year.
And the national TV station was injuncted five minutes before it went on air, like out of a movie: injunction landed on the news desk, and the news reader was like, "This has never happened before. What do we do?"
Well, we just show the website instead, for all that time, as a filler, and we became very famous in Iceland, went to Iceland and spoke about this issue.
And there was a feeling in the community that that should never happen again, and as a result, working with Icelandic politicians and some other international legal experts, we put together a new sort of package of legislation for Iceland to sort of become an offshore haven for the free press, with the strongest journalistic protections in the world, with a new Nobel Prize for freedom of speech.
Iceland's a Nordic country, so, like Norway, it's able to tap into the system.
And just a month ago, this was passed by the Icelandic parliament unanimously.
CA: Wow.
(Applause) Last question, Julian.
When you think of the future then, do you think it's more likely to be Big Brother exerting more control, more secrecy, or us watching Big Brother, or it's just all to be played for either way?
JA: I'm not sure which way it's going to go.
I mean, there's enormous pressures to harmonize freedom of speech legislation and transparency legislation around the world -- within the E.U., between China and the United States.
Which way is it going to go? It's hard to see.
That's why it's a very interesting time to be in -- because with just a little bit of effort, we can shift it one way or the other.
CA: Well, it looks like I'm reflecting the audience's opinion to say, Julian, be careful, and all power to you.
JA: Thank you, Chris. (CA: Thank you.) (Applause)
In October 2010, the Justice League of America will be teaming up with The 99.
Icons like Batman, Superman, Wonder Woman and their colleagues will be teaming up with icons Jabbar, Noora, Jami and their colleagues.
It's a story of intercultural intersections, and what better group to have this conversation than those that grew out of fighting fascism in their respective histories and geographies?
As fascism took over Europe in the 1930s, an unlikely reaction came out of North America.
As Christian iconography got changed, and swastikas were created out of crucifixes, Batman and Superman were created by Jewish young men in the United States and Canada, also going back to the Bible.
Consider this: like the prophets, all the superheroes are missing parents.
Superman's parents die on Krypton before the age of one.
Bruce Wayne, who becomes Batman, loses his parents at the age of six in Gotham City.
Spiderman is raised by his aunt and uncle.
And all of them, just like the prophets who get their message from God through Gabriel, get their message from above.
Peter Parker is in a library in Manhattan when the spider descends from above and gives him his message through a bite.
Bruce Wayne is in his bedroom when a big bat flies over his head, and he sees it as an omen to become Batman.
Superman is not only sent to Earth from the heavens, or Krypton, but he's sent in a pod, much like Moses was on the Nile.
(Laughter) And you hear the voice of his father, Jor-El, saying to Earth, "I have sent to you my only son."
(Laughter) (Applause) These are clearly biblical archetypes, and the thinking behind that was to create positive, globally-resonating storylines that could be tied to the same things that other people were pulling mean messages out of because then the person that's using religion for the wrong purpose just becomes a bad man with a bad message.
And it's only by linking positive things that the negative can be delinked.
This is the kind of thinking that went into creating The 99.
The 99 references the 99 attributes of Allah in the Koran, things like generosity and mercy and foresight and wisdom and dozens of others that no two people in the world would disagree about.
It doesn't matter what your religion is; even if you're an atheist, you don't raise your kid telling him, you know, "Make sure you lie three times a day."
Those are basic human values.
And so the backstory of The 99 takes place in 1258, which history tells us the Mongols invaded Baghdad and destroyed it.
All the books from Bait al-Hikma library, the most famous library in its day, were thrown in the Tigris River, and the Tigris changes color with ink.
It's a story passed on generation after generation.
I rewrote that story, and in my version, the librarians find out that this is going to happen -- and here's a side note: if you want a comic book to do well, make the librarians the hero. It always works well.
(Laughter) (Applause) So the librarians find out and they get together a special solution, a chemical solution called King's Water, that when mixed with 99 stones would be able to save all that culture and history in the books.
But the Mongols get there first.
The books and the solution get thrown in the Tigris River.
Some librarians escape, and over the course of days and weeks, they dip the stones into the Tigris and suck up that collective wisdom that we all think is lost to civilization.
Those stones have been smuggled as three prayer beads of 33 stones each through Arabia into Andalusia in Spain, where they're safe for 200 years.
But in 1492, two important things happen.
The first is the fall of Granada, the last Muslim enclave in Europe.
The second is Columbus finally gets funded to go to India, but he gets lost.
(Laughter) So 33 of the stones are smuggled onto the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria and are spread in the New World.
Thirty-three go on the Silk Road to China, South Asia and Southeast Asia.
And 33 are spread between Europe, the Middle East and Africa.
And now it's 2010, and there are 99 heroes from 99 different countries.
Now it's very easy to assume that those books, because they were from a library called Bait al-Hikma, were Muslim books, but that's not the case because the caliph that built that library, his name was al-Ma'mun -- he was Harun al-Rashid's son.
He had told his advisers, "Get me all the scholars to translate any book they can get their hands onto into Arabic, and I will pay them its weight in gold."
After a while, his advisers complained.
They said, "Your Highness, the scholars are cheating.
They're writing in big handwriting to take more gold."
To which he said, "Let them be, because what they're giving us is worth a lot more than what we're paying them."
So the idea of an open architecture, an open knowledge, is not new to my neck of the desert.
The concept centers on something called the Noor stones.
Noor is Arabic for light.
So these 99 stones, a few kind of rules in the game: Number one, you don't choose the stone; the stone chooses you.
There's a King Arthur element to the storyline, okay.
Number two, all of The 99, when they first get their stone, or their power, abuse it; they use it for self-interest.
And there's a very strong message in there that when you start abusing your stone, you get taken advantage of by people who will exploit your powers, okay.
Number three, the 99 stones all have within them a mechanism that self-updates.
Now there are two groups that exist within the Muslim world.
Everybody believes the Koran is for all time and all place.
Some believe that means that the original interpretation from a couple thousand years ago is what's relevant today.
I don't belong there.
Then there's a group that believes the Koran is a living, breathing document, and I captured that idea within these stones that self-update.
Now the main bad guy, Rughal, does not want these stones to update, so he's trying to get them to stop updating.
He can't use the stones, but he can stop them.
And by stopping them, he has more of a fascist agenda, where he gets some of The 99 to work for him -- they're all wearing cookie-cutter, same color uniforms They're not allowed to individually express who they are and what they are.
And he controls them from the top down -- whereas when they work for the other side, eventually, when they find out this is the wrong person, they've been manipulated, they actually, each one has a different, colorful kind of dress.
And the last point about the 99 Noor stones is this.
So The 99 work in teams of three.
Why three? A couple of reasons.
Number one, we have a thing within Islam that you don't leave a boy and a girl alone together, because the third person is temptation or the devil, right?
I think that's there in all cultures, right?
But this is not about religion, it's not about proselytizing.
There's this very strong social message that needs to get to kind of the deepest crevices of intolerance, and the only way to get there is to kind of play the game.
And so this is the way I dealt with it.
They work in teams of three: two boys and a girl, two girls and a boy, three boys, three girls, no problem.
And the Swiss psychoanalyst, Carl Jung, also spoke about the importance of the number three in all cultures, so I figure I'm covered.
Well ...
I got accused in a few blogs that I was actually sent by the Pope to preach the Trinity and Catholicism in the Middle East, so you -- (Laughter) you believe who you want. I gave you my version of the story.
So here's some of the characters that we have.
Mujiba, from Malaysia: her main power is she's able to answer any question.
She's the Trivial Pursuit queen, if you want, but when she first gets her power, she starts going on game shows and making money.
We have Jabbar from Saudi who starts breaking things when he has the power.
Now, Mumita was a fun one to name. Mumita is the destroyer.
So the 99 attributes of Allah have the yin and the yang; there's the powerful, the hegemonous, the strong, and there's also the kind, the generous.
I'm like, are all the girls going to be kind and merciful and the guys all strong?
I'm like, you know what, I've met a few girls who were destroyers in my lifetime, so ...
(Laughter) We have Jami from Hungary, who first starts making weapons: He's the technology wiz.
Musawwira from Ghana, Hadya from Pakistan, Jaleel from Iran who uses fire.
And this is one of my favorites, Al-Batina from Yemen.
Al-Batina is the hidden.
So Al-Batina is hidden, but she's a superhero.
I came home to my wife and I said, "I created a character after you."
My wife is a Saudi from Yemeni roots.
And she said, "Show me." So I showed this.
She said, "That's not me."
I said, "Look at the eyes. They're your eyes."
(Laughter) So I promised my investors this would not be another made-in-fifth-world-country production.
This was going to be Superman, or it wasn't worth my time or their money.
So from day one, the people involved in the project, bottom left is Fabian Nicieza, writer for X-Men and Power Rangers.
Next to him is Dan Panosian, one of the character creators for the modern-day X-Men.
Top right is Stuart Moore, a writer for Iron Man.
Next to him is John McCrea, who was an inker for Spiderman.
And we entered Western consciousness with a tagline: "Next Ramadan, the world will have new heroes," back in 2005.
Now I went to Dubai, to an Arab Thought Foundation Conference, and I was waiting by the coffee for the right journalist.
Didn't have a product, but had energy.
And I found somebody from The New York Times, and I cornered him, and I pitched him.
And I think I scared him -- (Laughter) because he basically promised me -- we had no product -- but he said, "We'll give you a paragraph in the arts section if you'll just go away."
(Laughter) So I said, "Great." So I called him up a few weeks afterward.
I said, "Hi, Hesa." And he said, "Hi." I said, "Happy New Year."
He said, "Thank you. We had a baby." I said, "Congratulations."
Like I care, right?
"So when's the article coming out?"
He said, "Naif, Islam and cartoon?
That's not timely.
You know, maybe next week, next month, next year, but, you know, it'll come out."
So a few days after that, what happens?
What happens is the world erupts in the Danish cartoon controversy.
I became timely.
(Laughter) So flurry of phone calls and emails from The New York Times.
Next thing you knew, there's a full page covering us positively, January 22nd, 2006, which changed our lives forever, because anybody Googling Islam and cartoon or Islam and comic, guess what they got; they got me.
And The 99 were like superheroes kind of flying out of what was happening around the world.
And that led to all kinds of things, from being in curricula in universities and schools to -- one of my favorite pictures I have from South Asia, it was a couple of men with long beards and a lot of girls wearing the hijab -- it looked like a school.
The good news is they're all holding copies of The 99, smiling, and they found me to sign the picture.
The bad news is they were all photocopies, so we didn't make a dime in revenue.
(Laughter) We've been able to license The 99 comic books into eight languages so far -- Chinese, Indonesian, Hindi, Urdu, Turkish.
Opened a theme park through a license in Kuwait a year and a half ago called The 99 Village Theme Park -- 300,000 square feet, 20 rides, all with our characters: a couple back-to-school licenses in Spain and Turkey.
But the biggest thing we've done to date, which is just amazing, is that we've done a 26-episode animated series, which is done for global audiences: in fact, we're already going to be in the U.S. and Turkey, we know.
It's 3D CGI, which is going to be very high-quality, written in Hollywood by the writers behind Ben 10 and Spiderman and Star Wars: Clone Wars.
In this clip I'm about to show you, which has never been seen in the public before, there is a struggle.
Two of the characters, Jabbar, the one with the muscles, and Noora, the one that can use light, are actually wearing the cookie-cutter fascist gray uniform because they're being manipulated.
They don't know, OK, and they're trying to get another member of The 99 to join them.
So there's a struggle within the team.
So if we can get the lights ...
["The 99"] Jabbar: Dana, I can't see where to grab hold.
I need more light.
What's happening?
Dana: There's too much darkness.
Rughal: There must be something we can do.
Man: I won't send any more commandos in until I know it's safe.
Dr. Razem: It's time to go, Miklos.
Miklos: Must download file contents.
I can't forget auntie.
Jabbar: Dana, I can't do this without you.
Dana: But I can't help.
Jabbar: You can, even if you don't believe in yourself right now.
I believe in you.
You are Noora the Light.
Dana: No.
I don't deserve it. I don't deserve anything.
Jabbar: Then what about the rest of us?
Don't we deserve to be saved? Don't I?
Now, tell me which way to go.
Dana: That way.
Alarm: Threat imminent.
Jabbar: Aaaahhh!
Miklos: Stay away from me.
Jabbar: We're here to help you.
Dr. Razem: Don't listen to them.
Dana: Miklos, that man is not your friend.
Miklos: No. He gave me access, and you want to reboot the [unclear]. No more [unclear].
["The 99"] Thank you.
(Applause) So "The 99" is technology; it's entertainment; it's design.
But that's only half the story.
As the father of five sons, I worry about who they're going to be using as role models.
I worry because all around me, even within my extended family, I see religion being manipulated.
As a psychologist, I worry for the world in general, but worry about the perception of how people see themselves in my part of the world.
Now, I'm a clinical psychologist. I'm licensed in New York State.
I trained at Bellevue Hospital Survivors of Political Torture Program, and I heard one too many stories of people growing up to idolize their leadership, only to end up being tortured by their heroes.
And torture's a terrible enough thing as it is, but when it's done by your hero, that just breaks you in so many ways.
I left Bellevue, went to business school and started this.
Now, one of the things that I refer to when I -- about the importance of this message -- is that I gave a lecture at the medical school at Kuwait University, where I lecture on the biological basis of behavior, and I gave the students two articles, one from The New York Times and one from New York magazine.
And I took away the name of the writer, the name of the [unclear] -- everything was gone except the facts.
And the first one was about a group called The Party of God, who wanted to ban Valentine's Day. Red was made illegal.
Any boys and girls caught flirting would get married off immediately, okay.
The second one was about a woman complaining because three minivans with six bearded men pulled up and started interrogating her on the spot for talking to a man who wasn't related to her.
And I asked the students in Kuwait where they thought these incidents took place.
The first one, they said Saudi Arabia. There was no debate.
The second one, they were actually split between Saudi and Afghanistan.
What blew their mind was the first one took place in India, it was the party of a Hindu God.
The second one took place in upstate New York.
It was an Orthodox Jewish community.
But what breaks my heart and what's alarming is that in those two interviews, the people around, who were interviewed as well, refer to that behavior as Talibanization.
In other words, good Hindus and good Jews don't act this way.
This is Islam's influence on Hinduism and Judaism.
But what do the students in Kuwait say? They said it's us -- and this is dangerous.
It's dangerous when a group self-identifies itself as extreme.
This is one of my sons, Rayan, who's a Scooby Doo addict.
You can tell by the glasses there.
He actually called me a meddling kid the other day.
(Laughter) But I borrow a lesson that I learned from him.
Last summer when we were in our home in New York, he was out in the yard playing in his playhouse. And I was in my office working, and he came in, "Baba, I want you to come with me. I want my toy."
"Yes, Rayan, just go away." He left his Scooby Doo in his house.
I said, "Go away. I'm working. I'm busy."
And what Rayan did then is he sat there, he tapped his foot on the floor, at three and a half, and he looked at me and he said, "Baba, I want you to come with me to my office in my house.
I have work to do."
(Laughter) (Applause) Rayan reframed the situation and brought himself down to my level.
(Laughter) And with The 99, that is what we aim to do.
You know, I think that there's a big parallel between bending the crucifix out of shape and creating swastikas.
And when I see pictures like this, of parents or uncles who think it's cute to have a little child holding a Koran and having a suicide bomber belt around them to protest something, the hope is by linking enough positive things to the Koran, that one day we can move this child from being proud in the way they're proud there, to that.
And I think -- I think The 99 can and will achieve its mission.
As an undergrad at Tufts University, we were giving away free falafel one day and, you know, it was Middle East Day or something.
And people came up and picked up the culturally resonant image of the falafel, ate it and, you know, talked and left.
And no two people could disagree about what the word free was and what the word falafel was, behind us, "free falafel." You know.
(Laughter) Or so we thought, until a woman came rushing across the campus and dropped her bag on the floor, pointed up to the sign and said, "Who's falafel?"
(Laughter) True story.
(Laughter) She was actually coming out of an Amnesty International meeting.
(Laughter) Just today, D.C. Comics announced the cover of our upcoming crossover.
On that cover you see Batman, Superman and a fully-clothed Wonder Woman with our Saudi member of The 99, our Emirati member and our Libyan member.
On April 26, 2010, President Barack Obama said that of all the initiatives since his now famous Cairo speech -- in which he reached out to the Muslim world -- the most innovative was that The 99 reach back out to the Justice League of America.
We live in a world in which the most culturally innocuous symbols, like the falafel, can be misunderstood because of baggage, and where religion can be twisted and purposefully made where it's not supposed to be by others.
In a world like that, they'll always be a job for Superman and The 99.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
About 10 years ago, I took on the task to teach global development to Swedish undergraduate students.
That was after having spent about 20 years, together with African institutions, studying hunger in Africa.
So I was sort of expected to know a little about the world.
And I started, in our medical university, Karolinska Institute, an undergraduate course called Global Health.
But when you get that opportunity, you get a little nervous.
I thought, these students coming to us actually have the highest grade you can get in the Swedish college system, so I thought, maybe they know everything I'm going to teach them about.
So I did a pretest when they came.
And one of the questions from which I learned a lot was this one: "Which country has the highest child mortality of these five pairs?"
And I put them together so that in each pair of countries, one has twice the child mortality of the other.
And this means that it's much bigger, the difference, than the uncertainty of the data.
I won't put you at a test here, but it's Turkey, which is highest there, Poland, Russia, Pakistan and South Africa.
And these were the results of the Swedish students.
I did it so I got the confidence interval, which is pretty narrow.
And I got happy, of course -- a 1.8 right answer out of five possible.
That means there was a place for a professor of international health and for my course.
(Laughter) But one late night, when I was compiling the report, I really realized my discovery.
I have shown that Swedish top students know, statistically, significantly less about the world than the chimpanzees.
(Laughter) Because the chimpanzee would score half right if I gave them two bananas with Sri Lanka and Turkey.
They would be right half of the cases. But the students are not there.
The problem for me was not ignorance; it was preconceived ideas.
I did also an unethical study of the professors of the Karolinska Institute, which hands out the Nobel Prize in Medicine, and they are on par with the chimpanzee there.
(Laughter) This is where I realized that there was really a need to communicate, because the data of what's happening in the world and the child health of every country is very well aware.
So we did this software, which displays it like this.
Every bubble here is a country.
This country over here is China.
The size of the bubble is the population, and on this axis here, I put fertility rate.
Because my students, what they said when they looked upon the world, and I asked them, "What do you really think about the world?"
Well, I first discovered that the textbook was Tintin, mainly.
(Laughter) And they said, "The world is still 'we' and 'them.' And 'we' is the Western world and 'them' is the Third World."
"And what do you mean with 'Western world?'" I said.
"Well, that's long life and small family.
So this is what I could display here.
I put fertility rate here -- number of children per woman: one, two, three, four, up to about eight children per woman.
We have very good data since 1962, 1960, about, on the size of families in all countries.
The error margin is narrow.
Here, I put life expectancy at birth, from 30 years in some countries, up to about 70 years.
And in 1962, there was really a group of countries here that were industrialized countries, and they had small families and long lives.
And these were the developing countries.
They had large families and they had relatively short lives.
Now, what has happened since 1962? We want to see the change.
Are the students right? It's still two types of countries?
Or have these developing countries got smaller families and they live here?
Or have they got longer lives and live up there?
Let's see. We stopped the world then.
This is all UN statistics that have been available.
Here we go. Can you see there?
All the green Latin American countries are moving towards smaller families.
Your yellow ones here are the Arabic countries, and they get longer life, but not larger families.
The Africans are the green here. They still remain here.
This is India; Indonesia is moving on pretty fast.
In the '80s here, you have Bangladesh still among the African countries.
But now, Bangladesh -- it's a miracle that happens in the '80s -- the imams start to promote family planning, and they move up into that corner.
And in the '90s, we have the terrible HIV epidemic that takes down the life expectancy of the African countries.
And the rest of them all move up into the corner, where we have long lives and small family, and we have a completely new world.
(Applause) (Applause ends) Let me make a comparison directly between the United States of America and Vietnam.
1964: America had small families and long life; Vietnam had large families and short lives.
And this is what happens.
The data during the war indicate that even with all the death, there was an improvement of life expectancy.
By the end of the year, family planning started in Vietnam, and they went for smaller families.
And the United States up there is getting longer life, keeping family size.
And in the '80s now, they give up Communist planning and they go for market economy, and it moves faster even than social life.
And today, we have in Vietnam the same life expectancy and the same family size here in Vietnam, 2003, as in United States, 1974, by the end of the war.
I think we all, if we don't look at the data, we underestimate the tremendous change in Asia, which was in social change before we saw the economic change.
So let's move over to another way here in which we could display the distribution in the world of income.
This is the world distribution of income of people.
One dollar, 10 dollars or 100 dollars per day.
There's no gap between rich and poor any longer. This is a myth.
There's a little hump here.
And if we look where the income ends up, this is 100 percent of the world's annual income.
And the richest 20 percent, they take out of that about 74 percent.
And the poorest 20 percent, they take about two percent.
And this shows that the concept of developing countries is extremely doubtful.
We think about aid, like these people here giving aid to these people here.
But in the middle, we have most of the world population, and they have now 24 percent of the income.
We heard it in other forms.
Where are the different countries?
I can show you Africa.
This is Africa.
This is OECD -- the rich countries, the country club of the UN.
And they are over here on this side. Quite an overlap between Africa and OECD.
And this is Latin America.
It has everything on this earth, from the poorest to the richest in Latin America.
And on top of that, we can put East Europe, we can put East Asia, and we put South Asia.
And what did it look like if we go back in time, to about 1970?
Then, there was more of a hump.
And most who lived in absolute poverty were Asians.
The problem in the world was the poverty in Asia.
And if I now let the world move forward, you will see that while population increases, there are hundreds of millions in Asia getting out of poverty, and some others getting into poverty, and this is the pattern we have today.
And the best projection from the World Bank is that this will happen, and we will not have a divided world.
Of course it's a logarithmic scale here, but our concept of economy is growth with percent.
We look upon it as a possibility of percentile increase.
If I change this and take GDP per capita instead of family income, and I turn these individual data into regional data of gross domestic product, and I take the regions down here, the size of the bubble is still the population.
And you have the OECD there, and you have sub-Saharan Africa there, and we take off the Arab states there, coming both from Africa and from Asia, and we put them separately, and we can expand this axis, and I can give it a new dimension here, by adding the social values there, child survival.
Now I have money on that axis, and I have the possibility of children to survive there.
In some countries, 99.7% of children survive to five years of age; others, only 70.
And here, it seems, there is a gap between OECD, Latin America, East Europe, East Asia, Arab states, South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.
The linearity is very strong between child survival and money.
But let me split sub-Saharan Africa.
Health is there and better health is up there.
I can go here, and I can split sub-Saharan Africa into its countries.
And when it bursts, the size of each country bubble is the size of the population.
Sierra Leone down there, Mauritius is up there.
Mauritius was the first country to get away with trade barriers, and they could sell their sugar, they could sell their textiles, on equal terms as the people in Europe and North America.
There's a huge difference [within] Africa.
And Ghana is here in the middle.
In Sierra Leone, humanitarian aid.
Here in Uganda, development aid.
Here, time to invest; there, you can go for a holiday.
There's tremendous variation within Africa, which we very often make that it's equal everything.
I can split South Asia here. India's the big bubble in the middle.
But there's a huge difference between Afghanistan and Sri Lanka.
I can split Arab states. How are they?
Same climate, same culture, same religion -- huge difference.
Even between neighbors -- Yemen, civil war; United Arab Emirates, money, which was quite equally and well-used.
And that includes all the children of the foreign workers who are in the country.
Data is often better than you think. Many people say data is bad.
There is an uncertainty margin, but we can see the difference here: Cambodia, Singapore.
The differences are much bigger than the weakness of the data.
East Europe: Soviet economy for a long time, but they come out after 10 years very, very differently.
And there is Latin America.
Chile will have a lower child mortality than Cuba within some few years from now.
Here, we have high-income countries in the OECD.
And we get the whole pattern here of the world, which is more or less like this.
And if we look at it, how the world looks, in 1960, it starts to move.
This is Mao Zedong. He brought health to China.
And then he died.
And we have seen how countries move in different directions like this, so it's sort of difficult to get an example country which shows the pattern of the world.
But I would like to bring you back to about here, at 1960.
I would like to compare South Korea, which is this one, with Brazil, which is this one.
And I would like to compare Uganda, which is there.
I can run it forward, like this.
And you can see how South Korea is making a very, very fast advancement, whereas Brazil is much slower.
And if we move back again, here, and we put trails on them, like this, you can see again that the speed of development is very, very different, and the countries are moving more or less at the same rate as money and health, but it seems you can move much faster if you are healthy first than if you are wealthy first.
And to show that, you can put on the way of United Arab Emirates.
They came from here, a mineral country.
They cached all the oil; they got all the money; but health cannot be bought at the supermarket.
You have to invest in health. You have to get kids into schooling.
You have to train health staff. You have to educate the population.
And Sheikh Zayed did that in a fairly good way.
In spite of falling oil prices, he brought this country up here.
So we've got a much more mainstream appearance of the world, where all countries tend to use their money better than they used it in the past.
Now, this is, more or less, if you look at the average data of the countries -- they are like this.
That's dangerous, to use average data, because there is such a lot of difference within countries.
So if I go and look here, we can see that Uganda today is where South Korea was in 1960.
If I split Uganda, there's quite a difference within Uganda.
These are the quintiles of Uganda.
If I split South Africa, it's like this.
And if I go down and look at Niger, where there was such a terrible famine [recently], it's like this.
The 20 percent poorest of Niger is out here, and the 20 percent richest of South Africa is there, and yet we tend to discuss what solutions there should be in Africa.
Everything in this world exists in Africa.
And you can't discuss universal access to HIV [treatment] for that quintile up here with the same strategy as down here.
The improvement of the world must be highly contextualized, and it's not relevant to have it on a regional level.
We find that students get very excited when they can use this.
And even more, policy makers and the corporate sectors would like to see how the world is changing.
Now, why doesn't this take place?
Why are we not using the data we have?
We have data in the United Nations, in the national statistical agencies and in universities and other nongovernmental organizations.
Because the data is hidden down in the databases.
And the public is there, and the internet is there, but we have still not used it effectively.
All that information we saw changing in the world does not include publicly funded statistics.
There are some web pages like this, you know, but they take some nourishment down from the databases, but people put prices on them, stupid passwords and boring statistics.
(Laughter) And this won't work.
(Applause) So what is needed? We have the databases.
It's not a new database that you need.
We have wonderful design tools and more and more are added up here.
So we started a nonprofit venture linking data to design, we called "Gapminder," from the London Underground, where they warn you, "Mind the gap."
And we started to write software which could link the data like this.
And it wasn't that difficult.
It took some person years, and we have produced animations.
We are liberating UN data, some few UN organization.
Some countries accept that their databases can go out on the world.
But what we really need is, of course, a search function, a search function where we can copy the data up to a searchable format and get it out in the world.
And what do we hear when we go around?
I've done anthropology on the main statistical units.
Everyone says, "It's impossible. This can't be done.
Our information is so peculiar in detail, so that cannot be searched as others can be searched.
We cannot give the data free to the students, free to the entrepreneurs of the world."
But this is what we would like to see, isn't it?
The publicly funded data is down here.
And we would like flowers to grow out on the net.
One of the crucial points is to make them searchable, and then people can use the different design tools to animate it there.
And I have pretty good news for you.
I have good news that the [current], new head of UN statistics doesn't say it's impossible.
He only says, "We can't do it."
(Laughter) And that's a quite clever guy, huh?
(Laughter) So we can see a lot happening in data in the coming years.
We will be able to look at income distributions in completely new ways.
This is the income distribution of China, 1970.
This is the income distribution of the United States, 1970.
Almost no overlap.
And what has happened?
What has happened is this: that China is growing, it's not so equal any longer, and it's appearing here, overlooking the United States, almost like a ghost, isn't it?
(Laughter) It's pretty scary.
(Laughter) But I think it's very important to have all this information.
We need really to see it.
And instead of looking at this, I would like to end up by showing the internet users per 1,000.
In this software, we access about 500 variables from all the countries quite easily.
It takes some time to change for this, but on the axes, you can quite easily get any variable you would like to have.
And the thing would be to get up the databases free, to get them searchable, and with a second click, to get them into the graphic formats, where you can instantly understand them.
Now, statisticians don't like it, because they say that this will not show the reality; we have to have statistical, analytical methods.
But this is hypothesis-generating.
I end now with the world.
There, the internet is coming.
This is the GDP per capita.
And it's a new technology coming in, but then amazingly, how well it fits to the economy of the countries.
That's why the $100 computer will be so important.
But it's a nice tendency.
It's as if the world is flattening off, isn't it?
These countries are lifting more than the economy, and it will be very interesting to follow this over the year, as I would like you to be able to do with all the publicly funded data.
(Applause)
Well, indeed, I'm very, very lucky.
My talk essentially got written by three historic events that happened within days of each other in the last two months -- seemingly unrelated, but as you will see, actually all having to do with the story I want to tell you today.
The first one was actually a funeral -- to be more precise, a reburial.
On May 22nd, there was a hero's reburial in Frombork, Poland of the 16th-century astronomer who actually changed the world.
He did that, literally, by replacing the Earth with the Sun in the center of the Solar System, and then with this simple-looking act, he actually launched a scientific and technological revolution, which many call the Copernican Revolution.
Now that was, ironically, and very befittingly, the way we found his grave.
As it was the custom of the time, Copernicus was actually simply buried in an unmarked grave, together with 14 others in that cathedral.
DNA analysis, one of the hallmarks of the scientific revolution of the last 400 years that he started, was the way we found which set of bones actually belonged to the person who read all those astronomical books which were filled with leftover hair that was Copernicus' hair -- obviously not many other people bothered to read these books later on.
That match was unambiguous.
The DNA matched, and we know that this was indeed Nicolaus Copernicus.
Now, the connection between biology and DNA and life is very tantalizing when you talk about Copernicus because, even back then, his followers very quickly made the logical step to ask: if the Earth is just a planet, then what about planets around other stars?
What about the idea of the plurality of the worlds, about life on other planets?
In fact, I'm borrowing here from one of those very popular books of the time.
And at the time, people actually answered that question positively: "Yes."
But there was no evidence.
And here begins 400 years of frustration, of unfulfilled dreams -- the dreams of Galileo, Giordano Bruno, many others -- which never led to the answer of those very basic questions which humanity has asked all the time.
"What is life? What is the origin of life?
Are we alone?"
And that especially happened in the last 10 years, at the end of the 20th century, when the beautiful developments due to molecular biology, understanding the code of life, DNA, all of that seemed to actually put us, not closer, but further apart from answering those basic questions.
Now, the good news.
A lot has happened in the last few years, and let's start with the planets.
Let's start with the old Copernican question: Are there earths around other stars?
And as we already heard, there is a way in which we are trying, and now able, to answer that question.
It's a new telescope.
Our team, befittingly I think, named it after one of those dreamers of the Copernican time, Johannes Kepler, and that telescope's sole purpose is to go out, find the planets that orbit other stars in our galaxy, and tell us how often do planets like our own Earth happen to be out there.
The telescope is actually built similarly to the, well-known to you, Hubble Space Telescope, except it does have an additional lens -- a wide-field lens, as you would call it as a photographer.
And if, in the next couple of months, you walk out in the early evening and look straight up and place you palm like this, you will actually be looking at the field of the sky where this telescope is searching for planets day and night, without any interruption, for the next four years.
The way we do that, actually, is with a method, which we call the transit method.
It's actually mini-eclipses that occur when a planet passes in front of its star.
Not all of the planets will be fortuitously oriented for us to be able do that, but if you have a million stars, you'll find enough planets.
And as you see on this animation, what Kepler is going to detect is just the dimming of the light from the star.
We are not going to see the image of the star and the planet as this.
All the stars for Kepler are just points of light.
But we learn a lot from that: not only that there is a planet there, but we also learn its size.
How much of the light is being dimmed depends on how big the planet is.
We learn about its orbit, the period of its orbit and so on.
So, what have we learned?
Well, let me try to walk you through what we actually see and so you understand the news that I'm here to tell you today.
What Kepler does is discover a lot of candidates, which we then follow up and find as planets, confirm as planets.
It basically tells us this is the distribution of planets in size.
There are small planets, there are bigger planets, there are big planets, okay.
So we count many, many such planets, and they have different sizes.
We do that in our solar system.
In fact, even back during the ancients, the Solar System in that sense would look on a diagram like this.
There will be the smaller planets, and there will be the big planets, even back to the time of Epicurus and then of course Copernicus and his followers.
Up until recently, that was the Solar System -- four Earth-like planets with small radius, smaller than about two times the size of the Earth -- and that was of course Mercury, Venus, Mars, and of course the Earth, and then the two big, giant planets.
Then the Copernican Revolution brought in telescopes, and of course three more planets were discovered.
Now the total planet number in our solar system was nine.
The small planets dominated, and there was a certain harmony to that, which actually Copernicus was very happy to note, and Kepler was one of the big proponents of.
So now we have Pluto to join the numbers of small planets.
But up until, literally, 15 years ago, that was all we knew about planets.
And that's what the frustration was.
The Copernican dream was unfulfilled.
Finally, 15 years ago, the technology came to the point where we could discover a planet around another star, and we actually did pretty well.
In the next 15 years, almost 500 planets were discovered orbiting other stars, with different methods.
Unfortunately, as you can see, there was a very different picture.
There was of course an explanation for it: We only see the big planets, so that's why most of those planets are really in the category of "like Jupiter."
But you see, we haven't gone very far.
We were still back where Copernicus was.
We didn't have any evidence whether planets like the Earth are out there.
And we do care about planets like the Earth because by now we understood that life as a chemical system really needs a smaller planet with water and with rocks and with a lot of complex chemistry to originate, to emerge, to survive.
And we didn't have the evidence for that.
So today, I'm here to actually give you a first glimpse of what the new telescope, Kepler, has been able to tell us in the last few weeks, and, lo and behold, we are back to the harmony and to fulfilling the dreams of Copernicus.
You can see here, the small planets dominate the picture.
The planets which are marked "like Earth," [are] definitely more than any other planets that we see.
And now for the first time, we can say that.
There is a lot more work we need to do with this.
Most of these are candidates.
In the next few years we will confirm them.
But the statistical result is loud and clear.
And the statistical result is that planets like our own Earth are out there.
Our own Milky Way Galaxy is rich in this kind of planets.
So the question is: what do we do next?
Well, first of all, we can study them now that we know where they are.
And we can find those that we would call habitable, meaning that they have similar conditions to the conditions that we experience here on Earth and where a lot of complex chemistry can happen.
So, we can even put a number to how many of those planets now do we expect our own Milky Way Galaxy harbors.
And the number, as you might expect, is pretty staggering.
It's about 100 million such planets.
That's great news. Why?
Because with our own little telescope, just in the next two years, we'll be able to identify at least 60 of them.
So that's great because then we can go and study them -- remotely, of course -- with all the techniques that we already have tested in the past five years.
We can find what they're made of, would their atmospheres have water, carbon dioxide, methane.
We know and expect that we'll see that.
That's great, but that is not the whole news.
That's not why I'm here.
Why I'm here is to tell you that the next step is really the exciting part.
The one that this step is enabling us to do is coming next.
And here comes biology -- biology, with its basic question, which still stands unanswered, which is essentially: "If there is life on other planets, do we expect it to be like life on Earth?"
And let me immediately tell you here, when I say life, I don't mean "dolce vita," good life, human life.
I really mean life on Earth, past and present, from microbes to us humans, in its rich molecular diversity, the way we now understand life on Earth as being a set of molecules and chemical reactions -- and we call that, collectively, biochemistry, life as a chemical process, as a chemical phenomenon.
So the question is: is that chemical phenomenon universal, or is it something which depends on the planet?
Is it like gravity, which is the same everywhere in the universe, or there would be all kinds of different biochemistries wherever we find them?
We need to know what we are looking for when we try to do that.
And that's a very basic question, which we don't know the answer to, but which we can try -- and we are trying -- to answer in the lab.
We don't need to go to space to answer that question.
And so, that's what we are trying to do.
And that's what many people now are trying to do.
And a lot of the good news comes from that part of the bridge that we are trying to build as well.
So this is one example that I want to show you here.
When we think of what is necessary for the phenomenon that we call life, we think of compartmentalization, keeping the molecules which are important for life in a membrane, isolated from the rest of the environment, but yet, in an environment in which they actually could originate together.
And in one of our labs, Jack Szostak's labs, it was a series of experiments in the last four years that showed that the environments -- which are very common on planets, on certain types of planets like the Earth, where you have some liquid water and some clays -- you actually end up with naturally available molecules which spontaneously form bubbles.
But those bubbles have membranes very similar to the membrane of every cell of every living thing on Earth looks like, like this.
And they really help molecules, like nucleic acids, like RNA and DNA, stay inside, develop, change, divide and do some of the processes that we call life.
Now this is just an example to tell you the pathway in which we are trying to answer that bigger question about the universality of the phenomenon.
And in a sense, you can think of that work that people are starting to do now around the world as building a bridge, building a bridge from two sides of the river.
On one hand, on the left bank of the river, are the people like me who study those planets and try to define the environments.
We don't want to go blind because there's too many possibilities, and there is not too much lab, and there is not enough human time to actually to do all the experiments.
So that's what we are building from the left side of the river.
From the right bank of the river are the experiments in the lab that I just showed you, where we actually tried that, and it feeds back and forth, and we hope to meet in the middle one day.
So why should you care about that?
Why am I trying to sell you a half-built bridge?
Am I that charming?
Well, there are many reasons, and you heard some of them in the short talk today.
This understanding of chemistry actually can help us with our daily lives.
But there is something more profound here, something deeper.
And that deeper, underlying point is that science is in the process of redefining life as we know it.
And that is going to change our worldview in a profound way -- not in a dissimilar way as 400 years ago, Copernicus' act did, by changing the way we view space and time.
Now it's about something else, but it's equally profound.
And half the time, what's happened is it's related this kind of sense of insignificance to humankind, to the Earth in a bigger space.
And the more we learn, the more that was reinforced.
You've all learned that in school -- how small the Earth is compared to the immense universe.
And the bigger the telescope, the bigger that universe becomes.
And look at this image of the tiny, blue dot.
This pixel is the Earth.
It is the Earth as we know it.
It is seen from, in this case, from outside the orbit of Saturn.
But it's really tiny.
We know that.
Let's think of life as that entire planet because, in a sense, it is.
The biosphere is the size of the Earth.
Life on Earth is the size of the Earth.
And let's compare it to the rest of the world in spatial terms.
What if that Copernican insignificance was actually all wrong?
Would that make us more responsible for what is happening today?
Let's actually try that.
So in space, the Earth is very small.
Can you imagine how small it is?
Let me try it.
Okay, let's say this is the size of the observable universe, with all the galaxies, with all the stars, okay, from here to here.
Do you know what the size of life in this necktie will be?
It will be the size of a single, small atom.
It is unimaginably small.
We can't imagine it.
I mean look, you can see the necktie, but you can't even imagine seeing the size of a little, small atom.
But that's not the whole story, you see.
The universe and life are both in space and time.
If that was the age of the universe, then this is the age of life on Earth.
Think about those oldest living things on Earth, but in a cosmic proportion.
This is not insignificant.
This is very significant.
So life might be insignificant in size, but it is not insignificant in time.
Life and the universe compare to each other like a child and a parent, parent and offspring.
So what does this tell us?
This tells us that that insignificance paradigm that we somehow got to learn from the Copernican principle, it's all wrong.
There is immense, powerful potential in life in this universe -- especially now that we know that places like the Earth are common.
And that potential, that powerful potential, is also our potential, of you and me.
And if we are to be stewards of our planet Earth and its biosphere, we'd better understand the cosmic significance and do something about it.
And the good news is we can actually, indeed do it.
And let's do it.
Let's start this new revolution at the tail end of the old one, with synthetic biology being the way to transform both our environment and our future.
And let's hope that we can build this bridge together and meet in the middle.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Up until now, our communication with machines has always been limited to conscious and direct forms.
Whether it's something simple like turning on the lights with a switch, or even as complex as programming robotics, we have always had to give a command to a machine, or even a series of commands, in order for it to do something for us.
Communication between people, on the other hand, is far more complex and a lot more interesting because we take into account so much more than what is explicitly expressed.
We observe facial expressions, body language, and we can intuit feelings and emotions from our dialogue with one another.
This actually forms a large part of our decision-making process.
Our vision is to introduce this whole new realm of human interaction into human-computer interaction so that computers can understand not only what you direct it to do, but it can also respond to your facial expressions and emotional experiences.
And what better way to do this than by interpreting the signals naturally produced by our brain, our center for control and experience.
Well, it sounds like a pretty good idea, but this task, as Bruno mentioned, isn't an easy one for two main reasons: First, the detection algorithms.
Our brain is made up of billions of active neurons, around 170,000 km of combined axon length.
When these neurons interact, the chemical reaction emits an electrical impulse, which can be measured.
The majority of our functional brain is distributed over the outer surface layer of the brain, and to increase the area that's available for mental capacity, the brain surface is highly folded.
Now this cortical folding presents a significant challenge for interpreting surface electrical impulses.
Each individual's cortex is folded differently, very much like a fingerprint.
So even though a signal may come from the same functional part of the brain, by the time the structure has been folded, its physical location is very different between individuals, even identical twins.
There is no longer any consistency in the surface signals.
Our breakthrough was to create an algorithm that unfolds the cortex, so that we can map the signals closer to its source, and therefore making it capable of working across a mass population.
The second challenge is the actual device for observing brainwaves.
EEG measurements typically involve a hairnet with an array of sensors, like the one that you can see here in the photo.
A technician will put the electrodes onto the scalp using a conductive gel or paste and usually after a procedure of preparing the scalp by light abrasion.
Now this is quite time consuming and isn't the most comfortable process.
And on top of that, these systems actually cost in the tens of thousands of dollars.
So with that, I'd like to invite onstage Evan Grant, who is one of last year's speakers, who's kindly agreed to help me to demonstrate what we've been able to develop.
(Applause) So the device that you see is a 14-channel, high-fidelity EEG acquisition system.
It doesn't require any scalp preparation, no conductive gel or paste.
It only takes a few minutes to put on and for the signals to settle.
It's also wireless, so it gives you the freedom to move around.
And compared to the tens of thousands of dollars for a traditional EEG system, this headset only costs a few hundred dollars.
Now on to the detection algorithms.
So facial expressions -- as I mentioned before in emotional experiences -- are actually designed to work out of the box with some sensitivity adjustments available for personalization.
But with the limited time we have available, I'd like to show you the cognitive suite, which is the ability for you to basically move virtual objects with your mind.
Now, Evan is new to this system, so what we have to do first is create a new profile for him.
He's obviously not Joanne -- so we'll "add user."
Evan. Okay.
So the first thing we need to do with the cognitive suite is to start with training a neutral signal.
With neutral, there's nothing in particular that Evan needs to do.
He just hangs out. He's relaxed.
And the idea is to establish a baseline or normal state for his brain, because every brain is different.
It takes eight seconds to do this, and now that that's done, we can choose a movement-based action.
So Evan, choose something that you can visualize clearly in your mind.
Evan Grant: Let's do "pull."
Tan Le: Okay, so let's choose "pull."
So the idea here now is that Evan needs to imagine the object coming forward into the screen, and there's a progress bar that will scroll across the screen while he's doing that.
The first time, nothing will happen, because the system has no idea how he thinks about "pull."
But maintain that thought for the entire duration of the eight seconds.
So: one, two, three, go.
Okay.
So once we accept this, the cube is live.
So let's see if Evan can actually try and imagine pulling.
Ah, good job!
(Applause) That's really amazing.
(Applause) So we have a little bit of time available, so I'm going to ask Evan to do a really difficult task.
And this one is difficult because it's all about being able to visualize something that doesn't exist in our physical world.
This is "disappear."
So what you want to do -- at least with movement-based actions, we do that all the time, so you can visualize it.
But with "disappear," there's really no analogies -- so Evan, what you want to do here is to imagine the cube slowly fading out, okay.
Same sort of drill. So: one, two, three, go.
Okay. Let's try that.
Oh, my goodness. He's just too good.
Let's try that again.
EG: Losing concentration.
(Laughter) TL: But we can see that it actually works, even though you can only hold it for a little bit of time.
As I said, it's a very difficult process to imagine this.
And the great thing about it is that we've only given the software one instance of how he thinks about "disappear."
As there is a machine learning algorithm in this -- (Applause) Thank you.
Good job. Good job.
(Applause) Thank you, Evan, you're a wonderful, wonderful example of the technology.
So, as you can see, before, there is a leveling system built into this software so that as Evan, or any user, becomes more familiar with the system, they can continue to add more and more detections, so that the system begins to differentiate between different distinct thoughts.
And once you've trained up the detections, these thoughts can be assigned or mapped to any computing platform, application or device.
So I'd like to show you a few examples, because there are many possible applications for this new interface.
In games and virtual worlds, for example, your facial expressions can naturally and intuitively be used to control an avatar or virtual character.
Obviously, you can experience the fantasy of magic and control the world with your mind.
And also, colors, lighting, sound and effects can dynamically respond to your emotional state to heighten the experience that you're having, in real time.
And moving on to some applications developed by developers and researchers around the world, with robots and simple machines, for example -- in this case, flying a toy helicopter simply by thinking "lift" with your mind.
The technology can also be applied to real world applications -- in this example, a smart home.
You know, from the user interface of the control system to opening curtains or closing curtains.
And of course, also to the lighting -- turning them on or off.
And finally, to real life-changing applications, such as being able to control an electric wheelchair.
In this example, facial expressions are mapped to the movement commands.
Man: Now blink right to go right.
Now blink left to turn back left.
Now smile to go straight.
TL: We really -- Thank you.
(Applause) We are really only scratching the surface of what is possible today, and with the community's input, and also with the involvement of developers and researchers from around the world, we hope that you can help us to shape where the technology goes from here. Thank you so much.
To kick the bucket, bite the dust, cash in your chips, check out, depart, expire, launch into eternity ...
These are all euphemisms we use in humor to describe the one life event we are all going to experience: death.
But most of us don't want to acknowledge death, we don't want to plan for it, and we don't want to discuss it with the most important people in our lives.
I grew up in an Australian community where people got old or sick and passed away, and only the adults attended the funeral.
My parents would come home looking sad and drained, but they didn't discuss it with us.
So I was ignorant to death and of the grieving process.
At 15, I got my invitation.
A dear neighbor who was like an aunt to me died suddenly of a heart attack, and I attended my first funeral and did my first reading.
I didn't know the tightness in my chest and the dryness in my mouth was normal.
The celebrant got some of the facts wrong, and it made me really angry.
He talked about how she loved knitting.
Knitting.
(Laughter) He didn't mention that, at 75, she still mowed her own lawn, built an amazing fish pond in her front yard and made her own ginger beer.
I'm pretty sure "keen knitter" isn't what she would have chosen for her eulogy.
(Laughter) I believe if we discuss death as part of day-to-day living, we give ourselves the opportunity to reflect on our core values, share them with our loved ones, and then our survivors can make informed decisions without fear or regret of having failed to honor our legacy.
I am blessed to lead a wonderful, culturally diverse team, and in the last 12 months, we've lost five parents, including my own father, and most recently, a former colleague who died at 41 from bowel cancer.
We started having open and frank conversations about what we were experiencing.
We talked about the practical stuff, the stuff no one prepares you for: dealing with government agencies, hospitals, nursing homes, advanced care directives, funeral directors and extended family members, (Laughter) making decisions about coffins, headstones, headstone wording, headstone font size, all while sleep-deprived.
We also discussed some of the issues triggered by our various cultural backgrounds, and we realized there can be some significant differences in how we honor the passing of a loved one.
A great example of this is "Sorry Business," practiced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
During Sorry Business, family members will take on specific roles and responsibilities, protocols such as limiting the use of photographs, saying the name of the deceased, and holding a smoking ceremony are all a sign of respect and allow for a peaceful transition of the spirit.
These customs can be a complete contrast to those we might practice in Western cultures, where we would honor the memory of a loved one by talking about them and sharing photographs.
So my lesson from this last year is, life would be a lot easier to live if we talked about death now, while we're healthy.
For most of us, we wait until we are too emotional, too ill or too physically exhausted -- and then it's too late.
Isn't it time we started taking ownership of our finale on this earth?
So let's get going.
Do you know what you want when you die?
Do you know how you want to be remembered?
Is location important?
Do you want to be near the ocean or in the ocean?
(Laughter) Do you want a religious service or an informal party, or do you want to go out with a bang, literally, in a firework?
(Laughter) When it comes to death, there's so much to discuss, but I want to focus on two aspects: why talking about and planning your death can help you experience a good death, and then reduce the stress on your loved ones; and how talking about death can help us support those who are grieving.
So let's start with planning.
How many of you have a will?
Put your hand up.
Oh, this is fantastic.
In Australia, 45 percent of adults over the age of 18 do not have a legal will.
You're a little bit above average.
This is a startling statistic given that writing a will can actually be quite simple and inexpensive.
So I started asking my friends and neighbors and was really surprised to learn many of them don't have a will, and some couples don't realize they need individual wills.
The usual explanation was, well, it's all going to go to my partner anyway.
So keep in mind that laws vary from state to state and country to country, but this is what happens in New South Wales if you die without leaving a legal will.
Firstly, a suitable administrator must be appointed by the Supreme Court of New South Wales.
Chances are this is someone who would never have met the deceased.
That person is then responsible for arranging your funeral, collecting assets and distributing them after paying debts and taxes.
And one of those debts will be the bill for their services.
This is not someone who would have known you want the four-foot wooden giraffe in your living room to go to the person who helped you carry it halfway across the world, and yes, that's in my will.
(Laughter) If you die leaving a spouse or a domestic partner, then chances are they will receive your estate, but if you are single, it's far more complicated, as parents, siblings, half-siblings and dependents all come into play.
And did you know that if you make a regular donation to charity, that charity may have grounds to make a claim on your estate?
The most important thing to know is the bigger your estate, the more complicated that will will be, and the more expensive that bill.
So if you don't have a will, I ask you ...
when else in your life have you willingly given money to the government when you didn't have to?
(Laughter) I lost my father in February to a progressive lung disease.
When dad knew his death was imminent, he had three clear wishes.
He wanted to die at home; he wanted to die surrounded by family; and he wanted to die peacefully, not choking or gasping for air.
And I'm pleased to say that my family were able to support dad's wishes, and he achieved his goals, and in that sense, he had a good death.
He had the death he planned for.
Because dad wanted to die at home, we had to have some pretty tough conversations and fill out a lot of paperwork.
The questions on the forms cover everything from resuscitation to organ donation.
Dad said, "Take whatever organs you can use."
This was upsetting to my mum, as my dad's health was deteriorating rapidly, and it was no longer the right time to talk about organ donation.
I believe we need to discuss these issues when we are fit and healthy, so we can take the emotion out of it, and then we can learn not just what is important, but why it's important.
So as part of my journey, I started engaging my family and friends to find out their thoughts on death, and how they wanted to be remembered.
I discovered you can host a "Death Over Dinner," or a "Death Cafe," which is a great, casual way to introduce the topic ...
(Laughter) and gain some wonderful insight.
(Laughter) Did you know that your body has to be legally disposed of, and you can't just be shoved off a cliff or set fire to in the backyard?
(Laughter) In Australia, you have three options.
The two most common are burial and cremation, but you can also donate your body to science.
And I am pleased to report that innovation has touched the world of corpse disposal.
(Laughter) You can now opt for an eco-funeral.
You can be buried at the base of a tree in recycled cardboard or a wicker basket, and for those who love the ocean, there are eco-friendly urns that will dissolve at sea.
Personally, I plan to be cremated, but given that I get seasick, I can think of nothing worse than having my ashes flung into a huge ocean swell.
I've actually bought a plot in the rose garden next to my dad.
I call it my investment property.
(Laughter) But sadly, there's no tax deduction.
(Laughter) So if you plan for your death, then your survivors will know how to experience a healthy bereavement without fear or guilt of having failed to honor your legacy.
As part of my research, I've been to seminars, read books and talked to palliative care nurses.
And I've come to understand as a consequence of not talking about death, we don't know how to be around grief.
And on the flip side, if we talk about death more, we will become more comfortable with the emotions we experience around grief.
I discovered, this year, it's actually a privilege to help someone exit this life, and although my heart is heavy with loss and sadness, it is not heavy with regret.
I knew what dad wanted, and I feel at peace knowing I could support his wishes.
My dad's last 24 hours were in a peaceful coma, and after days of around-the-clock care, we had time to sit, hold his hand, and say goodbye.
He passed away on a Monday morning just before breakfast, and after the doctor came and we waited for the funeral home, I went into the kitchen, and I ate a big bowl of porridge.
When I told some of my friends this, they were really shocked.
"How could you eat at a time like that?"
Well, I was hungry.
(Laughter) You see, grief impacted my sleep and my ability to concentrate, but it never impacted my stomach. I was always hungry.
(Laughter) It's different for all of us, and it's really important that we acknowledge that.
So if we don't talk about our death and the death of loved ones, how can we possibly support a friend, a colleague, a neighbor who is grieving?
How do we support someone who has lost someone suddenly, like an accident or suicide?
We tend to avoid them ...
not because we don't care, because we don't know what to say.
We know as a friend we can't fix it, we can't take away that pain, so we say things to fill that awkward silence, sometimes things we regret saying.
Examples would be: "At least he isn't suffering anymore."
"At least you've got your memories."
"At least you don't have to pay for hospital parking anymore."
(Laughter) Really, we don't need to say anything.
We just need to be.
Be patient, be understanding, and be a listener.
And if you can't be any of those things, then please, be the person who makes the lasagna, the curry or the casserole, because your offerings will be greatly appreciated.
(Laughter) I've been to 10 funerals in the last year, one of which I helped arrange.
They ran the full gamut: a very solemn Greek Orthodox service, four Catholic requiem masses and a garden party where I made a toast while scattering my friend's ashes around her garden with a soup ladle.
(Laughter) I have carried, kissed, written on and toasted coffins with a shot of ouzo.
I have worn all black, all color and a party dress.
Despite the vast differences in sendoff, despite me being at times out of my comfort zone doing something I've never done before, I drew comfort from one thing -- knowing that this is what each person would have wanted.
So what do I want?
Well, I like to be organized, so I have the will, I'm a registered organ donor, and I have my investment property.
All that is left is planning my sendoff, a big party, lots of champagne, color, laughter, and of course, music to remember me by.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So let me just start with my story.
So I tore my knee joint meniscus cartilage playing soccer in college.
Then I went on to tear my ACL, the ligament in my knee, and then developed an arthritic knee.
And I'm sure that many of you in this audience have that same story, and, by the way, I married a woman who has exactly the same story.
So this motivated me to become an orthopedic surgeon and to see if I couldn't focus on solutions for those problems that would keep me playing sports and not limit me.
So with that, let me just show you a quick video to get you in the mood of what we're trying to explain.
Narrator: We are all aware of the risk of cancer, but there's another disease that's destined to affect even more of us: arthritis.
Cancer may kill you, but when you look at the numbers, arthritis ruins more lives.
Assuming you live a long life, there's a 50 percent chance you'll develop arthritis.
And it's not just aging that causes arthritis.
Common injuries can lead to decades of pain, until our joints quite literally grind to a halt.
Desperate for a solution, we've turned to engineering to design artificial components to replace our worn-out body parts, but in the midst of the modern buzz around the promises of a bionic body, shouldn't we stop and ask if there's a better, more natural way?
Let's consider an alternative path.
What if all the replacements our bodies need already exist in nature, or within our own stem cells?
This is the field of biologic replacements, where we replace worn-out parts with new, natural ones.
Kevin Stone: And so, the mission is: how do I treat these things biologically?
And let's talk about both what I did for my wife, and what I've done for hundreds of other patients.
First thing for my wife, and the most common thing I hear from my patients, particularly in the 40- to 80-year-old age group, 70-year-old age group, is they come in and say, "Hey, Doc, isn't there just a shock absorber you can put in my knee?
I'm not ready for joint replacement."
And so for her, I put in a human meniscus allograft donor right into that [knee] joint space.
And [the allograft] replaces [the missing meniscus].
And then for that unstable ligament, we put in a human donor ligament to stabilize the knee.
And then for the damaged arthritis on the surface, we did a stem cell paste graft, which we designed in 1991, to regrow that articular cartilage surface and give it back a smooth surface there.
So here's my wife's bad knee on the left, and her just hiking now four months later in Aspen, and doing well.
And it works, not just for my wife, but certainly for other patients.
The girl on the video, Jen Hudak, just won the Superpipe in Aspen just nine months after having destroyed her knee, as you see in the other image -- and having a paste graft to that knee.
So with all this success, why isn't that good enough, you might ask.
Well the reason is because there's not enough donor cycles.
There's not enough young, healthy people falling off their motorcycle and donating that tissue to us.
And the tissue's very expensive.
And so that's not going to be a solution that's going to get us global with biologic tissue.
But the solution is animal tissue because it's plentiful, it's cheap, you can get it from young, healthy tissues, but the barrier is immunology.
And the specific barrier is a specific epitope called the galactosyl, or gal epitope.
So if we're going to transplant animal tissues to people, we have to figure out a way to get rid of that epitope.
So my story in working with animal tissues starts in 1984.
And I started first with cow Achilles tendon, where we would take the cow Achilles tendon, which is type-I collagen, strip it of its antigens by degrading it with an acid and detergent wash and forming it into a regeneration template.
We would then take that regeneration template and insert it into the missing meniscus cartilage to regrow that in a patient's knee.
We've now done that procedure, and it's been done worldwide in over 4,000 cases, so it's an FDA-approved and worldwide-accepted way to regrow the meniscus.
And that's great when I can degrade the tissue.
But what happens for your ligament when I need an intact ligament?
I can't grind it up in a blender.
So in that case, I have to design -- and we designed with Uri Galili and Tom Turek -- an enzyme wash to wash away, or strip, those galactosyl epitopes with a specific enzyme.
And we call that a "gal stripping" technique.
What we do is humanize the tissue.
It's by gal stripping that tissue we humanize it (Laughter), and then we can put it back into a patient's knee.
And we've done that. Now we've taken pig ligament -- young, healthy, big tissue, put it into 10 patients in an FDA-approved trial -- and then one of our patients went on to have three Canadian Masters Downhill championships -- on his "pig-lig," as he calls it. So we know it can work.
And there's a wide clinical trial of this tissue now pending.
So what about the next step?
What about getting to a total biologic knee replacement, not just the parts?
How are we going to revolutionize artificial joint replacement?
Well here's how we're going to do it.
So what we're going to do is take an articular cartilage from a young, healthy pig, strip it of its antigens, load it with your stem cells, then put it back on to that arthritic surface in your knee, tack it on there, have you heal that surface and then create a new biologic surface for your knee.
So that's our biologic approach right now.
We're going to rebuild your knee with the parts.
We're going to resurface it with a completely new surface.
But we have other advantages from the animal kingdom.
There's a benefit of 400 million years of ambulation.
We can harness those benefits.
We can use thicker, younger, better tissues than you might have injured in your knee, or that you might have when you're 40, 50 or 60.
We can do it as an outpatient procedure.
We can strip that tissue very economically, and so this is how we can get biologic knee replacement to go global.
And so welcome to super biologics.
It's not hardware.
It's not software.
It's bioware.
It's version 2.0 of you.
And so with that, coming to a -- (Laughter) coming to an operating theater near you soon, I believe.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Today, I'm going to take you around the world in 18 minutes.
My base of operations is in the U.S., but let's start at the other end of the map, in Kyoto, Japan, where I was living with a Japanese family while I was doing part of my dissertational research 15 years ago.
I knew even then that I would encounter cultural differences and misunderstandings, but they popped up when I least expected it.
On my first day, I went to a restaurant, and I ordered a cup of green tea with sugar.
After a pause, the waiter said, "One does not put sugar in green tea."
"I know," I said. "I'm aware of this custom.
But I really like my tea sweet."
In response, he gave me an even more courteous version of the same explanation.
"One does not put sugar in green tea."
"I understand," I said, "that the Japanese do not put sugar in their green tea, but I'd like to put some sugar in my green tea."
(Laughter) Surprised by my insistence, the waiter took up the issue with the manager.
Pretty soon, a lengthy discussion ensued, and finally the manager came over to me and said, "I am very sorry. We do not have sugar."
(Laughter) Well, since I couldn't have my tea the way I wanted it, I ordered a cup of coffee, which the waiter brought over promptly.
Resting on the saucer were two packets of sugar.
My failure to procure myself a cup of sweet, green tea was not due to a simple misunderstanding.
This was due to a fundamental difference in our ideas about choice.
From my American perspective, when a paying customer makes a reasonable request based on her preferences, she has every right to have that request met.
The American way, to quote Burger King, is to "have it your way," because, as Starbucks says, "happiness is in your choices."
(Laughter) But from the Japanese perspective, it's their duty to protect those who don't know any better -- (Laughter) in this case, the ignorant gaijin -- from making the wrong choice.
Let's face it: the way I wanted my tea was inappropriate according to cultural standards, and they were doing their best to help me save face.
Americans tend to believe that they've reached some sort of pinnacle in the way they practice choice.
They think that choice, as seen through the American lens best fulfills an innate and universal desire for choice in all humans.
Unfortunately, these beliefs are based on assumptions that don't always hold true in many countries, in many cultures.
At times they don't even hold true at America's own borders.
I'd like to discuss some of these assumptions and the problems associated with them.
As I do so, I hope you'll start thinking about some of your own assumptions and how they were shaped by your backgrounds.
First assumption: if a choice affects you, then you should be the one to make it.
This is the only way to ensure that your preferences and interests will be most fully accounted for.
It is essential for success.
In America, the primary locus of choice is the individual.
People must choose for themselves, sometimes sticking to their guns, regardless of what other people want or recommend.
It's called "being true to yourself."
But do all individuals benefit from taking such an approach to choice?
Mark Lepper and I did a series of studies in which we sought the answer to this very question.
In one study, which we ran in Japantown, San Francisco, we brought seven- to nine-year-old Anglo- and Asian-American children into the laboratory, and we divided them up into three groups.
The first group came in, and they were greeted by Miss Smith, who showed them six big piles of anagram puzzles.
The kids got to choose which pile of anagrams they would like to do, and they even got to choose which marker they would write their answers with.
When the second group of children came in, they were brought to the same room, shown the same anagrams, but this time Miss Smith told them which anagrams to do and which markers to write their answers with.
Now when the third group came in, they were told that their anagrams and their markers had been chosen by their mothers.
(Laughter) In reality, the kids who were told what to do, whether by Miss Smith or their mothers, were actually given the very same activity, which their counterparts in the first group had freely chosen.
With this procedure, we were able to ensure that the kids across the three groups all did the same activity, making it easier for us to compare performance.
Such small differences in the way we administered the activity yielded striking differences in how well they performed.
Anglo-Americans, they did two and a half times more anagrams when they got to choose them, as compared to when it was chosen for them by Miss Smith or their mothers.
It didn't matter who did the choosing, if the task was dictated by another, their performance suffered.
In fact, some of the kids were visibly embarrassed when they were told that their mothers had been consulted.
(Laughter) One girl named Mary said, "You asked my mother?"
(Laughter) In contrast, Asian-American children performed best when they believed their mothers had made the choice, second best when they chose for themselves, and least well when it had been chosen by Miss Smith.
A girl named Natsumi even approached Miss Smith as she was leaving the room and tugged on her skirt and asked, "Could you please tell my mommy I did it just like she said?"
The first-generation children were strongly influenced by their immigrant parents' approach to choice.
For them, choice was not just a way of defining and asserting their individuality, but a way to create community and harmony by deferring to the choices of people whom they trusted and respected.
If they had a concept of being true to one's self, then that self, most likely, [was] composed, not of an individual, but of a collective.
Success was just as much about pleasing key figures as it was about satisfying one's own preferences.
Or, you could say that the individual's preferences were shaped by the preferences of specific others.
The assumption then that we do best when the individual self chooses only holds when that self is clearly divided from others.
When, in contrast, two or more individuals see their choices and their outcomes as intimately connected, then they may amplify one another's success by turning choosing into a collective act.
To insist that they choose independently might actually compromise both their performance and their relationships.
Yet that is exactly what the American paradigm demands.
It leaves little room for interdependence or an acknowledgment of individual fallibility.
It requires that everyone treat choice as a private and self-defining act.
People that have grown up in such a paradigm might find it motivating, but it is a mistake to assume that everyone thrives under the pressure of choosing alone.
The second assumption which informs the American view of choice goes something like this.
The more choices you have, the more likely you are to make the best choice.
So bring it on, Walmart, with 100,000 different products, and Amazon, with 27 million books and Match.com with -- what is it? -- 15 million date possibilities now.
You will surely find the perfect match.
Let's test this assumption by heading over to Eastern Europe.
Here, I interviewed people who were residents of formerly communist countries, who had all faced the challenge of transitioning to a more democratic and capitalistic society.
One of the most interesting revelations came not from an answer to a question, but from a simple gesture of hospitality.
When the participants arrived for their interview, I offered them a set of drinks: Coke, Diet Coke, Sprite -- seven, to be exact.
During the very first session, which was run in Russia, one of the participants made a comment that really caught me off guard.
"Oh, but it doesn't matter.
It's all just soda. That's just one choice."
(Murmuring) I was so struck by this comment that from then on, I started to offer all the participants those seven sodas, and I asked them, "How many choices are these?"
Again and again, they perceived these seven different sodas, not as seven choices, but as one choice: soda or no soda.
When I put out juice and water in addition to these seven sodas, now they perceived it as only three choices -- juice, water and soda.
Compare this to the die-hard devotion of many Americans, not just to a particular flavor of soda, but to a particular brand.
You know, research shows repeatedly that we can't actually tell the difference between Coke and Pepsi.
Of course, you and I know that Coke is the better choice.
(Laughter) For modern Americans who are exposed to more options and more ads associated with options than anyone else in the world, choice is just as much about who they are as it is about what the product is.
Combine this with the assumption that more choices are always better, and you have a group of people for whom every little difference matters and so every choice matters.
But for Eastern Europeans, the sudden availability of all these consumer products on the marketplace was a deluge.
They were flooded with choice before they could protest that they didn't know how to swim.
When asked, "What words and images do you associate with choice?"
Grzegorz from Warsaw said, "Ah, for me it is fear.
There are some dilemmas you see.
I am used to no choice."
Bohdan from Kiev said, in response to how he felt about the new consumer marketplace, "It is too much.
We do not need everything that is there."
A sociologist from the Warsaw Survey Agency explained, "The older generation jumped from nothing to choice all around them.
They were never given a chance to learn how to react."
And Tomasz, a young Polish man said, "I don't need twenty kinds of chewing gum.
I don't mean to say that I want no choice, but many of these choices are quite artificial."
In reality, many choices are between things that are not that much different.
The value of choice depends on our ability to perceive differences between the options.
Americans train their whole lives to play "spot the difference."
They practice this from such an early age that they've come to believe that everyone must be born with this ability.
In fact, though all humans share a basic need and desire for choice, we don't all see choice in the same places or to the same extent.
When someone can't see how one choice is unlike another, or when there are too many choices to compare and contrast, the process of choosing can be confusing and frustrating.
Instead of making better choices, we become overwhelmed by choice, sometimes even afraid of it.
Choice no longer offers opportunities, but imposes constraints.
It's not a marker of liberation, but of suffocation by meaningless minutiae.
In other words, choice can develop into the very opposite of everything it represents in America when it is thrust upon those who are insufficiently prepared for it.
But it is not only other people in other places that are feeling the pressure of ever-increasing choice.
Americans themselves are discovering that unlimited choice seems more attractive in theory than in practice.
We all have physical, mental and emotional (Laughter) limitations that make it impossible for us to process every single choice we encounter, even in the grocery store, let alone over the course of our entire lives.
A number of my studies have shown that when you give people 10 or more options when they're making a choice, they make poorer decisions, whether it be health care, investment, other critical areas.
Yet still, many of us believe that we should make all our own choices and seek out even more of them.
This brings me to the third, and perhaps most problematic, assumption: "You must never say no to choice."
To examine this, let's go back to the U.S.
and then hop across the pond to France.
Right outside Chicago, a young couple, Susan and Daniel Mitchell, were about to have their first baby.
They'd already picked out a name for her, Barbara, after her grandmother.
One night, when Susan was seven months pregnant, she started to experience contractions and was rushed to the emergency room.
The baby was delivered through a C-section, but Barbara suffered cerebral anoxia, a loss of oxygen to the brain.
Unable to breathe on her own, she was put on a ventilator.
Two days later, the doctors gave the Mitchells a choice: They could either remove Barbara off the life support, in which case she would die within a matter of hours, or they could keep her on life support, in which case she might still die within a matter of days.
If she survived, she would remain in a permanent vegetative state, never able to walk, talk or interact with others.
What do they do?
What do any parent do?
In a study I conducted with Simona Botti and Kristina Orfali, American and French parents were interviewed.
They had all suffered the same tragedy.
In all cases, the life support was removed, and the infants had died.
But there was a big difference.
In France, the doctors decided whether and when the life support would be removed, while in the United States, the final decision rested with the parents.
We wondered: does this have an effect on how the parents cope with the loss of their loved one?
We found that it did.
Even up to a year later, American parents were more likely to express negative emotions, as compared to their French counterparts.
French parents were more likely to say things like, "Noah was here for so little time, but he taught us so much.
He gave us a new perspective on life."
American parents were more likely to say things like, "What if? What if?"
Another parent complained, "I feel as if they purposefully tortured me.
How did they get me to do that?"
And another parent said, "I feel as if I've played a role in an execution."
But when the American parents were asked if they would rather have had the doctors make the decision, they all said, "No."
They could not imagine turning that choice over to another, even though having made that choice made them feel trapped, guilty, angry.
In a number of cases they were even clinically depressed.
These parents could not contemplate giving up the choice, because to do so would have gone contrary to everything they had been taught and everything they had come to believe about the power and purpose of choice.
In her essay, "The White Album," Joan Didion writes, "We tell ourselves stories in order to live.
We interpret what we see, select the most workable of the multiple choices.
We live entirely by the imposition of a narrative line upon disparate images, by the idea with which we have learned to freeze the shifting phantasmagoria, which is our actual experience."
The story Americans tell, the story upon which the American dream depends, is the story of limitless choice.
This narrative promises so much: freedom, happiness, success.
It lays the world at your feet and says, "You can have anything, everything."
It's a great story, and it's understandable why they would be reluctant to revise it.
But when you take a close look, you start to see the holes, and you start to see that the story can be told in many other ways.
Americans have so often tried to disseminate their ideas of choice, believing that they will be, or ought to be, welcomed with open hearts and minds.
But the history books and the daily news tell us it doesn't always work out that way.
The phantasmagoria, the actual experience that we try to understand and organize through narrative, varies from place to place.
No single narrative serves the needs of everyone everywhere.
Moreover, Americans themselves could benefit from incorporating new perspectives into their own narrative, which has been driving their choices for so long.
Robert Frost once said that, "It is poetry that is lost in translation."
This suggests that whatever is beautiful and moving, whatever gives us a new way to see, cannot be communicated to those who speak a different language.
But Joseph Brodsky said that, "It is poetry that is gained in translation," suggesting that translation can be a creative, transformative act.
When it comes to choice, we have far more to gain than to lose by engaging in the many translations of the narratives.
Instead of replacing one story with another, we can learn from and revel in the many versions that exist and the many that have yet to be written.
No matter where we're from and what your narrative is, we all have a responsibility to open ourselves up to a wider array of what choice can do, and what it can represent.
And this does not lead to a paralyzing moral relativism.
Rather, it teaches us when and how to act.
It brings us that much closer to realizing the full potential of choice, to inspiring the hope and achieving the freedom that choice promises but doesn't always deliver.
If we learn to speak to one another, albeit through translation, then we can begin to see choice in all its strangeness, complexity and compelling beauty.
Thank you.
(Applause) Bruno Giussani: Thank you.
Sheena, there is a detail about your biography that we have not written in the program book.
But by now it's evident to everyone in this room. You're blind.
And I guess one of the questions on everybody's mind is: How does that influence your study of choosing because that's an activity that for most people is associated with visual inputs like aesthetics and color and so on?
Sheena Iyengar: Well, it's funny that you should ask that because one of the things that's interesting about being blind is you actually get a different vantage point when you observe the way sighted people make choices.
And as you just mentioned, there's lots of choices out there that are very visual these days.
Yeah, I -- as you would expect -- get pretty frustrated by choices like what nail polish to put on because I have to rely on what other people suggest.
And I can't decide.
And so one time I was in a beauty salon, and I was trying to decide between two very light shades of pink.
And one was called "Ballet Slippers."
And the other one was called "Adorable."
(Laughter) And so I asked these two ladies, and the one lady told me, "Well, you should definitely wear 'Ballet Slippers.'" "Well, what does it look like?"
"Well, it's a very elegant shade of pink."
"Okay, great."
The other lady tells me to wear "Adorable."
"What does it look like?"
"It's a glamorous shade of pink."
And so I asked them, "Well, how do I tell them apart?
What's different about them?"
And they said, "Well, one is elegant, the other one's glamorous."
Okay, we got that.
And the only thing they had consensus on: well, if I could see them, I would clearly be able to tell them apart.
(Laughter) And what I wondered was whether they were being affected by the name or the content of the color, so I decided to do a little experiment.
So I brought these two bottles of nail polish into the laboratory, and I stripped the labels off.
And I brought women into the laboratory, and I asked them, "Which one would you pick?"
50 percent of the women accused me of playing a trick, of putting the same color nail polish in both those bottles.
(Laughter) (Applause) At which point you start to wonder who the trick's really played on.
Now, of the women that could tell them apart, when the labels were off, they picked "Adorable," and when the labels were on, they picked "Ballet Slippers."
So as far as I can tell, a rose by any other name probably does look different and maybe even smells different.
BG: Thank you. Sheena Iyengar. Thank you Sheena.
(Applause)
I am a marine toxicologist, and I've been very, very concerned about the Gulf, particularly about the massive applications of the toxic dispersants, the Corexits.
I've been working on ocean pollution for quite a long time -- the impacts on marine life and particularly the impacts on marine mammals.
As it turns out, marine mammals are at the top of this food chain that we're pouring millions of tons of toxic substances into every year.
And they are showing the signs of this.
I'm sorry to have a sad slide like this, but not everything is all that happy, especially in my work.
They are loaded with toxic chemicals in their body, hundreds of compounds, all kinds of compounds -- it's staggering.
And they're dying off rather regularly, tens of thousands around the world.
It's predicted they may go extinct -- about a third of them -- within about 30 years.
So my project is along the Northwest Atlantic.
It's called Seals as Sentinels.
We're tracking pollution at the top of the food web, in marine mammals and fish.
It's a region-wide, eco-toxicological investigation.
We're looking at a lot of compounds, but recently been quite interested in the flame retardants, the brominated flame retardants that are in many, many things that we use in our everyday life, from the cushions in the chairs we're all sitting on to the plastic casings of our computers, our television sets and so on.
So we are tracking how do these things get from the products into the ocean, which is the final sink for them.
And there's quite a complicated pathway for that because, as these products age, they get concentrated in dust, and then they also get thrown out, so they go to the landfills.
They wind up in waste water treatment plants.
As you all know, we throw out billions of computers and TVs every year.
And those go to e-waste dumps.
And all that gets into surface waters, eventually reaching the ocean, the final sink.
So, in our study, we did find quite high levels, as we expected, of these flame retardants in the harbor seals' bodies.
And we reported this.
It led to a ban of this neuro-toxic flame retardant called Deca in Maine, where I am based, and also then a phase-out, U.S.-wide, at the end of last year.
But we said, well, on the bright side, our harbor seals at least will not be bursting into flame anytime soon.
So then I got really curious, myself, as a toxicologist, and I donated some blood to my lab and said, "Okay, let's do it."
Well, we detected 113 different compounds in my blood.
And I must say, if any of you would have this done, you'd probably find a similar profile, or cocktail, as they call it.
But I was the recipient of a lot of flame retardant material for some reason.
And just to point out the levels -- Americans have 10 to 40 times higher levels of these compounds in our bodies than the Europeans.
Why? Because we are flame-retarding everything, and we have weak regulations for toxic chemicals.
But lo and behold, I'm one of the high-end individuals.
Lucky me.
But then I thought, well, in case of a fire, I might be the last one to ignite.
(Laughter) So anyway, here's the problem -- and it is a problem that we're looking at in the Gulf today -- we're not regulating chemicals in this country properly.
We're hardly regulating them at all.
And we're letting industry run the show.
And Jackie Savitz spoke this morning about Big Oil and the propaganda and how we're all brainwashed with their, you know, lies and so forth.
Well, Big Chemical is what we're dealing with here.
And they're allowed to keep trade secrets, so they don't even give the ingredients out.
Plus they don't give health and safety data, so, consequently, they cannot be regulated before they go to market.
So it's a case of innocent until proven guilty.
The burden of proof is not on the producer.
So I then was invited to go to the Gulf in May.
I went down there on a preliminary investigation to look into dispersants and how they're going into the water column and so forth.
And I was told that I was the only toxicologist to date who was dumb enough to get into the water, but I did.
And we dove in the slick without even HazMat gear.
And I did get sick.
I got a ferocious sore throat two days later.
I felt like my throat was on fire.
But it did pass.
And what I did see in the water as we went down, what really shocked me -- and it's haunted me ever since -- because I could see the droplets of oil dispersing.
And as you go down, they're catching all kinds of plankton, bumping into, you know, little wisps of life that are the food for the planktivores, the herring kind of fish.
And you could just see the web of death as you go down in the water column.
Well, you know, we got into this in the beginning as a trade-off, they say, between the wetlands versus the ocean depth.
And I didn't agree with that decision at the time; I still don't.
The decision was to protect the marshes.
When the oil gets into the marshes, you can't get it out.
And as you know, there's been a very weak response, up until recently, to actually collect the oil.
It's gotten much more aggressive.
This is an Exxon slide showing what happens, the scenario and the trade-off.
So this shows oil on the surface.
You can see it getting up into the mangrove, but it is not harming the corals or the sea grass, right.
So here we have the other scenario.
If you disperse, the sea grass and the corals are getting hit pretty hard, but you're saving the mangrove.
So this, to me, is like going to the eye doctor, okay?
Is it better with one or two?
(Laughter) The problem is that we have released so darn much of this stuff, we're climbing up to two million gallons very quickly.
And then there's the problem of the plumes.
What plumes?
It turns out there are plumes.
Independent researchers found that.
And then there's the looming, messy problem of human health, reported human health effects.
And actually, one of our federal officials said that it was probably heat stress. So ...
Having been in that water just for the short time I was there, I can tell you, it is not heat stress.
There are volumes of volatile petroleum fumes coming off that water, plus the Corexit, which has solvent in it.
So it is not at all rational.
So what do we have? The BP show is going on.
Our officials complained about Corexit, which is the most toxic line of dispersants.
But heck, they're still using it, and they used the most toxic one, the 9527, until they ran out of supplies.
Now they're on 9500.
9527 had 2-butoxyethanol in it that causes internal bleeding.
We know that from the Exxon Valdez spill, by the way.
So what we're doing, we're putting compounds with petroleum solvents onto a petroleum spill.
Does this make sense?
So this is the way it works.
And I want to show you this cute little thing that happens here.
It's a micelle.
Micelles form around the oil.
And what happens first is the solvents break into the oil, the lipid membrane, they let the surfactants in there.
The surfactants -- which are like things we use on fast food wrappers -- they grab around the droplets of oil, and they make little, tiny droplets with nice, little surfactant edges to them.
The thing to remember about the micelles -- these little floating globules of toxin -- is they are there to deliver.
They're like the FedEx guys.
And if you're a fish, and you haven't gotten your glob in the morning, you're going to get it in the afternoon, because they've got your number.
So from a toxicology perspective, this is really awful because Corexit and the dispersed oil are much more toxic together than either alone.
And usually the exposure is a combined exposure.
The dispersants -- as I was saying -- their job is to break down the lipid membrane.
The solvents in them do that very efficiently.
So they break down lipid membranes in our body, starting with cells of the skin, the cells of organs.
So it actually hastens oil getting into the body easily and readily.
Oil contains hundreds of hydrocarbon compounds and other compounds that are toxic to every organ in the body.
And so with the dispersants combined, you have this very synergistic combined toxicity.
Corexit also contains petroleum solvents and many other toxic compounds.
And I'm part of a chat group, which is a national group of toxicologists and chemists that are, you know, basically turning cartwheels trying to figure out what's in this stuff, and what is it doing and what are the interactions of these chemicals, most of which we don't know, and what are their byproducts, which are usually more toxic than the parent compound.
So we did find that Corexit 9500 contains heavy metals, arsenic and chromium -- arsenic at high enough levels to have cancer-causing effects.
So this is what we have to look at, these, you know, ridiculous safety data sheets, which have nothing on them much.
And now they were forced to release the ultimate list of everything that's in Corexit.
And guess what, tons of stuff is missing.
Derivatives, derivatives, these are whole big groups of many, many compounds, these sorbitans.
And then you get down to the petroleum distillates, which are the solvents, hundreds of them.
They are not identified. And why?
Trade secrets again.
BP's running the show, and the Nalco company, this is all they have to do.
So far these ingredients have not been released, and toxicologists are actually going nuts because we cannot predict with certainty what the interactions and toxic results are going to be.
But we do have quite a lot at risk down there, as we all know, the 33 wildlife refuges, so much wildlife and fish and diversity.
So we know from previous spills.
And then part of this is just part of my bad dreams.
And I appreciate being able to vent some of my anguish upon you.
What we do know is that the corals are going to get hit hard.
And this is a study that was done on the Australian coast, the coast of Tasmania.
Corals are, you know, the home to about a quarter of all marine species.
And with the Corexit and the oil, there's zero percent fertilization.
With oil alone, there's 98 percent fertilization.
So they're a very sensitive species to this combo.
Here's another group.
I could see myself easily in the water column.
The plankton and the plankton eaters, you know, these are the little herring fish that go through the water column with their mouths open, feeding indiscriminately and just lapping up this brown pudding of toxic stuff.
And we do know from other studies that this is a highly toxic mixture.
See the oil and Corexit is causing death at a much, much lower dose than oil alone.
That's probably as far as what we do know about toxic effects.
But my bad dreams go like this.
The piscivorous fish, the cobia, grouper, amberjacks, those big fish, also the tuna and sharks, are going to hit by this.
And the gills are quite sensitive.
The respiratory system is very sensitive.
Think about it with the Corexit hitting the membranes, and it will clog up the gills, and then these animals are going to be getting something like what you call chemical pneumonia, trying to aspirate the compounds.
It also will cause internal bleeding upon ingestion.
I'm very worried about the air-breathing mammals because I study them, but also, the way their going to be exposed is every time they come to the surface to take a breath, they're going to inhale these volatile fumes.
And what does happen with that eventually is pneumonia sets in and liver, kidney, brain damage.
The Corexit is transporting the oil into every membrane and every system of the body.
And you're having a lot of different unpleasant effects, but burns to the eyes and mouth, skin ulcers, lesions.
And I think, personally, that we have not begun to see the impacts of this spill on the wildlife of the Gulf.
We started hypothesizing: what do we know?
what do with think would be a trophic cascade?
which means that somebody gets wiped out, and then everything above that's eating those guys will crash.
So our thought was -- this is a simple thinking process, but ...
obviously the plankton, the planktivores, and that's about as far as we got.
And then it turns out we're not very good at figuring this stuff out.
This is what the Exxon Valdez scientists thought would happen, this trophic cascade where you lose the kelp and the herring and other fishes and going up.
They thought that eventually the killer whale would be at the top of this cascade.
And then here's what really happened, much more complicated, much more specific.
Actually the kelp and the barnacles that attach to the rock were decimated by the combination of Corexit and the oil.
They were replaced by invasive species, which had less holding power to the rock.
Storms came along.
They ripped out of the rock.
And this was the entire food web for the sea ducks.
And as you know, we lost about 300,000 sea ducks from the Exxon Valdez spill, and they haven't come back.
So we are launching an independent study.
And by independent, I do not mean alone; I mean independent in the sense of not tied to the kind of crime-scene secrecy that's going on in the Gulf now.
But we are actually going to be assessing toxic impacts, but we need lots and lots of partners to do this intelligently.
We have some of the partners lined up.
And Dave Gallo signed on.
Sylvia's in here.
And we hope that some of you will help us.
My question to you is: why shouldn't we know?
Don't we have the right to know?
Surely we have the right to learn what loss we are going through in the Gulf.
And my wish would be -- for the gulf prize -- would be that we have the truth.
Whatever it is, please let us have the truth.
And to get there, we need to do the assessment.
So I appreciate being here. Thank you.
(Applause)
For a moment, what I need to do is project something on the screen of your imagination.
We're in 17th century Japan on the west coast, and a little, wizened monk is hurrying along, near midnight, to the crest of a small hill.
He arrives on the small hill, dripping with water.
He stands there, and he looks across at the island, Sado.
And he scans across the ocean, and he looks at the sky.
Then he says to himself, very quietly, "[Turbulent the sea,] [Stretching across to Sado] [The Milky Way]."
Basho was a brilliant man.
He said more with less than any human that I have ever read or talked to.
Basho, in 17 syllables, juxtaposed a turbulent ocean driven by a storm now past, and captured the almost impossible beauty of our home galaxy with millions of stars, probably hundreds and hundreds of -- who knows how many -- planets, maybe even an ocean that we will probably call Sylvia in time.
As he was nearing his death, his disciples and followers kept asking him, "What's the secret?
How can you make haiku poems so beautiful so easily?"
And toward the end, he said, "If you would know the pine tree, go to the pine tree."
That was it.
(Laughter) Sylvia has said we must use every capacity we have in order to know the oceans.
If we would know the oceans, we must go to the oceans.
And what I'd like to talk to you today about, a little bit, is really transforming the relationship, or the interplay, between humans and oceans with a new capability that is not at all routine yet.
I hope it will be.
There are a few key points.
One of them is the oceans are central to the quality of life on earth.
Another is that there are bold, new ways of studying oceans that we have not used well yet.
And the last is that these bold, new ways that we are exploring as a community will transform the way we look at our planet, our oceans, and eventually how we manage probably the entire planet, for what it's worth.
So what scientists do when they begin is to start with the system.
They define what the system is.
The system isn't Chesapeake Bay.
It's not the Kuril arc. It's not even the entire Pacific.
It's the whole planet, the entire planet, continents and oceans together.
That's the system.
And basically, our challenge is to optimize the benefits and mitigate the risks of living on a planet that's driven by only two processes, two sources of energy, one of which is solar, that drives the winds, the waves, the clouds, the storms and photosynthesis.
The second one is internal energy.
And these two war against one another almost continuously.
Mountain ranges, plate tectonics, moves the continents around, forms ore deposits.
Volcanoes erupt.
That's the planet that we live on.
It's immensely complex.
Now I don't expect all of you to see all the details here, but what I want you to see is this is about 10 percent of the processes that operate within the oceans almost continuously, and have for the last 4 billion years.
This is a system that's been around a very long time.
And these have all co-evolved.
What do I mean by that?
They interact with one another constantly.
All of them interact with one another.
So the complexity of this system that we're looking at, the one driven by the sun -- upper portion, mostly -- and the lower portion is partly driven by the input from heat below and by other processes.
This is very, very important because this is the system, this is the crucible, out of which life on the planet came, and it's now time for us to understand it.
We must understand it.
That's one of the themes that Sylvia reminds us about: understand this ocean of ours, this basic life support system, the dominant life support system on the planet.
Look at this complexity here.
This is only one variable.
If you can see the complexity, you can see how tiny, little eddies and large eddies and the motion -- this is just sea surface temperature, but it's immensely complicated.
Now a layer in, the other two or three hundred processes that are all interacting, partly as a function of temperature, partly as a function of all the other factors, and you've got a really complicated system.
That's our challenge, is to understand, understand this system in new and phenomenal ways.
And there's an urgency to this.
Part of the urgency comes from the fact that, of order, a billion people on the planet currently are undernourished or starving.
And part of the issue is for Cody -- who's here, 16 years old -- and I have permission to relay this number.
When he, 40 years from now, is the age of Nancy Brown, there are going to be another two and a half billion people on the planet.
We can't solve all the problems by looking only at the oceans, but if we don't understand the fundamental life support system of this planet much more thoroughly than we do now, then the stresses that we will face, and that Cody will face, and even Nancy, who's going to live till she's 98, will have really problems coping.
All right, let's talk about another perspective on the importance of the oceans.
Look at this diagram, which is showing warm waters in red, cool waters in blue, and on the continents, what you're seeing in bright green, is the growth of vegetation, and in olive green, the dieback of vegetation.
And in the lower left hand corner there's a clock ticking away from 1982 to 1998 and then cycling again.
What you'll see is that the rhythms of growth, of vegetation -- a subset of which is food on the continents -- is directly tied to the rhythms of the sea surface temperatures.
The oceans control, or at least significantly influence, correlate with, the growth patterns and the drought patterns and the rain patterns on the continents.
So people in Kansas, in a wheat field in Kansas, need to understand that the oceans are central to them as well.
Another complexity: this is the age of the oceans.
I'm going to layer in on top of this the tectonic plates.
The age of the ocean, the tectonic plates, gives rise to a totally new phenomenon that we have heard about in this conference.
And I share with you some very high-definition video that we collected in real time.
Seconds after this video was taken, people in Beijing, people in Sydney, people in Amsterdam, people in Washington D.C. were watching this.
Now you've heard of hydrothermal vents, but the other discovery is that deep below the sea floor, there is vast reservoir of microbial activity, which we have only just discovered and we have almost no way to study.
Some people have estimated that the biomass tied up in these microbes living in the pours and the cracks of the sea floor and below rival the total amount of living biomass at the surface of the planet.
It's an astonishing insight, and we have only found out about this recently.
This is very, very exciting.
It may be the next rainforest, in terms of pharmaceuticals.
We know little or nothing about it.
Well, Marcel Proust has this wonderful saying that, "The real voyage of discovery consists not so much in seeking new territory, but possibly in having new sets of eyes," new ways of seeing things, a new mindset.
And many of you remember the early stages of oceanography, when we had to use what we had at our fingertips.
And it wasn't easy. It wasn't easy in those days.
Some of you remember this, I'm sure.
And now, we have an entire suite of tools that are really pretty powerful -- ships, satellites, moorings.
But they don't quite cut it. They don't quite give us what we need.
And the program that I wanted to talk to you about just a little bit here, was funded, and it involves autonomous vehicles like the one running across the base of this image.
Modeling: on the right hand side, there's a very complex computational model.
On the left hand side, there's a new type of mooring, which I'll show you in just a second.
And on the basis of several points, the oceans are complex, and they're central to the life on earth.
They are changing rapidly, but not predictably.
And the models that we need to predict the future do not have enough data to refine them.
The computational power is amazing.
But without data, those models will never ever be predicted.
And that's what we really need.
For a variety of reasons they're dangerous, but we feel that OOI, this Ocean Observatory Initiative, which the National Science Foundation has begun to fund, has the potential to really transform things.
And the goal of the program is to launch an era of scientific discovery and understanding across and within the ocean basins, utilizing widely accessible, interactive telepresence.
It's a new world.
We will be present throughout the volume of the ocean, at will, communicating in real time.
And this is what the system involves, a number of sites in the southern hemisphere, shown in those circles.
And in the northern hemisphere there are four sites.
I won't talk a lot about most of them right here, but the one on the west coast, that's in the box, is called the regional scale nodes.
It was once called Neptune.
And let me show you what's behind it.
Fiber: next-generation way of communicating.
You can see the copper tips on these things.
You can transmit power, but the bandwidth is in those tiny, little threads smaller than the hair on your head in diameter.
And this particular set here can transmit something of the order of three to five terabits per second.
This is phenomenal bandwidth.
And this is what the planet looks like.
We are already laced up as if we're in a fiber optic corset, if you like.
This is what it looks like.
And the cables go really continent to continent.
It's a very powerful system, and most of our communications consist of it.
So this is the system that I'm talking about, off the west coast. It's coincident with the tectonic plate, the Juan de Fuca tectonic plate.
And it's going to deliver abundant power and unprecedented bandwidth across this entire volume -- in the overlying ocean, on the sea floor and below the sea floor.
Bandwidth and power and a wide variety of processes that will be operating.
This is what one of those primary nodes looks like, and it's like a sub station with power and bandwidth that can spread out over an area the size of Seattle.
And the kind of science that can be done will be determined by a variety of scientists who want to be involved and can bring the instrumentation to the table.
They will bring it and link it in.
It'll be, in a sense, like having time on a telescope, except you'll have your own port.
Climate change, ocean acidification, dissolved oxygen, carbon cycle, coastal upwelling, fishing dynamics -- the full spectrum of earth science and ocean science simultaneously in the same volume.
So anyone coming along later simply accesses the database and can draw down the information they need about anything that has taken place.
And this is just the first of these.
In conjunction with our Canadian colleagues, we've set this up.
Now I want to take you into the caldera.
On the left hand side there is a large volcano called Axial Seamount.
And we're going to go down into the Axial Seamount using animation.
Here's what this system is going to look like that we are funded to build at this point.
Very powerful.
That's an elevator that's constantly moving up and down, but it can be controlled by the folks on land who are responsible for it.
Or they can transfer control to someone in India or China who can take over for a while, because it's all going to be directly connected through the Internet.
There will be massive amounts of data flowing ashore, all available to anyone who has any interest in using it.
This is going to be much more powerful than having a single ship in a single location, then move to a new location.
We're flying across the caldera floor.
There is a number of robotic systems.
There's cameras that can be turned on and off at your will, if those are your experiments.
The kinds of systems that will be down there, the kinds of instruments that will be on the sea floor, consist of -- if you can read them there -- there's cameras, there's pressure sensors, fluorometers, there's seismometers.
It's a full spectrum of tools.
Now, that mound right there actually looks like this.
This is what it actually looks like.
And this is the kind of activity that we can see with high-definition video, because the bandwidth of these cables is so huge that we could have five to 10 stereo HD systems running continuously and, again, directed through robotic techniques from land.
Very, very powerful.
And these are the things that we're funded to do today.
So what can we actually do tomorrow?
We're about to ride the wave of technological opportunity.
There are emerging technologies throughout the field around oceanography, which we will incorporate into oceanography, and through that convergence, we will transform oceanography into something even more magical.
Robotics systems are just incredible these days, absolutely incredible.
And we will be bringing robotics of all sorts into the ocean.
Nanotechnology: this is a small generator.
It's smaller than a postage stamp, and it can generate power just by being attached to your shirt as you move.
Just as you move, it generates power.
There are many kinds of things that can be used in the ocean, continuously.
Imaging: Many of you know a good deal more about this type of thing than I, but stereo imaging at four times the definition that we have in HD will be routine within five years.
And this is the magic one.
As a result of the human genome process, we are in a situation where events that take place in the ocean -- like an erupting volcano, or something of that sort -- can actually be sampled.
We pump the fluid through one of these systems, and we press the button, and it's analyzed for the genomic character.
And that's transmitted back to land immediately.
So in the volume of the ocean, we will know, not just the physics and the chemistry, but the base of the food chain will be transparent to us with data on a continuous basis.
Grid computing: the power of grid computers is going to be just amazing here.
We will soon be using grid computing to do pretty much everything, like adjust the data and everything that goes with the data.
The power generation will come from the ocean itself.
And the next generation fiber will be simply magic.
It's far beyond what we currently have.
So the presence of the power and the bandwidth in the environment will allow all of these new technologies to converge in a manner that is just unprecedented.
So within five to seven years, I see us having a capacity to be completely present throughout the ocean and have all of that connected to the Internet, so we can reach many, many folks.
Delivering the power and the bandwidth into the ocean will dramatically accelerate adaptation.
Here's an example.
When earthquakes take place, massive amounts of these new microbes we've never seen before come out of the sea floor.
We have a way of addressing that, a new way of addressing that.
We've determined from the earthquake activity that you're seeing here that the top of that volcano is erupting, so we deploy the troops.
What are the troops? The troops are the autonomous vehicles, of course.
And they fly into the erupting volcano.
They sample the fluids coming out of the sea floor during an eruption, which have the microbes that have never been to the surface of the planet before.
They eject it to the surface where it floats, and it is picked up by an autonomous airplane, and it's brought back to the laboratory within 24 hours of the eruption.
This is doable. All the pieces are there.
A laboratory: many of you heard what happened on 9/7.
Some doctors in New York City removed the gallbladder of a woman in France.
We could do work on the sea floor that would be stunning, and it would be on live TV, if we have interesting things to show.
So we can bring an entirely new telepresence to the world, throughout the ocean.
This -- I've shown you sea floor -- but so the goal here is real time interaction with the oceans from anywhere on earth.
It's going to be amazing.
And as I go here, I just want to show you what we can bring into classrooms, and indeed, what we can bring into your pocket.
Many of you don't think of this yet, but the ocean will be in your pocket.
It won't be long. It won't be long.
So let me leave you then with a few words from another poet, if you'll forgive me.
In 1943, T.S. Eliot wrote the "Four Quartets."
He won the Nobel Prize for literature in 1948.
In "Little Gidding" he says -- speaking I think for the human race, but certainly for the TED Conference and Sylvia -- "We shall not cease from exploration, and the end of all our exploring will be to arrive where we started and know the place for the first time, arrive through the unknown remembered gate where the last of earth left to discover is that which was the beginning.
At the source of the longest river the voice of a hidden waterfall not known because not looked for, but heard, half heard in the stillness beneath the waves of the sea."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to start my talk today with two observations about the human species.
The first observation is something that you might think is quite obvious, and that's that our species, Homo sapiens, is actually really, really smart -- like, ridiculously smart -- like you're all doing things that no other species on the planet does right now.
And this is, of course, not the first time you've probably recognized this.
Of course, in addition to being smart, we're also an extremely vain species.
So we like pointing out the fact that we're smart.
You know, so I could turn to pretty much any sage from Shakespeare to Stephen Colbert to point out things like the fact that we're noble in reason and infinite in faculties and just kind of awesome-er than anything else on the planet when it comes to all things cerebral.
But of course, there's a second observation about the human species that I want to focus on a little bit more, and that's the fact that even though we're actually really smart, sometimes uniquely smart, we can also be incredibly, incredibly dumb when it comes to some aspects of our decision making.
Now I'm seeing lots of smirks out there.
Don't worry, I'm not going to call anyone in particular out on any aspects of your own mistakes.
But of course, just in the last two years we see these unprecedented examples of human ineptitude.
And we've watched as the tools we uniquely make to pull the resources out of our environment kind of just blow up in our face.
We've watched the financial markets that we uniquely create -- these markets that were supposed to be foolproof -- we've watched them kind of collapse before our eyes.
But both of these two embarrassing examples, I think, don't highlight what I think is most embarrassing about the mistakes that humans make, which is that we'd like to think that the mistakes we make are really just the result of a couple bad apples or a couple really sort of FAIL Blog-worthy decisions.
But it turns out, what social scientists are actually learning is that most of us, when put in certain contexts, will actually make very specific mistakes.
The errors we make are actually predictable.
We make them again and again.
And they're actually immune to lots of evidence.
When we get negative feedback, we still, the next time we're face with a certain context, tend to make the same errors.
And so this has been a real puzzle to me as a sort of scholar of human nature.
What I'm most curious about is, how is a species that's as smart as we are capable of such bad and such consistent errors all the time?
You know, we're the smartest thing out there, why can't we figure this out?
In some sense, where do our mistakes really come from?
And having thought about this a little bit, I see a couple different possibilities.
One possibility is, in some sense, it's not really our fault.
Because we're a smart species, we can actually create all kinds of environments that are super, super complicated, sometimes too complicated for us to even actually understand, even though we've actually created them.
We create financial markets that are super complex.
We create mortgage terms that we can't actually deal with.
And of course, if we are put in environments where we can't deal with it, in some sense makes sense that we actually might mess certain things up.
If this was the case, we'd have a really easy solution to the problem of human error.
We'd actually just say, okay, let's figure out the kinds of technologies we can't deal with, the kinds of environments that are bad -- get rid of those, design things better, and we should be the noble species that we expect ourselves to be.
But there's another possibility that I find a little bit more worrying, which is, maybe it's not our environments that are messed up.
Maybe it's actually us that's designed badly.
This is a hint that I've gotten from watching the ways that social scientists have learned about human errors.
And what we see is that people tend to keep making errors exactly the same way, over and over again.
It feels like we might almost just be built to make errors in certain ways.
This is a possibility that I worry a little bit more about, because, if it's us that's messed up, it's not actually clear how we go about dealing with it.
We might just have to accept the fact that we're error prone and try to design things around it.
So this is the question my students and I wanted to get at.
How can we tell the difference between possibility one and possibility two?
What we need is a population that's basically smart, can make lots of decisions, but doesn't have access to any of the systems we have, any of the things that might mess us up -- no human technology, human culture, maybe even not human language.
And so this is why we turned to these guys here.
These are one of the guys I work with. This is a brown capuchin monkey.
These guys are New World primates, which means they broke off from the human branch about 35 million years ago.
This means that your great, great, great great, great, great -- with about five million "greats" in there -- grandmother was probably the same great, great, great, great grandmother with five million "greats" in there as Holly up here.
You know, so you can take comfort in the fact that this guy up here is a really really distant, but albeit evolutionary, relative.
The good news about Holly though is that she doesn't actually have the same kinds of technologies we do.
You know, she's a smart, very cut creature, a primate as well, but she lacks all the stuff we think might be messing us up.
So she's the perfect test case.
What if we put Holly into the same context as humans?
Does she make the same mistakes as us?
Does she not learn from them? And so on.
And so this is the kind of thing we decided to do.
My students and I got very excited about this a few years ago.
We said, all right, let's, you know, throw so problems at Holly, see if she messes these things up.
First problem is just, well, where should we start?
Because, you know, it's great for us, but bad for humans.
We make a lot of mistakes in a lot of different contexts.
You know, where are we actually going to start with this?
And because we started this work around the time of the financial collapse, around the time when foreclosures were hitting the news, we said, hhmm, maybe we should actually start in the financial domain.
Maybe we should look at monkey's economic decisions and try to see if they do the same kinds of dumb things that we do.
Of course, that's when we hit a sort second problem -- a little bit more methodological -- which is that, maybe you guys don't know, but monkeys don't actually use money. I know, you haven't met them.
But this is why, you know, they're not in the queue behind you at the grocery store or the ATM -- you know, they don't do this stuff.
So now we faced, you know, a little bit of a problem here.
How are we actually going to ask monkeys about money if they don't actually use it?
So we said, well, maybe we should just, actually just suck it up and teach monkeys how to use money.
So that's just what we did.
What you're looking at over here is actually the first unit that I know of of non-human currency.
We weren't very creative at the time we started these studies, so we just called it a token.
But this is the unit of currency that we've taught our monkeys at Yale to actually use with humans, to actually buy different pieces of food.
It doesn't look like much -- in fact, it isn't like much.
Like most of our money, it's just a piece of metal.
As those of you who've taken currencies home from your trip know, once you get home, it's actually pretty useless.
It was useless to the monkeys at first before they realized what they could do with it.
When we first gave it to them in their enclosures, they actually kind of picked them up, looked at them.
They were these kind of weird things.
But very quickly, the monkeys realized that they could actually hand these tokens over to different humans in the lab for some food.
And so you see one of our monkeys, Mayday, up here doing this.
This is A and B are kind of the points where she's sort of a little bit curious about these things -- doesn't know.
There's this waiting hand from a human experimenter, and Mayday quickly figures out, apparently the human wants this.
Hands it over, and then gets some food.
It turns out not just Mayday, all of our monkeys get good at trading tokens with human salesman.
So here's just a quick video of what this looks like.
Here's Mayday. She's going to be trading a token for some food and waiting happily and getting her food.
Here's Felix, I think. He's our alpha male; he's a kind of big guy.
But he too waits patiently, gets his food and goes on.
So the monkeys get really good at this.
They're surprisingly good at this with very little training.
We just allowed them to pick this up on their own.
The question is: is this anything like human money?
Is this a market at all, or did we just do a weird psychologist's trick by getting monkeys to do something, looking smart, but not really being smart.
And so we said, well, what would the monkeys spontaneously do if this was really their currency, if they were really using it like money?
Well, you might actually imagine them to do all the kinds of smart things that humans do when they start exchanging money with each other.
You might have them start paying attention to price, paying attention to how much they buy -- sort of keeping track of their monkey token, as it were.
Do the monkeys do anything like this?
And so our monkey marketplace was born.
The way this works is that our monkeys normally live in a kind of big zoo social enclosure.
When they get a hankering for some treats, we actually allowed them a way out into a little smaller enclosure where they could enter the market.
Upon entering the market -- it was actually a much more fun market for the monkeys than most human markets because, as the monkeys entered the door of the market, a human would give them a big wallet full of tokens so they could actually trade the tokens with one of these two guys here -- two different possible human salesmen that they could actually buy stuff from.
The salesmen were students from my lab.
They dressed differently; they were different people.
And over time, they did basically the same thing so the monkeys could learn, you know, who sold what at what price -- you know, who was reliable, who wasn't, and so on.
And you can see that each of the experimenters is actually holding up a little, yellow food dish.
and that's what the monkey can for a single token.
So everything costs one token, but as you can see, sometimes tokens buy more than others, sometimes more grapes than others.
So I'll show you a quick video of what this marketplace actually looks like.
Here's a monkey-eye-view. Monkeys are shorter, so it's a little short.
But here's Honey.
She's waiting for the market to open a little impatiently.
All of a sudden the market opens. Here's her choice: one grapes or two grapes.
You can see Honey, very good market economist, goes with the guy who gives more.
She could teach our financial advisers a few things or two.
So not just Honey, most of the monkeys went with guys who had more.
Most of the monkeys went with guys who had better food.
When we introduced sales, we saw the monkeys paid attention to that.
They really cared about their monkey token dollar.
The more surprising thing was that when we collaborated with economists to actually look at the monkeys' data using economic tools, they basically matched, not just qualitatively, but quantitatively with what we saw humans doing in a real market.
So much so that, if you saw the monkeys' numbers, you couldn't tell whether they came from a monkey or a human in the same market.
And what we'd really thought we'd done is like we'd actually introduced something that, at least for the monkeys and us, works like a real financial currency.
Question is: do the monkeys start messing up in the same ways we do?
Well, we already saw anecdotally a couple of signs that they might.
One thing we never saw in the monkey marketplace was any evidence of saving -- you know, just like our own species.
The monkeys entered the market, spent their entire budget and then went back to everyone else.
The other thing we also spontaneously saw, embarrassingly enough, is spontaneous evidence of larceny.
The monkeys would rip-off the tokens at every available opportunity -- from each other, often from us -- you know, things we didn't necessarily think we were introducing, but things we spontaneously saw.
So we said, this looks bad.
Can we actually see if the monkeys are doing exactly the same dumb things as humans do?
One possibility is just kind of let the monkey financial system play out, you know, see if they start calling us for bailouts in a few years.
We were a little impatient so we wanted to sort of speed things up a bit.
So we said, let's actually give the monkeys the same kinds of problems that humans tend to get wrong in certain kinds of economic challenges, or certain kinds of economic experiments.
And so, since the best way to see how people go wrong is to actually do it yourself, I'm going to give you guys a quick experiment to sort of watch your own financial intuitions in action.
So imagine that right now I handed each and every one of you a thousand U.S. dollars -- so 10 crisp hundred dollar bills.
Take these, put it in your wallet and spend a second thinking about what you're going to do with it.
Because it's yours now; you can buy whatever you want.
Donate it, take it, and so on.
Sounds great, but you get one more choice to earn a little bit more money.
And here's your choice: you can either be risky, in which case I'm going to flip one of these monkey tokens.
If it comes up heads, you're going to get a thousand dollars more.
If it comes up tails, you get nothing.
So it's a chance to get more, but it's pretty risky.
Your other option is a bit safe. Your just going to get some money for sure.
I'm just going to give you 500 bucks.
You can stick it in your wallet and use it immediately.
So see what your intuition is here.
Most people actually go with the play-it-safe option.
Most people say, why should I be risky when I can get 1,500 dollars for sure?
This seems like a good bet. I'm going to go with that.
You might say, eh, that's not really irrational.
People are a little risk-averse. So what?
Well, the "so what?" comes when start thinking about the same problem set up just a little bit differently.
So now imagine that I give each and every one of you 2,000 dollars -- 20 crisp hundred dollar bills.
Now you can buy double to stuff you were going to get before.
Think about how you'd feel sticking it in your wallet.
And now imagine that I have you make another choice But this time, it's a little bit worse.
Now, you're going to be deciding how you're going to lose money, but you're going to get the same choice.
You can either take a risky loss -- so I'll flip a coin. If it comes up heads, you're going to actually lose a lot.
If it comes up tails, you lose nothing, you're fine, get to keep the whole thing -- or you could play it safe, which means you have to reach back into your wallet and give me five of those $100 bills, for certain.
And I'm seeing a lot of furrowed brows out there.
So maybe you're having the same intuitions as the subjects that were actually tested in this, which is when presented with these options, people don't choose to play it safe.
They actually tend to go a little risky.
The reason this is irrational is that we've given people in both situations the same choice.
It's a 50/50 shot of a thousand or 2,000, or just 1,500 dollars with certainty.
But people's intuitions about how much risk to take varies depending on where they started with.
So what's going on?
Well, it turns out that this seems to be the result of at least two biases that we have at the psychological level.
One is that we have a really hard time thinking in absolute terms.
You really have to do work to figure out, well, one option's a thousand, 2,000; one is 1,500.
Instead, we find it very easy to think in very relative terms as options change from one time to another.
So we think of things as, "Oh, I'm going to get more," or "Oh, I'm going to get less."
This is all well and good, except that changes in different directions actually effect whether or not we think options are good or not.
And this leads to the second bias, which economists have called loss aversion.
The idea is that we really hate it when things go into the red.
We really hate it when we have to lose out on some money.
And this means that sometimes we'll actually switch our preferences to avoid this.
What you saw in that last scenario is that subjects get risky because they want the small shot that there won't be any loss.
That means when we're in a risk mindset -- excuse me, when we're in a loss mindset, we actually become more risky, which can actually be really worrying.
These kinds of things play out in lots of bad ways in humans.
They're why stock investors hold onto losing stocks longer -- because they're evaluating them in relative terms.
They're why people in the housing market refused to sell their house -- because they don't want to sell at a loss.
The question we were interested in is whether the monkeys show the same biases.
If we set up those same scenarios in our little monkey market, would they do the same thing as people?
And so this is what we did, we gave the monkeys choices between guys who were safe -- they did the same thing every time -- or guys who were risky -- they did things differently half the time.
And then we gave them options that were bonuses -- like you guys did in the first scenario -- so they actually have a chance more, or pieces where they were experiencing losses -- they actually thought they were going to get more than they really got.
And so this is what this looks like.
We introduced the monkeys to two new monkey salesmen.
The guy on the left and right both start with one piece of grape, so it looks pretty good.
But they're going to give the monkeys bonuses.
The guy on the left is a safe bonus.
All the time, he adds one, to give the monkeys two.
The guy on the right is actually a risky bonus.
Sometimes the monkeys get no bonus -- so this is a bonus of zero.
Sometimes the monkeys get two extra.
For a big bonus, now they get three.
But this is the same choice you guys just faced.
Do the monkeys actually want to play it safe and then go with the guy who's going to do the same thing on every trial, or do they want to be risky and try to get a risky, but big, bonus, but risk the possibility of getting no bonus.
People here played it safe.
Turns out, the monkeys play it safe too.
Qualitatively and quantitatively, they choose exactly the same way as people, when tested in the same thing.
You might say, well, maybe the monkeys just don't like risk.
Maybe we should see how they do with losses.
And so we ran a second version of this.
Now, the monkeys meet two guys who aren't giving them bonuses; they're actually giving them less than they expect.
So they look like they're starting out with a big amount.
These are three grapes; the monkey's really psyched for this.
But now they learn these guys are going to give them less than they expect.
They guy on the left is a safe loss.
Every single time, he's going to take one of these away and give the monkeys just two.
the guy on the right is the risky loss.
Sometimes he gives no loss, so the monkeys are really psyched, but sometimes he actually gives a big loss, taking away two to give the monkeys only one.
And so what do the monkeys do?
Again, same choice; they can play it safe for always getting two grapes every single time, or they can take a risky bet and choose between one and three.
The remarkable thing to us is that, when you give monkeys this choice, they do the same irrational thing that people do.
They actually become more risky depending on how the experimenters started.
This is crazy because it suggests that the monkeys too are evaluating things in relative terms and actually treating losses differently than they treat gains.
So what does all of this mean?
Well, what we've shown is that, first of all, we can actually give the monkeys a financial currency, and they do very similar things with it.
They do some of the smart things we do, some of the kind of not so nice things we do, like steal it and so on.
But they also do some of the irrational things we do.
They systematically get things wrong and in the same ways that we do.
This is the first take-home message of the Talk, which is that if you saw the beginning of this and you thought, oh, I'm totally going to go home and hire a capuchin monkey financial adviser.
They're way cuter than the one at ... you know -- Don't do that; they're probably going to be just as dumb as the human one you already have.
So, you know, a little bad -- Sorry, sorry, sorry.
A little bad for monkey investors.
But of course, you know, the reason you're laughing is bad for humans too.
Because we've answered the question we started out with.
We wanted to know where these kinds of errors came from.
And we started with the hope that maybe we can sort of tweak our financial institutions, tweak our technologies to make ourselves better.
But what we've learn is that these biases might be a deeper part of us than that.
In fact, they might be due to the very nature of our evolutionary history.
You know, maybe it's not just humans at the right side of this chain that's duncey.
Maybe it's sort of duncey all the way back.
And this, if we believe the capuchin monkey results, means that these duncey strategies might be 35 million years old.
That's a long time for a strategy to potentially get changed around -- really, really old.
What do we know about other old strategies like this?
Well, one thing we know is that they tend to be really hard to overcome.
You know, think of our evolutionary predilection for eating sweet things, fatty things like cheesecake.
You can't just shut that off.
You can't just look at the dessert cart as say, "No, no, no. That looks disgusting to me."
We're just built differently.
We're going to perceive it as a good thing to go after.
My guess is that the same thing is going to be true when humans are perceiving different financial decisions.
When you're watching your stocks plummet into the red, when you're watching your house price go down, you're not going to be able to see that in anything but old evolutionary terms.
This means that the biases that lead investors to do badly, that lead to the foreclosure crisis are going to be really hard to overcome.
So that's the bad news. The question is: is there any good news?
I'm supposed to be up here telling you the good news.
Well, the good news, I think, is what I started with at the beginning of the Talk, which is that humans are not only smart; we're really inspirationally smart to the rest of the animals in the biological kingdom.
We're so good at overcoming our biological limitations -- you know, I flew over here in an airplane.
I didn't have to try to flap my wings.
I'm wearing contact lenses now so that I can see all of you.
I don't have to rely on my own near-sightedness.
We actually have all of these cases where we overcome our biological limitations through technology and other means, seemingly pretty easily.
But we have to recognize that we have those limitations.
And here's the rub.
It was Camus who once said that, "Man is the only species who refuses to be what he really is."
But the irony is that it might only be in recognizing our limitations that we can really actually overcome them.
The hope is that you all will think about your limitations, not necessarily as unovercomable, but to recognize them, accept them and then use the world of design to actually figure them out.
That might be the only way that we will really be able to achieve our own human potential and really be the noble species we hope to all be.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Last year when I was here, I was speaking to you about a swim which I did across the North Pole.
And while that swim took place three years ago, I can remember it as if it was yesterday.
I remember standing on the edge of the ice, about to dive into the water, and thinking to myself, I have never ever seen any place on this earth which is just so frightening.
The water is completely black.
The water is minus 1.7 degrees centigrade, or 29 degrees Fahrenheit.
It's flipping freezing in that water.
And then a thought came across my mind: if things go pear-shaped on this swim, how long will it take for my frozen body to sink the four and a half kilometers to the bottom of the ocean?
And then I said to myself, I've just got to get this thought out of my mind as quickly as possible.
And the only way I can dive into that freezing cold water and swim a kilometer is by listening to my iPod and really revving myself up, listening to everything from beautiful opera all the way across to Puff Daddy, and then committing myself a hundred percent -- there is nothing more powerful than the made-up mind -- and then walking up to the edge of the ice and just diving into the water.
And that swim took me 18 minutes and 50 seconds, and it felt like 18 days.
And I remember getting out of the water and my hands feeling so painful and looking down at my fingers, and my fingers were literally the size of sausages because -- you know, we're made partially of water -- when water freezes it expands, and so the cells in my fingers had frozen and expanded and burst.
And the most immediate thought when I came out of that water was the following: I'm never, ever going to do another cold water swim in my life again.
Anyway, last year, I heard about the Himalayas and the melting of the -- (Laughter) and the melting of the glaciers because of climate change.
I heard about this lake, Lake Imja.
This lake has been formed in the last couple of years because of the melting of the glacier.
The glacier's gone all the way up the mountain and left in its place this big lake.
And I firmly believe that what we're seeing in the Himalayas is the next great, big battleground on this earth.
Nearly two billion people -- so one in three people on this earth -- rely on the water from the Himalayas.
And with a population increasing as quickly as it is, and with the water supply from these glaciers -- because of climate change -- decreasing so much, I think we have a real risk of instability.
North, you've got China; south, you've India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, all these countries.
And so I decided to walk up to Mt. Everest, the highest mountain on this earth, and go and do a symbolic swim underneath the summit of Mt. Everest.
Now, I don't know if any of you have had the opportunity to go to Mt. Everest, but it's quite an ordeal getting up there.
28 great, big, powerful yaks carrying all the equipment up onto this mountain -- I don't just have my Speedo, but there's a big film crew who then send all the images around the world.
The other thing which was so challenging about this swim is not just the altitude.
I wanted to do the swim at 5,300 meters above sea level.
So it's right up in the heavens.
It's very, very difficult to breath. You get altitude sickness.
I feels like you've got a man standing behind you with a hammer just hitting your head all the time.
That's not the worst part of it.
The worst part was this year was the year where they decided to do a big cleanup operation on Mt. Everest.
Many, many people have died on Mt. Everest, and this was the year they decided to go and recover all the bodies of the mountaineers and then bring them down the mountain.
And when you're walking up the mountain to attempt to do something which no human has ever done before, and, in fact, no fish -- there are no fish up there swimming at 5,300 meters -- When you're trying to do that, and then the bodies are coming past you, it humbles you, and you also realize very, very clearly that nature is so much more powerful than we are.
And we walked up this pathway, all the way up.
And to the right hand side of us was this great Khumbu Glacier.
And all the way along the glacier we saw these big pools of melting ice.
And then we got up to this small lake underneath the summit of Mt. Everest, and I prepared myself the same way as I've always prepared myself, for this swim which was going to be so very difficult.
I put on my iPod, I listened to some music, I got myself as aggressive as possible -- but controlled aggression -- and then I hurled myself into that water.
I swam as quickly as I could for the first hundred meters, and then I realized very, very quickly, I had a huge problem on my hands.
I could barely breathe.
I was gasping for air.
I then began to choke, and then it quickly led to me vomiting in the water.
And it all happened so quickly: I then -- I don't know how it happened -- but I went underwater.
And luckily, the water was quite shallow, and I was able to push myself off the bottom of the lake and get up and then take another gasp of air.
And then I said, carry on. Carry on. Carry on.
I carried on for another five or six strokes, and then I had nothing in my body, and I went down to the bottom of the lake.
And I don't where I got it from, but I was able to somehow pull myself up and as quickly as possible get to the side of the lake.
I've heard it said that drowning is the most peaceful death that you can have.
I have never, ever heard such utter bollocks.
(Laughter) It is the most frightening and panicky feeling that you can have.
I got myself to the side of the lake.
My crew grabbed me, and then we walked as quickly as we could down -- over the rubble -- down to our camp.
And there, we sat down, and we did a debrief about what had gone wrong there on Mt. Everest.
And my team just gave it to me straight.
They said, Lewis, you need to have a radical tactical shift if you want to do this swim.
Every single thing which you have learned in the past 23 years of swimming, you must forget.
Every single thing which you learned when you were serving in the British army, about speed and aggression, you put that to one side.
We want you to walk up the hill in another two days' time.
Take some time to rest and think about things.
We want you to walk up the mountain in two days' time, and instead of swimming fast, swim as slowly as possible.
Instead of swimming crawl, swim breaststroke.
And remember, never ever swim with aggression.
This is the time to swim with real humility.
And so we walked back up to the mountain two days later.
And I stood there on the edge of the lake, and I looked up at Mt. Everest -- and she is one of the most beautiful mountains on the earth -- and I said to myself, just do this slowly.
And I swam across the lake.
And I can't begin to tell you how good I felt when I came to the other side.
But I learned two very, very important lessons there on Mt. Everest, and I thank my team of Sherpas who taught me this.
The first one is that just because something has worked in the past so well, doesn't mean it's going to work in the future.
And similarly, now, before I do anything, I ask myself what type of mindset do I require to successfully complete a task.
And taking that into the world of climate change -- which is, frankly, the Mt. Everest of all problems -- just because we've lived the way we have lived for so long, just because we have consumed the way we have for so long and populated the earth the way we have for so long, doesn't mean that we can carry on the way we are carrying on.
The warning signs are all there.
When I was born, the world's population was 3.5 billion people.
We're now 6.8 billion people, and we're expected to be 9 billion people by 2050.
And then the second lesson, the radical, tactical shift.
And I've come here to ask you today: what radical tactical shift can you take in your relationship to the environment, which will ensure that our children and our grandchildren live in a safe world and a secure world, and most importantly, in a sustainable world?
And I ask you, please, to go away from here and think about that one radical tactical shift which you could make, which will make that big difference, and then commit a hundred percent to doing it.
Blog about it, tweet about it, talk about it, and commit a hundred percent, because very, very few things are impossible to achieve if we really put our whole minds to it.
So thank you very, very much.
I grew up on a small farm in Missouri.
We lived on less than a dollar a day for about 15 years.
I got a scholarship, went to university, studied international agriculture, studied anthropology, and decided I was going to give back.
I was going to work with small farmers.
I was going to help alleviate poverty.
I was going to work on international development, and then I took a turn and ended up here.
Now, if you get a Ph.D., and you decide not to teach, you don't always end up in a place like this.
It's a choice. You might end up driving a taxicab.
You could be in New York.
What I found was, I started working with refugees and famine victims -- small farmers, all, or nearly all -- who had been dispossessed and displaced.
Now, what I'd been trained to do was methodological research on such people.
So I did it: I found out how many women had been raped en route to these camps.
I found out how many people had been put in jail, how many family members had been killed.
I assessed how long they were going to stay and how much it would take to feed them.
And I got really good at predicting how many body bags you would need for the people who were going to die in these camps.
Now this is God's work, but it's not my work.
It's not the work I set out to do.
So I was at a Grateful Dead benefit concert on the rainforests in 1988.
I met a guy -- the guy on the left.
His name was Ben.
He said, "What can I do to save the rainforests?"
I said, "Well, Ben, what do you do?"
"I make ice cream."
So I said, "Well, you've got to make a rainforest ice cream.
And you've got to use nuts from the rainforests to show that forests are worth more as forests than they are as pasture."
He said, "Okay."
Within a year, Rainforest Crunch was on the shelves.
It was a great success.
We did our first million-dollars-worth of trade by buying on 30 days and selling on 21.
That gets your adrenaline going.
Then we had a four and a half million-dollar line of credit because we were credit-worthy at that point.
We had 15 to 20, maybe 22 percent of the global Brazil-nut market.
We paid two to three times more than anybody else.
Everybody else raised their prices to the gatherers of Brazil nuts because we would buy it otherwise.
A great success.
50 companies signed up, 200 products came out, generated 100 million in sales.
It failed.
Why did it fail?
Because the people who were gathering Brazil nuts weren't the same people who were cutting the forests.
And the people who made money from Brazil nuts were not the people who made money from cutting the forests.
We were attacking the wrong driver.
We needed to be working on beef.
We needed to be working on lumber.
We needed to be working on soy -- things that we were not focused on.
So let's go back to Sudan.
I often talk to refugees: "Why was it that the West didn't realize that famines are caused by policies and politics, not by weather?"
And this farmer said to me, one day, something that was very profound.
He said, "You can't wake a person who's pretending to sleep."
(Laughter) Okay. Fast forward.
We live on a planet.
There's just one of them.
We've got to wake up to the fact that we don't have any more and that this is a finite planet.
We know the limits of the resources we have.
We may be able to use them differently.
We may have some innovative, new ideas.
But in general, this is what we've got.
There's no more of it.
There's a basic equation that we can't get away from.
Population times consumption has got to have some kind of relationship to the planet, and right now, it's a simple "not equal."
Our work shows that we're living at about 1.3 planets.
Since 1990, we crossed the line of being in a sustainable relationship to the planet.
Now we're at 1.3.
If we were farmers, we'd be eating our seed.
For bankers, we'd be living off the principal, not the interest.
This is where we stand today.
A lot of people like to point to some place else as the cause of the problem.
It's always population growth.
Population growth's important, but it's also about how much each person consumes.
So when the average American consumes 43 times as much as the average African, we've got to think that consumption is an issue.
It's not just about population, and it's not just about them; it's about us.
But it's not just about people; it's about lifestyles.
There's very good evidence -- again, we don't necessarily have a peer-reviewed methodology that's bulletproof yet -- but there's very good evidence that the average cat in Europe has a larger environmental footprint in its lifetime than the average African.
You think that's not an issue going forward?
You think that's not a question as to how we should be using the Earth's resources?
Let's go back and visit our equation.
In 2000, we had six billion people on the planet.
They were consuming what they were consuming -- let's say one unit of consumption each.
We have six billion units of consumption.
By 2050, we're going to have nine billion people -- all the scientists agree.
They're all going to consume twice as much as they currently do -- scientists, again, agree -- because income is going to grow in developing countries five times what it is today -- on global average, about [2.9].
So we're going to have 18 billion units of consumption.
Who have you heard talking lately that's said we have to triple production of goods and services?
But that's what the math says.
We're not going to be able to do that.
We can get productivity up.
We can get efficiency up.
But we've also got to get consumption down.
We need to use less to make more.
And then we need to use less again.
And then we need to consume less.
All of those things are part of that equation.
But it basically raises a fundamental question: should consumers have a choice about sustainability, about sustainable products?
Should you be able to buy a product that's sustainable sitting next to one that isn't, or should all the products on the shelf be sustainable?
If they should all be sustainable on a finite planet, how do you make that happen?
The average consumer takes 1.8 seconds in the U.S.
Okay, so let's be generous.
Let's say it's 3.5 seconds in Europe.
How do you evaluate all the scientific data around a product, the data that's changing on a weekly, if not a daily, basis?
How do you get informed?
You don't.
Here's a little question.
From a greenhouse gas perspective, is lamb produced in the U.K.
better than lamb produced in New Zealand, frozen and shipped to the U.K.?
Is a bad feeder lot operation for beef better or worse than a bad grazing operation for beef?
Do organic potatoes actually have fewer toxic chemicals used to produce them than conventional potatoes?
In every single case, the answer is "it depends."
It depends on who produced it and how, in every single instance.
And there are many others.
How is a consumer going to walk through this minefield?
They're not.
They may have a lot of opinions about it, but they're not going to be terribly informed.
Sustainability has got to be a pre-competitive issue.
It's got to be something we all care about.
And we need collusion.
We need groups to work together that never have.
We need Cargill to work with Bunge.
We need Coke to work with Pepsi.
We need Oxford to work with Cambridge.
We need Greenpeace to work with WWF.
Everybody's got to work together -- China and the U.S.
We need to begin to manage this planet as if our life depended on it, because it does, it fundamentally does.
But we can't do everything.
Even if we get everybody working on it, we've got to be strategic.
We need to focus on the where, the what and the who.
So, the where: We've identified 35 places globally that we need to work.
These are the places that are the richest in biodiversity and the most important from an ecosystem function point-of-view.
We have to work in these places.
We have to save these places if we want a chance in hell of preserving biodiversity as we know it.
We looked at the threats to these places.
These are the 15 commodities that fundamentally pose the biggest threats to these places because of deforestation, soil loss, water use, pesticide use, over-fishing, etc.
So we've got 35 places, we've got 15 priority commodities, who do we work with to change the way those commodities are produced?
Are we going to work with 6.9 billion consumers?
Let's see, that's about 7,000 languages, 350 major languages -- a lot of work there.
I don't see anybody actually being able to do that very effectively.
Are we going to work with 1.5 billion producers?
Again, a daunting task.
There must be a better way.
300 to 500 companies control 70 percent or more of the trade of each of the 15 commodities that we've identified as the most significant.
If we work with those, if we change those companies and the way they do business, then the rest will happen automatically.
So, we went through our 15 commodities.
This is nine of them.
We lined them up side-by-side, and we put the names of the companies that work on each of those.
And if you go through the first 25 or 30 names of each of the commodities, what you begin to see is, gosh, there's Cargill here, there's Cargill there, there's Cargill everywhere.
In fact, these names start coming up over and over again.
So we did the analysis again a slightly different way.
We said: if we take the top hundred companies, what percentage of all 15 commodities do they touch, buy or sell?
And what we found is it's 25 percent.
So 100 companies control 25 percent of the trade of all 15 of the most significant commodities on the planet.
We can get our arms around a hundred companies.
A hundred companies, we can work with.
Why is 25 percent important?
Because if these companies demand sustainable products, they'll pull 40 to 50 percent of production.
Companies can push producers faster than consumers can.
By companies asking for this, we can leverage production so much faster than by waiting for consumers to do it.
After 40 years, the global organic movement has achieved 0.7 of one percent of global food.
We can't wait that long.
We don't have that kind of time.
We need change that's going to accelerate.
Even working with individual companies is not probably going to get us there.
We need to begin to work with industries.
So we've started roundtables where we bring together the entire value chain, from producers all the way to the retailers and brands.
We bring in civil society, we bring in NGOs, we bring in researchers and scientists to have an informed discussion -- sometimes a battle royale -- to figure out what are the key impacts of these products, what is a global benchmark, what's an acceptable impact, and design standards around that.
It's not all fun and games.
In salmon aquaculture, we kicked off a roundtable almost six years ago.
Eight entities came to the table.
We eventually got, I think, 60 percent of global production at the table and 25 percent of demand at the table.
Three of the original eight entities were suing each other.
And yet, next week, we launch globally verified, vetted and certified standards for salmon aquaculture.
It can happen.
(Applause) So what brings the different entities to the table?
It's risk and demand.
For the big companies, it's reputational risk, but more importantly, they don't care what the price of commodities is.
If they don't have commodities, they don't have a business.
They care about availability, so the big risk for them is not having product at all.
For the producers, if a buyer wants to buy something produced a certain way, that's what brings them to the table.
So it's the demand that brings them to the table.
The good news is we identified a hundred companies two years ago.
In the last 18 months, we've signed agreements with 40 of those hundred companies to begin to work with them on their supply chain.
And in the next 18 months, we will have signed up to work with another 40, and we think we'll get those signed as well.
Now what we're doing is bringing the CEOs of these 80 companies together to help twist the arms of the final 20, to bring them to the table, because they don't like NGOs, they've never worked with NGOs, they're concerned about this, they're concerned about that, but we all need to be in this together.
So we're pulling out all the stops.
We're using whatever leverage we have to bring them to the table.
One company we're working with that's begun -- in baby steps, perhaps -- but has begun this journey on sustainability is Cargill.
They've funded research that shows that we can double global palm oil production without cutting a single tree in the next 20 years, and do it all in Borneo alone by planting on land that's already degraded.
The study shows that the highest net present value for palm oil is on land that's been degraded.
They're also undertaking a study to look at all of their supplies of palm oil to see if they could be certified and what they would need to change in order to become third-party certified under a credible certification program.
Why is Cargill important?
Because Cargill has 20 to 25 percent of global palm oil.
If Cargill makes a decision, the entire palm oil industry moves, or at least 40 or 50 percent of it.
That's not insignificant.
More importantly, Cargill and one other company ship 50 percent of the palm oil that goes to China.
We don't have to change the way a single Chinese company works if we get Cargill to only send sustainable palm oil to China.
It's a pre-competitive issue.
All the palm oil going there is good.
Buy it.
Mars is also on a similar journey.
Now most people understand that Mars is a chocolate company, but Mars has made sustainability pledges to buy only certified product for all of its seafood.
It turns out Mars buys more seafood than Walmart because of pet food.
But they're doing some really interesting things around chocolate, and it all comes from the fact that Mars wants to be in business in the future.
And what they see is that they need to improve chocolate production.
On any given plantation, 20 percent of the trees produce 80 percent of the crop, so Mars is looking at the genome, they're sequencing the genome of the cocoa plant.
They're doing it with IBM and the USDA, and they're putting it in the public domain because they want everybody to have access to this data, because they want everybody to help them make cocoa more productive and more sustainable.
What they've realized is that if they can identify the traits on productivity and drought tolerance, they can produce 320 percent as much cocoa on 40 percent of the land.
The rest of the land can be used for something else.
It's more with less and less again.
That's what the future has got to be, and putting it in the public domain is smart.
They don't want to be an I.P. company; they want to be a chocolate company, but they want to be a chocolate company forever.
Now, the price of food, many people complain about, but in fact, the price of food is going down, and that's odd because in fact, consumers are not paying for the true cost of food.
If you take a look just at water, what we see is that, with four very common products, you look at how much a farmer produced to make those products, and then you look at how much water input was put into them, and then you look at what the farmer was paid.
If you divide the amount of water into what the farmer was paid, the farmer didn't receive enough money to pay a decent price for water in any of those commodities.
That is an externality by definition.
This is the subsidy from nature.
Coca-Cola, they've worked a lot on water, but right now, they're entering into 17-year contracts with growers in Turkey to sell juice into Europe, and they're doing that because they want to have a product that's closer to the European market.
But they're not just buying the juice; they're also buying the carbon in the trees to offset the shipment costs associated with carbon to get the product into Europe.
There's carbon that's being bought with sugar, with coffee, with beef.
This is called bundling. It's bringing those externalities back into the price of the commodity.
We need to take what we've learned in private, voluntary standards of what the best producers in the world are doing and use that to inform government regulation, so we can shift the entire performance curve.
We can't just focus on identifying the best; we've got to move the rest.
The issue isn't what to think, it's how to think.
These companies have begun to think differently.
They're on a journey; there's no turning back.
We're all on that same journey with them.
We have to really begin to change the way we think about everything.
Whatever was sustainable on a planet of six billion is not going to be sustainable on a planet with nine.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to talk to you about some stuff that's in this book of mine that I hope will resonate with other things you've already heard, and I'll try to make some connections myself, in case you miss them.
But I want to start with what I call the "official dogma."
The official dogma of what?
The official dogma of all Western industrial societies.
And the official dogma runs like this: if we are interested in maximizing the welfare of our citizens, the way to do that is to maximize individual freedom.
The reason for this is both that freedom is, in and of itself, good, valuable, worthwhile, essential to being human, and because if people have freedom, then each of us can act on our own to do the things that will maximize our welfare, and no one has to decide on our behalf.
The way to maximize freedom is to maximize choice.
The more choice people have, the more freedom they have, and the more freedom they have, the more welfare they have.
This, I think, is so deeply embedded in the water supply that it wouldn't occur to anyone to question it.
And it's also deeply embedded in our lives.
I'll give you some examples of what modern progress has made possible for us.
This is my supermarket.
I want to say just a word about salad dressing.
A hundred seventy-five salad dressings in my supermarket, if you don't count the 10 extra-virgin olive oils and 12 balsamic vinegars you could buy to make a very large number of your own salad dressings, in the off-chance that none of the 175 the store has on offer suit you.
So this is what the supermarket is like.
And then you go to the consumer electronics store to set up a stereo system -- speakers, CD player, tape player, tuner, amplifier -- and in this one single consumer electronics store, there are that many stereo systems.
We can construct six and a half million different stereo systems out of the components that are on offer in one store.
You've got to admit that's a lot of choice.
In other domains -- the world of communications.
There was a time, when I was a boy, when you could get any kind of telephone service you wanted, as long as it came from Ma Bell.
You rented your phone, you didn't buy it.
One consequence of that, by the way, is that the phone never broke.
And those days are gone.
We now have an almost unlimited variety of phones, especially in the world of cell phones.
These are cell phones of the future.
My favorite is the middle one -- the MP3 player, nose hair trimmer, and crme brle torch.
And if -- (Laughter) if by some chance you haven't seen that in your store yet, you can rest assured that one day soon, you will.
And what this does is it leads people to walk into their stores, asking this question.
And do you know what the answer to this question now is?
The answer is "no."
It is not possible to buy a cell phone that doesn't do too much.
So, in other aspects of life that are much more significant than buying things, the same explosion of choice is true.
Health care.
It is no longer the case in the United States that you go to the doctor, and the doctor tells you what to do.
Instead, you go to the doctor, and the doctor tells you, "Well, we could do A, or we could do B.
A has these benefits and these risks.
B has these benefits and these risks.
And you say, "Doc, what should I do?"
And the doc says, "A has these benefits and risks, and B has these benefits and risks.
What do you want to do?"
And you say, "If you were me, Doc, what would you do?"
And the doc says, "But I'm not you."
And the result is -- we call it "patient autonomy," which makes it sound like a good thing, but what it really is is a shifting of the burden and the responsibility for decision-making from somebody who knows something -- namely, the doctor -- to somebody who knows nothing and is almost certainly sick and thus, not in the best shape to be making decisions -- namely, the patient.
There's enormous marketing of prescription drugs to people like you and me, which, if you think about it, makes no sense at all, since we can't buy them.
Why do they market to us if we can't buy them?
The answer is that they expect us to call our doctors the next morning and ask for our prescriptions to be changed.
Something as dramatic as our identity has now become a matter of choice, as this slide is meant to indicate.
We don't inherit an identity; we get to invent it.
And we get to reinvent ourselves as often as we like.
And that means that every day, when you wake up in the morning, you have to decide what kind of person you want to be.
With respect to marriage and family: there was a time when the default assumption that almost everyone had is that you got married as soon as you could, and then you started having kids as soon as you could.
The only real choice was who, not when, and not what you did after.
Nowadays, everything is very much up for grabs.
I teach wonderfully intelligent students, and I assign 20 percent less work than I used to.
And it's not because they're less smart, and it's not because they're less diligent.
It's because they are preoccupied, asking themselves, "Should I get married or not? Should I get married now?
Should I get married later?
All of these are consuming questions.
And they're going to answer these questions, whether or not it means not doing all the work I assign and not getting a good grade in my courses.
And indeed they should.
Work.
We are blessed, as Carl was pointing out, with the technology that enables us to work every minute of every day from any place on the planet -- except the Randolph Hotel.
(Laughter) (Applause) There is one corner, by the way, that I'm not going to tell anybody about, where the WiFi actually works.
I'm not telling you about it, because I want to use it.
So what this means, this incredible freedom of choice we have with respect to work, is that we have to make a decision, again and again and again, about whether we should or shouldn't be working.
We can go to watch our kid play soccer, and we have our cell phone on one hip and our Blackberry on our other hip, and our laptop, presumably, on our laps.
And even if they're all shut off, every minute that we're watching our kid mutilate a soccer game, we are also asking ourselves, "Should I answer this cell phone call?
Should I respond to this email? Should I draft this letter?"
And even if the answer to the question is "no," it's certainly going to make the experience of your kid's soccer game very different than it would've been.
So everywhere we look, big things and small things, material things and lifestyle things, life is a matter of choice.
And the world we used to live in looked like this.
[Well, actually, they are written in stone.] That is to say, there were some choices, but not everything was a matter of choice.
The world we now live in looks like this.
[The Ten Commandments Do-It-Yourself Kit] And the question is: Is this good news or bad news?
And the answer is "yes."
(Laughter) We all know what's good about it, so I'm going to talk about what's bad about it.
All of this choice has two effects, two negative effects on people.
One effect, paradoxically, is that it produces paralysis rather than liberation.
With so many options to choose from, people find it very difficult to choose at all.
I'll give you one very dramatic example of this, a study that was done of investments in voluntary retirement plans.
A colleague of mine got access to investment records from Vanguard, the gigantic mutual fund company, of about a million employees and about 2,000 different workplaces.
What she found is that for every 10 mutual funds the employer offered, rate of participation went down two percent.
You offer 50 funds -- 10 percent fewer employees participate than if you only offer five.
Because with 50 funds to choose from, it's so damn hard to decide which fund to choose, that you'll just put it off till tomorrow, and then tomorrow and then tomorrow and tomorrow, and, of course, tomorrow never comes.
Understand that not only does this mean that people are going to have to eat dog food when they retire because they don't have enough money put away, it also means that making the decision is so hard that they pass up significant matching money from the employer.
By not participating, they are passing up as much as 5,000 dollars a year from the employer, who would happily match their contribution.
So paralysis is a consequence of having too many choices.
And I think it makes the world look like this.
[And lastly, for all eternity, French, bleu cheese or ranch?] (Laughter) You really want to get the decision right if it's for all eternity, right?
You don't want to pick the wrong mutual fund or wrong salad dressing.
So that's one effect.
The second effect is that, even if we manage to overcome the paralysis and make a choice, we end up less satisfied with the result of the choice than we would be if we had fewer options to choose from.
And there are several reasons for this.
One of them is, with a lot of different salad dressings to choose from, if you buy one and it's not perfect -- and what salad dressing is? -- it's easy to imagine that you could've made a different choice that would've been better.
And what happens is, this imagined alternative induces you to regret the decision you made, and this regret subtracts from the satisfaction you get out of the decision you made, even if it was a good decision.
The more options there are, the easier it is to regret anything at all that is disappointing about the option that you chose.
Second, what economists call "opportunity costs."
Dan Gilbert made a big point this morning of talking about how much the way in which we value things depends on what we compare them to.
Well, when there are lots of alternatives to consider, it's easy to imagine the attractive features of alternatives that you reject that make you less satisfied with the alternative that you've chosen.
Here's an example.
[I can't stop thinking about those other available parking spaces on W 85th Street] If you're not a New Yorker, I apologize.
Here's what you're supposed to be thinking.
Here's this couple on the Hamptons. Very expensive real estate.
Gorgeous beach. Beautiful day. They have it all to themselves.
What could be better?
"Damn it," this guy is thinking, "It's August. Everybody in my Manhattan neighborhood is away.
I could be parking right in front of my building."
And he spends two weeks nagged by the idea that he is missing the opportunity, day after day, to have a great parking space.
(Laughter) Opportunity costs subtract from the satisfaction that we get out of what we choose, even when what we choose is terrific.
And the more options there are to consider, the more attractive features of these options are going to be reflected by us as opportunity costs.
Here's another example.
(Laughter) Now, this cartoon makes a lot of points.
It makes points about living in the moment as well, and probably about doing things slowly.
But one point it makes is that whenever you're choosing one thing, you're choosing not to do other things, and those other things may have lots of attractive features, and it's going to make what you're doing less attractive.
This hit me when I went to replace my jeans.
I wear jeans almost all the time.
There was a time when jeans came in one flavor, and you bought them, and they fit like crap.
They were incredibly uncomfortable, and if you wore them long enough and washed them enough times, they started to feel OK.
I went to replace my jeans after years of wearing these old ones.
I said, "I want a pair of jeans. Here's my size."
And the shopkeeper said, "Do you want slim fit, easy fit, relaxed fit?
You want button fly or zipper fly? You want stonewashed or acid-washed?
Do you want them distressed?
Do you want boot cut, tapered?" Blah, blah, blah on and on he went.
My jaw dropped.
And after I recovered, I said, "I want the kind that used to be the only kind."
(Laughter) He had no idea what that was.
(Laughter) So I spent an hour trying on all these damn jeans, and I walked out of the store -- truth -- with the best-fitting jeans I had ever had.
I did better.
But -- I felt worse.
Why? I wrote a whole book to try to explain this to myself.
The reason is -- (Laughter) The reason I felt worse is that with all of these options available, my expectations about how good a pair of jeans should be went up.
I had very low, no particular expectations when they only came in one flavor.
When they came in 100 flavors, damn it, one of them should've been perfect.
And what I got was good, but it wasn't perfect.
And so I compared what I got to what I expected, and what I got was disappointing in comparison to what I expected.
Adding options to people's lives can't help but increase the expectations people have about how good those options will be.
And what that's going to produce is less satisfaction with results, even when they're good results.
[It all looks so great. I can't wait to be disappointed.] Nobody in the world of marketing knows this.
The truth is more like this.
[Everything was better back when everything was worse.] The reason that everything was better back when everything was worse is that when everything was worse, it was actually possible for people to have experiences that were a pleasant surprise.
Nowadays, the world we live in -- we affluent, industrialized citizens, with perfection the expectation -- the best you can ever hope for is that stuff is as good as you expect it to be.
You will never be pleasantly surprised, because your expectations, my expectations, have gone through the roof.
The secret to happiness -- this is what you all came for -- the secret to happiness is: low expectations.
(Laughter) [You'll do] (Applause) (Laughter) I want to say -- just a little autobiographical moment -- that I actually am married to a wife, and she's really quite wonderful.
I couldn't have done better.
But settling isn't always such a bad thing.
Finally, one consequence of buying a bad-fitting pair of jeans when there is only one kind to buy is that when you are dissatisfied and you ask why, who's responsible, the answer is clear: the world is responsible.
When there are hundreds of different styles of jeans available and you buy one that is disappointing and you ask why, who's responsible, it is equally clear that the answer to the question is "you."
You could have done better.
With a hundred different kinds of jeans on display, there is no excuse for failure.
And so when people make decisions, and even though the results of the decisions are good, they feel disappointed about them; they blame themselves.
Clinical depression has exploded in the industrial world in the last generation.
I believe a significant -- not the only, but a significant -- contributor to this explosion of depression and also suicide, is that people have experiences that are disappointing because their standards are so high, and then when they have to explain these experiences to themselves, they think they're at fault.
So the net result is that we do better in general, objectively, and we feel worse.
So let me remind you: this is the official dogma, the one that we all take to be true, and it's all false.
There's no question that some choice is better than none.
But it doesn't follow from that that more choice is better than some choice.
There's some magical amount. I don't know what it is.
I'm pretty confident that we have long since passed the point where options improve our welfare.
Now, as a policy matter -- I'm almost done -- as a policy matter, the thing to think about is this: what enables all of this choice in industrial societies is material affluence.
There are lots of places in the world, and we have heard about several of them, where their problem is not that they have too much choice.
Their problem is they have too little.
So the stuff I'm talking about is the peculiar problem of modern, affluent, Western societies.
And what is so frustrating and infuriating is this: Steve Levitt talked to you yesterday about how these expensive and difficult-to-install child seats don't help.
What I'm telling you is that these expensive, complicated choices -- it's not simply that they don't help.
They actually hurt.
They actually make us worse off.
If some of what enables people in our societies to make all of the choices we make were shifted to societies in which people have too few options, not only would those people's lives be improved, but ours would be improved also.
This is what economists call a "Pareto-improving move."
Income redistribution will make everyone better off, not just poor people, because of how all this excess choice plagues us.
So to conclude.
[You can be anything you want to be -- no limits.] You're supposed to read this cartoon and, being a sophisticated person, say, "Ah! What does this fish know? Nothing is possible in this fishbowl."
Impoverished imagination, a myopic view of the world -- that's the way I read it at first.
The more I thought about it, however, the more I came to the view that this fish knows something.
Because the truth of the matter is, if you shatter the fishbowl so that everything is possible, you don't have freedom.
If you shatter this fishbowl so that everything is possible, you decrease satisfaction.
You increase paralysis, and you decrease satisfaction.
Everybody needs a fishbowl.
This one is almost certainly too limited -- perhaps even for the fish, certainly for us.
But the absence of some metaphorical fishbowl is a recipe for misery and, I suspect, disaster.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
The global challenge that I want to talk to you about today rarely makes the front pages.
It, however, is enormous in both scale and importance.
Look, you all are very well traveled; this is TEDGlobal after all.
But I do hope to take you to some places you've never been to before.
So, let's start off in China.
This photo was taken two weeks ago.
Actually, one indication is that little boy on my husband's shoulders has just graduated from high school.
(Laughter) But this is Tiananmen Square.
Many of you have been there. It's not the real China.
Let me take you to the real China.
This is in the Dabian Mountains in the remote part of Hubei province in central China.
Dai Manju is 13 years old at the time the story starts.
She lives with her parents, her two brothers and her great-aunt.
They have a hut that has no electricity, no running water, no wristwatch, no bicycle.
And they share this great splendor with a very large pig.
Dai Manju was in sixth grade when her parents said, "We're going to pull you out of school because the 13-dollar school fees are too much for us.
You're going to be spending the rest of your life in the rice paddies.
Why would we waste this money on you?"
This is what happens to girls in remote areas.
Turns out that Dai Manju was the best pupil in her grade.
She still made the two-hour trek to the schoolhouse and tried to catch every little bit of information that seeped out of the doors.
We wrote about her in The New York Times.
We got a flood of donations -- mostly 13-dollar checks because New York Times readers are very generous in tiny amounts (Laughter) but then, we got a money transfer for $10,000 -- really nice guy.
We turned the money over to that man there, the principal of the school.
He was delighted.
He thought, "Oh, I can renovate the school.
I can give scholarships to all the girls, you know, if they work hard and stay in school.
So Dai Manju basically finished out middle school.
She went to high school.
She went to vocational school for accounting.
She scouted for jobs down in Guangdong province in the south.
She found a job, she scouted for jobs for her classmates and her friends.
She sent money back to her family.
They built a new house, this time with running water, electricity, a bicycle, no pig.
What we saw was a natural experiment.
It is rare to get an exogenous investment in girls' education.
And over the years, as we followed Dai Manju, we were able to see that she was able to move out of a vicious cycle and into a virtuous cycle.
She not only changed her own dynamic, she changed her household, she changed her family, her village.
The village became a real standout.
Of course, most of China was flourishing at the time, but they were able to get a road built to link them up to the rest of China.
And that brings me to my first major of two tenets of "Half the Sky."
And that is that the central moral challenge of this century is gender inequity.
In the 19th century, it was slavery.
In the 20th century, it was totalitarianism.
The cause of our time is the brutality that so many people face around the world because of their gender.
So some of you may be thinking, "Gosh, that's hyperbole.
She's exaggerating."
Well, let me ask you this question.
How many of you think there are more males or more females in the world?
Let me take a poll. How many of you think there are more males in the world?
Hands up, please.
How many of you think -- a few -- how many of you there are more females in the world?
Okay, most of you.
Well, you know this latter group, you're wrong.
There are, true enough, in Europe and the West, when women and men have equal access to food and health care, there are more women, we live longer.
But in most of the rest of the world, that's not the case.
In fact, demographers have shown that there are anywhere between 60 million and 100 million missing females in the current population.
And, you know, it happens for several reasons.
For instance, in the last half-century, more girls were discriminated to death than all the people killed on all the battlefields in the 20th century.
Sometimes it's also because of the sonogram.
Girls get aborted before they're even born when there are scarce resources.
This girl here, for instance, is in a feeding center in Ethiopia.
The entire center was filled with girls like her.
What's remarkable is that her brothers, in the same family, were totally fine.
In India, in the first year of life, from zero to one, boy and girl babies basically survive at the same rate because they depend upon the breast, and the breast shows no son preference.
From one to five, girls die at a 50 percent higher mortality rate than boys, in all of India.
The second tenet of "Half the Sky" is that, let's put aside the morality of all the right and wrong of it all, and just on a purely practical level, we think that one of the best ways to fight poverty and to fight terrorism is to educate girls and to bring women into the formal labor force.
Poverty, for instance.
There are three reasons why this is the case.
For one, overpopulation is one of the persistent causes of poverty.
And you know, when you educate a boy, his family tends to have fewer kids, but only slightly.
When you educate a girl, she tends to have significantly fewer kids.
The second reason is it has to do with spending.
It's kind of like the dirty, little secret of poverty, which is that, not only do poor people take in very little income, but also, the income that they take in, they don't spend it very wisely, and unfortunately, most of that spending is done by men.
So research has shown, if you look at people who live under two dollars a day -- one metric of poverty -- two percent of that take-home pay goes to this basket here, in education.
20 percent goes to a basket that is a combination of alcohol, tobacco, sugary drinks -- and prostitution and festivals.
If you just take four percentage points and put it into this basket, you would have a transformative effect.
The last reason has to do with women being part of the solution, not the problem.
You need to use scarce resources.
It's a waste of resources if you don't use someone like Dai Manju.
Bill Gates put it very well when he was traveling through Saudi Arabia.
He was speaking to an audience much like yourselves.
However, two-thirds of the way there was a barrier.
On this side was men, and then the barrier, and this side was women.
And someone from this side of the room got up and said, "Mr. Gates, we have here as our goal in Saudi Arabia to be one of the top 10 countries when it comes to technology.
Do you think we'll make it?"
So Bill Gates, as he was staring out at the audience, he said, "If you're not fully utilizing half the resources in your country, there is no way you will get anywhere near the top 10."
So here is Bill of Arabia.
(Laughter) So what would some of the specific challenges look like?
I would say, on the top of the agenda is sex trafficking.
And I'll just say two things about this.
The slavery at the peak of the slave trade in the 1780s: there were about 80,000 slaves transported from Africa to the New World.
Now, modern slavery: according to State Department rough statistics, there are about 800,000 -- 10 times the number -- that are trafficked across international borders.
And that does not even include those that are trafficked within country borders, which is a substantial portion.
And if you look at another factor, another contrast, a slave back then is worth about $40,000 in today's money.
Today, you can buy a girl trafficked for a few hundred dollars, which means she's actually more disposable.
But you know, there is progress being made in places like Cambodia and Thailand.
We don't have to expect a world where girls are bought and sold or killed.
The second item on the agenda is maternal mortality.
You know, childbirth in this part of the world is a wonderful event.
In Niger, one in seven women can expect to die during childbirth.
Around the world, one woman dies every minute and a half from childbirth.
You know, it's not as though we don't have the technological solution, but these women have three strikes against them: they are poor, they are rural and they are female.
You know, for every woman who does die, there are 20 who survive but end up with an injury.
And the most devastating injury is obstetric fistula.
It's a tearing during obstructed labor that leaves a woman incontinent.
Let me tell you about Mahabuba.
She lives in Ethiopia.
She was married against her will at age 13.
She got pregnant, ran to the bush to have the baby, but you know, her body was very immature, and she ended up having obstructed labor.
The baby died, and she ended up with a fistula.
So that meant she was incontinent; she couldn't control her wastes.
In a word, she stank.
The villagers thought she was cursed; they didn't know what to do with her.
So finally, they put her at the edge of the village in a hut.
They ripped off the door so that the hyenas would get her at night.
That night, there was a stick in the hut.
She fought off the hyenas with that stick.
And the next morning, she knew if she could get to a nearby village where there was a foreign missionary, she would be saved.
Because she had some damage to her nerves, she crawled all the way -- 30 miles -- to that doorstep, half dead.
The foreign missionary opened the door, knew exactly what had happened, took her to a nearby fistula hospital in Addis Ababa, and she was repaired with a 350-dollar operation.
The doctors and nurses there noticed that she was not only a survivor, she was really clever, and they made her a nurse.
So now, Mahabuba, she is saving the lives of hundreds, thousands, of women.
She has become part of the solution, not the problem.
She's moved out of a vicious cycle and into a virtuous cycle.
I've talked about some of the challenges, let me talk about some of the solutions, and there are predictable solutions.
I've hinted at them: education and also economic opportunity.
So of course, when you educate a girl, she tends to get married later on in life, she tends to have kids later on in life, she tends to have fewer kids, and those kids that she does have, she educates them in a more enlightened fashion.
With economic opportunity, it can be transformative.
Let me tell you about Saima.
She lives in a small village outside Lahore, Pakistan.
And at the time, she was miserable.
She was beaten every single day by her husband, who was unemployed.
He was kind of a gambler type -- and unemployable, therefore -- and took his frustrations out on her.
Well, when she had her second daughter, her mother in-law told her son, "I think you'd better get a second wife.
Saima's not going to produce you a son."
This is when she had her second daughter.
At the time, there was a microlending group in the village that gave her a 65-dollar loan.
Saima took that money, and she started an embroidery business.
The merchants liked her embroidery; it sold very well, and they kept asking for more.
And when she couldn't produce enough, she hired other women in the village.
Pretty soon she had 30 women in the village working for her embroidery business.
And then, when she had to transport all of the embroidery goods from the village to the marketplace, she needed someone to help her do the transport, so she hired her husband.
So now they're in it together.
He does the transportation and distribution, and she does the production and sourcing.
And now they have a third daughter, and the daughters, all of them, are being tutored in education because Saima knows what's really important.
Which brings me to the final element, which is education.
Larry Summers, when he was chief economist at the World Bank, once said that, "It may well be that the highest return on investment in the developing world is in girls' education."
Let me tell you about Beatrice Biira.
Beatrice was living in Uganda near the Congo border, and like Dai Manju, she didn't go to school.
Actually, she had never been to school, not to a lick, one day.
Her parents, again, said, "Why should we spend the money on her?
She's going to spend most of her life lugging water back and forth."
Well, it just so happens, at that time, there was a group in Connecticut called the Niantic Community Church Group in Connecticut.
They made a donation to an organization based in Arkansas called Heifer International.
Heifer sent two goats to Africa.
One of them ended up with Beatrice's parents, and that goat had twins.
The twins started producing milk.
They sold the milk for cash.
The cash started accumulating, and pretty soon the parents said, "You know, we've got enough money. Let's send Beatrice to school."
So at nine years of age, Beatrice started in first grade -- after all, she'd never been to a lick of school -- with a six year-old.
No matter, she was just delighted to be in school.
She rocketed to the top of her class.
She stayed at the top of her class through elementary school, middle school, and then in high school, she scored brilliantly on the national examinations so that she became the first person in her village, ever, to come to the United States on scholarship.
Two years ago, she graduated from Connecticut College.
On the day of her graduation, she said, "I am the luckiest girl alive because of a goat."
(Laughter) And that goat was $120.
So you see how transformative little bits of help can be.
But I want to give you a reality check.
Look: U.S. aid, helping people is not easy, and there have been books that have criticized U.S. aid.
There's Bill Easterly's book.
There's a book called "Dead Aid."
You know, the criticism is fair; it isn't easy.
You know, people say how half of all water well projects, a year later, are failed.
When I was in Zimbabwe, we were touring a place with the village chief -- he wanted to raise money for a secondary school -- and there was some construction a few yards away, and I said, "What's that?"
He sort of mumbled.
Turns out that it's a failed irrigation project.
A few yards away was a failed chicken coop.
One year, all the chickens died, and no one wanted to put the chickens in there.
It's true, but we think that you don't through the baby out with the bathwater; you actually improve.
You learn from your mistakes, and you continuously improve.
We also think that individuals can make a difference, and they should, because individuals, together, we can all help create a movement.
And a movement of men and women is what's needed to bring about social change, change that will address this great moral challenge.
So then, I ask, what's in it for you?
You're probably asking that. Why should you care?
I will just leave you with two things.
One is that research shows that once you have all of your material needs taken care of -- which most of us, all of us, here in this room do -- research shows that there are very few things in life that can actually elevate your level of happiness.
One of those things is contributing to a cause larger than yourself.
And the second thing, it's an anecdote that I'll leave you with.
And that is the story of an aid worker in Darfur.
Here was a woman who had worked in Darfur, seeing things that no human being should see.
Throughout her time there, she was strong, she was steadfast.
She never broke down.
And then she came back to the United States and was on break, Christmas break.
She was in her grandmother's backyard, and she saw something that made her break down in tears.
What that was was a bird feeder.
And she realized that she had the great fortune to be born in a country where we take security for granted, where we not only can feed, clothe and house ourselves, but also provide for wild birds so they don't go hungry in the winter.
And she realized that with that great fortune comes great responsibility.
And so, like her, you, me, we have all won the lottery of life.
And so the question becomes: how do we discharge that responsibility?
So, here's the cause.
Join the movement.
Feel happier and help save the world.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
When I saw a piece of technology called Kinect -- it was called Natal -- I was inspired, and I thought for a moment, maybe it's possible to address that one problem of storytelling, to create a character which seemed alive, which noticed me, that could look me in the eyes and feel real, and sculpt a story about our relationship.
And so a year ago, I showed this off at a computer show called E3.
And this was a piece of technology with someone called Claire interacting with this boy.
And there was a huge row online about, "Hey, this can't be real."
And so I waited till now to have an actual demo of the real tech.
Now, this tech incorporates three big elements.
The first is a Kinect camera, which will be out in November, some incredible AI that was hidden in the dusty vaults, collecting dust in Microsoft, plus our quite crude attempts at AI at a company called Lionhead, mixing all those things together just to get to this one simple idea: to create a real, living being in a computer.
Now, I'll be honest with you and say that most of it is just a trick, but it's a trick that actually works.
So why don't we go over and have a look at the demo now.
This is Dimitri.
Dimitri, just waggle your arm around.
Now, you notice he's sitting.
There are no controllers, no keyboards, or mice, or joysticks, or joypads.
He is just going to use his hand, his body and his voice, just like humans interact with their hands, body and voice.
So let's move forward.
You're going to meet Milo for the first time.
We had to give him a problem because when we first created Milo, we realized that he came across as a little bit of a brat, to be honest with you.
He was quite a know-it-all, and he wanted to kind of make you laugh.
So the problem we introduced to him was this: he's just moved house.
He's moved from London to New England, over in America.
His parents are too busy to listen to his problems, and that's when he starts almost conjuring you up.
So here he is walking through the grass.
And you're able to interact with his world.
The cool thing is, what we're doing is we're changing the mind of Milo constantly.
That means no two people's Milos can be the same.
You're actually sculpting a human being here.
So, he's discovering the garden.
You're helping him discover the garden by just pointing out these snails.
Very simple at the start.
By the way, if you are a boy, it's snails; if you're a girl, it's butterflies because what we found was that girls hate snails.
(Laughter) So remember, this is the first time you've met him, and we really want to draw you in and make you more curious.
His face, by the way, is fully AI-driven.
We have complete control over his blush responses, the diameter of his nostrils to denote stress.
We actually do something called body matching.
If you're leaning forward, he will try and slightly change the neuro-linguistic nature of his face, because we went out with this strong idea: how can we make you believe that something's real?
Now we've used the hand.
The other thing to use is your body.
Why not just, instead of pushing left and right with a mouse or with a joypad, why not use your body just to lean on the chair -- again, relaxed?
You can lean back, but the camera will change its perspective depending on which way you're looking.
So Dimitri's now going to use -- he's used his hand; he's used his body.
He's now going to use the other thing which is essential, and that's his voice.
Now, the thing about voice is, our experience with voice recognition is pretty awful, isn't it?
It never works.
You order an airline ticket; you end up in Timbuktu.
So we've tackled that problem, and we've come up with a solution, which we'll see in a second.
Milo: I could just squish it.
Peter Molyneux: What are you going to do, Dimitri?
Female Voice: Squashing a snail may not seem important, but remember, even this choice will affect how Milo develops.
Do you want Milo to squash it?
When you see the microphone, say ... (PM: Squash.) ... yes to decide.
Dimitri: Go on, Milo. Squash it.
PM: No. That's the wrong thing to do.
Now look at his response.
He said, "Go on, Milo. Squash it."
What we're using there is, we're using something, a piece of technology called Tellme.
It's a company that Microsoft acquired some years ago.
We've got a database of words which we recognize.
We pick those words out.
We also reference that with the tonation database that we build up of Dimitri's voice, or the user's voice.
Now we need to have a bit more engagement, and again, what we can do is we can look at the body.
And we'll do that in a second.
Milo: I wonder how deep it is.
Deep.
PM: Okay. So what we're going to do now is teach Milo to skim stones.
We're actually teaching him.
It's very, very interesting that men, more than women, tend to be more competitive here.
They're fine with teaching Milo for the first few throws, but then they want to beat Milo, where women, they're more nurturing about this.
Okay, this is skimming stones.
How do you skim stones?
You stand up, and you skim the stone.
It's that simple.
Just recognizing your body, recognizing the body's motions, the tech, understanding that you've gone from sitting down to standing up.
Again, all of this is done in the way us humans do things, and that's crucially important if we want Milo to appear real.
Female Voice: See if you can inspire him to do any better.
Try hitting the boat.
Milo: Ahhh. So close.
PM: That's Dimitri at his most competitive.
Now beaten an 11-year-old child. Well done.
Milo: Okay.
PM: So, Milo's being called back in by his parents, giving us time to be alone and to help him out.
Basically -- the bit that we missed at the start -- his parents had asked him to clean up his room.
And we're going to help him with this now.
But this is going to be an introduction, and this is all about the deep psychology that we're trying to use.
We're trying to introduce you to what I believe is the most wonderful part, you being able to talk in your natural voice to Milo.
Now, to do that, we needed a set up, like a magician's trick.
And what we did was, we needed to give Milo this big problem.
So as Dimitri starts tidying up, you can overhear a conversation that Milo's having with his parents.
Milo's Mom: Oh, you've got gravy all over the floor. (Milo: I didn't mean to!) Milo's Mom: That carpet is brand new.
PM: So he's just spilled a plate of sausages on the floor, on the brand-new carpet.
We've all done it as parents; we've all done it as children.
Now's a chance for Dimitri to kind of reassure and calm Milo down.
It's all been too much for him.
He's just moved house. He's got no friends.
Now is the time when we open that portal and allow you to talk to Milo.
Female Voice: Why don't you try saying something encouraging to cheer Milo up.
Dimitri: Come on, Milo. You know what parents are like.
They're always getting stressed.
Milo: What do they want to come here for anyway?
We don't know anyone.
Dimitri: Well, you've got a new school to go to.
You're going to meet loads of cool, new friends.
Milo: I just really miss my old house, that's all.
Dimitri: Well, this is a pretty awesome house, Milo.
You've got a cool garden to play in and a pond.
Milo: It was good skimming stones.
This looks nice.
You cleaned up my room.
Thanks.
PM: So after three-quarters of an hour, he recognizes you.
And I promise you, if you're sitting in front of this screen, that is a truly wonderful moment.
And we're ready now to tell a story about his childhood and his life, and it goes on, and he has, you know, many adventures.
Some of those adventures are a little bit dark or on the darker side.
Some of those adventures are wonderfully encouraging -- he's got to go to school.
The cool thing is that we're doing as well: as you interact with him, you're able to put things into his world; he recognizes objects.
His mind is based in a cloud.
That means Milo's mind, as millions of people use it, will get smarter and cleverer.
He'll recognize more objects and thus understand more words.
But for me, this is a wonderful opportunity where technology, at last, can be connected with, where I am no longer restrained by the finger I hold in my hand -- as far as a computer game's concerned -- or by the blandness of not being noticed if you're watching a film or a book.
And I love those revolutions, and I love the future that Milo brings.
Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause)
This talk is about righting writing wrongs.
No, the sound's not faulty -- righting writing wrongs.
The Middle East is huge, and with all our problems, one thing's for sure: we love to laugh.
I think humor is a great way to celebrate our differences.
We need to take our responsibilities seriously, but not ourselves.
Don't get me wrong: it's not like we don't have comedy in the Middle East.
I grew up at a time when iconic actors from Kuwait, Syria, Egypt used laughter to unite the region, just as football can.
(Laughter) Now is the time for us to laugh at ourselves, before others can laugh with us.
This is the story of the rise and rise of stand-up comedy in the Middle East -- a stand-up uprising, if you will.
Working in London as TV maker and writer, I quickly realized that comedy connects audiences.
Now, the best breeding ground for good comic writing is the stand-up comedy circuit, where they just happen to say that you kill when you do well and you bomb when you do badly.
An unfortunate connection for us maybe, but it reminds me that we'd like to thank one man for, over the past decade, working tirelessly to support comedians all around the world, specifically comedians with a Middle Eastern background.
(Applause) Like my good friends, Dean and Maysoon, at the bottom of the screen, who, two years after 9/11, started a festival to change the way Middle Easterners are perceived in the world.
It's still going strong, with positive press to die for.
Also, three guys working for years in Los Angeles, an Iranian, a Palestinian and an Egyptian, created the aptly named Axis of Evil comedy act.
And wherever they went, they killed.
Now, I didn't start this fire, but I did pour petrol on it.
I moved to Dubai as the head of original content for a Western TV network.
My job was to connect the brand with a Middle Eastern audience.
Now, the American head of programming wanted new local Arabic comedy.
In a thick Arabic accent, my brain went, "Berfect."
(Laughter) Now, I had friends in the U.S.
who had started a successful new tribe.
And I had every intention of taking this tribe from being outliers in the Middle East and pushing them over the tipping point towards success.
Now, as with any new idea, it wasn't easy.
I had four phases to this plan.
First, we'd need to buy content from the West and air it.
Then I'd bring my friends, and we'd show local amateurs how it's done.
We would film that and air it, and then I could work with the local amateurs and write new comedy.
I excitedly presented this to the big boss, and his reaction was, "Um, I don't get it."
So I retreated back to my cave and continued to support and produce comedy and let my friends use my couch as a regional operations hub.
Now, fast forward two years, to early 2007.
The earth rotated, as did our management, (Laughter) and as if by divine intervention, things came together to help this revolution take shape.
Here's how the dots connected.
First, the Axis guys recorded a Comedy Central special that aired in the States, and it was getting great hits on YouTube.
Our new French CEO believed in the power of positive PR ...
(Laughter) and ideas du bon marche.
Let's just say "value for money."
I produced in Dubai a show for Ahmed Ahmed to showcase his new Axis special to a packed room.
I invited our new CEO, and as soon as he realized we had a room packed full of laughing infidels, his reaction was very simple: "Let's make this happen.
And one more thing: No, don't F it up."
So I quickly went to work with a great team around me.
I happened to find a funny guy to present it in Arabic, who is originally Korean, a perfect fit for the Axis of Evil.
This is all true.
Now, while preparing for the tour, I had to remind the guys to be culturally sensitive.
I used the three Bs of stand-up don'ts as I call them in the Middle East: blue content, keep it clean; beliefs, not religion; and the third B, bolitics.
Stay away from bolitics in the Middle East.
Oh course, you might think, what's left without bolitics, sex and religion, how can you make people laugh?
I'd say, watch any successful well-written, family-friendly sitcom in the West for your answers.
Now, were the Axis successful?
In five countries, in just under a month, we had thousands of fanatical fans come and see them live.
We had millions see them on TV and on TV news.
In Jordan, we had His Majesty the King come and see them.
In fact, they were so successful that you could buy a pirated copy of their DVD, even before it was released in the Middle East.
Anywhere you go.
So everywhere we went, we auditioned amateurs.
We filmed that process and aired a documentary.
I called it "Three Guys and Wonho."
It really is his name.
And all this TV and Internet exposure has led to a great many recruits to our cause.
In Dubai this year, we've just had the first all-women's, homegrown stand-up show.
And notice two of them are wearing headscarves, and yes, even they can laugh.
Dubai, to me, is like a hand that supports anyone who wants to make things happen.
20 years ago, no one had heard of it.
Look at it now.
With an inspirational leader, I think this year, the opening of the tallest tower in the world is like adding a finger to that hand, that points at all those who spread fallacious stories about us.
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, in three short years, we've come a long way with stand-up comedy shows happening even in Saudi Arabia.
These comics are now going to the New York festival.
And the Lebanese, brilliant Lebanese, Nemr Abou Nassar, we featured in our first tour, has just been performing in L.A.'s legendary comedy clubs.
So clearly, from the inside, we are doing our best to change our image, and it's exploding.
(Laughter) So, as for the outsiders looking in, watch the CNN report on the second Amman Comedy Festival.
The reporter did a great job, and I thank her, but somebody forgot to send the positive PR email to the person operating the automatic news ticker that appears at the bottom.
For example, when Dean talks, the ticker says, "U.S.: Suspect gave 'actionable intel."
Well, if you're used to listening to comedians, then I'm not surprised.
Sadly, this leads me to another three Bs that represents how the media in the West talks about us as bombers, billionaires and belly dancers.
Enough.
We're not all angry fanatics who want to kill the infidel.
We have a positive story to tell and image to sell.
In fact, one thing's for sure, in my experience, we love to laugh like hell.
(Laughter) Here are three questions that I like to use to test the truthiness of our representation in any media story.
One: Is the Middle East being shown in a current time and correct context?
(Laughter) Two: Do the Middle Eastern characters laugh or smile without showing the whites of their eyes?
(Laughter) Three: Is the Middle Eastern character being played by one?
Clearly, there are wrongs that need to be righted.
We've started in our region.
My challenge to the rest of the world is please, start using positive Middle Eastern images in your stories.
For inspiration, go to one of our festivals, go online, drop us a line.
Let's change the narrative together and let's start righting writing wrongs.
I'd like to end, before going back to the Middle East, with a quote from one of the greatest Sheikhs to put quill to parchment.
As my father likes to call him, "Asheikh Azubare;" as my mother would say, "Shakespeare."
(Laughter) "And now we go in content to liberty and not to banishment."
Thank you.
(Applause)
I was one of the founding members of the Axis of Evil Comedy Tour.
The other founding members included Ahmed Ahmed, who is an Egyptian-American, who actually had the idea to go to the Middle East and try it out before we went out as a tour.
He went out solo and did it first.
Then there was Aron Kader, who was the Palestinian-American.
And then there was me, the Iranian-American of the group.
Now, being Iranian-American presents its own set of problems, as you know.
Those two countries aren't getting along these days.
So it causes a lot of inner conflict, you know, like part of me likes me, part of me hates me.
(Laughter) Part of me thinks I should have a nuclear program, the other part thinks I can't be trusted with one.
These are dilemmas I have every day.
But I was born in Iran; I'm now an American citizen, which means I have the American passport, which means I can travel.
Because if you only have the Iranian passport, you're kind of limited to the countries you can go to with open arms, you know -- Syria, Venezuela, North Korea.
(Laughter) So, anyone who's gotten their passport in America will tell you, when you get it, it still says what country you were born in.
So I remember getting my American passport.
I was like, "Woo-hoo! I'm going to travel."
And I opened it up, it said, "Born in Iran." I'm like, "Oh, come on, man!"
(Laughter) "I'm trying to go places."
(Laughter) But what's interesting is, I've never had trouble in any Western countries with my American passport, even though it says, "Born in Iran" -- no problems.
Where I've had problems is in some of the Arab countries.
I guess some of the Arab countries aren't getting along with Iran either.
So I was in Kuwait recently, doing a comedy show with some other American comedians.
Then the border patrol saw my American passport: "Ah-ha! American, great."
Then he opened it up. "Born in Iran? Wait."
(Laughter) And he started asking me questions.
He said, "What is your father's name?"
I said, "Well, he's passed away, but his name was Khosro."
He goes, "What is your grandfather's name?"
I said, "He passed away a long time ago.
He says, "You wait. I'll be back," and he walked away.
And I started freaking out, because I don't know what kind of crap my grandfather was into.
(Laughter) Thought the guy was going to come back and be like, "We've been looking for you for 200 years."
(Laughter) "Your grandfather has a parking violation. It's way overdue.
You owe us two billion dollars."
(Laughter) But as you can see, when I talk, I speak with an American accent, which you would think, as an Iranian-American actor, I should be able to play any part, good, bad, what have you.
But a lot of times in Hollywood, when casting directors find out you're of Middle Eastern descent, they go, "Oh, you're Iranian. Great!
Can you say 'I will kill you in the name of Allah?'" I go, "I could say that, but what if I were to say, 'Hello. I'm your doctor'?"
They go, "Great! And then you hijack the hospital."
(Laughter) Like, I think you're missing the point here.
Don't get me wrong, I don't mind playing bad guys.
I want to play a bad guy. I want to rob a bank.
I want to rob a bank in a film, but do it with a gun, not with a bomb strapped around me, right?
(Laughter) Because I imagine the director: "Maz, I think your character would rob the bank with a bomb around him."
"Why would I do that?
If I want the money, why would I kill myself?"
(Laughter) Right?
(Applause) "Gimme all your money, or I'll blow myself up!"
(Laughter) "Well, then blow yourself up.
(Laughter) Just do it outside, please."
(Laughter) But the fact is, there's good people everywhere.
That's what I try and show in my stand-up, good people everywhere.
All it takes in one person to mess it up.
Like a couple months ago in Times Square in New York, there was a Pakistani Muslim guy who tried to blow up a car bomb.
Now, I happened to be in Times Square that night doing a comedy show.
And a few months before that, there was a white American guy in Austin, Texas who flew his airplane into the IRS building, and I happened to be in Austin that day doing a stand-up comedy show.
Now I'll tell you, as a Middle-Eastern male, when you show up around a lot of these activities, you start feeling guilty at one point.
(Laughter) I was watching the news. I'm like, "Am I involved in this crap?"
(Laughter) "I didn't get the memo. What's going on?"
(Laughter) But what was interesting was, the Pakistani Muslim guy -- see, he gives a bad name to Muslims and Middle Easterners and Pakistanis from all over the world.
And one thing that happened there was also the Pakistani Taliban took credit for that failed car bombing.
My question is: Why would you take credit for a failed car bombing?
"We just want to say: we tried."
(Laughter) "And furthermore ...
(Laughter) it is the thought that counts."
(Laughter) (Applause) "And in conclusion, win some, lose some."
(Laughter) But what happened was, when the white guy flew his plane into the building, I know all my Middle Eastern and Muslim friends in the States were watching TV, going, "Please, don't be Middle Eastern. Don't be Hassan or Hussein."
And the name came out: Jack. I'm like, "Woooo! That's not one of us!"
But I kept watching the news in case they came back, and were like, "Before he did it, he converted to Islam."
"Damn it! Why Jack? Why?"
But the fact is, I've been lucky to get a chance to perform all over the world, and I did a lot of shows in the Middle East.
I just did a seven-country solo tour.
I was in Oman, and I was in Saudi Arabia.
I was in Dubai.
And it's great, there's good people everywhere.
And you learn great things about these places.
I encourage people always to go visit these places.
For example, Dubai -- cool place.
They're obsessed with having the biggest, tallest, longest, as we all know.
They have a mall there, the Dubai Mall.
I was walking. I heard, "Beep! Beep!" I'm like, "What are you doing here?"
He goes, "I'm going to the Zara store. It's three miles away.
(Laughter) And what's crazy -- there's a recession going on, even in Dubai, but you wouldn't know by the prices.
Like in the Dubai Mall, they sell frozen yogurt by the gram.
It's like a drug deal.
I was walking by. The guy goes, "Psst! Habibi, my friend."
(Laughter) "You want some frozen yogurt?
(Laughter) Come here. Come here. Come here.
I have one gram, five gram, 10 gram. How many gram do you want?"
(Laughter) I bought five grams. 10 dollars. 10 dollars! I said, "What's in this?"
He's like, "Good stuff, man. Colombian. Top of the line."
(Laughter) The other thing you learn when you travel in these countries, in the Middle East, Latin American, South American countries, a lot of times when they build stuff, there's no rules and regulations.
For example, I took my two-year-old son to the playground at the Dubai Mall.
And I've taken him to playgrounds all over the United States.
And when you put your two-year-old on a slide in the United States, they put something on the slide to slow the kid down as he comes down the slide.
Not in the Middle East.
(Laughter) I put my two-year-old on the slide, he went whoosh! He took off!
(Laughter) I went down and, "Where's my son?" "On the third floor, sir. Third floor."
(Laughter) "You take a taxi. You go to Zara. Make a left."
(Laughter) "Try the yogurt. It's very good. Little expensive."
(Laughter) But one thing I try to do with my stand-up is break stereotypes.
And I've been guilty of stereotyping as well.
And they don't get paid that well.
And I got it in my head that all the Indians must be workers.
I forgot there's obviously successful Indians in Dubai too.
I was doing a show, and they said, "We'll send a driver to pick you up."
I went down to the lobby, and saw this Indian guy.
I go, "He must be my driver," since he's standing there in a cheap suit, thin mustache, staring at me.
I say, "Excuse me, are you my driver?"
(Laughter) I go, "I'm sorry! Why were you staring at me?"
He goes, "I thought you were my driver."
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) I'll leave you with this: I try, with my stand-up, to break stereotypes, present Middle Easterners and Muslims in a positive light.
I hope that in the coming years, more film and television programs come out of Hollywood, presenting us in a positive light.
Who knows? Maybe one day, we'll even have our own James Bond. Right?
"My name is Bond.
Jamal Bond."
(Laughter) Til then, I'll keep telling jokes. Hope you keep laughing.
Have a good day. Thank you.
(Applause)
My name's Seth Priebatsch. I'm the chief ninja of SCVNGR.
I'm a proud Princeton dropout.
Also proud to have relocated here to Boston, where I actually grew up.
(Applause) Yeah, Boston.
Easy wins, I should just name the counties that we've got around here.
I'm also fairly determined to try and build a game layer on top of the world.
This is sort of a new concept and it's really important, because while the last decade was the decade of social, the decade where the framework in which we connect with other people was built, this next decade will be the decade where the game framework is built, where the motivations we use to actually influence behavior and the framework in which that is constructed, is decided upon, and that's really important.
I say I want to build a game layer on top of the world, but that's not quite true, because it's already under construction; it's already happening.
And it looks like this right now.
It looks like the Web did back in 1997, right?
It's not very good. It's cluttered.
It's filled with lots of different things that, in short, aren't that fun.
There are credit card schemes and airline mile programs, coupon cards and all these loyalty schemes that actually do use game dynamics and are building the game layer -- they just suck.
They're not very well-designed.
(Laughter) So that's unfortunate.
But luckily, as my favorite action hero, Bob the Builder, says, "We can do better. We can build this better."
And the tools, the resources that we use to build a game layer, are game dynamics themselves.
And so the crux of this presentation is going to go through four really important game dynamics, really interesting things, that, if you use consciously, you can use to influence behavior, both for good, for bad, for in-between.
Hopefully for good.
But this is the important stage in which that framework will get built, and so we want to all be thinking about it consciously now.
Before we jump into that, there's a question of: Why is this important?
I'm making this claim that there's a game layer on top of the world, and it's very important that we build it properly.
The reason it's so important is that, in the last decade, what we've seen has been building the social layer, has been this framework for connections, and construction on that layer is over, it's finished.
There's still a lot to explore, still a lot of people trying to figure out social and how we leverage this and how we use this, but the framework itself is done, and it's called Facebook.
And that's OK, right? A lot of people are very happy with Facebook.
I like it quite a lot.
They've created this thing called the Open Graph, and they own all of our connections.
They own half a billion people.
So when you want to build on the social layer, the framework has been decided; it is the Open Graph API.
And if you're happy with that, fantastic.
If you're not, too bad. There's nothing you can do.
And that's a real thing.
I mean, we want to build frameworks in a way that makes it acceptable and makes it productive down the road.
So, the social layer is all about these connections.
The game layer is all about influence.
It's not about adding a social fabric to the web and connecting you to other people everywhere you are and everywhere you go, it's actually about using dynamics, using forces, to influence the behavior of where you are, what you do there, how you do it.
That's really, really powerful.
And it's going to be more important than the social layer, and affect our lives more deeply and perhaps more invisibly.
So it's incredibly critical that at this moment, while it's just getting constructed, while the frameworks like Facebook or Open Graph are being created for the game-layer equivalent, that we think about it very consciously, and that we do it in a way that is open, available, and can be leveraged for good.
So that's what I want to talk about for game dynamics, because construction has just begun, and the more consciously we can think about this, the better we'll be able to use it for anything we want.
So like I said, the way you go through and build on the game layer is not with glass and steel and cement.
And the resources we use are not this two-dimensional swath of land that we have.
The resources are mindshare, and the tools, the raw materials, are these game dynamics.
Back at SCVNGR, we like to joke that with seven game dynamics, you can get anyone to do anything.
Today, I'm going to show you four, because I hope to have a competitive advantage at the end of this, still.
(Laughter) So the first one, it's a very simple game dynamic.
It's called the appointment dynamic.
It's a dynamic in which to succeed, players have to do something at a predefined time, generally at a predefined place.
And these dynamics are a little scary sometimes, because you think, "Other people can be using forces that will manipulate how I interact: what I do, where I do it, when I do it."
This sort of "loss of free will" that occurs in games can be frightening.
So with each dynamic, I'm going to give three examples: one that shows how it's already being used in the real world, so you can rationalize it a bit; one that shows it in what we consider a conventional game -- I think everything is a game, but this is more what you'd think of as a game played on a board or on a computer screen; and one of how it can be used for good, so you can see that these forces can be very powerful.
So the first one, the most famous appointment dynamic in the world, is something called, "Happy Hour."
So I had just recently dropped out of Princeton and actually ended up for the first time in a bar, and I saw these happy hour things all over the place.
And this is simply an appointment dynamic: come here at a certain time, get your drinks half off.
This game dynamic is so powerful, it doesn't just influence our behavior; it's influenced our entire culture.
That's a really scary thought, that one game dynamic can change things so powerfully.
It also exists in more conventional game forms.
I'm sure you've all heard of Farmville by now.
If you haven't, I recommend playing it.
You won't do anything else for the rest of your day.
Farmville has more active users than Twitter.
It's incredibly powerful, and it has this dynamic where you have to return at a certain time to water your fake crops, or they wilt.
And this is so powerful that when they tweak their stats, when they say your crops wilt after eight hours, or after six hours, or after 24 hours, it changes the life cycle of some 70 million people during the day.
They will return, like clockwork, at different times.
So if they wanted the world to end, if they wanted productivity to stop, they could make it a 30-minute cycle, and no one could do anything else, right?
(Laughter) That's a little scary.
But this could also be used for good.
This local company called Vitality has created a product to help people take their medicine on time.
That's an appointment.
It's something that people don't do very well.
They have these GlowCaps which flash and email you and do cool things to remind you to take your medicine.
This isn't a game yet, but really should be.
You should get points for doing it on time and lose points for not doing it on time.
They should recognize they've built an appointment dynamic, and leverage the games.
Then you can really achieve good in some interesting ways.
We're going to jump onto the next one.
Influence and status.
This is one of the most famous game dynamics, used all over the place.
It's used in your wallets, right now.
We all want that credit card on the far left, because it's black.
And you see someone at CVS or -- not CVS -- like, Christian Dior -- (Laughter) I don't know. I don't have a black card; I've got a debit card.
(Laughter) So they whip it out and you see that black card, and: "I want that because it means they're cooler than I am, and I need that."
And this is used in games as well.
"Modern Warfare," one of the most successful selling games of all time.
I'm only a level four, but I desperately want to be a level 10, because they've got that cool red badge, and that means that I am somehow better than everyone else.
And that's very powerful to me.
It's also used in more conventional settings, and can be used more consciously there.
School -- and remember, I made it through one year, so I think I'm qualified to talk on school -- is a game; it's just not a terribly well-designed game.
There are levels. There are C. There are B. There's A.
There are statuses. I mean, what is valedictorian, but a status?
If we called valedictorian a "White Knight Paladin level 20," I think people would probably work a lot harder.
(Laughter) (Applause) So school is a game, and there has been lots of experimentation on how we do this properly.
But let's use it consciously.
Why have games you can lose? Why go from an A to an F or a B to a C?
That sucks. Why not level-up?
At Princeton, they've actually experimented with this, with quizzes where you gain experience points, and you level up from B to an A.
And it's very powerful.
It can be used in interesting ways.
The third one I'll talk about is the progression dynamic, where you have to make progress, move through different steps in a very granular fashion.
This is used all over the place, including LinkedIn, where I am an unwhole individual.
I am only 85 percent complete on LinkedIn, and that bothers me.
And this is so deep-seated in our psyche that when we're presented with a progress bar and presented with easy, granular steps to take to try and complete that progress bar, we will do it.
We will find a way to move that blue line all the way to the right edge of the screen.
This is used in conventional games as well.
I mean, this is a Paladin level 10, and that's a Paladin level 20.
And if you were going to fight Orcs on the fields of Mordor against the Ra's Al Ghul, you'd probably want to be the bigger one, right?
I would.
And so people work very hard to level-up.
"World of Warcraft" is one of the most successful games of all time.
The average player spends some six, six-and-a-half hours a day on it, their most dedicated players -- it's like a full-time job, it's insane.
And they have these systems where you can level-up.
And that's a very powerful thing. Progression is powerful.
It can also be used in very compelling ways for good.
One of the things we work on at SCVNGR is: How do you use games to drive traffic and business to local businesses, to something that is very key to the economy?
And here, we have a game that people play.
They go places, do challenges, earn points.
And we've introduced a progression dynamic into it, where, by going to the same place over and over, doing challenges, engaging with the business, you move a green bar from the left edge of the screen to the right, and unlock rewards.
This is powerful enough that we can see it hooks people into these dynamics, pulls them back to the same local businesses, creates loyalty, creates engagement, and is able to drive meaningful revenue and fun and engagement to businesses.
These progression dynamics are powerful and can be used in the real world.
The final one I want to talk about -- and it's a great one to end on -- is this concept of communal discovery, a dynamic in which everyone has to work together to achieve something.
Communal discovery is powerful because it leverages the network that is society to solve problems.
This is used in some famous consumer web stories like Digg, which I'm sure you've all heard of.
Digg is a communal dynamic to try to find and source the best news, the most interesting stories.
And they made this into a game, initially.
They had a leader board where, if you recommended the best stories, you would get points.
And that really motivated people to find the best stories.
But it became so powerful, there was actually a cabal, a group of people, the top seven on the leader board, who would work together to make sure they maintained that position, recommending people's stories.
The game became more powerful than the goal.
They ended up shutting down the leader board because, while it was effective, it was so powerful that it stopped sourcing the best stories, and started having people work to maintain leadership.
So we have to use this one carefully.
It's also used in things like McDonald's Monopoly, where the game is not the Monopoly you're playing, but the cottage industries that form to try and find Boardwalk.
There, they're just looking for a sticker that says "Boardwalk," but it can also be used to find real things.
This is the DARPA balloon challenge, where they hid a couple balloons all across the United States and said, "Use networks. Try and find these balloons fastest, and the winner will get $40,000."
The winner was a group out of MIT, where they created sort of a pyramid scheme, a network, where the first person to recommend the location of a balloon got $2,000, and anyone else to push that recommendation up also got a cut.
And in 12 hours, they were able to find all these balloons, all across the country.
Really powerful dynamic.
And so, I've got about 20 seconds left, so if I'm going to leave you with anything, last decade was the decade of social.
This next decade is the decade of games.
We use game dynamics to build on it. We build with mindshare.
We can influence behavior.
It's very powerful. It's very exciting.
Let's all build it together, let's do it well and have fun playing.
It feels like we're all suffering from information overload or data glut.
And the good news is there might be an easy solution to that, and that's using our eyes more.
So, visualizing information, so that we can see the patterns and connections that matter and then designing that information so it makes more sense, or it tells a story, or allows us to focus only on the information that's important.
Failing that, visualized information can just look really cool.
So, let's see.
This is the $Billion Dollar o-Gram, and this image arose out of frustration I had with the reporting of billion-dollar amounts in the press.
That is, they're meaningless without context: 500 billion for this pipeline, 20 billion for this war.
It doesn't make any sense, so the only way to understand it is visually and relatively.
So I scraped a load of reported figures from various news outlets and then scaled the boxes according to those amounts.
And the colors here represent the motivation behind the money.
So purple is "fighting," and red is "giving money away," and green is "profiteering."
And what you can see straight away is you start to have a different relationship to the numbers.
You can literally see them.
But more importantly, you start to see patterns and connections between numbers that would otherwise be scattered across multiple news reports.
Let me point out some that I really like.
This is OPEC's revenue, this green box here -- 780 billion a year.
And this little pixel in the corner -- three billion -- that's their climate change fund.
Americans, incredibly generous people -- over 300 billion a year, donated to charity every year, compared with the amount of foreign aid given by the top 17 industrialized nations at 120 billion.
Then of course, the Iraq War, predicted to cost just 60 billion back in 2003.
And it mushroomed slightly. Afghanistan and Iraq mushroomed now to 3,000 billion.
So now it's great because now we have this texture, and we can add numbers to it as well.
So we could say, well, a new figure comes out ... let's see African debt.
How much of this diagram do you think might be taken up by the debt that Africa owes to the West?
Let's take a look.
So there it is: 227 billion is what Africa owes.
And the recent financial crisis, how much of this diagram might that figure take up?
What has that cost the world? Let's take a look at that.
Dooosh -- Which I think is the appropriate sound effect for that much money: 11,900 billion.
So, by visualizing this information, we turned it into a landscape that you can explore with your eyes, a kind of map really, a sort of information map.
And when you're lost in information, an information map is kind of useful.
So I want to show you another landscape now.
We need to imagine what a landscape of the world's fears might look like.
Let's take a look.
This is Mountains Out of Molehills, a timeline of global media panic.
(Laughter) So, I'll label this for you in a second.
But the height here, I want to point out, is the intensity of certain fears as reported in the media.
Let me point them out.
So this, swine flu -- pink.
Bird flu.
SARS -- brownish here. Remember that one?
The millennium bug, terrible disaster.
These little green peaks are asteroid collisions.
(Laughter) And in summer, here, killer wasps.
(Laughter) So these are what our fears look like over time in our media.
But what I love -- and I'm a journalist -- and what I love is finding hidden patterns; I love being a data detective.
And there's a very interesting and odd pattern hidden in this data that you can only see when you visualize it.
Let me highlight it for you.
See this line, this is a landscape for violent video games.
As you can see, there's a kind of odd, regular pattern in the data, twin peaks every year.
If we look closer, we see those peaks occur at the same month every year.
Why?
Well, November, Christmas video games come out, and there may well be an upsurge in the concern about their content.
But April isn't a particularly massive month for video games.
Why April?
Well, in April 1999 was the Columbine shooting, and since then, that fear has been remembered by the media and echoes through the group mind gradually through the year.
You have retrospectives, anniversaries, court cases, even copy-cat shootings, all pushing that fear into the agenda.
And there's another pattern here as well. Can you spot it?
See that gap there? There's a gap, and it affects all the other stories.
Why is there a gap there?
You see where it starts? September 2001, when we had something very real to be scared about.
So, I've been working as a data journalist for about a year, and I keep hearing a phrase all the time, which is this: "Data is the new oil."
Data is the kind of ubiquitous resource that we can shape to provide new innovations and new insights, and it's all around us, and it can be mined very easily.
It's not a particularly great metaphor in these times, especially if you live around the Gulf of Mexico, but I would, perhaps, adapt this metaphor slightly, and I would say that data is the new soil.
Because for me, it feels like a fertile, creative medium.
Over the years, online, we've laid down a huge amount of information and data, and we irrigate it with networks and connectivity, and it's been worked and tilled by unpaid workers and governments.
And, all right, I'm kind of milking the metaphor a little bit.
But it's a really fertile medium, and it feels like visualizations, infographics, data visualizations, they feel like flowers blooming from this medium.
But if you look at it directly, it's just a lot of numbers and disconnected facts.
But if you start working with it and playing with it in a certain way, interesting things can appear and different patterns can be revealed.
Let me show you this.
Can you guess what this data set is?
What rises twice a year, once in Easter and then two weeks before Christmas, has a mini peak every Monday, and then flattens out over the summer?
I'll take answers.
(Audience: Chocolate.) David McCandless: Chocolate.
You might want to get some chocolate in.
Any other guesses?
(Audience: Shopping.) DM: Shopping.
Yeah, retail therapy might help.
(Audience: Sick leave.) DM: Sick leave. Yeah, you'll definitely want to take some time off.
Shall we see?
(Laughter) (Applause) So, the information guru Lee Byron and myself, we scraped 10,000 status Facebook updates for the phrase "break-up" and "broken-up" and this is the pattern we found -- people clearing out for Spring Break, (Laughter) coming out of very bad weekends on a Monday, being single over the summer, and then the lowest day of the year, of course: Christmas Day.
Who would do that?
So there's a titanic amount of data out there now, unprecedented.
But if you ask the right kind of question, or you work it in the right kind of way, interesting things can emerge.
So information is beautiful. Data is beautiful.
I wonder if I could make my life beautiful.
And here's my visual C.V.
I'm not quite sure I've succeeded.
Pretty blocky, the colors aren't that great.
But I wanted to convey something to you.
I started as a programmer, and then I worked as a writer for many years, about 20 years, in print, online and then in advertising, and only recently have I started designing.
And I've never been to design school.
I've never studied art or anything.
I just kind of learned through doing.
And when I started designing, I discovered an odd thing about myself.
I already knew how to design, but it wasn't like I was amazingly brilliant at it, but more like I was sensitive to the ideas of grids and space and alignment and typography.
It's almost like being exposed to all this media over the years had instilled a kind of dormant design literacy in me.
And I don't feel like I'm unique.
I feel that everyday, all of us now are being blasted by information design.
It's being poured into our eyes through the Web, and we're all visualizers now; we're all demanding a visual aspect to our information.
There's something almost quite magical about visual information.
It's effortless, it literally pours in.
And if you're navigating a dense information jungle, coming across a beautiful graphic or a lovely data visualization, it's a relief, it's like coming across a clearing in the jungle.
I was curious about this, so it led me to the work of a Danish physicist called Tor Norretranders, and he converted the bandwidth of the senses into computer terms.
So here we go. This is your senses, pouring into your senses every second.
Your sense of sight is the fastest.
It has the same bandwidth as a computer network.
Then you have touch, which is about the speed of a USB key.
And then you have hearing and smell, which has the throughput of a hard disk.
And then you have poor old taste, which is like barely the throughput of a pocket calculator.
And that little square in the corner, a naught .7 percent, that's the amount we're actually aware of.
So a lot of your vision -- the bulk of it is visual, and it's pouring in.
It's unconscious.
The eye is exquisitely sensitive to patterns in variations in color, shape and pattern.
It loves them, and it calls them beautiful.
It's the language of the eye.
If you combine the language of the eye with the language of the mind, which is about words and numbers and concepts, you start speaking two languages simultaneously, each enhancing the other.
So, you have the eye, and then you drop in the concepts.
And that whole thing -- it's two languages both working at the same time.
So we can use this new kind of language, if you like, to alter our perspective or change our views.
Let me ask you a simple question with a really simple answer: Who has the biggest military budget?
It's got to be America, right?
Massive. 609 billion in 2008 -- 607, rather.
So massive, in fact, that it can contain all the other military budgets in the world inside itself.
Gobble, gobble, gobble, gobble, gobble.
Now, you can see Africa's total debt there and the U.K. budget deficit for reference.
So that might well chime with your view that America is a sort of warmongering military machine, out to overpower the world with its huge industrial-military complex.
But is it true that America has the biggest military budget?
Because America is an incredibly rich country.
In fact, it's so massively rich that it can contain the four other top industrialized nations' economies inside itself, it's so vastly rich.
So its military budget is bound to be enormous.
So, to be fair and to alter our perspective, we have to bring in another data set, and that data set is GDP, or the country's earnings.
Who has the biggest budget as a proportion of GDP?
Let's have a look.
That changes the picture considerably.
Other countries pop into view that you, perhaps, weren't considering, and American drops into eighth.
Now you can also do this with soldiers.
Who has the most soldiers? It's got to be China.
Of course, 2.1 million.
Again, chiming with your view that China has a militarized regime ready to, you know, mobilize its enormous forces.
But of course, China has an enormous population.
So if we do the same, we see a radically different picture.
China drops to 124th.
It actually has a tiny army when you take other data into consideration.
So, absolute figures, like the military budget, in a connected world, don't give you the whole picture.
They're not as true as they could be.
We need relative figures that are connected to other data so that we can see a fuller picture, and then that can lead to us changing our perspective.
As Hans Rosling, the master, my master, said, "Let the dataset change your mindset."
And if it can do that, maybe it can also change your behavior.
Take a look at this one.
I'm a bit of a health nut.
I love taking supplements and being fit, but I can never understand what's going on in terms of evidence.
There's always conflicting evidence.
Should I take vitamin C? Should I be taking wheatgrass?
This is a visualization of all the evidence for nutritional supplements.
This kind of diagram is called a balloon race.
So the higher up the image, the more evidence there is for each supplement.
And the bubbles correspond to popularity as regards to Google hits.
So you can immediately apprehend the relationship between efficacy and popularity, but you can also, if you grade the evidence, do a "worth it" line.
So supplements above this line are worth investigating, but only for the conditions listed below, and then the supplements below the line are perhaps not worth investigating.
Now this image constitutes a huge amount of work.
We scraped like 1,000 studies from PubMed, the biomedical database, and we compiled them and graded them all.
And it was incredibly frustrating for me because I had a book of 250 visualizations to do for my book, and I spent a month doing this, and I only filled two pages.
But what it points to is that visualizing information like this is a form of knowledge compression.
It's a way of squeezing an enormous amount of information and understanding into a small space.
And once you've curated that data, and once you've cleaned that data, and once it's there, you can do cool stuff like this.
So I converted this into an interactive app, so I can now generate this application online -- this is the visualization online -- and I can say, "Yeah, brilliant."
So it spawns itself.
And then I can say, "Well, just show me the stuff that affects heart health."
So let's filter that out.
So heart is filtered out, so I can see if I'm curious about that.
I think, "No, no. I don't want to take any synthetics, I just want to see plants and -- just show me herbs and plants. I've got all the natural ingredients."
Now this app is spawning itself from the data.
The data is all stored in a Google Doc, and it's literally generating itself from that data.
So the data is now alive; this is a living image, and I can update it in a second.
New evidence comes out. I just change a row on a spreadsheet.
Doosh! Again, the image recreates itself.
So it's cool.
It's kind of living.
But it can go beyond data, and it can go beyond numbers.
I like to apply information visualization to ideas and concepts.
This is a visualization of the political spectrum, an attempt for me to try and understand how it works and how the ideas percolate down from government into society and culture, into families, into individuals, into their beliefs and back around again in a cycle.
What I love about this image is it's made up of concepts, it explores our worldviews and it helps us -- it helps me anyway -- to see what others think, to see where they're coming from.
And it feels just incredibly cool to do that.
What was most exciting for me designing this was that, when I was designing this image, I desperately wanted this side, the left side, to be better than the right side -- being a journalist, a Left-leaning person -- but I couldn't, because I would have created a lopsided, biased diagram.
So, in order to really create a full image, I had to honor the perspectives on the right-hand side and at the same time, uncomfortably recognize how many of those qualities were actually in me, which was very, very annoying and uncomfortable.
(Laughter) But not too uncomfortable, because there's something unthreatening about seeing a political perspective, versus being told or forced to listen to one.
You're capable of holding conflicting viewpoints joyously when you can see them.
It's even fun to engage with them because it's visual.
So that's what's exciting to me, seeing how data can change my perspective and change my mind midstream -- beautiful, lovely data.
So, just to wrap up, I wanted to say that it feels to me that design is about solving problems and providing elegant solutions, and information design is about solving information problems.
It feels like we have a lot of information problems in our society at the moment, from the overload and the saturation to the breakdown of trust and reliability and runaway skepticism and lack of transparency, or even just interestingness.
I mean, I find information just too interesting.
It has a magnetic quality that draws me in.
So, visualizing information can give us a very quick solution to those kinds of problems.
Even when the information is terrible, the visual can be quite beautiful.
Often we can get clarity or the answer to a simple question very quickly, like this one, the recent Icelandic volcano.
Which was emitting the most CO2?
Was it the planes or the volcano, the grounded planes or the volcano?
So we can have a look.
We look at the data and we see: Yep, the volcano emitted 150,000 tons; the grounded planes would have emitted 345,000 if they were in the sky.
So essentially, we had our first carbon-neutral volcano.
(Laughter) (Applause) And that is beautiful. Thank you.
(Applause)
Come with me to the bottom of the world, Antarctica, the highest, driest, windiest, and yes, coldest region on Earth -- more arid than the Sahara and, in parts, colder than Mars.
The ice of Antarctica glows with a light so dazzling, it blinds the unprotected eye.
Early explorers rubbed cocaine in their eyes to kill the pain of it.
The weight of the ice is such that the entire continent sags below sea level, beneath its weight.
Yet, the ice of Antarctica is a calendar of climate change.
It records the annual rise and fall of greenhouse gases and temperatures going back before the onset of the last ice ages.
Nowhere on Earth offers us such a perfect record.
And here, scientists are drilling into the past of our planet to find clues to the future of climate change.
This past January, I traveled to a place called WAIS Divide, about 600 miles from the South Pole.
It is the best place on the planet, many say, to study the history of climate change.
There, about 45 scientists from the University of Wisconsin, the Desert Research Institute in Nevada and others have been working to answer a central question about global warming.
What is the exact relationship between levels of greenhouse gases and planetary temperatures?
It's urgent work. We know that temperatures are rising.
This past May was the warmest worldwide on record.
And we know that levels of greenhouse gases are rising too.
What we don't know is the exact, precise, immediate impact of these changes on natural climate patterns -- winds, ocean currents, precipitation rates, cloud formation, things that bear on the health and well-being of billions of people.
Their entire camp, every item of gear, was ferried 885 miles from McMurdo Station, the main U.S. supply base on the coast of Antarctica.
WAIS Divide itself though, is a circle of tents in the snow.
In blizzard winds, the crew sling ropes between the tents so that people can feel their way safely to the nearest ice house and to the nearest outhouse.
It snows so heavily there, the installation was almost immediately buried.
Indeed, the researchers picked this site because ice and snow accumulates here 10 times faster than anywhere else in Antarctica.
They have to dig themselves out every day.
It makes for an exotic and chilly commute.
(Laughter) But under the surface is a hive of industrial activity centered around an eight-million-dollar drill assembly.
Periodically, this drill, like a biopsy needle, plunges thousands of feet deep into the ice to extract a marrow of gases and isotopes for analysis.
Ten times a day, they extract the 10-foot long cylinder of compressed ice crystals that contain the unsullied air and trace chemicals laid down by snow, season after season for thousands of years.
It's really a time machine.
At the peak of activity earlier this year, the researchers lowered the drill an extra hundred feet deeper into the ice every day and another 365 years deeper into the past.
Periodically, they remove a cylinder of ice, like gamekeepers popping a spent shotgun shell from the barrel of a drill.
They inspect it, they check it for cracks, for drill damage, for spalls, for chips.
More importantly, they prepare it for inspection and analysis by 27 independent laboratories in the United States and Europe, who will examine it for 40 different trace chemicals related to climate, some in parts per quadrillion.
Yes, I said that with a Q, quadrillion.
They cut the cylinders up into three-foot sections for easier handling and shipment back to these labs, some 8,000 miles from the drill site.
Each cylinder is a parfait of time.
This ice formed as snow 15,800 years ago, when our ancestors were daubing themselves with paint and considering the radical new technology of the alphabet.
Bathed in polarized light and cut in cross-section, this ancient ice reveals itself as a mosaic of colors, each one showing how conditions at depth in the ice have affected this material at depths where pressures can reach a ton per square inch.
Every year, it begins with a snowflake, and by digging into fresh snow, we can see how this process is ongoing today.
This wall of undisturbed snow, back-lit by sunlight, shows the striations of winter and summer snow, layer upon layer.
Each storm scours the atmosphere, washing out dust, soot, trace chemicals, and depositing them on the snow pack year after year, millennia after millennia, creating a kind of periodic table of elements that at this point is more than 11,000 feet thick.
From this, we can detect an extraordinary number of things.
We can see the calcium from the world's deserts, soot from distant wildfires, methane as an indicator of the strength of a Pacific monsoon, all wafted on winds from warmer latitudes to this remote and very cold place.
Most importantly, these cylinders and this snow trap air.
Each cylinder is about 10 percent ancient air, a pristine time capsule of greenhouse gases -- carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide -- all unchanged from the day that snow formed and first fell.
And this is the object of their scrutiny.
But don't we already know what we need to know about greenhouse gases?
Why do we need to study this anymore?
Don't we already know how they affect temperatures?
Don't we already know the consequences of a changing climate on our settled civilization?
The truth is, we only know the outlines, and what we don't completely understand, we can't properly fix.
Indeed, we run the risk of making things worse.
Consider, the single most successful international environmental effort of the 20th century, the Montreal Protocol, in which the nations of Earth banded together to protect the planet from the harmful effects of ozone-destroying chemicals used at that time in air conditioners, refrigerators and other cooling devices.
We banned those chemicals, and we replaced them, unknowingly, with other substances that, molecule per molecule, are a hundred times more potent as heat-trapping, greenhouse gases than carbon dioxide.
This process requires extraordinary precautions.
The scientists must insure that the ice is not contaminated.
Moreover, in this 8,000-mile journey, they have to insure this ice doesn't melt.
Imagine juggling a snowball across the tropics.
They have to, in fact, make sure this ice never gets warmer than about 20 degrees below zero, otherwise, the key gases inside it will dissipate.
So, in the coldest place on Earth, they work inside a refrigerator.
As they handle the ice, in fact, they keep an extra pair of gloves warming in an oven, so that, when their work gloves freeze and their fingers stiffen, they can don a fresh pair.
They work against the clock and against the thermometer.
So far, they've packed up about 4,500 feet of ice cores for shipment back to the United States.
This past season, they manhandled them across the ice to waiting aircraft.
The 109th Air National Guard flew the most recent shipment of ice back to the coast of Antarctica, where it was boarded onto a freighter, shipped across the tropics to California, unloaded, put on a truck, driven across the desert to the National Ice Core Laboratory in Denver, Colorado, where, as we speak, scientists are now slicing this material up for samples, for analysis, to be distributed to the laboratories around the country and in Europe.
Antarctica was this planet's last empty quarter -- the blind spot in our expanding vision of the world.
Early explorers sailed off the edge of the map, and they found a place where the normal rules of time and temperature seem suspended.
Here, the ice seems a living presence.
The wind that rubs against it gives it voice.
It is a voice of experience.
It is a voice we should heed.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Cartoons are basically short stories.
I tried to find one that didn't have a whole lot of words.
Not all of them have happy endings.
So how did I get started cartooning?
I doodled a lot as a kid, and if you spend enough time doodling, sooner or later, something happens: all your career options run out.
So you have to make a living cartooning.
Actually, I fell in love with the ocean when I was a little boy, when I was about eight or nine.
And I was particularly fascinated with sharks.
This is some of my early work.
Eventually, my mom took the red crayon away, so it was [unclear].
But I'd like to relay to you a childhood experience of mine that really made me see the ocean differently, and it's become the foundation of my work because, I feel like, if in a day, I can see the ocean differently, then I can evoke that same kind of change in others, especially kids.
Before that day, this is how I saw the ocean.
It's just a big blue surface.
And this is how we've seen the ocean since the beginning of time.
It's a mystery.
There's been a lot of folklore developed around the ocean, mostly negative.
And that prompted people to make maps like this, with all kinds of wonderful detail on the land, but when you get to the waters edge, the ocean looks like one giant puddle of blue paint.
And this is the way I saw the ocean at school -- as if to say, "All geography and science lessons stop at water's edge.
This part's not going to be on the test."
But that day I flew low over the islands -- it was a family trip to the Caribbean, and I flew in a small plane low over the islands.
This is what I saw. I saw hills and valleys.
I saw forests and meadows.
I saw grottoes and secret gardens and places I'd love to hide as a kid, if I could only breathe underwater.
And best of all, I saw the animals.
I saw a manta ray that looked as big as the plane I was flying in.
And I flew over a lagoon with a shark in it, and that was the day that my comic strip about a shark was born.
So from that day on, I was an ordinary kid walking around on dry land, but my head was down there, underwater.
Up until that day, these were the animals that were most common in my life.
These were the ones I'd like to draw -- all variations of four legs and fur.
But when you got to the ocean, my imagination was no competition for nature.
Every time I'd come up with a crazy cartoon character on the drawing board, I'd find a critter in the ocean that was even crazier.
And the differences in scale between this tiny sea dragon and this enormous humpback whale was like something out of a science-fiction movie.
Whenever I talk to kids, I always like to tell them, the biggest animal that ever lived is still alive.
It's not a dinosaur; it's a whale, animals as big as office buildings still swimming around out there in our ocean.
Speaking of dinosaurs, sharks are basically the same fish they were 300 million years ago.
So if you ever fantasize about going back in time and seeing what a dinosaur looked like, that's what a dinosaur looks like.
So you have living dinosaurs and space aliens, animals that evolved in zero gravity in harsh conditions.
It's just incredible; no Hollywood designer could come up with something more interesting than that.
Or this fangtooth. The particles in the water make it look like it's floating in outer space.
Could you image if we looked through the Hubble Telescope and we saw that?
It would start a whole new space race.
But instead, we stick a camera in the deep ocean, and we see a fish, and it doesn't capture our imagination as a society.
We say to ourselves, "Maybe we can make fish sticks with it or something."
So, what I'd like to do now is try a little drawing.
So, I'm going to try to draw this fangtooth here.
I love to draw the deep sea fish, because they are so ugly, but beautiful in their own way.
Maybe we can give him a little bioluminescence here -- give him a headlight, maybe a brake light, turn signals.
But it's easy to see why these animals make such great cartoon characters, their shapes and sizes.
So some of them actually seem to have powers like superheroes in a comic book.
For instance, take these sea turtles.
They kind of have a sixth sense like Superman's x-ray vision.
They can sense the magnetic fields of the earth.
And they can use that sense to navigate hundreds of miles of open ocean.
I kind of give my turtle hands just to make them an easier cartoon character to work with.
Or take this sea cucumber.
It's not an animal we draw cartoons of or draw at all.
He's like an underwater Spiderman.
He shoots out these sticky webs to entangle his enemy.
Of course, sea cucumbers shoot them out their rears, which, in my opinion, makes them much more interesting a superhero.
(Laughter) He can't spin a web anytime; he's got to pull his pants down first.
(Laughter) Or the blowfish.
The blowfish is like the Incredible Hulk.
It can change its body into a big, intimidating fish in a matter of seconds.
I'm going to draw this blowfish uninflated.
And then I'm going to attempt onscreen animation here.
Let's see.
Try and inflate it.
(Laughter) "You talkin' to me?" See, he can inflate himself when he wants to be intimidating.
Or take this swordfish.
Could you imagine being born with a tool for a nose?
Do you think he wakes up in the morning, looks in the mirror and says, "Somebody's getting stabbed today."
Or this lionfish for instance.
Imagine trying to make friends covered with razor-sharp poisonous barbs.
It's not something you want to put on your Facebook page, right?
My characters are -- my lead character's a shark named Sherman.
He's a great white shark.
And I kind of broke the mold with Sherman.
I didn't want to go with this ruthless predator image.
He's kind of just out there making a living.
He's sort of a Homer Simpson with fins.
And then his sidekick is a sea turtle, as I mentioned before, named Filmore.
He uses his wonderful skills at navigation to wander the oceans, looking for a mate.
And he does manage to find them, but great navigation skills, lousy pick-up lines.
He never seems to settle on any particular girl.
I have a hermit crab named Hawthorne, who doesn't get a lot of respect as a hermit crab, so he kind of wishes he were a great white shark.
And then I'll introduce you to one more character, this guy, Ernest, who is basically a juvenile delinquent in a fish body.
So with characters, you can make stories.
Sometimes making a story is as easy as putting two characters in a room and seeing what happens.
So, imagine a great white shark and a giant squid in the same bathroom.
(Laughter) Or, sometimes I take them to places that people have never heard of because they're underwater.
For instance, I took them skiing in the Mid-Atlantic Range, which is this range of mountains in the middle of the Atlantic.
I've taken them to the Sea of Japan, where they met giant jellyfish.
I've taken them camping in the kelp forests of California.
This next one here, I did a story on the census of marine life.
And that was a lot of fun because, as most of you know, it's a real project we've heard about.
But it was a chance for me to introduce readers to a lot of crazy undersea characters.
So we start off the story with Ernest, who volunteers as a census taker.
He goes down and he meets this famous anglerfish.
Then he meets the yeti crab, the famous vampire squid -- elusive, hard to find -- and the Dumbo octopus, which looks so much like a cartoon in real life that really didn't have to change a thing when I drew it.
I did another story on marine debris.
I was speaking to a lot of my friends in the conservation business, and they -- I asked them, "So what's one issue you would like everyone to know more about?"
And they said -- this one friend of mine said, "I've got one word for you: plastic."
And I told him, "Well, I need something a little sexier than that.
Plastic just is not going to do it."
We sort of worked things out.
He wanted me to use words like polyvinyl chloride, which doesn't really work in voice balloons very well.
I couldn't fit them in.
So what I did was I made an adventure strip.
Basically, this bottle travels a long way.
What I'm trying to tell readers is that plastic doesn't really go away; it just continues to wash downstream.
And a lot of it ends up washing into the ocean, which is a great story if you attach a couple characters to it, especially if they can't stand each other, like these two.
So, I sent them to Boise, Idaho, where they dropped a plastic bottle into the Boise sewer system.
And it ended up in the Boise River and then on to the Columbia River and then to the mouth of the Columbia and to the Pacific Ocean and then on to this place called the Great Pacific Garbage Patch -- which is this giant Pacific gyre in the North Pacific, where a lot of this plastic ends up floating around -- and then back onto the lagoon.
So that was basically a buddy story with a plastic bottle following along.
So a lot of people remember the plastic bottle anyway, but we really talked about marine debris and plastic in the course of that one.
The third storyline I did about a year and a half ago was probably my most difficult.
It was on shark finning, and I felt really strongly about this issue.
And I felt like, since my main character was a shark, the comic strip was a perfect vehicle for telling the public about this.
Now, finning is the act of taking a shark, cutting the valuable fins off and throwing the live animal back in the water.
It's cruel, it's wasteful.
There's nothing funny or entertaining about it, but I really wanted to take this issue on.
I had to kill my main character, who is a shark.
We start with Sherman in a Chinese restaurant, who gets a fortune that he's about to get caught by a trawler, which he does.
And then he dies.
He gets finned, and then he gets thrown overboard.
Ostensibly, he's dead now.
And so I killed a character that's been in the newspaper for 15 years.
So I got a lot of reader feedback on that one.
Meanwhile, the other characters are talking about shark fin soup.
I do three or four strips after that where we explore the finning issue and the shark fin soup issue.
Sherman's up in shark heaven.
This is what I love about comic strips, you know.
You really don't have to worry about the audience suspending its sense of disbelief because, if you start with a talking shark, readers pretty much check their disbelief at the door.
You can kind of do anything.
It becomes a near-death experience for Sherman.
Meanwhile, Ernest finds his fins on the internet.
There was a real website based in China that actually sold shark fins, so I kind of exposed that.
And he clicks the "buy now" button.
And voila, next-day air, they show up, and they surgically reattach them.
I ended that series with a kind of a mail-in petition that encouraged our National Marine Fishery Service, to force other countries to have a stronger stance with shark management.
(Applause) Thanks.
I'd like to end with a little metaphor here.
I've been trying to think of a metaphor to represent Mission Blue, and this is what I came up with.
Imagine you're in an enormous room, and it's as dark as a cave.
And you can have anything in that room, anything you want, but you can't see anything.
You've been given one tool, a hammer.
So you wander around in the darkness, and you bump into something, and it feels like it's made of stone.
It's big, it's heavy. You can't carry it away, so you bang it with your hammer, and you break off a piece.
And you take the piece out into the daylight.
And you see you have a beautiful piece of white alabaster.
So you say to yourself, "Well, that's worth something."
So you go back into the room, and you break this thing to pieces, and you haul it away.
And you find other things, and you break that up, and you haul those away.
And you're getting all kinds of cool stuff.
And you hear other people doing the same thing.
So you get this sense of urgency, like you need to find as much stuff as possible as soon as possible.
And then some yells, "Stop!"
And they turn up the lights.
And you realize where you are; you're in the Louvre.
And you've taken all this complexity and beauty, and you've turned it into a cheap commodity.
And that's what we're doing with the ocean.
And part of what Mission Blue is about is yelling, "Stop!"
so that each of us -- explorer, scientist, cartoonist, singer, chef -- can turn up the lights in their own way.
And that's what I hope my comic strip does in a small way.
That's why I like what I do.
Thanks for listening.
(Applause)
It's wonderful to be back.
I love this wonderful gathering.
And you must be wondering, "What on earth?
Have they put up the wrong slide?"
No, no.
Look at this magnificent beast, and ask the question: Who designed it?
This is TED; this is Technology, Entertainment, Design, and there's a dairy cow.
It's a quite wonderfully designed animal.
And I was thinking, how do I introduce this?
And I thought, well, maybe that old doggerel by Joyce Kilmer, you know: "Poems are made by fools like me, but only God can make a tree."
And you might say, "Well, God designed the cow."
But, of course, God got a lot of help.
This is the ancestor of cattle.
This is the aurochs.
And it was designed by natural selection, the process of natural selection, over many millions of years.
And then it became domesticated, thousands of years ago.
And human beings became its stewards, and, without even knowing what they were doing, they gradually redesigned it and redesigned it and redesigned it.
And then more recently, they really began to do reverse engineering on this beast and figure out just what the parts were, how they worked and how they might be optimized -- how they might be made better.
Now, why am I talking about cows?
Because I want to say that much the same thing is true of religions.
Religions are natural phenomena -- they're just as natural as cows.
They have evolved over millennia.
They have a biological base, just like the aurochs.
They have become domesticated, and human beings have been redesigning their religions for thousands of years.
This is TED, and I want to talk about design.
Because what I've been doing for the last four years -- really since the first time you saw me -- some of you saw me at TED when I was talking about religion -- and in the last four years, I've been working just about non-stop on this topic.
And you might say it's about the reverse engineering of religions.
Now that very idea, I think, strikes terror in many people, or anger, or anxiety of one sort or another.
And that is the spell that I want to break.
I want to say, no, religions are an important natural phenomenon.
We should study them with the same intensity that we study all the other important natural phenomena, like global warming, as we heard so eloquently last night from Al Gore.
Today's religions are brilliantly designed -- brilliantly designed.
They are immensely powerful social institutions and many of their features can be traced back to earlier features that we can really make sense of by reverse engineering.
And, as with the cow, there's a mixture of evolutionary design -- designed by natural selection itself -- and intelligent design -- more or less intelligent design -- and redesigned by human beings who are trying to redesign their religions.
You don't do book talks at TED, but I'm going to have just one slide about my book, because there is one message in it which I think this group really needs to hear.
And I would be very interested to get your responses to this.
It's the one policy proposal that I make in the book, at this time, when I claim not to know enough about religion to know what other policy proposals to make.
And it's one that echoes remarks that you've heard already today.
Here's my proposal, I'm going to just take a couple of minutes to explain it: Education on world religions for all of our children -- in primary school, in high school, in public schools, in private schools and in home schooling.
So what I'm proposing is, just as we require reading, writing, arithmetic, American history, so we should have a curriculum on facts about all the religions of the world -- about their history, about their creeds, about their texts, their music, their symbolisms, their prohibitions, their requirements.
And this should be presented factually, straightforwardly, with no particular spin, to all of the children in the country.
And as long as you teach them that, you can teach them anything else you like.
That, I think, is maximal tolerance for religious freedom.
As long as you inform your children about other religions, then you may -- and as early as you like and whatever you like -- teach them whatever creed you want them to learn.
But also let them know about other religions.
Now, why do I say that?
Because democracy depends on an informed citizenship.
Informed consent is the very bedrock of our understanding of democracy.
Misinformed consent is not worth it.
It's like a coin flip; it doesn't count, really.
Democracy depends on informed consent.
This is the way we treat people as responsible adults.
Now, children below the age of consent are a special case.
Parents -- I'm going to use a word that Pastor Rick just used -- parents are stewards of their children.
They don't own them.
You can't own your children.
You have a responsibility to the world, to the state, to them, to take care of them right.
You may teach them whatever creed you think is most important, but I say you have a responsibility to let them be informed about all the other creeds in the world, too.
The reason I've taken this time is I've been fascinated to hear some of the reactions to this.
One reviewer for a Roman Catholic newspaper called it "totalitarian."
It strikes me as practically libertarian.
Is it totalitarian to require reading, writing and arithmetic?
I don't think so.
All I'm saying is -- and facts, facts only; no values, just facts -- about all the world's religions.
Another reviewer called it "hilarious."
Well, I'm really bothered by the fact that anybody would think that was hilarious.
It seems to me to be such a plausible, natural extension of the democratic principles we already have that I'm shocked to think anybody would find that just ridiculous.
I know many religions are so anxious about preserving the purity of their faith among their children that they are intent on keeping their children ignorant of other faiths.
I don't think that's defensible.
But I'd really be pleased to get your answers on that -- any reactions to that -- later.
But now I'm going to move on.
Back to the cow.
This picture, which I pulled off the web -- the fellow on the left is really an important part of this picture.
That's the steward.
Cows couldn't live without human stewards -- they're domesticated.
They're a sort of ectosymbiont.
They depend on us for their survival.
And Pastor Rick was just talking about sheep.
I'm going to talk about sheep, too.
There's a lot of serendipitous convergence here.
How clever it was of sheep to acquire shepherds!
(Laughter) Think of what this got them.
They could outsource all their problems: protection from predators, food-finding ...
(Laughter) The only cost in most flocks -- not even this -- a loss of free mating.
What a deal!
"How clever of sheep!" you might say.
Except, of course, it wasn't the sheep's cleverness.
It wasn't the cleverness of the sheep at all.
They were clueless.
Whose clever move was it?
It was the clever move of natural selection itself.
Francis Crick, the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA with Jim Watson, once joked about what he called Orgel's Second Rule.
Leslie Orgel is a molecular biologist, brilliant guy, and Orgel's Second Rule is: Evolution is cleverer than you are.
Now, that is not Intelligent Design -- not from Francis Crick.
Evolution is cleverer than you are.
If you understand Orgel's Second Rule, then you understand why the Intelligent Design movement is basically a hoax.
The designs discovered by the process of natural selection are brilliant, unbelievably brilliant.
Again and again biologists are fascinated with the brilliance of what's discovered.
But the process itself is without purpose, without foresight, without design.
When I was here four years ago, I told the story about an ant climbing a blade of grass.
And why the ant was doing it was because its brain had been infected with a lancet fluke that was needed to get into the belly of a sheep or a cow in order to reproduce.
So it was sort of a spooky story.
And I think some people may have misunderstood.
Lancet flukes aren't smart.
I submit that the intelligence of a lancet fluke is down there, somewhere between petunia and carrot.
They're not really bright. They don't have to be.
The lesson we learn from this is: you don't have to have a mind to be a beneficiary.
The design is there in nature, but it's not in anybody's head.
It doesn't have to be.
That's the way evolution works.
Question: Was domestication good for sheep?
It was great for their genetic fitness.
And here I want to remind you of a wonderful point that Paul MacCready made at TED three years ago.
Here's what he said: "Ten thousand years ago, at the dawn of agriculture, human population, plus livestock and pets, was approximately a tenth of one percent of the terrestrial vertebrate landmass."
That was just 10,000 years ago.
What is it today? Does anybody remember what he told us?
98 percent.
That is what we have done on this planet.
Now, I talked to Paul afterwards -- I wanted to check to find out how he'd calculated this, and get the sources and so forth -- and he also gave me a paper that he had written on this.
And there was a passage in it which he did not present here and I think it is so good, I'm going to read it to you: "Over billions of years on a unique sphere, chance has painted a thin covering of life: complex, improbable, wonderful and fragile.
Suddenly, we humans -- a recently arrived species no longer subject to the checks and balances inherent in nature -- have grown in population, technology and intelligence to a position of terrible power.
We now wield the paintbrush."
We heard about the atmosphere as a thin layer of varnish.
Life itself is just a thin coat of paint on this planet.
And we're the ones that hold the paintbrush.
The key to our domination of the planet is culture.
And the key to culture is religion.
Suppose Martian scientists came to Earth.
They would be puzzled by many things.
Anybody know what this is? I'll tell you what it is.
This is a million people gathering on the banks of the Ganges in 2001, perhaps the largest single gathering of human beings ever, as seen from satellite photograph.
Here's a big crowd.
Here's another crowd in Mecca.
They'd want to know how it originated, what it was for and how it perpetuates itself.
Actually, I'm going to pass over this.
The ant isn't alone.
There's all sorts of wonderful cases of species which -- in that case -- A parasite gets into a mouse and needs to get into the belly of a cat.
And it turns the mouse into Mighty Mouse, makes it fearless, so it runs out in the open, where it'll be eaten by a cat.
True story.
In other words, we have these hijackers -- you've seen this slide before, from four years ago -- a parasite that infects the brain and induces even suicidal behavior, on behalf of a cause other than one's own genetic fitness.
Does that ever happen to us?
Yes, it does -- quite wonderfully.
The Arabic word "Islam" means "submission."
It means "surrender of self-interest to the will of Allah."
But I'm not just talking about Islam.
I'm talking also about Christianity.
This is a parchment music page that I found in a Paris bookstall 50 years ago.
And on it, it says, in Latin: "Semen est verbum Dei. Sator autem Christus."
The word of God is the seed and the sower of the seed is Christ.
Same idea. Well, not quite.
But in fact, Christians, too ...
I'll give you a few quotes.
"The heart of worship is surrender.
Surrendered people obey God's words, even if it doesn't make sense."
Those words are by Rick Warren.
Those are from "The Purpose Driven Life."
And I want to turn now, briefly, to talk about that book, which I've read.
You've all got a copy, and you've just heard the man.
And what I want to do now is say a bit about this book from the design standpoint, because I think it's actually a brilliant book.
First of all, the goal -- and you heard just now what the goal is -- it's to bring purpose to the lives of millions, and he has succeeded.
Is it a good goal? In itself, I'm sure we all agree, it is a wonderful goal.
He's absolutely right.
There are lots of people out there who don't have purpose in their life, and bringing purpose to their life is a wonderful goal.
I give him an A+ on this.
(Laughter) Is the goal achieved?
Yes.
Al Gore, eat your heart out.
(Laughter) Just exactly what Al is trying to do, Rick is doing.
This is a fantastic achievement.
And the means -- how does he do it?
It's a brilliant redesign of traditional religious themes -- updating them, quietly dropping obsolete features, putting new interpretations on other features.
This is the evolution of religion that's been going on for thousands of years, and he's just the latest brilliant practitioner of it.
I don't have to tell you this; you just heard the man.
Excellent insights into human psychology, wise advice on every page.
Moreover, he invites us to look under the hood.
I really appreciated that.
For instance, he has an appendix where he explains his choice of translations of different Bible verses.
The book is clear, vivid, accessible, beautifully formatted.
Just enough repetition.
That's really important.
Every time you read it or say it, you make another copy in your brain.
Every time you read it or say it, you make another copy in your brain.
(Laughter) With me, everybody -- (Audience and Dan Dennett) Every time you read it or say it, you make another copy in your brain.
And now we come to my problem.
Because I'm absolutely sincere in my appreciation of all that I said about this book.
But I wish it were better.
I have some problems with the book.
And it would just be insincere of me not to address those problems.
I wish he could do this with a revision, a Mark 2 version of his book.
"The truth will set you free."
That's what it says in the Bible, and it's something that I want to live by, too.
My problem is, some of the bits in it I don't think are true.
Now some of this is a difference of opinion.
And that's not my main complaint, that's worth mentioning.
Here's a passage -- it's very much what he said, anyway: "If there was no God we would all be accidents, the result of astronomical random chance in the Universe.
You could stop reading this book because life would have no purpose or meaning or significance.
There would be no right or wrong and no hope beyond your brief years on Earth."
Now, I just do not believe that.
By the way, I find -- Homer Groening's film presented a beautiful alternative to that very claim.
We don't need a belief in God to be good or to have meaning in us.
But that, as I said, is just a difference of opinion.
That's not what I'm really worried about.
How about this: "God designed this planet's environment just so we could live in it."
I'm afraid that a lot of people take that sentiment to mean that we don't have to do the sorts of things that Al Gore is trying so hard to get us to do.
I am not happy with that sentiment at all.
And then I find this: "All the evidence available in the biological sciences supports the core proposition that the cosmos is a specially designed whole with life and mankind as its fundamental goal and purpose, a whole in which all facets of reality have their meaning and explanation in this central fact."
Well, that's Michael Denton. He's a creationist.
And here, I think, "Wait a minute." I read this again.
I read it three or four times and I think, "Is he really endorsing Intelligent Design?
Is he endorsing creationism here?"
And you can't tell.
So I'm sort of thinking, "Well, I don't know, I don't know if I want to get upset with this yet."
But then I read on, and I read this: "First, Noah had never seen rain, because prior to the Flood, God irrigated the earth from the ground up."
I wish that sentence weren't in there, because I think it is false.
And I think that thinking this way about the history of the planet, after we've just been hearing about the history of the planet over millions of years, discourages people from scientific understanding.
Now, Rick Warren uses scientific terms and scientific factoids and information in a very interesting way.
Here's one: "God deliberately shaped and formed you to serve him in a way that makes your ministry unique.
I think that's false.
Now, maybe we want to treat it as metaphorical.
Here's another one: "For instance, your brain can store 100 trillion facts.
Your mind can handle 15,000 decisions a second."
Well, it would be interesting to find the interpretation where I would accept that.
There might be some way of treating that as true.
"Anthropologists have noted that worship is a universal urge, hardwired by God into the very fiber of our being -- an inbuilt need to connect with God."
Well, the sense of which I agree with him, except I think it has an evolutionary explanation.
And what I find deeply troubling in this book is that he seems to be arguing that if you want to be moral, if you want to have meaning in your life, you have to be an Intelligent Designer, you have to deny the theory of evolution by natural selection.
And I think, on the contrary, that it is very important to solving the world's problems that we take evolutionary biology seriously.
Whose truth are we going to listen to?
Well, this is from "The Purpose Driven Life": "The Bible must become the authoritative standard for my life: the compass I rely on for direction, the counsel I listen to for making wise decisions, and the benchmark I use for evaluating everything."
And here's one that does concern me.
Remember I quoted him before with this line: "Surrendered people obey God's word, even if it doesn't make sense."
And that's a problem.
(Sighs) "Don't ever argue with the Devil.
He's better at arguing than you are, having had thousands of years to practice."
Now, Rick Warren didn't invent this clever move.
It's an old move.
It's a very clever adaptation of religions.
It's a wild card for disarming any reasonable criticism.
"You don't like my interpretation?
You've got a reasonable objection to it?
Don't listen, don't listen!
That's the Devil speaking."
This discourages the sort of reasoning citizenship it seems to me that we want to have.
I've got one more problem, then I'm through.
And I'd really like to get a response if Rick is able to do it.
"In the Great Commission, Jesus said, 'Go to all people of all nations and make them my disciples.
Baptize them in the name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit, and teach them to do everything I've told you.'" The Bible says Jesus is the only one who can save the world.
We've seen many wonderful maps of the world in the last day or so.
Here's one, not as beautiful as the others; it simply shows the religions of the world.
Here's one that shows the sort of current breakdown of the different religions.
Do we really want to commit ourselves to engulfing all the other religions, when their holy books are telling them, "Don't listen to the other side, that's just Satan talking!"?
It seems to me that that's a very problematic ship to get on for the future.
I found this sign as I was driving to Maine recently, in front of a church: "Good without God becomes zero."
Sort of cute.
A very clever little meme.
I don't believe it and I think this idea, popular as it is -- not in this guise, but in general -- is itself one of the main problems that we face.
If you are like me, you know many wonderful, committed, engaged atheists, agnostics, who are being very good without God.
And you also know many religious people who hide behind their sanctity instead of doing good works.
I wish this meme would go extinct.
Thanks very much for your attention.
(Applause)
So I'm going to talk to you about you about the political chemistry of oil spills and why this is an incredibly important, long, oily, hot summer, and why we need to keep ourselves from getting distracted.
But before I talk about the political chemistry, I actually need to talk about the chemistry of oil.
This is a photograph from when I visited Prudhoe Bay in Alaska in 2002 to watch the Minerals Management Service testing their ability to burn oil spills in ice.
And what you see here is, you see a little bit of crude oil, you see some ice cubes, and you see two sandwich baggies of napalm.
The napalm is burning there quite nicely.
And the thing is, is that oil is really an abstraction for us as the American consumer.
We're four percent of the world's population; we use 25 percent of the world's oil production.
And we don't really understand what oil is, until you check out its molecules, And you don't really understand that until you see this stuff burn.
So this is what happens as that burn gets going.
It takes off. It's a big woosh.
I highly recommend that you get a chance to see crude oil burn someday, because you will never need to hear another poli sci lecture on the geopolitics of oil again.
It'll just bake your retinas.
So there it is; the retinas are baking.
Let me tell you a little bit about this chemistry of oil.
Oil is a stew of hydrocarbon molecules.
It starts of with the very small ones, which are one carbon, four hydrogen -- that's methane -- it just floats off.
Then there's all sorts of intermediate ones with middle amounts of carbon.
You've probably heard of benzene rings; they're very carcinogenic.
And it goes all the way over to these big, thick, galumphy ones that have hundreds of carbons, and they have thousands of hydrogens, and they have vanadium and heavy metals and sulfur and all kinds of craziness hanging off the sides of them.
Those are called the asphaltenes; they're an ingredient in asphalt.
They're very important in oil spills.
Let me tell you a little bit about the chemistry of oil in water.
It is this chemistry that makes oil so disastrous.
Oil doesn't sink, it floats.
If it sank, it would be a whole different story as far as an oil spill.
And the other thing it does is it spreads out the moment it hits the water.
It spreads out to be really thin, so you have a hard time corralling it.
The next thing that happens is the light ends evaporate, and some of the toxic things float into the water column and kill fish eggs and smaller fish and things like that, and shrimp.
And then the asphaltenes -- and this is the crucial thing -- the asphaltenes get whipped by the waves into a frothy emulsion, something like mayonnaise.
It triples the amount of oily, messy goo that you have in the water, and it makes it very hard to handle.
It also makes it very viscous.
When the Prestige sank off the coast of Spain, there were big, floating cushions the size of sofa cushions of emulsified oil, with the consistency, or the viscosity, of chewing gum.
It's incredibly hard to clean up.
And every single oil is different when it hits water.
When the chemistry of the oil and water also hits our politics, it's absolutely explosive.
For the first time, American consumers will kind of see the oil supply chain in front of themselves.
They have a "eureka!" moment, when we suddenly understand oil in a different context.
So I'm going to talk just a little bit about the origin of these politics, because it's really crucial to understanding why this summer is so important, why we need to stay focused.
Nobody gets up in the morning and thinks, "Wow! I'm going to go buy some three-carbon-to-12-carbon molecules to put in my tank and drive happily to work."
No, they think, "Ugh. I have to go buy gas.
I'm so angry about it. The oil companies are ripping me off.
They set the prices, and I don't even know.
I am helpless over this."
And this is what happens to us at the gas pump -- and actually, gas pumps are specifically designed to diffuse that anger.
You might notice that many gas pumps, including this one, are designed to look like ATMs.
I've talked to engineers. That's specifically to diffuse our anger, because supposedly we feel good about ATMs.
(Laughter) That shows you how bad it is.
But actually, I mean, this feeling of helplessness comes in because most Americans actually feel that oil prices are the result of a conspiracy, not of the vicissitudes of the world oil market.
And the thing is, too, is that we also feel very helpless about the amount that we consume, which is somewhat reasonable, because in fact, we have designed this system where, if you want to get a job, it's much more important to have a car that runs, to have a job and keep a job, than to have a GED.
And that's actually very perverse.
Now there's another perverse thing about the way we buy gas, which is that we'd rather be doing anything else.
This is BP's gas station in downtown Los Angeles.
It is green. It is a shrine to greenishness.
"Now," you think, "why would something so lame work on people so smart?"
Well, the reason is, is because, when we're buying gas, we're very invested in this sort of cognitive dissonance.
I mean, we're angry at the one hand and we want to be somewhere else.
We don't want to be buying oil; we want to be doing something green.
And we get kind of in on our own con.
I mean -- and this is funny, it looks funny here.
But in fact, that's why the slogan "beyond petroleum" worked.
But it's an inherent part of our energy policy, which is we don't talk about reducing the amount of oil that we use.
We talk about energy independence. We talk about hydrogen cars.
We talk about biofuels that haven't been invented yet.
And so, cognitive dissonance is part and parcel of the way that we deal with oil, and it's really important to dealing with this oil spill.
Okay, so the politics of oil are very moral in the United States.
The oil industry is like a huge, gigantic octopus of engineering and finance and everything else, but we actually see it in very moral terms.
This is an early-on photograph -- you can see, we had these gushers.
Early journalists looked at these spills, and they said, "This is a filthy industry."
But they also saw in it that people were getting rich for doing nothing.
They weren't farmers, they were just getting rich for stuff coming out of the ground.
It's the "Beverly Hillbillies," basically.
But in the beginning, this was seen as a very morally problematic thing, long before it became funny.
And then, of course, there was John D. Rockefeller.
And the thing about John D. is that he went into this chaotic wild-east of oil industry, and he rationalized it into a vertically integrated company, a multinational.
It was terrifying; you think Walmart is a terrifying business model now, imagine what this looked like in the 1860s or 1870s.
And it also the kind of root of how we see oil as a conspiracy.
But what's really amazing is that Ida Tarbell, the journalist, went in and did a big expos of Rockefeller and actually got the whole antitrust laws put in place.
But in many ways, that image of the conspiracy still sticks with us.
And here's one of the things that Ida Tarbell said -- she said, "He has a thin nose like a thorn.
There were no lips.
There were puffs under the little colorless eyes with creases running from them."
(Laughter) Okay, so that guy is actually still with us.
(Laughter) I mean, this is a very pervasive -- this is part of our DNA.
And then there's this guy, okay.
So, you might be wondering why it is that, every time we have high oil prices or an oil spill, we call these CEOs down to Washington, and we sort of pepper them with questions in public and we try to shame them.
And this is something that we've been doing since 1974, when we first asked them, "Why are there these obscene profits?"
And we've sort of personalized the whole oil industry into these CEOs.
And we take it as, you know -- we look at it on a moral level, rather than looking at it on a legal and financial level.
And so I'm not saying these guys aren't liable to answer questions -- I'm just saying that, when you focus on whether they are or are not a bunch of greedy bastards, you don't actually get around to the point of making laws that are either going to either change the way they operate, or you're going to get around to really reducing the amount of oil and reducing our dependence on oil.
So I'm saying this is kind of a distraction.
But it makes for good theater, and it's powerfully cathartic as you probably saw last week.
So the thing about water oil spills is that they are very politically galvanizing.
I mean, these pictures -- this is from the Santa Barbara spill.
You have these pictures of birds.
They really influence people.
When the Santa Barbara spill happened in 1969, it formed the environmental movement in its modern form.
It started Earth Day.
It also put in place the National Environmental Policy Act, the Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act.
Everything that we are really stemmed from this period.
I think it's important to kind of look at these pictures of the birds and understand what happens to us.
Here we are normally; we're standing at the gas pump, and we're feeling kind of helpless.
We look at these pictures and we understand, for the first time, our role in this supply chain.
We connect the dots in the supply chain.
And we have this kind of -- as voters, we have kind of a "eureka!" moment.
This is why these moments of these oil spills are so important.
But it's also really important that we don't get distracted by the theater or the morals of it.
We actually need to go in and work on the roots of the problem.
One of the things that happened with the two previous oil spills was that we really worked on some of the symptoms.
We were very reactive, as opposed to being proactive about what happened.
And so what we did was, actually, we made moratoriums on the east and west coasts on drilling.
We stopped drilling in ANWR, but we didn't actually reduce the amount of oil that we consumed.
In fact, it's continued to increase.
The only thing that really reduces the amount of oil that we consume is much higher prices.
As you can see, our own production has fallen off as our reservoirs have gotten old and expensive to drill out.
We only have two percent of the world's oil reserves; 65 percent of them are in the Persian Gulf.
One of the things that's happened because of this is that, since 1969, the country of Nigeria, or the part of Nigeria that pumps oil, which is the delta -- which is two times the size of Maryland -- has had thousands of oil spills a year.
I mean, we've essentially been exporting oil spills when we import oil from places without tight environmental regulations.
That has been the equivalent of an Exxon Valdez spill every year since 1969.
And we can wrap our heads around the spills, because that's what we see here, but in fact, these guys actually live in a war zone.
There's a thousand battle-related deaths a year in this area twice the size of Maryland, and it's all related to the oil.
And these guys, I mean, if they were in the U.S., they might be actually here in this room.
They have degrees in political science, degrees in business -- they're entrepreneurs. They don't actually want to be doing what they're doing.
And it's sort of one of the other groups of people who pay a price for us.
The other thing that we've done, as we've continued to increase demand, is that we kind of play a shell game with the costs.
One of the places we put in a big oil project in Chad, with Exxon.
So the U.S. taxpayer paid for it; the World Bank, Exxon paid for it.
We put it in. There was a tremendous banditry problem.
I was there in 2003.
We were driving along this dark, dark road, and the guy in the green stepped out, and I was just like, "Ahhh! This is it."
And then the guy in the Exxon uniform stepped out, and we realized it was okay.
They have their own private sort of army around them at the oil fields.
But at the same time, Chad has become much more unstable, and we are not paying for that price at the pump.
We pay for it in our taxes on April 15th.
We do the same thing with the price of policing the Persian Gulf and keeping the shipping lanes open.
This is 1988 -- we actually bombed two Iranian oil platforms that year.
That was the beginning of an escalating U.S. involvement there that we do not pay for at the pump.
We pay for it on April 15th, and we can't even calculate the cost of this involvement.
The other place that is sort of supporting our dependence on oil and our increased consumption is the Gulf of Mexico, which was not part of the moratoriums.
Now what's happened in the Gulf of Mexico -- as you can see, this is the Minerals Management diagram of wells for gas and oil.
It's become this intense industrialized zone.
It doesn't have the same resonance for us that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge has, but it should, I mean, it's a bird sanctuary.
Also, every time you buy gasoline in the United States, half of it is actually being refined along the coast, because the Gulf actually has about 50 percent of our refining capacity and a lot of our marine terminals as well.
So the people of the Gulf have essentially been subsidizing the rest of us through a less-clean environment.
And finally, American families also pay a price for oil.
Now on the one hand, the price at the pump is not really very high when you consider the actual cost of the oil, but on the other hand, the fact that people have no other transit options means that they pay a large amount of their income into just getting back and forth to work, generally in a fairly crummy car.
If you look at people who make $50,000 a year, they have two kids, they might have three jobs or more, and then they have to really commute.
They're actually spending more on their car and fuel than they are on taxes or on health care.
And the same thing happens at the 50th percentile, around 80,000.
Gasoline costs are a tremendous drain on the American economy, but they're also a drain on individual families and it's kind of terrifying to think about what happens when prices get higher.
So, what I'm going to talk to you about now is: what do we have to do this time?
What are the laws? What do we have to do to keep ourselves focused?
One thing is -- we need to stay away from the theater.
We need to stay away from the moratoriums.
We need to focus really back again on the molecules.
The moratoriums are fine, but we do need to focus on the molecules on the oil.
One of the things that we also need to do, is we need to try to not kind of fool ourselves into thinking that you can have a green world, before you reduce the amount of oil that we use.
We need to focus on reducing the oil.
What you see in this top drawing is a schematic of how petroleum gets used in the U.S. economy.
It comes in on the side -- the useful stuff is the dark gray, and the un-useful stuff, which is called the rejected energy -- the waste, goes up to the top.
Now you can see that the waste far outweighs the actually useful amount.
And one of the things that we need to do is, not only fix the fuel efficiency of our vehicles and make them much more efficient, but we also need to fix the economy in general.
We need to remove the perverse incentives to use more fuel.
For example, we have an insurance system where the person who drives 20,000 miles a year pays the same insurance as somebody who drives 3,000.
We actually encourage people to drive more.
We have policies that reward sprawl -- we have all kinds of policies.
We need to have more mobility choices.
We need to make the gas price better reflect the real cost of oil.
And we need to shift subsidies from the oil industry, which is at least 10 billion dollars a year, into something that allows middle-class people to find better ways to commute.
Whether that's getting a much more efficient car and also kind of building markets for new cars and new fuels down the road, this is where we need to be.
We need to kind of rationalize this whole thing, and you can find more about this policy.
It's called STRONG, which is "Secure Transportation Reducing Oil Needs Gradually," and the idea is instead of being helpless, we need to be more strong.
They're up at NewAmerica.net.
What's important about these is that we try to move from feeling helpless at the pump, to actually being active and to really sort of thinking about who we are, having kind of that special moment, where we connect the dots actually at the pump.
Now supposedly, oil taxes are the third rail of American politics -- the no-fly zone.
I actually -- I agree that a dollar a gallon on oil is probably too much, but I think that if we started this year with three cents a gallon on gasoline, and upped it to six cents next year, nine cents the following year, all the way up to 30 cents by 2020, that we could actually significantly reduce our gasoline consumption, and at the same time we would give people time to prepare, time to respond, and we would be raising money and raising consciousness at the same time.
Let me give you a little sense of how this would work.
This is a gas receipt, hypothetically, for a year from now.
The first thing that you have on the tax is -- you have a tax for a stronger America -- 33 cents.
So you're not helpless at the pump.
And the second thing that you have is a kind of warning sign, very similar to what you would find on a cigarette pack.
And what it says is, "The National Academy of Sciences estimates that every gallon of gas you burn in your car creates 29 cents in health care costs."
That's a lot.
And so this -- you can see that you're paying considerably less than the health care costs on the tax.
And also, the hope is that you start to be connected to the whole greater system.
And at the same time, you have a number that you can call to get more information on commuting, or a low-interest loan on a different kind of car, or whatever it is you're going to need to actually reduce your gasoline dependence.
With this whole sort of suite of policies, we could actually reduce our gasoline consumption -- or our oil consumption -- by 20 percent by 2020.
So, three million barrels a day.
But in order to do this, one of the things we really need to do, is we need to remember we are people of the hydrocarbon.
We need to keep or minds on the molecules and not get distracted by the theater, not get distracted by the cognitive dissonance of the green possibilities that are out there.
We need to kind of get down and do the gritty work of reducing our dependence upon this fuel and these molecules.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to introduce you to my badass friends.
Meet Thelma and Louise.
(Laughter) I'm passionate about cows.
And although they've been getting a lot of crap lately due to methane emissions and climate change, I hope that I can redeem their reputation in part by showing you how incredibly important they are in solving one of the world's biggest problems: food security.
But more importantly, for Africa -- it's resultant childhood stunting.
Nutritional stunting manifests itself in a reduction of growth rate in human development.
And according to UNICEF, stunting doesn't come easy.
It happens over a long period of time during which a child endures painful and debilitating cycles of illness, depressed appetite, insufficient nutrition and inadequate care.
And most kids simply can't endure such rigors.
But those that do survive, they carry forward long-term cognitive problems as well as losses of stature.
The numbers of stunted children under the age of five, in most regions of the world, has been declining.
And I really hate to say this, but the only place where they haven't been declining is here, in Africa.
Here, 59 million children, three in 10 in that age group, struggle to meet their genetic potential -- their full genetic potential.
Protein is one of our most important dietary requirements, and evidence shows that lack of essential amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, in young children's diets, can result in stunting.
Essential amino acids are called essential because we can't synthesize them in our bodies.
We have to get them from our foods and the best sources are animal-derived: milk, meat and eggs.
Most protein consumed on the African continent is crop-based.
And although we have millions of smallholder farmers rearing animals, livestock production is not as easy as we think.
The big livestock gaps between rich countries and poor countries are due to poor animal health.
Endemic livestock diseases, some of them transmissible to humans, threaten not only livestock producers in those poor countries, but all human health across all countries.
This is a global pathogens network.
It shows the pathogens found across the world according to the Enhanced Infectious Diseases database.
And it shows those pathogens that share hosts.
In a nutshell, we share pathogens, and thus diseases, with the species we live closest to: our livestock.
And we call these zoonotic diseases.
Recent reports show that the deadly dozen zoonotic diseases kill 2.2 million people and sicken 2.4 billion people annually.
And Jimmy says, "The greatest burden of zoonoses falls on one billion poor livestock keepers."
We totally underestimate the importance of our smallholder farmers.
We're beginning to recognize how important they are and how they influence our medical health, our biosafety and more recently, our cognitive and our physical health.
They stand at the frontline of zoonotic epidemics.
They pretty much underpin our existence.
And they need to know so much, yet most lack knowledge on livestock disease prevention and treatment.
So how do they learn?
Apart from shared experiences, trial and error, conventional farming extension services are boots on the ground and radio -- expensive and hard to scale in the face of population growth.
Sounds pretty gloomy, doesn't it?
But we're at an interesting point in Africa.
We're changing that narrative using innovative solutions, riding across scalable technologies.
Knowledge doesn't have to be expensive.
My company developed an agricultural platform called iCow.
We teach farmers best livestock practices using SMS over simple, low-end phones.
Farmers receive three SMSs a week on best livestock practices, and those that execute the messages go on to see increases in productivity within as short a time as three months.
The first increases in productivity, of course, are improved animal health.
We use SMS because it is retentive.
Farmers store their messages, they write them down in books, and in effect, we're drip-feeding agricultural manuals into the fields.
We recognize that we are all part of the global food network: producers and consumers, you and me, and every farmer.
We're focusing now on trying to bring together producers and consumers to take action and take responsibility for not only food security, but for food safety.
This beautiful animal is an African-Asian Sahiwal crossed with a Dutch Fleckvieh.
She's milkier than her Sahiwal mom, and she's sturdier and more resistant to disease than her Fleckvieh father.
In Ethiopia and Tanzania, the African Dairy Genetic Gains program is using SMS and cutting-edge genomics and pioneering Africa's first tropically adapted dairy breeding centers and dairy performance recording centers.
Farmers contribute their production data -- milking records, breeding records and feeding records -- to the ADGG platform.
This stage is synthesized through algorithms from some of the top livestock institutions in the world before it lands back in the farmers' hands in actionable SMSs.
Customized data, customized responses all aimed at increasing productivity based on the potential on the ground.
We're at a very interesting place in agriculture in Africa.
By the end of this year, we'll have almost one billion mobile phone subscriptions.
We have the power in our hands to ensure that livestock production systems are not only healthy, productive and profitable, but that farmers are knowledgeable, and more importantly, that our farmers are safe.
Working with smallholder farmers is one of the best ways to guarantee food security.
Working with smallholder farmers is one of the best ways to guarantee each and every child their full opportunity and ability to reach their full genetic potential.
And harnessing the power of millions of smallholder farmers and their badass cows like mine, we should be able to bring a halt to stunting in Africa.
Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
So I work in marketing, which I love, but my first passion was physics, a passion brought to me by a wonderful school teacher, when I had a little less gray hair.
So he taught me that physics is cool because it teaches us so much about the world around us.
And I'm going to spend the next few minutes trying to convince you that physics can teach us something about marketing.
So quick show of hands -- who studied some marketing in university?
Who studied some physics in university?
Pretty good. And at school?
Okay, lots of you.
So, hopefully this will bring back some happy, or possibly some slightly disturbing memories.
So, physics and marketing.
We'll start with something very simple -- Newton's Law: "The force equals mass times acceleration."
This is something that perhaps Turkish Airlines should have studied a bit more carefully before they ran this campaign.
(Laughter) But if we rearrange this formula quickly, we can get to acceleration equals force over mass, which means that for a larger particle -- a larger mass -- it requires more force to change its direction.
It's the same with brands: the more massive a brand, the more baggage it has, the more force is needed to change its positioning.
And that's one of the reasons why Arthur Andersen chose to launch Accenture rather than try to persuade the world that Andersen's could stand for something other than accountancy.
It explains why Hoover found it very difficult to persuade the world that it was more than vacuum cleaners, and why companies like Unilever and P&amp;G keep brands separate, like Ariel and Pringles and Dove rather than having one giant parent brand.
So the physics is that the bigger the mass of an object the more force is needed to change its direction.
The marketing is, the bigger a brand, the more difficult it is to reposition it.
So think about a portfolio of brands or maybe new brands for new ventures.
Now, who remembers Heisenberg's uncertainty principle?
Getting a little more technical now.
So this says that it's impossible, by definition, to measure exactly the state -- i.e., the position -- and the momentum of a particle, because the act of measuring it, by definition, changes it.
So to explain that -- if you've got an elementary particle and you shine a light on it, then the photon of light has momentum, which knocks the particle, so you don't know where it was before you looked at it.
By measuring it, the act of measurement changes it.
The act of observation changes it.
It's the same in marketing.
So with the act of observing consumers, changes their behavior.
Think about the group of moms who are talking about their wonderful children in a focus group, and almost none of them buy lots of junk food.
And yet, McDonald's sells hundreds of millions of burgers every year.
Think about the people who are on accompanied shops in supermarkets, who stuff their trolleys full of fresh green vegetables and fruit, but don't shop like that any other day.
And if you think about the number of people who claim in surveys to regularly look for porn on the Web, it's very few.
Yet, at Google, we know it's the number-one searched for category.
So luckily, the science -- no, sorry -- the marketing is getting easier.
Luckily, with now better point-of-sale tracking, more digital media consumption, you can measure more what consumers actually do, rather than what they say they do.
So the physics is you can never accurately and exactly measure a particle, because the observation changes it.
The marketing is -- the message for marketing is -- that try to measure what consumers actually do, rather than what they say they'll do or anticipate they'll do.
So next, the scientific method -- an axiom of physics, of all science -- says you cannot prove a hypothesis through observation, you can only disprove it.
What this means is you can gather more and more data around a hypothesis or a positioning, and it will strengthen it, but it will not conclusively prove it.
And only one contrary data point can blow your theory out of the water.
So if we take an example -- Ptolemy had dozens of data points to support his theory that the planets would rotate around the Earth.
It only took one robust observation from Copernicus to blow that idea out of the water.
And there are parallels for marketing -- you can invest for a long time in a brand, but a single contrary observation of that positioning will destroy consumers' belief.
Take BP -- they spent millions of pounds over many years building up its credentials as an environmentally friendly brand, but then one little accident.
Think about Toyota.
It was, for a long time, revered as the most reliable of cars, and then they had the big recall incident.
And Tiger Woods, for a long time, the perfect brand ambassador.
Well, you know the story.
(Laughter) So the physics is that you cannot prove a hypothesis, but it's easy to disprove it -- any hypothesis is shaky.
And the marketing is that not matter how much you've invested in your brand, one bad week can undermine decades of good work.
So be really careful to try and avoid the screw-ups that can undermine your brand.
And lastly, to the slightly obscure world of entropy -- the second law of thermodynamics.
This says that entropy, which is a measure of the disorder of a system, will always increase.
The same is true of marketing.
If we go back 20 years, the one message pretty much controlled by one marketing manager could pretty much define a brand.
But where we are today, things have changed.
You can get a strong brand image or a message and put it out there like the Conservative Party did earlier this year with their election poster.
But then you lose control of it.
With the kind of digital comment creation and distribution tools that are available now to every consumer, it's impossible to control where it goes.
Your brand starts being dispersed, (Laughter) it gets more chaotic.
(Laughter) It's out of your control.
(Laughter) I actually saw him speak -- he did a good job.
But while this may be unsettling for marketers, it's actually a good thing.
This distribution of brand energy gets your brand closer to the people, more in with the people.
It makes this distribution of energy a democratizing force, which is ultimately good for your brand.
So, the lesson from physics is that entropy will always increase; it's a fundamental law.
The message for marketing is that your brand is more dispersed.
You can't fight it, so embrace it and find a way to work with it.
So to close, my teacher, Mr. Vutter, told me that physics is cool, and hopefully, I've convinced you that physics can teach all of us, even in the world of marketing, something special.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Martin Luther King did not say, "I have a nightmare," when he inspired the civil rights movements.
He said, "I have a dream."
And I have a dream.
I have a dream that we can stop thinking that the future will be a nightmare, and this is going to be a challenge, because, if you think of every major blockbusting film of recent times, nearly all of its visions for humanity are apocalyptic.
I think this film is one of the hardest watches of modern times, "The Road."
It's a beautiful piece of filmmaking, but everything is desolate, everything is dead.
And just a father and son trying to survive, walking along the road.
And I think the environmental movement of which I am a part of has been complicit in creating this vision of the future.
For too long, we have peddled a nightmarish vision of what's going to happen.
We have focused on the worst-case scenario.
We have focused on the problems.
And we have not thought enough about the solutions.
We've used fear, if you like, to grab people's attention.
And any psychologist will tell you that fear in the organism is linked to flight mechanism.
It's part of the fight and flight mechanism, that when an animal is frightened -- think of a deer.
A deer freezes very, very still, poised to run away.
And I think that's what we're doing when we're asking people to engage with our agenda around environmental degradation and climate change.
People are freezing and running away because we're using fear.
And I think the environmental movement has to grow up and start to think about what progress is.
What would it be like to be improving the human lot?
And one of the problems that we face, I think, is that the only people that have cornered the market in terms of progress is a financial definition of what progress is, an economic definition of what progress is -- that somehow, if we get the right numbers to go up, we're going to be better off, whether that's on the stock market, whether that's with GDP and economic growth, that somehow life is going to get better.
This is somehow appealing to human greed instead of fear -- that more is better.
Come on. In the Western world, we have enough.
Maybe some parts of the world don't, but we have enough.
And we've know for a long time that this is not a good measure of the welfare of nations.
In fact, the architect of our national accounting system, Simon Kuznets, in the 1930s, said that, "A nation's welfare can scarcely be inferred from their national income."
But we've created a national accounting system which is firmly based on production and producing stuff.
And indeed, this is probably historical, and it had its time.
In the second World War, we needed to produce a lot of stuff.
And indeed, we were so successful at producing certain types of stuff that we destroyed a lot of Europe, and we had to rebuild it afterwards.
And so our national accounting system became fixated on what we can produce.
But as early as 1968, this visionary man, Robert Kennedy, at the start of his ill-fated presidential campaign, gave the most eloquent deconstruction of gross national product that ever has been.
And he finished his talk with the phrase, that, "The gross national product measures everything except that which makes life worthwhile."
How crazy is that? That our measure of progress, our dominant measure of progress in society, is measuring everything except that which makes life worthwhile?
I believe, if Kennedy was alive today, he would be asking statisticians such as myself to go out and find out what makes life worthwhile.
He'd be asking us to redesign our national accounting system to be based upon such important things as social justice, sustainability and people's well-being.
And actually, social scientists have already gone out and asked these questions around the world.
This is from a global survey.
It's asking people, what do they want.
And unsurprisingly, people all around the world say that what they want is happiness, for themselves, for their families, their children, their communities.
Okay, they think money is slightly important.
It's there, but it's not nearly as important as happiness, and it's not nearly as important as love.
We all need to love and be loved in life.
It's not nearly as important as health.
We want to be healthy and live a full life.
These seem to be natural human aspirations.
Why are statisticians not measuring these?
Why are we not thinking of the progress of nations in these terms, instead of just how much stuff we have?
And really, this is what I've done with my adult life -- is think about how do we measure happiness, how do we measure well-being, how can we do that within environmental limits.
And we created, at the organization that I work for, the New Economics Foundation, something we call the Happy Planet Index, because we think people should be happy and the planet should be happy.
Why don't we create a measure of progress that shows that?
And what we do, is we say that the ultimate outcome of a nation is how successful is it at creating happy and healthy lives for its citizens.
That should be the goal of every nation on the planet.
But we have to remember that there's a fundamental input to that, and that is how many of the planet's resources we use.
We all have one planet. We all have to share it.
It is the ultimate scarce resource, the one planet that we share.
And economics is very interested in scarcity.
When it has a scarce resource that it wants to turn into a desirable outcome, it thinks in terms of efficiency.
It thinks in terms of how much bang do we get for our buck.
And this is a measure of how much well-being we get for our planetary resource use.
It is an efficiency measure.
And probably the easiest way to show you that, is to show you this graph.
Running horizontally along the graph, is "ecological footprint," which is a measure of how much resources we use and how much pressure we put on the planet.
More is bad.
Running vertically upwards, is a measure called "happy life years."
It's about the well-being of nations.
It's like a happiness adjusted life-expectancy.
It's like quality and quantity of life in nations.
And the yellow dot there you see, is the global average.
Now, there's a huge array of nations around that global average.
To the top right of the graph, are countries which are doing reasonably well and producing well-being, but they're using a lot of planet to get there.
They are the U.S.A., other Western countries going across in those triangles and a few Gulf states in there actually.
Conversely, at the bottom left of the graph, are countries that are not producing much well-being -- typically, sub-Saharan Africa.
In Hobbesian terms, life is short and brutish there.
The average life expectancy in many of these countries is only 40 years.
Malaria, HIV/AIDS are killing a lot of people in these regions of the world.
But now for the good news!
There are some countries up there, yellow triangles, that are doing better than global average, that are heading up towards the top left of the graph.
This is an aspirational graph.
We want to be top left, where good lives don't cost the earth.
They're Latin American.
The country on its own up at the top is a place I haven't been to.
Maybe some of you have.
Costa Rica.
Costa Rica -- average life expectancy is 78-and-a-half years.
That is longer than in the USA.
They are, according to the latest Gallup world poll, the happiest nation on the planet -- than anybody; more than Switzerland and Denmark.
They are the happiest place.
They are doing that on a quarter of the resources that are used typically in [the] Western world -- a quarter of the resources.
What's going on there?
What's happening in Costa Rica?
We can look at some of the data.
99 percent of their electricity comes from renewable resources.
Their government is one of the first to commit to be carbon neutral by 2021.
They abolished the army in 1949 -- 1949.
And they invested in social programs -- health and education.
They have one of the highest literacy rates in Latin America and in the world.
And they have that Latin vibe, don't they.
They have the social connectedness.
(Laughter) The challenge is, that possibly -- and the thing we might have to think about -- is that the future might not be North American, might not be Western European.
It might be Latin American.
And the challenge, really, is to pull the global average up here.
That's what we need to do.
And if we're going to do that, we need to pull countries from the bottom, and we need to pull countries from the right of the graph.
And then we're starting to create a happy planet.
That's one way of looking at it.
Another way of looking at it is looking at time trends.
We don't have good data going back for every country in the world, but for some of the richest countries, the OECD group, we do.
And this is the trend in well-being over that time, a small increase, but this is the trend in ecological footprint.
And so in strict happy-planet methodology, we've become less efficient at turning our ultimate scarce resource into the outcome we want to.
And the point really is, is that I think, probably everybody in this room would like society to get to 2050 without an apocalyptic something happening.
It's actually not very long away.
It's half a human lifetime away.
A child entering school today will be my age in 2050.
This is not the very distant future.
This is what the U.K. government target on carbon and greenhouse emissions looks like.
And I put it to you, that is not business as usual.
That is changing our business.
That is changing the way we create our organizations, we do our government policy and we live our lives.
And the point is, we need to carry on increasing well-being.
No one can go to the polls and say that quality of life is going to reduce.
None of us, I think, want human progress to stop.
I think we want it to carry on.
I think we want the lot of humanity to keep on increasing.
And I think this is where climate change skeptics and deniers come in.
I think this is what they want. They want quality of life to keep increasing.
They want to hold on to what they've got.
And if we're going to engage them, I think that's what we've got to do.
And that means we have to really increase efficiency even more.
Now that's all very easy to draw graphs and things like that, but the point is we need to turn those curves.
And this is where I think we can take a leaf out of systems theory, systems engineers, where they create feedback loops, put the right information at the right point of time.
Human beings are very motivated by the "now."
You put a smart meter in your home, and you see how much electricity you're using right now, how much it's costing you, your kids go around and turn the lights off pretty quickly.
What would that look like for society?
Why is it, on the radio news every evening, I hear the FTSE 100, the Dow Jones, the dollar pound ratio -- I don't even know which way the dollar pound ratio should go to be good news.
And why do I hear that?
Why don't I hear how much energy Britain used yesterday, or American used yesterday?
Did we meet our three percent annual target on reducing carbon emissions?
That's how you create a collective goal.
You put it out there into the media and start thinking about it.
And we need positive feedback loops for increasing well-being At a government level, they might create national accounts of well-being.
At a business level, you might look at the well-being of your employees, which we know is really linked to creativity, which is linked to innovation, and we're going to need a lot of innovation to deal with those environmental issues.
At a personal level, we need these nudges too.
Maybe we don't quite need the data, but we need reminders.
In the U.K., we have a strong public health message on five fruit and vegetables a day and how much exercise we should do -- never my best thing.
What are these for happiness?
What are the five things that you should do every day to be happier?
We did a project for the Government Office of Science a couple of years ago, a big program called the Foresight program -- lots and lots of people -- involved lots of experts -- everything evidence based -- a huge tome.
But a piece of work we did was on: what five positive actions can you do to improve well-being in your life?
And the point of these is they are, not quite, the secrets of happiness, but they are things that I think happiness will flow out the side from.
And the first of these is to connect, is that your social relationships are the most important cornerstones of your life.
Do you invest the time with your loved ones that you could do, and energy?
Keep building them.
The second one is be active.
The fastest way out of a bad mood: step outside, go for a walk, turn the radio on and dance.
Being active is great for our positive mood.
The third one is take notice.
How aware are you of things going on around the world, the seasons changing, people around you?
Do you notice what's bubbling up for you and trying to emerge?
Based on a lot of evidence for mindfulness, cognitive behavioral therapy, [very] strong for our well being.
The fourth is keep learning and keep is important -- learning throughout the whole life course.
Older people who keep learning and are curious, they have much better health outcomes than those who start to close down.
But it doesn't have to be formal learning; it's not knowledge based.
It's more curiosity.
It can be learning to cook a new dish, picking up an instrument you forgot as a child.
Keep learning.
And the final one is that most anti-economic of activities, but give.
Our generosity, our altruism, our compassion, are all hardwired to the reward mechanism in our brain.
We feel good if we give.
You can do an experiment where you give two groups of people a hundred dollars in the morning.
You tell one of them to spend it on themselves and one on other people.
You measure their happiness at the end of the day, those that have gone and spent on other people are much happier that those that spent it on themselves.
And these five ways, which we put onto these handy postcards, I would say, don't have to cost the earth.
They don't have any carbon content.
They don't need a lot of material goods to be satisfied.
And so I think it's really quite feasible that happiness does not cost the earth.
Now, Martin Luther King, on the eve of his death, gave an incredible speech.
He said, "I know there are challenges ahead, there may be trouble ahead, but I fear no one. I don't care.
I have been to the mountain top, and I have seen the Promised Land."
Now, he was a preacher, but I believe the environmental movement and, in fact, the business community, government, needs to go to the top of the mountain top, and it needs to look out, and it needs to see the Promised Land, or the land of promise, and it needs to have a vision of a world that we all want.
And not only that, we need to create a Great Transition to get there, and we need to pave that great transition with good things.
Human beings want to be happy.
Pave them with the five ways.
And we need to have signposts gathering people together and pointing them -- something like the Happy Planet Index.
And then I believe that we can all create a world we all want, where happiness does not cost the earth.
(Applause)
We live on a human-dominated planet, putting unprecedented pressure on the systems on Earth.
This is bad news, but perhaps surprising to you, it's also part of the good news.
We're the first generation -- thanks to science -- to be informed that we may be undermining the stability and the ability of planet Earth to support human development as we know it.
It's also good news, because the planetary risks we're facing are so large, that business as usual is not an option.
In fact, we're in a phase where transformative change is necessary, which opens the window for innovation, for new ideas and new paradigms.
This is a scientific journey on the challenges facing humanity in the global phase of sustainability.
On this journey, I'd like to bring, apart from yourselves, a good friend, a stakeholder, who's always absent when we deal with the negotiations on environmental issues, a stakeholder who refuses to compromise -- planet Earth.
So I thought I'd bring her with me today on stage, to have her as a witness of a remarkable journey, which humbly reminds us of the period of grace we've had over the past 10,000 years.
This is the living conditions on the planet over the last 100,000 years.
It's a very important period -- it's roughly half the period when we've been fully modern humans on the planet.
We've had the same, roughly, abilities that developed civilizations as we know it.
This is the environmental conditions on the planet.
Here, used as a proxy, temperature variability.
It was a jumpy ride. 80,000 years back in a crisis, we leave Africa, we colonize Australia in another crisis, 60,000 years back, we leave Asia for Europe in another crisis, 40,000 years back, and then we enter the remarkably stable Holocene phase, the only period in the whole history of the planet, that we know of, that can support human development.
A thousand years into this period, we abandon our hunting and gathering patterns.
We go from a couple of million people to the seven billion people we are today.
The Mesopotamian culture: we invent agriculture, we domesticate animals and plants.
You have the Roman, the Greek and the story as you know it.
The only phase, as we know it that can support humanity.
The trouble is we're putting a quadruple sqeeze on this poor planet, a quadruple sqeeze, which, as its first squeeze, has population growth of course.
Now, this is not only about numbers; this is not only about the fact that we're seven billion people committed to nine billion people, it's an equity issue as well.
The majority of the environmental impacts on the planet have been caused by the rich minority, the 20 percent that jumped onto the industrial bandwagon in the mid-18th century.
The majority of the planet, aspiring for development, having the right for development, are in large aspiring for an unsustainable lifestyle, a momentous pressure.
The second pressure on the planet is, of course the climate agenda -- the big issue -- where the policy interpretation of science is that it would be enough to stabilize greenhouse gases at 450 ppm to avoid average temperatures exceeding two degrees, to avoid the risk that we may be destabilizing the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, holding six meters -- level rising, the risk of destabilizing the Greenland Ice Sheet, holding another seven meters -- sea level rising.
Now, you would have wished the climate pressure to hit a strong planet, a resilient planet, but unfortunately, the third pressure is the ecosystem decline.
Never have we seen, in the past 50 years, such a sharp decline of ecosystem functions and services on the planet, one of them being the ability to regulate climate on the long term, in our forests, land and biodiversity.
The forth pressure is surprise, the notion and the evidence that we need to abandon our old paradigm, that ecosystems behave linearly, predictably, controllably in our -- so to say -- linear systems, and that in fact, surprise is universal, as systems tip over very rapidly, abruptly and often irreversibly.
This, dear friends, poses a human pressure on the planet of momentous scale.
We may, in fact, have entered a new geological era -- the Anthropocene, where humans are the predominant driver of change at a planetary level.
Now, as a scientist, what's the evidence for this?
Well, the evidence is, unfortunately, ample.
It's not only carbon dioxide that has this hockey stick pattern of accelerated change.
You can take virtually any parameter that matters for human well-being -- nitrous oxide, methane, deforestation, overfishing land degredation, loss of species -- they all show the same pattern over the past 200 years.
Simultaneously, they branch off in the mid-50s, 10 years after the Second World War, showing very clearly that the great acceleration of the human enterprise starts in the mid-50s.
You see, for the first time, an imprint on the global level.
And I can tell you, you enter the disciplinary research in each of these, you find something remarkably important, the conclusion that we may have come to the point where we have to bend the curves, that we may have entered the most challenging and exciting decade in the history humanity on the planet, the decade when we have to bend the curves.
Now, as if this was not enough -- to just bend the curves and understanding the accelerated pressure on the planet -- we also have to recognize the fact that systems do have multiple stable states, separated by thresholds -- illustrated here by this ball and cup diagram, where the depth of the cup is the resilience of the system.
Now, the system may gradually -- under pressure of climate change, erosion, biodiversity loss -- lose the depth of the cup, the resilience, but appear to be healthy and appear to suddenly, under a threshold, be tipping over. Upff.
Sorry. Changing state and literally ending up in an undesired situation, where new biophysical logic takes over, new species take over, and the system gets locked.
Do we have evidence of this? Yes, coral reef systems.
Biodiverse, low-nutrient, hard coral systems under multiple pressures of overfishing, unsustainable tourism, climate change.
A trigger and the system tips over, loses its resilience, soft corals take over, and we get undesired systems that cannot support economic and social development.
The Arctic -- a beautiful system -- a regulating biome at the planetary level, taking the knock after knock on climate change, appearing to be in a good state.
No scientist could predict that in 2007, suddenly, what could be crossing a threshold.
The system suddenly, very surprisingly, loses 30 to 40 percent of its summer ice cover.
And the drama is, of course, that when the system does this, the logic may change.
It may get locked in an undesired state, because it changes color, absorbs more energy, and the system may get stuck.
In my mind, the largest red flag warning for humanity that we are in a precarious situation.
As a sideline, you know that the only red flag that popped up here was a submarine from an unnamed country that planted a red flag at the bottom of the Arctic to be able to control the oil resources.
Now, if we have evidence, which we now have, that wetlands, forests, [unclear] monsoon system, the rainforests, behave in this nonlinear way.
30 or so scientists around the world gathered and asked a question for the first time, "Do we have to put the planet into the the pot?"
So we have to ask ourselves: are we threatening this extraordinarily stable Holocene state?
Are we in fact putting ourselves in a situation where we're coming too close to thresholds that could lead to deleterious and very undesired, if now catastrophic, change for human development?
You know, you don't want to stand there.
In fact, you're not even allowed to stand where this gentleman is standing, at the foaming, slippery waters at the threshold.
In fact, there's a fence quite upstream of this threshold, beyond which you are in a danger zone.
And this is the new paradigm, which we gathered two, three years back, recognizing that our old paradigm of just analyzing and pushing and predicting parameters into the future, aiming at minimalizing environmental impacts, is of the past.
Now we to ask ourselves: which are the large environmental processes that we have to be stewards of to keep ourselves safe in the Holocene?
And could we even, thanks to major advancements in Earth systems science, identify the thresholds, the points where we may expect nonlinear change?
And could we even define a planetary boundary, a fence, within which we then have a safe operating space for humanity?
This work, which was published in "Nature," late 2009, after a number of years of analysis, led to the final proposition that we can only find nine planetary boundaries with which, under active stewardship, would allow ourselves to have a safe operating space.
These include, of course, climate.
It may surprise you that it's not only climate.
But it shows that we are interconnected, among many systems on the planet, with the three big systems, climate change, stratospheric ozone depletion and ocean acidification being the three big systems, where the scientific evidence of large-scale thresholds in the paleo-record of the history of the planet.
But we also include, what we call, the slow variables, the systems that, under the hood, regulate and buffer the capacity of the resilience of the planet -- the interference of the big nitrogen and phosphorus cycles on the planet, land use change, rate of biodiversity loss, freshwater use, functions which regulate biomass on the planet, carbon sequestration, diversity.
And then we have two parameters which we were not able to quantify -- air pollution, including warming gases and air-polluting sulfates and nitrates, but also chemical pollution.
Together, these form an integrated whole for guiding human development in the Anthropocene, understanding that the planet is a complex self-regulating system.
In fact, most evidence indicates that these nine may behave as three Musketeers, "One for all. All for one."
You degrade forests, you go beyond the boundary on land, you undermine the ability of the climate system to stay stable.
The drama here is, in fact, that it may show that the climate challenge is the easy one, if you consider the whole challenge of sustainable development.
Now this is the Big Bang equivalent then of human development within the safe operating space of the planetary boundaries.
What you see here in black line is the safe operating space, the quantified boundaries, as suggested by this analysis.
The yellow dot in the middle here is our starting point, the pre-industrial point, where we're very safely in the safe operating space.
In the '50s, we start branching out.
In the '60s already, through the green revolution and the Haber-Bosch process of fixing nitrogen from the atmosphere -- you know, human's today take out more nitrogen from the atmosphere than the whole biosphere does naturally as a whole.
We don't transgress the climate boundary until the early '90s, actually, right after Rio.
And today, we are in a situation where we estimate that we've transgressed three boundaries, the rate of biodiversity loss, which is the sixth extinction period in the history of humanity -- one of them being the extinctions of the dinosaurs -- nitrogen and climate change.
But we still have some degrees of freedom on the others, but we are approaching fast on land, water, phosphorus and oceans.
But this gives a new paradigm to guide humanity, to put the light on our, so far overpowered industrial vehicle, which operates as if we're only on a dark, straight highway.
Now the question then is: how gloomy is this?
Is then sustainable development utopia?
Well, there's no science to suggest.
In fact, there is ample science to indicate that we can do this transformative change, that we have the ability to now move into a new innovative, a transformative gear, across scales.
The drama is, of course, is that 200 countries on this planet have to simultaneously start moving in the same direction.
But it changes fundamentally our governance and management paradigm, from the current linear, command and control thinking, looking at efficiencies and optimization towards a much more flexible, a much more adaptive approach, where we recognize that redundancy, both in social and environmental systems, is key to be able to deal with a turbulent era of global change.
We have to invest in persistence, in the ability of social systems and ecological systems to withstand shocks and still remain in that desired cup.
We have to invest in transformations capability, moving from crisis into innovation and the ability to rise after a crisis, and of course to adapt to unavoidable change.
This is a new paradigm.
We're not doing that at any scale on governance.
But is it happening anywhere?
Do we have any examples of success on this mind shift being applied at the local level?
Well, yes, in fact we do and the list can start becoming longer and longer.
There's good news here, for example, from Latin America, where plow-based farming systems of the '50s and '60s led farming basically to a dead-end, with lower and lower yields, degrading the organic matter and fundamental problems at the livelihood levels in Paraguay, Uruguay and a number of countries, Brazil, leading to innovation and entrepreneurship among farmers in partnership with scientists into an agricultural revolution of zero tillage systems combined with mulch farming with locally adapted technologies, which today, for example, in some countries, have led to a tremendous increase in area under mulch, zero till farming which, not only produces more food, but also sequesters carbon.
The Australian Great Barrier Reef is another success story.
Under the realization from tourist operators, fishermen, the Australian Great Barrier Reef Authority and scientists that the Great Barrier Reef is doomed under the current governance regime.
Global change, beautification rack culture, overfishing and unsustainable tourism, all together placing this system in the realization of crisis.
But the window of opportunity was innovation and new mindset, which today has led to a completely new governance strategy to build resilience, acknowledge redundancy and invest in the whole system as an integrated whole, and then allow for much more redundancy in the system.
Sweden, the country I come from, has other examples, where wetlands in southern Sweden were seen as -- as in many countries -- as flood-prone polluted nuisance in the peri-urban regions.
But again, a crisis, new partnerships, actors locally, transforming these into a key component of sustainable urban planning.
So crisis leading into opportunities.
Now, what about the future?
Well, the future, of course, has one massive challenge, which is feeding a world of nine billion people.
We need nothing less than a new green revolution, and the planet boundaries shows that agriculture has to go from a source of greenhouse gases to a sink.
It has to basically do this on current land.
We cannot expand anymore, because it erodes the planetary boundaries.
We cannot continue consuming water as we do today, with 25 percent of world rivers not even reaching the ocean.
And we need a transformation.
Well, interestingly, and based on my work and others in Africa, for example, we've shown that even the most vulnerable small-scale rainfall farming systems, with innovations and supplementary irrigation to bridge dry spells and droughts, sustainable sanitation systems to close the loop on nutrients from toilets back to farmers' fields, and innovations in tillage systems, we can triple, quadruple, yield levels on current land.
Elinor Ostrom, the latest Nobel laureate of economics, clearly shows empirically across the world that we can govern the commons if we invest in trust, local, action-based partnerships and cross-scale institutional innovations, where local actors, together, can deal with the global commons at a large scale.
But even on the hard policy area we have innovations.
We know that we have to move from our fossil dependence very quickly into a low-carbon economy in record time.
And what shall we do?
Everybody talks about carbon taxes -- it won't work -- emission schemes, but for example, one policy measure, feed-in tariffs on the energy system, which is already applied, from China doing it on offshore wind systems, all the way to the U.S.
where you give the guaranteed price for investment in renewable energy, but you can subsidize electricity to poor people.
You get people out of poverty.
You solve the climate issue with regards to the energy sector, while at the same time, stimulating innovation -- examples of things that can be out scaled quickly at the planetary level.
So there is -- no doubt -- opportunity here, and we can list many, many examples of transformative opportunities around the planet.
The key though in all of these, the red thread, is the shift in mindset, moving away from a situation where we simply are pushing ourselves into a dark future, where we instead backcast our future, and we say, "What is the playing field on the planet?
What are the planetary boundaries within which we can safely operate?"
and then backtrack innovations within that.
But of course, the drama is, it clearly shows that incremental change is not an option.
So, there is scientific evidence.
They sort of say the harsh news, that we are facing the largest transformative development since the industrialization.
In fact, what we have to do over the next 40 years is much more dramatic and more exciting than what we did when we moved into the situation we're in today.
Now, science indicates that, yes, we can achieve a prosperous future within the safe operating space, if we move simultaneously, collaborating on a global level, from local to global scale, in transformative options, which build resilience on a finite planet.
Thank you.
Tyler Dewar: The way I feel right now is that all of the other speakers have said exactly what I wanted to say.
(Laughter) And it seems that the only thing left for me to say is to thank you all for your kindness.
TD: But maybe in the spirit of appreciating the kindness of you all, I could share with you a little story about myself.
TD: From the time I was very young, onward, I was given a lot of different responsibilities, and it always seemed to me, when I was young, that everything was laid out before me.
All of the plans for me were already made.
I was given the clothes that I needed to wear and told where I needed to be, given these very precious and holy looking robes to wear, with the understanding that it was something sacred or important.
TD: But before that kind of formal lifestyle happened for me, I was living in eastern Tibet with my family.
And when I was seven years old, all of a sudden, a search party arrived at my home.
They were looking the next Karmapa, and I noticed they were talking to my mom and dad, and the news came to me that they were telling me that I was the Karmapa.
And these days, people ask me a lot, how did that feel.
How did that feel when they came and whisked you away, and your lifestyle completely changed?
And what I mostly say is that, at that time, it was a pretty interesting idea to me.
I thought that things would be pretty fun and there would be more things to play with.
(Laughter) TD: But it didn't turn out to be so fun and entertaining, as I thought it would have been.
I was placed in a pretty strictly controlled environment.
And immediately, a lot of different responsibilities, in terms of my education and so forth, were heaped upon me.
I was separated, largely, from my family, including my mother and father.
I didn't have have many personal friends to spend time with, but I was expected to perform these prescribed duties.
So it turned out that my fantasy about an entertaining life of being the Karmapa wasn't going to come true.
It more felt to be the case to me that I was being treated like a statue, and I was to sit in one place like a statue would.
TD: Nevertheless, I felt that, even though I've been separated from my loved ones -- and, of course, now I'm even further away.
When I was 14, I escaped from Tibet and became even further removed from my mother and father, my relatives, my friends and my homeland.
But nevertheless, there's no real sense of separation from me in my heart, in terms of the love that I feel for these people.
I feel, still, a very strong connection of love for all of these people and for the land.
TD: And I still do get to keep in touch with my mother and father, albeit infrequently.
I talk to my mother once in a blue moon on the telephone.
And my experience is that, when I'm talking to her, with every second that passes during our conversation, the feeling of love that binds us is bringing us closer and closer together.
TD: So those were just a few remarks about my personal background.
And in terms of other things that I wanted to share with you, in terms of ideas, I think it's wonderful to have a situation like this, where so many people from different backgrounds and places can come together, exchange their ideas and form relationships of friendship with each other.
And I think that's symbolic of what we're seeing in the world in general, that the world is becoming smaller and smaller, and that all of the peoples in the world are enjoying more opportunities for connection.
That's wonderful, but we should also remember that we should have a similar process happening on the inside.
Along with outward development and increase of opportunity, there should be inward development and deepening of our heart connections as well as our outward connections.
So we spoke and we heard some about design this week.
I think that it's important for us to remember that we need to keep pushing forward on the endeavor of the design of the heart.
We heard a lot about technology this week, and it's important for us to remember to invest a lot of our energy in improving the technology of the heart.
TD: So, even though I'm somewhat happy about the wonderful developments that are happening in the world, still, I feel a sense of impediment, when it comes to the ability that we have to connect with each other on a heart-to-heart, or a mind-to-mind, level.
I feel that there are some things that are getting in the way.
TC: My relationship to this concept of heart-to-heart connection, or mind-to-mind connection, is an interesting one, because, as a spiritual leader, I'm always attempting to open my heart to others and offer myself up for heart-to-heart and mind-to-mind connections in a genuine way with other people, but at the same time, I've always been advised that I need to emphasize intelligence over the heart-to-heart connections, because, being someone in a position like mine, if I don't rely primarily on intelligence, then something dangerous may happen to me.
So it's an interesting paradox at play there.
But I had a really striking experience once, when a group from Afghanistan came to visit me, and we had a really interesting conversation.
TD: So we ended up talking about the Bamiyan Buddhas, which, as you know, were destroyed some years ago in Afghanistan.
But the basis of our conversation was the different approach to spirituality on the part of the Muslim and Buddhist traditions.
Of course, in Muslim, because of the teachings around the concept of idolatry, you don't find as many physical representations of divinity or of spiritual liberation as you do in the Buddhist tradition, where, of course, there are many statues of the Buddha that are highly revered.
So, we were talking about the differences between the traditions and what many people perceived as the tragedy of the destruction of the Bamiyan Buddhas, but I offered the suggestion that perhaps we could look at this in a positive way.
What we saw in the destruction of the Bamiyan Buddhas was the depletion of matter, some solid substance falling down and disintegrating.
Maybe we could look at that to be more similar to the falling of the Berlin Wall, where a divide that had kept two types of people apart had collapsed and opened up a door for further communication.
So I think that, in this way, it's always possible for us to derive something positive that can help us understand one another better.
TD: So, with regard to the development that we've been talking about here at this conference, I really feel that the development that we make shouldn't create a further burden for us as human beings, but should be used to improve our fundamental lifestyle of how we live in the world.
TD: Of course, I rejoice in the development and the growth and the rise of the noble land of India, the great country of India, but at the same time, I think, as some of us have acknowledged, we need to be aware that some aspects of this rise are coming at the cost of the very ground on which we stand.
So, as we are climbing the tree, some of the things that we're doing in order to climb the tree are actually undermining the tree's very root.
And so, what I think it comes down to is a question of, not only having information of what's going on, but paying attention to that and letting that shift our motivation to become more sincere and genuinely positive.
We have hear, this week, about the horrible sufferings, for example, that so many women of the world are enduring day-to-day.
We have that information, but what often happens to us is that we don't really choose to pay attention to it.
We don't really choose to allow that to cause there to be a shift in our hearts.
So I think the way forward for the world -- one that will bring the path of outer development in harmony with the real root of happiness -- is that we allow the information that we have to really make a change in our heart.
TD: So I think that sincere motivation is very important for our future well-being, or deep sense of well-being as humans, and I think that means sinking in to whatever it is you're doing now.
Whatever work you're trying to do now to benefit the world, sink into that, get a full taste of that.
TD: So, since we've been here this week, we've taken millions of breaths, collectively, and perhaps we haven't witnessed any course changes happening in our lives, but we often miss the very subtle changes.
And I think that sometimes we develop grand concepts of what happiness might look like for us, but that, if we pay attention, we can see that there are little symbols of happiness in every breath that we take.
TD: So, every one of you who has come here is so talented, and you have so much to offer to the world, I think it would be a good note to conclude on then to just take a moment to appreciate how fortunate we are to have come together in this way and exchanged ideas and really form a strong aspiration and energy within ourselves that we will take the good that has come from this conference, the momentum, the positivity, and we will spread that and plant it in all of the corners of the world.
His Holiness the Karmapa: Tomorrow is my Talk.
TD: Lakshmi has worked incredibly hard, even in inviting me, let alone everything else that she has done to make this happen, and I was somewhat resistant at times, and I was also very nervous throughout this week.
I was feeling under the weather and dizzy and so forth, and people would ask me, why.
I would tell them, "It's because I have to talk tomorrow."
And so Lakshmi had to put up with me through all of that, but I very much appreciate the opportunity she's given me to be here.
And to you, everyone, thank you very much.
(Applause) HH: Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Hello, everyone.
Sawubona.
In South Africa, where I come from, "sawubona" is the Zulu word for "hello."
There's a beautiful and powerful intention behind the word because "sawubona" literally translated means, "I see you, and by seeing you, I bring you into being."
So beautiful, imagine being greeted like that.
But what does it take in the way we see ourselves?
Our thoughts, our emotions and our stories that help us to thrive in an increasingly complex and fraught world?
This crucial question has been at the center of my life's work.
Because how we deal with our inner world drives everything.
Every aspect of how we love, how we live, how we parent and how we lead.
The conventional view of emotions as good or bad, positive or negative, is rigid.
And rigidity in the face of complexity is toxic.
We need greater levels of emotional agility for true resilience and thriving.
My journey with this calling began not in the hallowed halls of a university, but in the messy, tender business of life.
I grew up in the white suburbs of apartheid South Africa, a country and community committed to not seeing.
To denial.
It's denial that makes 50 years of racist legislation possible while people convince themselves that they are doing nothing wrong.
And yet, I first learned of the destructive power of denial at a personal level, before I understood what it was doing to the country of my birth.
My father died on a Friday.
He was 42 years old and I was 15.
My mother whispered to me to go and say goodbye to my father before I went to school.
So I put my backpack down and walked the passage that ran through to where the heart of our home my father lay dying of cancer.
His eyes were closed, but he knew I was there.
In his presence, I had always felt seen.
I told him I loved him, said goodbye and headed off for my day.
At school, I drifted from science to mathematics to history to biology, as my father slipped from the world.
From May to July to September to November, I went about with my usual smile.
I didn't drop a single grade.
When asked how I was doing, I would shrug and say, "OK."
I was praised for being strong.
I was the master of being OK.
But back home, we struggled -- my father hadn't been able to keep his small business going during his illness.
And my mother, alone, was grieving the love of her life trying to raise three children, and the creditors were knocking.
We felt, as a family, financially and emotionally ravaged.
And I began to spiral down, isolated, fast.
I started to use food to numb my pain.
Binging and purging.
Refusing to accept the full weight of my grief.
No one knew, and in a culture that values relentless positivity, I thought that no one wanted to know.
But one person did not buy into my story of triumph over grief.
My eighth-grade English teacher fixed me with burning blue eyes as she handed out blank notebooks.
She said, "Write what you're feeling.
Tell the truth.
Write like nobody's reading."
And just like that, I was invited to show up authentically to my grief and pain.
It was a simple act but nothing short of a revolution for me.
It was this revolution that started in this blank notebook 30 years ago that shaped my life's work.
The secret, silent correspondence with myself.
Like a gymnast, I started to move beyond the rigidity of denial into what I've now come to call emotional agility.
Life's beauty is inseparable from its fragility.
We are young until we are not.
We walk down the streets sexy until one day we realize that we are unseen.
We nag our children and one day realize that there is silence where that child once was, now making his or her way in the world.
We are healthy until a diagnosis brings us to our knees.
The only certainty is uncertainty, and yet we are not navigating this frailty successfully or sustainably.
The World Health Organization tells us that depression is now the single leading cause of disability globally -- outstripping cancer, outstripping heart disease.
And at a time of greater complexity, unprecedented technological, political and economic change, we are seeing how people's tendency is more and more to lock down into rigid responses to their emotions.
On the one hand we might obsessively brood on our feelings.
Getting stuck inside our heads.
Hooked on being right.
Or victimized by our news feed.
On the other, we might bottle our emotions, pushing them aside and permitting only those emotions deemed legitimate.
In a survey I recently conducted with over 70,000 people, I found that a third of us -- a third -- either judge ourselves for having so-called "bad emotions," like sadness, anger or even grief.
Or actively try to push aside these feelings.
We do this not only to ourselves, but also to people we love, like our children -- we may inadvertently shame them out of emotions seen as negative, jump to a solution, and fail to help them to see these emotions as inherently valuable.
Normal, natural emotions are now seen as good or bad.
And being positive has become a new form of moral correctness.
People with cancer are automatically told to just stay positive.
Women, to stop being so angry.
And the list goes on.
It's a tyranny.
It's a tyranny of positivity.
And it's cruel.
Unkind.
And ineffective.
And we do it to ourselves, and we do it to others.
If there's one common feature of brooding, bottling or false positivity, it's this: they are all rigid responses.
And if there's a single lesson we can learn from the inevitable fall of apartheid it is that rigid denial doesn't work.
It's unsustainable.
For individuals, for families, for societies.
And as we watch the ice caps melt, it is unsustainable for our planet.
Research on emotional suppression shows that when emotions are pushed aside or ignored, they get stronger.
Psychologists call this amplification.
Like that delicious chocolate cake in the refrigerator -- the more you try to ignore it ...
(Laughter) the greater its hold on you.
You might think you're in control of unwanted emotions when you ignore them, but in fact they control you.
Internal pain always comes out.
Always.
And who pays the price?
We do.
Our children, our colleagues, our communities.
Now, don't get me wrong.
I'm not anti-happiness.
I like being happy.
I'm a pretty happy person.
But when we push aside normal emotions to embrace false positivity, we lose our capacity to develop skills to deal with the world as it is, not as we wish it to be.
I've had hundreds of people tell me what they don't want to feel.
They say things like, "I don't want to try because I don't want to feel disappointed."
Or, "I just want this feeling to go away."
"I understand," I say to them.
"But you have dead people's goals."
(Laughter) (Applause) Only dead people never get unwanted or inconvenienced by their feelings.
(Laughter) Only dead people never get stressed, never get broken hearts, never experience the disappointment that comes with failure.
Tough emotions are part of our contract with life.
You don't get to have a meaningful career or raise a family or leave the world a better place without stress and discomfort.
Discomfort is the price of admission to a meaningful life.
So, how do we begin to dismantle rigidity and embrace emotional agility?
As that young schoolgirl, when I leaned into those blank pages, I started to do away with feelings of what I should be experiencing.
And instead started to open my heart to what I did feel.
Pain.
And grief.
And loss.
And regret.
Research now shows that the radical acceptance of all of our emotions -- even the messy, difficult ones -- is the cornerstone to resilience, thriving, and true, authentic happiness.
But emotional agility is more that just an acceptance of emotions.
We also know that accuracy matters.
In my own research, I found that words are essential.
We often use quick and easy labels to describe our feelings.
"I'm stressed" is the most common one I hear.
But there's a world of difference between stress and disappointment or stress and that knowing dread of "I'm in the wrong career."
When we label our emotions accurately, we are more able to discern the precise cause of our feelings.
And what scientists call the readiness potential in our brain is activated, allowing us to take concrete steps.
But not just any steps -- the right steps for us.
Because our emotions are data.
Our emotions contain flashing lights to things that we care about.
We tend not to feel strong emotion to stuff that doesn't mean anything in our worlds.
If you feel rage when you read the news, that rage is a signpost, perhaps, that you value equity and fairness -- and an opportunity to take active steps to shape your life in that direction.
When we are open to the difficult emotions, we are able to generate responses that are values-aligned.
But there's an important caveat.
Emotions are data, they are not directives.
We can show up to and mine our emotions for their values without needing to listen to them.
Just like I can show up to my son in his frustration with his baby sister -- but not endorse his idea that he gets to give her away to the first stranger he sees in a shopping mall.
(Laughter) We own our emotions, they don't own us.
When we internalize the difference between how I feel in all my wisdom and what I do in a values-aligned action, we generate the pathway to our best selves via our emotions.
So, what does this look like in practice?
When you feel a strong, tough emotion, don't race for the emotional exits.
Learn its contours, show up to the journal of your hearts.
What is the emotion telling you?
And try not to say "I am," as in, "I'm angry" or "I'm sad."
When you say "I am" it makes you sound as if you are the emotion.
Whereas you are you, and the emotion is a data source.
Instead, try to notice the feeling for what it is: "I'm noticing that I'm feeling sad" or "I'm noticing that I'm feeling angry."
These are essential skills for us, our families, our communities.
They're also critical to the workplace.
In my research, when I looked at what helps people to bring the best of themselves to work, I found a powerful key contributor: individualized consideration.
When people are allowed to feel their emotional truth, engagement, creativity and innovation flourish in the organization.
Diversity isn't just people, it's also what's inside people.
Including diversity of emotion.
The most agile, resilient individuals, teams, organizations, families, communities are built on an openness to the normal human emotions.
It's this that allows us to say, "What is my emotion telling me?"
"Which action will bring me towards my values?"
"Which will take me away from my values?"
Emotional agility is the ability to be with your emotions with curiosity, compassion, and especially the courage to take values-connected steps.
When I was little, I would wake up at night terrified by the idea of death.
My father would comfort me with soft pats and kisses.
But he would never lie.
"We all die, Susie," he would say.
"It's normal to be scared."
He didn't try to invent a buffer between me and reality.
It took me a while to understand the power of how he guided me through those nights.
What he showed me is that courage is not an absence of fear; courage is fear walking.
Neither of us knew that in 10 short years, he would be gone.
And that time for each of us is all too precious and all too brief.
But when our moment comes to face our fragility, in that ultimate time, it will ask us, "Are you agile?"
"Are you agile?"
Let the moment be an unreserved "yes."
A "yes" born of a lifelong correspondence with your own heart.
And in seeing yourself.
Because in seeing yourself, you are also able to see others, too: the only sustainable way forward in a fragile, beautiful world.
Sawubona.
And thank you.
(Laughter) Thank you.
(Applause) Thank you.
(Applause)
Everyone, please think of your biggest personal goal.
For real -- you can take a second. You've got to feel this to learn it.
Take a few seconds and think of your personal biggest goal, okay?
Imagine deciding right now that you're going to do it.
Imagine telling someone that you meet today what you're going to do.
Imagine their congratulations, and their high image of you.
Doesn't it feel good to say it out loud?
Don't you feel one step closer already, like it's already becoming part of your identity?
Well, bad news: you should have kept your mouth shut, because that good feeling now will make you less likely to do it.
The repeated psychology tests have proven that telling someone your goal makes it less likely to happen.
Any time you have a goal, there are some steps that need to be done, some work that needs to be done in order to achieve it.
Ideally you would not be satisfied until you'd actually done the work.
But when you tell someone your goal and they acknowledge it, psychologists have found that it's called a "social reality."
The mind is kind of tricked into feeling that it's already done.
And then because you've felt that satisfaction, you're less motivated to do the actual hard work necessary.
(Laughter) So this goes against conventional wisdom that we should tell our friends our goals, right?
So they hold us to it.
So, let's look at the proof.
1926: Kurt Lewin, founder of social psychology, called this "substitution."
1933: Wera Mahler found when it was acknowledged by others, it felt real in the mind.
1982, Peter Gollwitzer wrote a whole book about this, and in 2009, he did some new tests that were published.
It goes like this: 163 people across four separate tests.
Everyone wrote down their personal goal.
Then half of them announced their commitment to this goal to the room, and half didn't.
Then everyone was given 45 minutes of work that would directly lead them towards their goal, but they were told that they could stop at any time.
Now, those who kept their mouths shut worked the entire 45 minutes on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt that they had a long way to go still to achieve their goal.
But those who had announced it quit after only 33 minutes, on average, and when asked afterward, said that they felt much closer to achieving their goal.
So if this is true, what can we do?
Well, you could resist the temptation to announce your goal.
You can delay the gratification that the social acknowledgment brings, and you can understand that your mind mistakes the talking for the doing.
But if you do need to talk about something, you can state it in a way that gives you no satisfaction, such as, "I really want to run this marathon, so I need to train five times a week and kick my ass if I don't, okay?"
So audience, next time you're tempted to tell someone your goal, what will you say?
(Silence) Exactly! Well done.
(Laughter) (Applause)
I was 17 when I chose my career.
I was standing outside on a hot summer night in Florida and just a few miles from the ocean.
I was waiting for a miracle to happen.
That summer, I was privileged to work as an intern at NASA's Kennedy Space Center, and the miracle I was waiting for was the launch of the Columbia Space Shuttle carrying the Chandra X-Ray Observatory, a telescope that would allow scientists to peer into the edge of black holes.
The entire sky filled with light.
And it was as if it was daytime in the middle of the night.
Soon, we could feel the rumble of the engines vibrating in our chests.
And it wasn't a miracle; it was the combined effort of a team of thousands of people who worked together to make was seemed impossible a reality.
And I wanted to join that team.
So I decided to apply to a university where I could study aerospace engineering.
And the following year, I started at MIT in my engineering training and joined a student project building space robots.
And everything was going as I planned, except I was confused about something important.
Now, my confusion arose in my summer breaks.
I traveled to a school in Kenya, and there I volunteered with girls ages five to 17, giving them lessons in English and math and science.
And they taught me songs in Swahili.
And mostly, I just spent time getting to know the girls, enjoying their presence.
And I saw that these girls and the leaders in their community, they were overcoming important barriers to allow these girls to have the best possible chances in life.
And I wanted to join that team.
I wanted to be part of a team that would help break down barriers and improve the lives of girls around the world.
But I was worried that studying aerospace engineering wasn't the most useful.
I was worried this team in Kenya couldn't use the technology I was learning about space.
But thankfully, I still learned that I was wrong.
I came back and interned at NASA again, and this time, a mentor taught me that countries like Kenya had been using space technology for decades to improve the lives in their own countries.
And then I knew that I could have a career in space and in development.
This idea is not new.
In fact, in 1967, the nations of the world came together to write the Outer Space Treaty.
This treaty made a bold statement, saying, "The exploration and use of outer space should be carried on for the benefit of all peoples, irrespective of their level of economic or scientific development."
We have not truly lived up to this ideal, although people have worked for decades to make this a reality.
Forces such as colonialism and racism and gender inequality have actually excluded many people from the benefits of space and caused us to believe that space is for the few or the rich or elite.
But we cannot afford this attitude, because the world is engaged in a vital mission to improve life for everyone.
Our road map for this mission comes from the 17 Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations.
All the member states of the United Nations have agreed that these are priorities between now and 2030.
These goals give us our key moments and opportunities of our time -- opportunities to end extreme poverty, to insure that everyone has access to food and clean water.
We must pursue these goals as a global community.
And technology from space supports sustainable development.
In fact, there are six space services that can help us pursue the Sustainable Development Goals.
Over the next few minutes, let's explore these six services, and see examples of just a few of the goals they help support.
You ready?
OK.
Communication satellites provide access to phone and internet service to almost any location on Earth.
This is particularly important during times of disaster recovery.
When Typhoon Haiyan struck the Philippines, the local communication networks needed to be repaired, and teams brought in inflatable communication antennas that could link to satellites.
This was useful during the time of repair and recovery.
Positioning satellites tell us where we are by telling us where they are.
Scientists can use this technology to track endangered wildlife.
This turtle has been fitted with a system that allows it to receive location information from positioning satellites, and they send the location information to scientists via communication satellites.
Scientists can use this knowledge to then make better policies and help determine how to keep these animals alive.
Earth observation satellites.
They tell us what's going on in our environment.
Right now, there are about 150 satellites operated by over 60 government agencies, and these are just those observing the Earth.
And meanwhile, companies are adding to this list.
Most of the governments provide the data from the satellites for free online.
Some of these satellites provide images like this, that show what you would see from a camera.
This is an image showing agricultural land in Kansas.
However, the majority of the Earth observation satellites don't take pictures at all.
They take measurements.
And they combine these measurements with complex computer models and make beautiful, global visualizations such as this one, showing the ocean currents and the temperature of the ocean, globally.
Or we can look at the salt and smoke and dust in the atmosphere, or the rainfall and snowfall, globally, as well as the annual cycle of vegetation on land and in the ocean.
Now, scientists can take this information about the rainfall and the vegetation and use it to understand what areas on Earth are in danger of a famine or a drought and provide that information to aid organizations so they can be prepared with food aid before the hunger becomes severe.
In space, we have an orbiting laboratory on the International Space Station.
The vehicle and everything inside are in a form of free fall around the Earth, and they don't experience the effect of gravity.
And because of this, we call it "microgravity."
When astronauts are in the microgravity environment, their bodies react as if they're aging rapidly.
Their bones and muscles weaken, and their cardiovascular system and their immune system change.
As scientists study how to keep astronauts healthy in space, we can take the exercises and techniques we use for astronauts and transfer them to people on Earth to improve our health here.
Often, as we develop technology for astronauts and exploration or for spacecraft, we can also transfer those inventions to improve life on Earth.
Here's one of my favorites.
It's a water filtration system, and a key component of it is based on the technology to filter wastewater on the space station.
It's now being used around the world.
Space is also an infinite source of inspiration, through education, through research and astronomy and that age-old experience of stargazing.
Now, countries around the world are engaging in advancing their own development by increasing their local knowledge of engineering and science and space.
Let's meet some of the world's newest satellite engineers.
This is Elyka Abello, from Venezuela.
Elyka is training as a satellite engineer as part of her national satellite program in Venezuela.
She has designed a software tool that allows her team to better design the power systems for engineering.
This is Adel Castillo-Duran, from the Philippines.
Adel is both a meteorologist and a satellite engineer, and she uses data from satellites in her weather forecasting.
And finally, meet Hala.
Hala is from the Sudan, and as she was studying electrical engineering as an undergraduate in Khartoum, she and several students decided to build their own satellite.
And later, Hala earned a scholarship to study satellite engineering at the graduate level.
These stories that I've shared with you all illustrate that space truly is useful for sustainable development for the benefit of all peoples.
But we have more work to do, because there are still barriers that exclude people from space and limit the impact of this technology.
For many people, Earth observation data is complex.
And satellite communication services are too expensive.
And microgravity research just appears to be inaccessible.
This is what motivates my work as a professor at MIT's Media Lab.
I've recently founded a new research group called Space Enabled.
We are working to tear down these barriers that limit the benefits of space.
And we're also going to develop the future applications that will continue to contribute to sustainable development.
We'll keep on this work until we can truly say that space is for the benefit of all peoples, and we are all space enabled.
Thank you.
(Applause)
This strange-looking plant is called the Llareta.
What looks like moss covering rocks is actually a shrub comprised of thousands of branches, each containing clusters of tiny green leaves at the end and so densely packed together that you could actually stand on top of it.
This individual lives in the Atacama Desert in Chile, and it happens to be 3,000 years old.
It also happens to be a relative of parsley.
For the past five years, I've been researching, working with biologists and traveling all over the world to find continuously living organisms that are 2,000 years old and older.
The project is part art and part science.
There's an environmental component.
And I'm also trying to create a means in which to step outside our quotidian experience of time and to start to consider a deeper timescale.
I selected 2,000 years as my minimum age because I wanted to start at what we consider to be year zero and work backward from there.
What you're looking at now is a tree called Jomon Sugi, living on the remote island of Yakushima.
The tree was in part a catalyst for the project.
I'd been traveling in Japan without an agenda other than to photograph, and then I heard about this tree that is 2,180 years old and knew that I had to go visit it.
It wasn't until later, when I was actually back home in New York that I got the idea for the project.
So it was the slow churn, if you will.
I think it was my longstanding desire to bring together my interest in art, science and philosophy that allowed me to be ready when the proverbial light bulb went on.
So I started researching, and to my surprise, this project had never been done before in the arts or the sciences.
And -- perhaps naively -- I was surprised to find that there isn't even an area in the sciences that deals with this idea of global species longevity.
So what you're looking at here is the rhizocarpon geographicum, or map lichen, and this is around 3,000 years old and lives in Greenland, which is a long way to go for some lichens.
Visiting Greenland was more like traveling back in time than just traveling very far north.
It was very primal and more remote than anything I'd ever experienced before.
And this is heightened by a couple of particular experiences.
One was when I had been dropped off by boat on a remote fjord, only to find that the archeologists I was supposed to meet were nowhere to be found.
And it's not like you could send them a text or shoot them an e-mail, so I was literally left to my own devices.
But luckily, it worked out obviously, but it was a humbling experience to feel so disconnected.
And then a few days later, we had the opportunity to go fishing in a glacial stream near our campsite, where the fish were so abundant that you could literally reach into the stream and grab out a foot-long trout with your bare hands.
It was like visiting a more innocent time on the planet.
And then, of course, there's the lichens.
These lichens grow only one centimeter every hundred years.
I think that really puts human lifespans into a different perspective.
And what you're looking at here is an aerial photo take over eastern Oregon.
And if the title "Searching for Armillaria Death Rings," sounds ominous, it is.
The Armillaria is actually a predatory fungus, killing certain species of trees in the forest.
It's also more benignly known as the honey mushroom or the "humongous fungus" because it happens to be one of the world's largest organisms as well.
So with the help of some biologists studying the fungus, I got some maps and some GPS coordinates and chartered a plane and started looking for the death rings, the circular patterns in which the fungus kills the trees.
So I'm not sure if there are any in this photo, but I do know the fungus is down there.
And then this back down on the ground and you can see that the fungus is actually invading this tree.
So that white material that you see in between the bark and the wood is the mycelial felt of the fungus, and what it's doing -- it's actually slowly strangling the tree to death by preventing the flow of water and nutrients.
So this strategy has served it pretty well -- it's 2,400 years old.
And then from underground to underwater.
This is a Brain Coral living in Tobago that's around 2,000 years old.
And I had to overcome my fear of deep water to find this one.
This is at about 60 feet or 18 meters, depth.
And you'll see, there's some damage to the surface of the coral.
That was actually caused by a school of parrot fish that had started eating it, though luckily, they lost interest before killing it.
Luckily still, it seems to be out of harm's way of the recent oil spill.
But that being said, we just as easily could have lost one of the oldest living things on the planet, and the full impact of that disaster is still yet to be seen.
Now this is something that I think is one of the most quietly resilient things on the planet.
This is clonal colony of Quaking Aspen trees, living in Utah, that is literally 80,000 years old.
What looks like a forest is actually only one tree.
Imagine that it's one giant root system and each tree is a stem coming up from that system.
So what you have is one giant, interconnected, genetically identical individual that's been living for 80,000 years.
It also happens to be male and, in theory immortal.
(Laughter) This is a clonal tree as well.
This is the spruce Gran Picea, which at 9,550 years is a mere babe in the woods.
The location of this tree is actually kept secret for its own protection.
I spoke to the biologist who discovered this tree, and he told me that that spindly growth you see there in the center is most likely a product of climate change.
As it's gotten warmer on the top of the mountain, the vegetation zone is actually changing.
So we don't even necessarily have to have direct contact with these organisms to have a very real impact on them.
This is the Fortingall Yew -- no, I'm just kidding -- this is the Fortingall Yew.
(Laughter) But I put that slide in there because I'm often asked if there are any animals in the project.
And aside from coral, the answer is no.
Does anybody know how old the oldest tortoise is -- any guesses?
(Audience: 300.) Rachel Sussman: 300? No, 175 is the oldest living tortoise, so nowhere near 2,000.
And then, you might have heard of this giant clam that was discovered off the coast of northern Iceland that reached 405 years old.
However, it died in the lab as they were determining its age.
The most interesting discovery of late, I think is the so-called immortal jellyfish, which has actually been observed in the lab to be able to be able to revert back to the polyp state after reaching full maturity.
So that being said, it's highly unlikely that any jellyfish would survive that long in the wild.
And back to the yew here.
So as you can see, it's in a churchyard; it's in Scotland. It's behind a protective wall.
And there are actually a number or ancient yews in churchyards around the U.K., but if you do the math, you'll remember it's actually the yew trees that were there first, then the churches.
And now down to another part of the world.
I had the opportunity to travel around the Limpopo Province in South Africa with an expert in Baobab trees.
And we saw a number of them, and this is most likely the oldest.
It's around 2,000, and it's called the Sagole Baobab.
And you know, I think of all of these organisms as palimpsests.
They contain thousands of years of their own histories within themselves, and they also contain records of natural and human events.
And the Baobabs in particular are a great example of this.
You can see that this one has names carved into its trunk, but it also records some natural events.
So the Baobabs, as they get older, tend to get pulpy in their centers and hollow out.
And this can create great natural shelters for animals, but they've also been appropriated for some rather dubious human uses, including a bar, a prison and even a toilet inside of a tree.
And this brings me to another favorite of mine -- I think, because it is just so unusual.
This plant is called the Welwitschia, and it lives only in parts of coastal Namibia and Angola, where it's uniquely adapted to collect moisture from mist coming off the sea.
And what's more, it's actually a tree.
It's a primitive conifer.
You'll notice that it's bearing cones down the center.
And what looks like two big heaps of leaves, is actually two single leaves that get shredded up by the harsh desert conditions over time.
And it actually never sheds those leaves, so it also bears the distinction of having the longest leaves in the plant kingdom.
I spoke to a biologist at the Kirstenbosch Botanical Garden in Capetown to ask him where he thought this remarkable plant came from, and his thought was that if you travel around Namibia, you see that there are a number of petrified forests, and the logs are all -- the logs are all giant coniferous trees, and yet there's no sign of where they might have come from.
So his thought was that flooding in the north of Africa actually brought those coniferous trees down tens of thousands of years ago, and what resulted was this remarkable adaptation to this unique desert environment.
This is what I think is the most poetic of the oldest living things.
This is something called an underground forest.
So, I spoke to a botanist at the Pretoria Botanical Garden, who explained that certain species of trees have adapted to this region.
It's bushfelt region, which is dry and prone to a lot of fires, as so what these trees have done is, if you can imagine that this is the crown of the tree, and that this is ground level, imagine that the whole thing, that whole bulk of the tree, migrated underground, and you just have those leaves peeping up above the surface.
That way, when a fire roars through, it's the equivalent of getting your eyebrows singed.
The tree can easily recover.
These also tend to grow clonally, the oldest of which is 13,000 years old.
Back in the U.S., there's a couple plants of similar age.
This is the clonal Creosote bush, which is around 12,000 years old.
If you've been in the American West, you know the Creosote bush is pretty ubiquitous, but that being said, you see that this has this unique, circular form.
And what's happening is it's expanding slowly outwards from that original shape.
And it's one -- again, that interconnected root system, making it one genetically identical individual.
It also has a friend nearby -- well, I think they're friends.
This is the clonal Mojave yucca, it's about a mile away, and it's a little bit older than 12,000 years.
And you see it has that similar circular form.
And there's some younger clones dotting the landscape behind it.
And both of these, the yucca and the Creosote bush, live on Bureau of Land Management land, and that's very different from being protected in a national park.
In fact, this land is designated for recreational all-terrain vehicle use.
So, now I want to show what very well might be the oldest living thing on the planet.
This is Siberian Actinobacteria, which is between 400,000 and 600,000 years old.
This bacteria was discovered several years ago by a team of planetary biologists hoping to find clues to life on other planets by looking at one of the harshest conditions on ours.
And what they found, by doing research into the permafrost, was this bacteria.
But what's unique about it is that it's doing DNA repair below freezing.
And what that means is that it's not dormant -- it's actually been living and growing for half a million years.
It's also probably one the most vulnerable of the oldest living things, because if the permafrost melts, it won't survive.
This is a map that I've put together of the oldest living things, so you can get a sense of where they are; you see they're all over the world.
The blue flags represent things that I've already photographed, and the reds are places that I'm still trying to get to.
You'll see also, there's a flag on Antarctica.
I'm trying to travel there to find 5,000 year-old moss, which lives on the Antarctic Peninsula.
So, I probably have about two more years left on this project -- on this phase of the project, but after five years, I really feel like I know what's at the heart of this work.
The oldest living things in the world are a record and celebration of our past, a call to action in the present and a barometer of our future.
They've survived for millennia in desert, in the permafrost, at the tops of mountains and at the bottom of the ocean.
They've withstood untold natural perils and human encroachments, but now some of them are in jeopardy, and they can't just get up and get out of the way.
It's my hope that, by going to find these organisms, that I can help draw attention to their remarkable resilience and help play a part in insuring their continued longevity into the foreseeable future.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Well, that's kind of an obvious statement up there.
I started with that sentence about 12 years ago, and I started in the context of developing countries, but you're sitting here from every corner of the world.
So if you think of a map of your country, I think you'll realize that for every country on Earth, you could draw little circles to say, "These are places where good teachers won't go."
On top of that, those are the places from where trouble comes.
So we have an ironic problem -- good teachers don't want to go to just those places where they're needed the most.
I started in 1999 to try and address this problem with an experiment, which was a very simple experiment in New Delhi.
I basically embedded a computer into a wall of a slum in New Delhi.
The children barely went to school, they didn't know any English -- they'd never seen a computer before, and they didn't know what the internet was.
I connected high speed internet to it -- it's about three feet off the ground -- turned it on and left it there.
After this, we noticed a couple of interesting things, which you'll see.
But I repeated this all over India and then through a large part of the world and noticed that children will learn to do what they want to learn to do.
This is the first experiment that we did -- eight year-old boy on your right teaching his student, a six year-old girl, and he was teaching her how to browse.
This boy here in the middle of central India -- this is in a Rajasthan village, where the children recorded their own music and then played it back to each other and in the process, they've enjoyed themselves thoroughly.
They did all of this in four hours after seeing the computer for the first time.
In another South Indian village, these boys here had assembled a video camera and were trying to take the photograph of a bumble bee.
They downloaded it from Disney.com, or one of these websites, 14 days after putting the computer in their village.
So at the end of it, we concluded that groups of children can learn to use computers and the internet on their own, irrespective of who or where they were.
At that point, I became a little more ambitious and decided to see what else could children do with a computer.
We started off with an experiment in Hyderabad, India, where I gave a group of children -- they spoke English with a very strong Telugu accent.
I gave them a computer with a speech-to-text interface, which you now get free with Windows, and asked them to speak into it.
So when they spoke into it, the computer typed out gibberish, so they said, "Well, it doesn't understand anything of what we are saying."
So I said, "Yeah, I'll leave it here for two months.
Make yourself understood to the computer."
So the children said, "How do we do that."
And I said, "I don't know, actually."
(Laughter) And I left.
(Laughter) Two months later -- and this is now documented in the Information Technology for International Development journal -- that accents had changed and were remarkably close to the neutral British accent in which I had trained the speech-to-text synthesizer.
In other words, they were all speaking like James Tooley.
(Laughter) So they could do that on their own.
After that, I started to experiment with various other things that they might learn to do on their own.
I got an interesting phone call once from Columbo, from the late Arthur C. Clarke, who said, "I want to see what's going on."
And he couldn't travel, so I went over there.
He said two interesting things, "A teacher that can be replaced by a machine should be."
(Laughter) The second thing he said was that, "If children have interest, then education happens."
And I was doing that in the field, so every time I would watch it and think of him.
(Video) Arthur C. Clarke: And they can definitely help people, because children quickly learn to navigate the web and find things which interest them.
And when you've got interest, then you have education.
Sugata Mitra: I took the experiment to South Africa.
This is a 15 year-old boy.
(Video) Boy: ... just mention, I play games like animals, and I listen to music.
SM: And I asked him, "Do you send emails?"
And he said, "Yes, and they hop across the ocean."
This is in Cambodia, rural Cambodia -- a fairly silly arithmetic game, which no child would play inside the classroom or at home.
They would, you know, throw it back at you.
They'd say, "This is very boring."
If you leave it on the pavement and if all the adults go away, then they will show off with each other about what they can do.
This is what these children are doing.
They are trying to multiply, I think.
And all over India, at the end of about two years, children were beginning to Google their homework.
As a result, the teachers reported tremendous improvements in their English -- (Laughter) rapid improvement and all sorts of things.
They said, "They have become really deep thinkers and so on and so forth.
(Laughter) And indeed they had.
I mean, if there's stuff on Google, why would you need to stuff it into your head?
So at the end of the next four years, I decided that groups of children can navigate the internet to achieve educational objectives on their own.
At that time, a large amount of money had come into Newcastle University to improve schooling in India.
So Newcastle gave me a call. I said, "I'll do it from Delhi."
They said, "There's no way you're going to handle a million pounds-worth of University money sitting in Delhi."
So in 2006, I bought myself a heavy overcoat and moved to Newcastle.
I wanted to test the limits of the system.
The first experiment I did out of Newcastle was actually done in India.
And I set myself and impossible target: can Tamil speaking 12-year-old children in a South Indian village teach themselves biotechnology in English on their own?
And I thought, I'll test them, they'll get a zero -- I'll give the materials, I'll come back and test them -- they get another zero, I'll go back and say, "Yes, we need teachers for certain things."
I called in 26 children.
They all came in there, and I told them that there's some really difficult stuff on this computer.
I wouldn't be surprised if you didn't understand anything.
It's all in English, and I'm going.
(Laughter) So I left them with it.
I came back after two months, and the 26 children marched in looking very, very quiet.
I said, "Well, did you look at any of the stuff?"
They said, "Yes, we did."
"Did you understand anything?" "No, nothing."
So I said, "Well, how long did you practice on it before you decided you understood nothing?"
They said, "We look at it every day."
So I said, "For two months, you were looking at stuff you didn't understand?"
So a 12 year-old girl raises her hand and says, literally, "Apart from the fact that improper replication of the DNA molecule causes genetic disease, we've understood nothing else."
(Laughter) (Applause) (Laughter) It took me three years to publish that.
It's just been published in the British Journal of Educational Technology.
One of the referees who refereed the paper said, "It's too good to be true," which was not very nice.
Well, one of the girls had taught herself to become the teacher.
And then that's her over there.
Remember, they don't study English.
I edited out the last bit when I asked, "Where is the neuron?"
and she says, "The neuron? The neuron," and then she looked and did this.
Whatever the expression, it was not very nice.
So their scores had gone up from zero to 30 percent, which is an educational impossibility under the circumstances.
But 30 percent is not a pass.
So I found that they had a friend, a local accountant, a young girl, and they played football with her.
I asked that girl, "Would you teach them enough biotechnology to pass?"
And she said, "How would I do that? I don't know the subject."
I said, "No, use the method of the grandmother."
She said, "What's that?"
I said, "Well, what you've got to do is stand behind them and admire them all the time.
Just say to them, 'That's cool. That's fantastic.
What is that? Can you do that again? Can you show me some more?'" She did that for two months.
The scores went up to 50, which is what the posh schools of New Delhi, with a trained biotechnology teacher were getting.
So I came back to Newcastle with these results and decided that there was something happening here that definitely was getting very serious.
So, having experimented in all sorts of remote places, I came to the most remote place that I could think of.
(Laughter) Approximately 5,000 miles from Delhi is the little town of Gateshead.
In Gateshead, I took 32 children and I started to fine-tune the method.
I made them into groups of four.
I said, "You make your own groups of four.
Each group of four can use one computer and not four computers."
Remember, from the Hole in the Wall.
"You can exchange groups.
You can walk across to another group, if you don't like your group, etc.
You can go to another group, peer over their shoulders, see what they're doing, come back to you own group and claim it as your own work."
And I explained to them that, you know, a lot of scientific research is done using that method.
(Laughter) (Applause) The children enthusiastically got after me and said, "Now, what do you want us to do?"
I gave them six GCSE questions.
The first group -- the best one -- solved everything in 20 minutes.
The worst, in 45.
They used everything that they knew -- news groups, Google, Wikipedia, Ask Jeeves, etc.
The teachers said, "Is this deep learning?"
I said, "Well, let's try it.
I'll come back after two months.
We'll give them a paper test -- no computers, no talking to each other, etc."
The average score when I'd done it with the computers and the groups was 76 percent.
When I did the experiment, when I did the test, after two months, the score was 76 percent.
There was photographic recall inside the children, I suspect because they're discussing with each other.
A single child in front of a single computer will not do that.
I have further results, which are almost unbelievable, of scores which go up with time.
Because their teachers say that after the session is over, the children continue to Google further.
Here in Britain, I put out a call for British grandmothers, after my Kuppam experiment.
Well, you know, they're very vigorous people, British grandmothers.
200 of them volunteered immediately.
(Laughter) The deal was that they would give me one hour of broadband time, sitting in their homes, one day in a week.
So they did that, and over the last two years, over 600 hours of instruction has happened over Skype, using what my students call the granny cloud.
The granny cloud sits over there.
I can beam them to whichever school I want to.
(Video) Teacher: You can't catch me.
You say it.
You can't catch me.
Children: You can't catch me.
Teacher: I'm the gingerbread man.
Children: I'm the gingerbread man.
Teacher: Well done. Very good ...
SM: Back at Gateshead, a 10-year-old girl gets into the heart of Hinduism in 15 minutes.
You know, stuff which I don't know anything about.
Two children watch a TEDTalk.
They wanted to be footballers before.
After watching eight TEDTalks, he wants to become Leonardo da Vinci.
(Laughter) (Applause) It's pretty simple stuff.
This is what I'm building now -- they're called SOLEs: Self Organized Learning Environments.
The furniture is designed so that children can sit in front of big, powerful screens, big broadband connections, but in groups.
If they want, they can call the granny cloud.
This is a SOLE in Newcastle.
The mediator is from Pune, India.
So how far can we go? One last little bit and I'll stop.
I went to Turin in May.
I sent all the teachers away from my group of 10 year-old students.
I speak only English, they speak only Italian, so we had no way to communicate.
I started writing English questions on the blackboard.
The children looked at it and said, "What?"
I said, "Well, do it."
They typed it into Google, translated it into Italian, went back into Italian Google.
Fifteen minutes later -- next question: where is Calcutta?
This one, they took only 10 minutes.
I tried a really hard one then.
Who was Pythagoras, and what did he do?
There was silence for a while, then they said, "You've spelled it wrong.
It's Pitagora."
And then, in 20 minutes, the right-angled triangles began to appear on the screens.
This sent shivers up my spine.
These are 10 year-olds.
Text: In another 30 minutes they would reach the Theory of Relativity. And then?
(Laughter) (Applause) SM: So you know what's happened?
I think we've just stumbled across a self-organizing system.
A self-organizing system is one where a structure appears without explicit intervention from the outside.
Self-organizing systems also always show emergence, which is that the system starts to do things, which it was never designed for.
Which is why you react the way you do, because it looks impossible.
I think I can make a guess now -- education is self-organizing system, where learning is an emergent phenomenon.
It'll take a few years to prove it, experimentally, but I'm going to try.
But in the meanwhile, there is a method available.
One billion children, we need 100 million mediators -- there are many more than that on the planet -- 10 million SOLEs, 180 billion dollars and 10 years.
We could change everything.
Thanks.
(Applause)
The moment I say "school," so many memories come back to me.
It's like after every exam, when I walk out, the teacher would say, "Hey, come.
How did you do?"
I would say with a great smile, "I will definitely pass."
And I didn't understand why, in one hand they say, "Speak the truth," in the other hand, when you say the truth, they hated you.
So it went on like that, and I didn't know where else to find myself.
So I remember those nights I used to go to sleep with asking help from [the] Unknown because, for some reason, I couldn't believe what my father and mother hanged in the Puja room as a god, because my friend's family had something else as a god.
So I thought, "I guess I'll pray to [the] Unknown and ask help," and started getting help from everywhere, each and every corner of my life at that time.
My brothers started giving me a few tips about drawing and painting.
Then, when I was in eighth standard around 13 years old, I started working in a part-time job in one of the signboard artists called Putu.
And then school also started supporting me.
"Oh, he's bad at studies, but let him send to the drawing competitions."
So it was good to survive with that little tool that I found to find my own place in school.
And one of those competitions, I just won a small, little transistor Philips radio.
And I didn't have the patience to wait until I reached home.
So I just switched on in the train, loudly.
If you travel in Indian trains, you can see people listening to radio and, you know, even from their mobiles.
So at that time -- and I was 13 -- and I was listening to just radio, and someone happened to sit next to me, like these three people are sitting here.
You know, like just adjacent to me.
He just started asking, "Where did you buy the radio? How much is it?"
I said, "It's a prize from [an] art competition."
And he said, "Oh, I teach at a college of arts.
I think you should study in a school of art.
You just quit school and come there."
So, why I'm telling you this, you know, maybe, you know, whoever is sitting next to you can change your whole life -- it's possible.
It is that we need we need to be open and fine-tuned.
So that's what made me enter [the] college of arts after three attempts and just continue to inquire what I really want to do with art work, or art and finally I'm here in front of you.
When I look back, you know, on what happened between that time and now here -- the last 10/15 years -- I can see that most of the works revolve around three subjects, but it was not intentional.
And I just start out with a trace because I was thinking, "What really makes us?" -- you know, it's actually [the] past, what makes a person.
So I was thinking, but when you look at the past, the way to understand the past is only by the traces available, because we cannot go back [to] the past.
It can be ruins, or it can be music, or it can be painting or drawing or writing, whatever it is.
But it is just a kind of trace of that time.
And that fascinated me, to explore that territory.
So I was working on the line, but instead of working about traces, I started capturing traces.
So here are some of the works I would like to show you.
So this is called "Self In Progress."
It's just a trace of being in this body.
So here, what happened then, you know -- what I really enjoyed the most is that this sculpture is nothing but a trace of myself.
It's almost like a 3D photograph.
So there is an element of performance, and there is an element of sculpture, and there is an element of feeling one's self, so close to one's self.
So it's almost like fossils for the future.
And then moved slowly to explore the other possibilities of capturing traces.
So this is what I was talking about, while molding, it's such a great experience, because we have freedom of like walking, or moving my hand or, moving around in the space, but the moment this becomes solid, when you cannot move even an inch, because this is plaster of Paris, so the moment you pour it it's like liquid; but after 20 minutes, it's almost like a hard stone.
So this is capturing the trace of a thumbprint because, knowingly or unknowingly, whatever we do, you know, we leave our traces here.
So I just thought, "I'm going to capture thumbprint, footprint, or whatever traces we leave as humans."
This is the trace of fire, this is the trace of sun.
Because when I was capturing traces, you know, this thought comes to me always: is it, only when the object touches the thing and it leaves the trace, or is there other ways to capture it?"
So this work is nothing but like -- because of the focal length of the lens, it just shows what is on the other side.
So I just put the paper on the focal length, which was an etching print, then I got the portrait of [the] sun from sunlight.
This is called "Dawn to Dawn."
What I did here, I just put like 10 feet [of] paper then put a coconut rope, and just burnt it.
So it took about 24 hours to get this line.
So wherever the fire is eating the paper, that's what becomes the work -- detail.
Even though we have traces when we try to understand them, the perception and context play a major role to understand it.
So do we really understand what it is, or are we trying to get what we think it is?
Then move towards questioning the perception because, even though there are traces, when you try to understand them, you know you play a major role.
So like let's say even a simple act.
How many of you saw a cow crossing in India while you were coming from Bangalore to Mysore?
Can you just raise the hand?
If you just ask an opinion of how, everyone can interpret it.
Like, let's say, if a schoolteacher says, she'll simply say, "To get to the other side."
Why the cow was crossing the road, you know.
The answer can be so different if Potter said it.
Martin Luther King would say, "I imagine a world where all cows will be free to cross the road, without having their motives called into question."
(Laughter) Imagine Moses comes now, and he sees the same cow walking around the street.
He would definitely say, "God came down from heaven, and he said unto the cow, 'Thou shalt cross the road.' And cow crossed the road, and there was much rejoicing as a holy cow."
(Laughter) Freud would say, "The fact that you're at all concerned reveals your underlying sexual insecurity."
(Laughter) If we ask Einstein, he would say, "Whether the cow crossed the road, or the road moved underneath the cow, depends on your frame of reference."
(Laughter) Or Buddha -- if he saw the same cow, he would say, "Asking this question denies your own nature [as a] cow."
(Laughter) So, what we see is just what we think often, and most of the time, we don't see what it is.
It just all depends on one's perception.
And context, what is really context?
You know, I could just show you this little piece of paper.
Because I always think meaning doesn't really exist.
The meaning of what we create in this world doesn't exist.
It's just created by the mind.
If you look at this piece of paper, this is the breadth and this is called length.
This is how we've been taught in school.
But if you tear it in the middle -- now, I didn't touch this breadth, but still, the meaning of this changes.
So what we conceive as a meaning is always not there; it's on the other side, even when we say dark, light, good, bad, tall, short -- all meaning it doesn't exist in reality.
It's just that being a human, the way we train to perceive the reality creates this meaning.
So this work from this period is mostly like -- you know, this is a work called "Light Makes Dark."
It's just captured through from the lamp.
So the lamp is not just giving a light, it's also giving a darkness.
So this is a work of art, which is just trying to explore that.
This is called "Limit Out."
This shows how limited our eye or hearing sense or touch -- do we really see?
This is an exact negative.
It's about six inches deep in the wall, but it just appears like it's coming out of the wall.
You know the wall is almost like -- this is the first skin, and this is the second, and there's a third, and each creates a meaning.
And we're just pulling the wall off the gallery.
Again, "Inward Out."
It's a full-figure cast from myself.
It's about eight inches deep.
When I was doing that, I always wondered since I've worked with creators -- and now you know, I've moved to questioning the perception -- whenever I see the bird flying in the sky, it just makes me feel like: is there anything behind, are there any traces up there, which as a human, we don't see them?
Is there any way to capture the thought into visual art?
I couldn't find it.
But a solution arrived after being quiet and not working for about six, seven months, in the restroom, when I was changing the air freshener that goes from solid substance to vapor.
It's called Odonil.
This is the work I made out of that material.
The process to get to make the sculpture was interesting, because I wrote to Balsara, who produces that air freshener called Odonil, saying, "Dear Sir, I am an artist. This is my catalogue.
Will you help me to make this sculpture?"
They never wrote back to me.
Then I thought, "I will go to the Small Scale Industries Facilitating Unit and ask help."
So I told them, "I'd like to start an air freshener company."
They said, "Of course.
This is the fee for the project report, and we will give you all the details," and they gave.
Finally, I went back to them and said, "It's not for starting the company, it's just to make my own work.
Please come for the show."
And they did.
And this work is in the Devi Art Foundation in Delhi.
In India, nobody really talks about works of art; they always talk about the appreciation of art.
You buy this for 3,000 rupees, it'll become 30,000 in two months.
This is the craft that was going on, but there are a few collectors who also collect art which can depreciate.
And this was collected by Anupam -- which is like, finally in the end, he will not have anything, because it will evaporate.
So this is after a few weeks, this is after a few months.
It's just all about questioning the preconceptions.
So if someone says, "Oh, I see the portrait," it may not be the portrait after a few months.
And if they say it's solid, it will not be solid, it will evaporate.
And if they say they don't get it, that's also not true, because it's in the air.
It's in the same gallery or in the same museum.
So they inhaled it, but they are not aware of it.
While I was doing that work, my mom and my dad, they were looking at it and they said, "Why do you deal with negative subjects all the time?"
And I was like, "What do you mean?"
"Light makes dark and now evaporating self.
Don't you think it remained something about death," they said.
"Of course not. For me," I'm thinking, "this is tucked in some small solid, but the moment it evaporates, it's merged with the whole."
But she said, "No. Still, I don't like it.
Can you make something from nothing as a sculptor?"
I said, "No, mom. It can't be.
Because we can create a sculpture by gathering dust together, or we can break the sculpture and get the dust, but there is nowhere that we can bring dust into the universe."
So, I did this work for her.
It's called "Emerging Angel."
This is the first day -- it just gives the appearance that one is becoming the other.
So, the same sculpture after a few days.
This is after 15/20 days.
Through that small little slit between the glass box and the wood, the air goes underneath the sculpture and creates the other one.
This gave me a greater faith.
That evaporating sculpture gave me a greater faith that maybe there is many more possibilities to capture [the] invisible.
So what you see now is called "Shadow Foreshadow."
And what I'd like to tell you is we don't see shadow, and we don't see light too; we see the source of the light.
We see where it's bouncing, but we don't see [them] as they exist.
You know, that's why the night sky, we see the sky as dark, but it's filled with light all the time.
When it's bounced on the moon, we see it.
The same thing in the darkroom.
The little dust particle will again, reflect the light, and we realize the existence of light.
So we don't see dark, we don't see light, we don't see gravity, we don't see electricity.
So, I just started doing this work to inquire further about how to sculpt the space between this object and there.
Because, as a visual artist, if I'm seeing this and I'm seeing that -- but how to sculpt this, you know?
If we sculpt this, this has two reference points.
The skin of this is also representing this.
And skin at the other end also represents the floor.
I did this as an experiment of casting the shadow.
So this is a corrugated box and its shadow.
Then the second one -- the moment you bring any invisible into the visible world it will have all the characteristics of the visible existence.
So that produced a shadow.
Then I thought, okay, let me sculpt that.
Then, again, that becomes an object.
Again, throwing light, then the third one.
So what you see is nothing but shadow of a shadow of a shadow.
And then again, at that point, there is no shadow.
I thought, "Oh, good. Work is finished."
You can see the detail.
This is called "Gravity."
It's called "Breath." It's just two holes on the gallery wall.
It's a false wall, which contains like 110 cubic feet.
So that hole actually makes the air come out and go in.
So where it's happening, we can see, but what is happening will remain invisible only.
This is from the show called "Invisible," at Talwar Gallery.
This is called "Kaayam."
Detail.
And what I'd like to tell you, our senses are so limited -- we cannot hear everything, we cannot see everything.
We don't feel, "I am touching the air," but if the breeze is a little more faster, then I can feel it.
So all of our construction of reality is through these limited senses.
So my request was like, is there any way to use all this as just a symbol or a sign?
And to really get to the point, we should move beyond, you know, go to the other side of the wall, like illogic, like are invisible.
Because when we see someone walks, we see the footprint.
But if we're just cutting that footprint from the whole thing and trying to analyze it, you will miss the point because the actual journey happens between those footprints, and the footprints are nothing but passing time.
Thank you.
(Applause)
My story is a little bit about war.
It's about disillusionment.
It's about death.
And it's about rediscovering idealism in all of that wreckage.
And perhaps also, there's a lesson about how to deal with our screwed-up, fragmenting and dangerous world of the 21st century.
I don't believe in straightforward narratives.
I don't believe in a life or history written as decision "A" led to consequence "B" led to consequence "C" -- these neat narratives that we're presented with, and that perhaps we encourage in each other.
I believe in randomness, and one of the reasons I believe that is because me becoming a diplomat was random.
I'm colorblind.
I was born unable to see most colors.
This is why I wear gray and black most of the time, and I have to take my wife with me to chose clothes.
And I'd always wanted to be a fighter pilot when I was a boy.
I loved watching planes barrel over our holiday home in the countryside.
And it was my boyhood dream to be a fighter pilot.
And I did the tests in the Royal Air Force to become a pilot, and sure enough, I failed.
I couldn't see all the blinking different lights, and I can't distinguish color.
So I had to choose another career, and this was in fact relatively easy for me, because I had an abiding passion all the way through my childhood, which was international relations.
As a child, I read the newspaper thoroughly.
I was fascinated by the Cold War, by the INF negotiations over intermediate-range nuclear missiles, the proxy war between the Soviet Union and the U.S.
in Angola or Afghanistan.
These things really interested me.
And so I decided quite at an early age I wanted to be a diplomat.
And I, one day, I announced this to my parents -- and my father denies this story to this day -- I said, "Daddy, I want to be a diplomat."
And he turned to me, and he said, "Carne, you have to be very clever to be a diplomat."
(Laughter) And my ambition was sealed.
In 1989, I entered the British Foreign Service.
That year, 5,000 people applied to become a diplomat, and 20 of us succeeded.
And as those numbers suggest, I was inducted into an elite and fascinating and exhilarating world.
Being a diplomat, then and now, is an incredible job, and I loved every minute of it -- I enjoyed the status of it.
I bought myself a nice suit and wore leather-soled shoes and reveled in this amazing access I had to world events.
I traveled to the Gaza Strip.
I headed the Middle East Peace Process section in the British Foreign Ministry.
I became a speechwriter for the British Foreign Secretary.
I met Yasser Arafat.
I negotiated with Saddam's diplomats at the U.N.
Later, I traveled to Kabul and served in Afghanistan after the fall of the Taliban.
And I would travel in a C-130 transport and go and visit warlords in mountain hideaways and negotiate with them about how we were going to eradicate Al Qaeda from Afghanistan, surrounded by my Special Forces escort, who, themselves, had to have an escort of a platoon of Royal Marines, because it was so dangerous.
And that was exciting -- that was fun.
It was really interesting.
And it's a great cadre of people, incredibly close-knit community of people.
And the pinnacle of my career, as it turned out, was when I was posted to New York.
I'd already served in Germany, Norway, various other places, but I was posted to New York to serve on the U.N. Security Council for the British delegation.
And my responsibility was the Middle East, which was my specialty.
And there, I dealt with things like the Middle East peace process, the Lockerbie issue -- we can talk about that later, if you wish -- but above all, my responsibility was Iraq and its weapons of mass destruction and the sanctions we placed on Iraq to oblige it to disarm itself of these weapons.
I was the chief British negotiator on the subject, and I was steeped in the issue.
And anyway, my tour -- it was kind of a very exciting time.
I mean it was very dramatic diplomacy.
We went through several wars during my time in New York.
I negotiated for my country the resolution in the Security Council of the 12th of September 2001 condemning the attacks of the day before, which were, of course, deeply present to us actually living in New York at the time.
So it was kind of the best of time, worst of times kind of experience.
I lived the high-life.
Although I worked very long hours, I lived in a penthouse in Union Square.
I was a single British diplomat in New York City; you can imagine what that might have meant.
(Laughter) I had a good time.
But in 2002, when my tour came to an end, I decided I wasn't going to go back to the job that was waiting for me in London.
I decided to take a sabbatical, in fact, at the New School, Bruce.
In some inchoate, inarticulate way I realized that there was something wrong with my work, with me.
I was exhausted, and I was also disillusioned in a way I couldn't quite put my finger on.
And I decided to take some time out from work.
The Foreign Office was very generous.
You could take these special unpaid leave, as they called them, and yet remain part of the diplomatic service, but not actually do any work.
It was nice.
And eventually, I decided to take a secondment to join the U.N. in Kosovo, which was then under U.N. administration.
And two things happened in Kosovo, which kind of, again, shows the randomness of life, because these things turned out to be two of the pivots of my life and helped to deliver me to the next stage.
But they were random things.
One was that, in the summer of 2004, the British government, somewhat reluctantly, decided to have an official inquiry into the use of intelligence on WMD in the run up to the Iraq War, a very limited subject.
And I testified to that inquiry in secret.
I had been steeped in the intelligence on Iraq and its WMD, and my testimony to the inquiry said three things: that the government exaggerated the intelligence, which was very clear in all the years I'd read it.
And indeed, our own internal assessment was very clear that Iraq's WMD did not pose a threat to its neighbors, let alone to us.
Secondly, the government had ignored all available alternatives to war, which in some ways was a more discreditable thing still.
The third reason, I won't go into.
But anyway, I gave that testimony, and that presented me with a crisis.
What was I going to do?
This testimony was deeply critical of my colleagues, of my ministers, who had, in my view had perpetrated a war on a falsehood.
And so I was in crisis.
And this wasn't a pretty thing.
I moaned about it, I hesitated, I went on and on and on to my long-suffering wife, and eventually I decided to resign from the British Foreign Service.
I felt -- there's a scene in the Al Pacino movie "The Insider," which you may know, where he goes back to CBS after they've let him down over the tobacco guy, and he goes, "You know, I just can't do this anymore. Something's broken."
And it was like that for me. I love that movie.
I felt just something's broken.
I can't actually sit with my foreign minister or my prime minister again with a smile on my face and do what I used to do gladly for them.
So took a running leap and jumped over the edge of a cliff.
And it was a very, very uncomfortable, unpleasant feeling.
And I started to fall.
And today, that fall hasn't stopped; I'm still falling.
But, in a way, I've got used to the sensation of it.
And in a way, I kind of like the sensation of it a lot better than I like actually standing on top of the cliff, wondering what to do.
A second thing happened in Kosovo, which kind of -- I need a quick gulp of water, forgive me.
A second thing happened in Kosovo, which kind of delivered the answer, which I couldn't really answer, which is, "What do I do with my life?"
I love diplomacy -- I have no career -- I expected my entire life to be a diplomat, to be serving my country.
I wanted to be an ambassador, and my mentors, my heroes, people who got to the top of my profession, and here I was throwing it all away.
A lot of my friends were still in it.
My pension was in it.
And I gave it up.
And what was I going to do?
And that year, in Kosovo, this terrible, terrible thing happened, which I saw.
In March 2004, there were terrible riots all over the province -- as it then was -- of Kosovo.
18 people were killed.
It was anarchy.
And it's a very horrible thing to see anarchy, to know that the police and the military -- there were lots of military troops there -- actually can't stop that rampaging mob who's coming down the street.
And the only way that rampaging mob coming down the street will stop is when they decide to stop and when they've had enough burning and killing.
And that is not a very nice feeling to see, and I saw it.
And I went through it. I went through those mobs.
And with my Albanian friends, we tried to stop it, but we failed.
And that riot taught me something, which isn't immediately obvious and it's kind of a complicated story.
But one of the reasons that riot took place -- those riots, which went on for several days, took place -- was because the Kosovo people were disenfranchised from their own future.
There were diplomatic negotiations about the future of Kosovo going on then, and the Kosovo government, let alone the Kosovo people, were not actually participating in those talks.
There was this whole fancy diplomatic system, this negotiation process about the future of Kosovo, and the Kosovars weren't part of it.
And funnily enough, they were frustrated about that.
Those riots were part of the manifestation of that frustration.
It wasn't the only reason, and life is not simple, one reason narratives.
It was a complicated thing, and I'm not pretending it was more simple than it was.
But that was one of the reasons.
And that kind of gave me the inspiration -- or rather to be precise, it gave my wife the inspiration.
She said, "Why don't you advise the Kosovars?
Why don't you advise their government on their diplomacy?"
And the Kosovars were not allowed a diplomatic service.
They were not allowed diplomats.
They were not allowed a foreign office to help them deal with this immensely complicated process, which became known as the Final Status Process of Kosovo.
And so that was the idea.
That was the origin of the thing that became Independent Diplomat, the world's first diplomatic advisory group and a non-profit to boot.
And it began when I flew back from London after my time at the U.N. in Kosovo.
I flew back and had dinner with the Kosovo prime minister and said to him, "Look, I'm proposing that I come and advise you on the diplomacy.
I know this stuff. It's what I do. Why don't I come and help you?"
And he raised his glass of raki to me and said, "Yes, Carne. Come."
And I came to Kosovo and advised the Kosovo government.
Independent Diplomat ended up advising three successive Kosovo prime ministers and the multi-party negotiation team of Kosovo.
And Kosovo became independent.
Independent Diplomat is now established in five diplomatic centers around the world, and we're advising seven or eight different countries, or political groups, depending on how you wish to define them -- and I'm not big on definitions.
We're advising the Northern Cypriots on how to reunify their island.
We're advising the Burmese opposition, the government of Southern Sudan, which -- you heard it here first -- is going to be a new country within the next few years.
We're advising the Polisario Front of the Western Sahara, who are fighting to get their country back from Moroccan occupation after 34 years of dispossession.
We're advising various island states in the climate change negotiations, which is suppose to culminate in Copenhagen.
There's a bit of randomness here too because, when I was beginning Independent Diplomat, I went to a party in the House of Lords, which is a ridiculous place, but I was holding my drink like this, and I bumped into this guy who was standing behind me.
And we started talking, and he said -- I told him what I was doing, and I told him rather grandly I was going to establish Independent Diplomat in New York.
At that time there was just me -- and me and my wife were moving back to New York.
And he said, "Why don't you see my colleagues in New York?"
And it turned out he worked for an innovation company called ?What If!, which some of you have probably heard of.
And one thing led to another, and I ended up having a desk in ?What If! in New York, when I started Independent Diplomat.
And watching ?What If!
develop new flavors of chewing gum for Wrigley or new flavors for Coke actually helped me innovate new strategies for the Kosovars and for the Saharawis of the Western Sahara.
And I began to realize that there are different ways of doing diplomacy -- that diplomacy, like business, is a business of solving problems, and yet the word innovation doesn't exist in diplomacy; it's all zero sum games and realpolitik and ancient institutions that have been there for generations and do things the same way they've always done things.
And Independent Diplomat, today, tries to incorporate some of the things I learned at ?What If!.
We all sit in one office and shout at each other across the office.
We all work on little laptops and try to move desks to change the way we think.
And we use naive experts who may know nothing about the countries we're dealing with, but may know something about something else to try to inject new thinking into the problems that we try to address for our clients.
It's not easy, because our clients, by definition, are having a difficult time, diplomatically.
There are, I don't know, some lessons from all of this, personal and political -- and in a way, they're the same thing.
The personal one is falling off a cliff is actually a good thing, and I recommend it.
And it's a good thing to do at least once in your life just to tear everything up and jump.
The second thing is a bigger lesson about the world today.
Independent Diplomat is part of a trend which is emerging and evident across the world, which is that the world is fragmenting.
States mean less than they used to, and the power of the state is declining.
That means the power of others things is rising.
Those other things are called non-state actors.
They may be corporations, they may be mafiosi, they may be nice NGOs, they may anything, any number of things.
We are living in a more complicated and fragmented world.
If governments are less able to affect the problems that affect us in the world, then that means, who is left to deal with them, who has to take greater responsibility to deal with them?
Us.
If they can't do it, who's left to deal with it?
We have no choice but to embrace that reality.
What this means is it's no longer good enough to say that international relations, or global affairs, or chaos in Somalia, or what's going on in Burma is none of your business, and that you can leave it to governments to get on with.
I can connect any one of you by six degrees of separation to the Al-Shabaab militia in Somalia.
Ask me how later, particularly if you eat fish, interestingly enough, but that connection is there.
We are all intimately connected.
And this isn't just Tom Friedman, it's actually provable in case after case after case.
What that means is, instead of asking your politicians to do things, you have to look to yourself to do things.
And Independent Diplomat is a kind of example of this in a sort of loose way.
There aren't neat examples, but one example is this: the way the world is changing is embodied in what's going on at the place I used to work -- the U.N. Security Council.
The U.N. was established in 1945.
Its charter is basically designed to stop conflicts between states -- interstate conflict.
Today, 80 percent of the agenda of the U.N. Security Council is about conflicts within states, involving non-state parties -- guerillas, separatists, terrorists, if you want to call them that, people who are not normal governments, who are not normal states.
That is the state of the world today.
When I realized this, and when I look back on my time at the Security Council and what happened with the Kosovars, and I realize that often the people who were most directly affected by what we were doing in the Security Council weren't actually there, weren't actually invited to give their views to the Security Council, I thought, this is wrong.
Something's got to be done about this.
So I started off in a traditional mode.
Me and my colleagues at Independent Diplomat went around the U.N. Security Council.
We went around 70 U.N. member states -- the Kazaks, the Ethiopians, the Israelis -- you name them, we went to see them -- the secretary general, all of them, and said, "This is all wrong.
This is terrible that you don't consult these people who are actually affected.
You've got to institutionalize a system where you actually invite the Kosovars to come and tell you what they think.
This will allow you to tell me -- you can tell them what you think.
It'll be great. You can have an exchange.
You can actually incorporate these people's views into your decisions, which means your decisions will be more effective and durable."
Super-logical, you would think.
I mean, incredibly logical. So obvious, anybody could get it.
And of course, everybody got it. Everybody went, "Yes, of course, you're absolutely right.
Come back to us in maybe six months."
And of course, nothing happened -- nobody did anything.
The Security Council does its business in exactly the same way today that it did X number of years ago, when I was there 10 years ago.
So we looked at that observation of basically failure and thought, what can we do about it.
And I thought, I'm buggered if I'm going to spend the rest of my life lobbying for these crummy governments to do what needs to be done.
So what we're going to do is we're actually going to set up these meetings ourselves.
So now, Independent Diplomat is in the process of setting up meetings between the U.N. Security Council and the parties to the disputes that are on the agenda of the Security Council.
So we will be bringing Darfuri rebel groups, the Northern Cypriots and the Southern Cypriots, rebels from Aceh, and awful long laundry list of chaotic conflicts around the world.
And we will be trying to bring the parties to New York to sit down in a quiet room in a private setting with no press and actually explain what they want to the members of the U. N. Security Council, and for the members of the U.N. Security Council to explain to them what they want.
So there's actually a conversation, which has never before happened.
And of course, describing all this, any of you who know politics will think this is incredibly difficult, and I entirely agree with you.
The chances of failure are very high, but it certainly won't happen if we don't try to make it happen.
And my politics has changed fundamentally from when I was a diplomat to what I am today, and I think that outputs is what matters, not process, not technology, frankly, so much either.
Preach technology to all the Twittering members of all the Iranian demonstrations who are now in political prison in Tehran, where Ahmadinejad remains in power.
Technology has not delivered political change in Iran.
You've got to look at the outputs, and you got to say to yourself, "What can I do to produce that particular output?"
That is the politics of the 21st century, and in a way, Independent Diplomat embodies that fragmentation, that change, that is happening to all of us.
That's my story. Thanks.
I am a cultural omnivore, one whose daily commute is made possible by attachment to an iPod -- an iPod that contains Wagner and Mozart, pop diva Christina Aguilera, country singer Josh Turner, gangsta rap artist Kirk Franklin, concerti, symphonies and more and more.
I'm a voracious reader, a reader who deals with Ian McEwan down to Stephanie Meyer.
I have read the Twilight tetralogy.
And one who lives for my home theater, a home theater where I devour DVDs, video on demand and a lot of television.
For me, "Law &amp; Order: SVU," Tina Fey and "30 Rock" and "Judge Judy" -- "The people are real, the cases are real, the rulings are final."
(Laughter) Now, I'm convinced a lot of you probably share my passions, especially my passion for "Judge Judy," and you'd fight anybody who attempted to take her away from us, but I'm a little less convinced that you share the central passion of my life, a passion for the live professional performing arts, performing arts that represent the orchestral repertoire, yes, but jazz as well, modern dance, opera, theater and more and more and more.
Frankly, it's a sector that many of us who work in the field worry is being endangered and possibly dismantled by technology.
While we initially heralded the Internet as the fantastic new marketing device that was going to solve all our problems, we now realize that the Internet is, if anything, too effective in that regard.
Depending on who you read, an arts organization or an artist, who tries to attract the attention of a potential single ticket buyer, now competes with between three and 5,000 different marketing messages a typical citizen sees every single day.
We now know, in fact, that technology is our biggest competitor for leisure time.
Five years ago, Gen Xers spent 20.7 hours online and TV, the majority on TV.
Gen Yers spent even more -- 23.8 hours, the majority online.
And now, a typical university-entering student arrives at college already having spent 20,000 hours online and an additional 10,000 hours playing video games -- a stark reminder that we operate in a cultural context where video games now outsell music and movie recordings combined.
Moreover, we're afraid that technology has altered our very assumptions of cultural consumption.
Thanks to the Internet, we believe we can get anything we want whenever we want it, delivered to our own doorstep.
We can shop at three in the morning or eight at night, ordering jeans tailor-made for our unique body types.
Expectations of personalization and customization that the live performing arts -- which have set curtain times, set venues, attendant inconveniences of travel, parking and the like -- simply cannot meet.
And we're all acutely aware: what's it going to mean in the future when we ask someone to pay a hundred dollars for a symphony, opera or ballet ticket, when that cultural consumer is used to downloading on the internet 24 hours a day for 99 cents a song or for free?
These are enormous questions for those of us that work in this terrain.
But as particular as they feel to us, we know we're not alone.
All of us are engaged in a seismic, fundamental realignment of culture and communications, a realignment that is shaking and decimating the newspaper industry, the magazine industry, the book and publishing industry and more.
Saddled in the performing arts as we are, by antiquated union agreements that inhibit and often prohibit mechanical reproduction and streaming, locked into large facilities that were designed to ossify the ideal relationship between artist and audience most appropriate to the 19th century and locked into a business model dependent on high ticket revenues, where we charge exorbitant prices.
Many of us shudder in the wake of the collapse of Tower Records and ask ourselves, "Are we next?"
Everyone I talk to in performing arts resonates to the words of Adrienne Rich, who, in "Dreams of a Common Language," wrote, "We are out in a country that has no language, no laws.
Whatever we do together is pure invention.
The maps they gave us are out of date by years."
And for those of you who love the arts, aren't you glad you invited me here to brighten your day?
(Laughter) (Applause) Now, rather than saying that we're on the brink of our own annihilation, I prefer to believe that we are engaged in a fundamental reformation, a reformation like the religious Reformation of the 16th century.
The arts reformation, like the religious Reformation, is spurred in part by technology, with indeed, the printing press really leading the charge on the religious Reformation.
Both reformations were predicated on fractious discussion, internal self-doubt and massive realignment of antiquated business models.
And at heart, both reformations, I think, were asking the questions: who's entitled to practice?
How are they entitled to practice?
And indeed, do we need anyone to intermediate for us in order to have an experience with a spiritual divine?
Chris Anderson, someone I trust you all know, editor in chief of Wired magazine and author of The Long Tail, really was the first, for me, to nail a lot of this.
He wrote a long time ago, you know, thanks to the invention of the Internet, web technology, minicams and more, the means of artistic production have been democratized for the first time in all of human history.
In the 1930s, if any of you wanted to make a movie, you had to work for Warner Brothers or RKO, because who could afford a movie set and lighting equipment and editing equipment and scoring, and more?
And now who in this room doesn't know a 14 year-old hard at work on her second, third, or fourth movie?
(Laughter) Similarly, the means of artistic distribution have been democratized for the first time in human history.
Again, in the '30s, Warner Brothers, RKO did that for you.
Now, go to YouTube, Facebook; you have worldwide distribution without leaving the privacy of your own bedroom.
This double impact is occasioning a massive redefinition of the cultural market, a time when anyone is a potential author.
Frankly, what we're seeing now in this environment is a massive time, when the entire world is changing as we move from a time when audience numbers are plummeting.
But the number of arts participants, people who write poetry, who sing songs, who perform in church choirs, is exploding beyond our wildest imaginations.
This group, others have called the pro-ams, amateur artists doing work at a professional level.
You see them on YouTube, in dance competitions, film festivals and more.
They are radically expanding our notions of the potential of an aesthetic vocabulary, while they are challenging and undermining the cultural autonomy of our traditional institutions.
Ultimately, we now live in a world defined not by consumption, but by participation.
But I want to be clear, just as the religious Reformation did not spell the end to the formal Church or to the priesthood; I believe that our artistic institutions will continue to have importance.
They currently are the best opportunities for artists to have lives of economic dignity -- not opulence, of dignity.
And they are the places where artists who deserve and want to work at a certain scale of resources will find a home.
But to view them as synonymous with the entirety of the arts community is, by far, too shortsighted.
And indeed, while we've tended to polarize the amateur from the professional, the single most exciting development in the last five to 10 years has been the rise of the professional hybrid artist, the professional artist who works, not primarily in the concert hall or on the stage; but most frequently around women's rights, or human rights, or on global warming issues or AIDS relief for more -- not out of economic necessity, but out of a deep, organic conviction that the work that she or he is called to do cannot be accomplished in the traditional hermetic arts environment.
Today's dance world is not defined solely by the Royal Winnipeg Ballet or the National Ballet of Canada, but by Liz Lerman's Dance Exchange -- a multi-generational, professional dance company, whose dancers range in age from 18 to 82, and who work with genomic scientists to embody the DNA strand and with nuclear physicists at CERN.
Today's professional theater community is defined, not only the Shaw and Stratford Festivals, but by the Cornerstone Theater of Los Angeles -- a collective of artists that after 9/11, brought together 10 different religious communities -- the Baha'i, the Catholic, the Muslim, the Jewish, even the Native American and the gay and lesbian communities of faith, helping them create their own individual plays and one massive play, where they explored the differences in their faith and found commonality as an important first step toward cross-community healing.
Today's performers, like Rhodessa Jones, work in women's prisons, helping women prisoners articulate the pain of incarceration, while today's playwrights and directors work with youth gangs to find alternate channels to violence and more and more and more.
And indeed, I think, rather than being annihilated, the performing arts are poised on the brink of a time when we will be more important than we have ever been.
You know, we've said for a long time, we are critical to the health of the economic communities in your town.
And absolutely -- I hope you know that every dollar spent on a performing arts ticket in a community generates five to seven additional dollars for the local economy, dollars spent in restaurants or on parking, at the fabric stores where we buy fabric for costumes, the piano tuner who tunes the instruments, and more.
But the arts are going to be more important to economies as we go forward, especially in industries we can't even imagine yet, just as they have been central to the iPod and the computer game industries, which few, if any of us, could have foreseen 10 to 15 years ago.
Business leadership will depend more and more on emotional intelligence, the ability to listen deeply, to have empathy, to articulate change, to motivate others -- the very capacities that the arts cultivate with every encounter.
Especially now, as we all must confront the fallacy of a market-only orientation, uninformed by social conscience; we must seize and celebrate the power of the arts to shape our individual and national characters, and especially characters of the young people, who all too often are subjected to bombardment of sensation, rather than digested experience.
Ultimately, especially now in this world, where we live in a context of regressive and onerous immigration laws, in reality TV that thrives on humiliation, and in a context of analysis, where the thing we hear most repeatedly, day in, day out in the United States, in every train station, every bus station, every plane station is, "Ladies and gentlemen, please report any suspicious behavior or suspicious individuals to the authorities nearest to you," when all of these ways we are encouraged to view our fellow human being with hostility and fear and contempt and suspicion.
The arts, whatever they do, whenever they call us together, invite us to look at our fellow human being with generosity and curiosity.
God knows, if we ever needed that capacity in human history, we need it now.
You know, we're bound together, not, I think by technology, entertainment and design, but by common cause.
We work to promote healthy vibrant societies, to ameliorate human suffering, to promote a more thoughtful, substantive, empathic world order.
I salute all of you as activists in that quest and urge you to embrace and hold dear the arts in your work, whatever your purpose may be.
I promise you the hand of the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation is stretched out in friendship for now and years to come.
And I thank you for your kindness and your patience in listening to me this afternoon.
If you really want to understand the problem that we're facing with the oceans, you have to think about the biology at the same time you think about the physics.
We can't solve the problems unless we start studying the ocean in a very much more interdisciplinary way.
So I'm going to demonstrate that through discussion of some of the climate change things that are going on in the ocean.
We'll look at sea level rise.
We'll look at ocean warming.
And then the last thing on the list there, ocean acidification -- if you were to ask me, you know, "What do you worry about the most?
What frightens you?"
for me, it's ocean acidification.
And this has come onto the stage pretty recently.
So I will spend a little time at the end.
I was in Copenhagen in December like a number of you in this room.
And I think we all found it, simultaneously, an eye-opening and a very frustrating experience.
I sat in this large negotiation hall, at one point, for three or four hours, without hearing the word "oceans" one time.
It really wasn't on the radar screen.
The nations that brought it up when we had the speeches of the national leaders -- it tended to be the leaders of the small island states, the low-lying island states.
And by this weird quirk of alphabetical order of the nations, a lot of the low-lying states, like Kiribati and Nauru, they were seated at the very end of these immensely long rows.
You know, they were marginalized in the negotiation room.
One of the problems is coming up with the right target.
It's not clear what the target should be.
And how can you figure out how to fix something if you don't have a clear target?
Now, you've heard about "two degrees": that we should limit temperature rise to no more than two degrees.
But there's not a lot of science behind that number.
We've also talked about concentrations of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.
Should it be 450? Should it be 400?
There's not a lot of science behind that one either.
Most of the science that is behind these numbers, these potential targets, is based on studies on land.
And I would say, for the people that work in the ocean and think about what the targets should be, we would argue that they must be much lower.
You know, from an oceanic perspective, 450 is way too high.
Now there's compelling evidence that it really needs to be 350.
We are, right now, at 390 parts per million of CO2 in the atmosphere.
We're not going to put the brakes on in time to stop at 450, so we've got to accept we're going to do an overshoot, and the discussion as we go forward has to focus on how far the overshoot goes and what's the pathway back to 350.
Now, why is this so complicated?
Why don't we know some of these things a little bit better?
Well, the problem is that we've got very complicated forces in the climate system.
There's all kinds of natural causes of climate change.
There's air-sea interactions.
Here in Galapagos, we're affected by El Ninos and La Nina.
But the entire planet warms up when there's a big El Nino.
Volcanoes eject aerosols into the atmosphere.
That changes our climate.
The ocean contains most of the exchangeable heat on the planet.
So anything that influences how ocean surface waters mix with the deep water changes the ocean of the planet.
And we know the solar output's not constant through time.
So those are all natural causes of climate change.
And then we have the human-induced causes of climate change as well.
We're changing the characteristics of the surface of the land, the reflectivity.
We inject our own aerosols into the atmosphere, and we have trace gases, and not just carbon dioxide -- it's methane, ozone, oxides of sulfur and nitrogen.
So here's the thing. It sounds like a simple question.
Is CO2 produced by man's activities causing the planet to warm up?
But to answer that question, to make a clear attribution to carbon dioxide, you have to know something about all of these other agents of change.
But the fact is we do know a lot about all of those things.
You know, thousands of scientists have been working on understanding all of these man-made causes and the natural causes.
And we've got it worked out, and we can say, "Yes, CO2 is causing the planet to warm up now."
Now, we have many ways to study natural variability.
I'll show you a few examples of this now.
This is the ship that I spent the last three months on in the Antarctic.
It's a scientific drilling vessel.
We go out for months at a time and drill into the sea bed to recover sediments that tell us stories of climate change, right.
Like one of the ways to understand our greenhouse future is to drill down in time to the last period where we had CO2 double what it is today.
And so that's what we've done with this ship.
This was -- this is south of the Antarctic Circle.
It looks downright tropical there.
One day where we had calm seas and sun, which was the reason I could get off the ship.
Most of the time it looked like this.
We had a waves up to 50 ft.
and winds averaging about 40 knots for most of the voyage and up to 70 or 80 knots.
So that trip just ended, and I can't show you too many results from that right now, but we'll go back one more year, to another drilling expedition I've been involved in.
This was led by Ross Powell and Tim Naish.
It's the ANDRILL project.
And we made the very first bore hole through the largest floating ice shelf on the planet.
This is a crazy thing, this big drill rig wrapped in a blanket to keep everybody warm, drilling at temperatures of minus 40.
And we drilled in the Ross Sea.
That's the Ross Sea Ice Shelf on the right there.
So, this huge floating ice shelf the size of Alaska comes from West Antarctica.
Now, West Antarctica is the part of the continent where the ice is grounded on sea floor as much as 2,000 meters deep.
So that ice sheet is partly floating, and it's exposed to the ocean, to the ocean heat.
This is the part of Antarctica that we worry about.
Because it's partly floating, you can imagine, is sea level rises a little bit, the ice lifts off the bed, and then it can break off and float north.
When that ice melts, sea level rises by six meters.
So we drill back in time to see how often that's happened, and exactly how fast that ice can melt.
Here's the cartoon on the left there.
We drilled through a hundred meters of floating ice shelf then through 900 meters of water and then 1,300 meters into the sea floor.
So it's the deepest geological bore hole ever drilled.
It took about 10 years to put this project together.
And here's what we found.
Now, there's 40 scientists working on this project, and people are doing all kinds of really complicated and expensive analyses.
But it turns out, you know, the thing that told the best story was this simple visual description.
You know, we saw this in the core samples as they came up.
We saw these alternations between sediments that look like this -- there's gravel and cobbles in there and a bunch of sand.
That's the kind of material in the deep sea.
It can only get there if it's carried out by ice.
So we know there's an ice shelf overhead.
And that alternates with a sediment that looks like this.
This is absolutely beautiful stuff.
This sediment is 100 percent made up of the shells of microscopic plants.
And these plants need sunlight, so we know when we find that sediment there's no ice overhead.
And we saw about 35 alternations between open water and ice-covered water, between gravels and these plant sediments.
So what that means is, what it tells us is that the Ross Sea region, this ice shelf, melted back and formed anew about 35 times.
And this is in the past four million years.
This was completely unexpected.
Nobody imagined that the West Antarctic Ice Sheet was this dynamic.
In fact, the lore for many years has been, "The ice formed many tens of millions of years ago, and it's been there ever since."
And now we know that in our recent past it melted back and formed again, and sea level went up and down, six meters at a time.
What caused it?
Well, we're pretty sure that it's very small changes in the amount of sunlight reaching Antarctica, just caused by natural changes in the orbit of the Earth.
But here's the key thing: you know, the other thing we found out is that the ice sheet passed a threshold, that the planet warmed up enough -- and the number's about one degree to one and a half degrees Centigrade -- the planet warmed up enough that it became ...
that ice sheet became very dynamic and was very easily melted.
And you know what?
We've actually changed the temperature in the last century just the right amount.
So many of us are convinced now that West Antarctica, the West Antarctic Ice Sheet, is starting to melt.
We do expect to see a sea-level rise on the order of one to two meters by the end of this century.
And it could be larger than that.
This is a serious consequence for nations like Kiribati, you know, where the average elevation is about a little over a meter above sea level.
Okay, the second story takes place here in Galapagos.
This is a bleached coral, coral that died during the 1982-'83 El Nino.
This is from Champion Island.
It's about a meter tall Pavona clavus colony.
And it's covered with algae. That's what happens.
When these things die, immediately, organisms come in and encrust and live on that dead surface.
And so, when a coral colony is killed by an El Nino event, it leaves this indelible record.
You can go then and study corals and figure out how often do you see this.
So one of the things thought of in the '80s was to go back and take cores of coral heads throughout the Galapagos and find out how often was there a devastating event.
And just so you know, 1982-'83, that El Nino killed 95 percent of all the corals here in Galapagos.
Then there was similar mortality in '97-'98.
And what we found after drilling back in time two to 400 years was that these were unique events.
We saw no other mass mortality events.
So these events in our recent past really are unique.
So they're either just truly monster El Ninos, or they're just very strong El Ninos that occurred against a backdrop of global warming.
Either case, it's bad news for the corals of the Galapagos Islands.
Here's how we sample the corals.
This is actually Easter Island. Look at this monster.
This coral is eight meters tall, right.
And it been growing for about 600 years.
Now, Sylvia Earle turned me on to this exact same coral.
And she was diving here with John Lauret -- I think it was 1994 -- and collected a little nugget and sent it to me.
And we started working on it, and we figured out we could tell the temperature of the ancient ocean from analyzing a coral like this.
So we have a diamond drill.
We're not killing the colony; we're taking a small core sample out of the top.
The core comes up as these cylindrical tubes of limestone.
And that material then we take back to the lab and analyze it.
You can see some of the coral cores there on the right.
So we've done that all over the Eastern Pacific.
We're starting to do it in the Western Pacific as well.
I'll take you back here to the Galapagos Islands.
And we've been working at this fascinating uplift here in Urbina Bay.
That the place where, during an earthquake in 1954, this marine terrace was lifted up out of the ocean very quickly, and it was lifted up about six to seven meters.
And so now you can walk through a coral reef without getting wet.
If you go on the ground there, it looks like this, and this is the grandaddy coral.
It's 11 meters in diameter, and we know that it started growing in the year 1584.
Imagine that.
And that coral was growing happily in those shallow waters, until 1954, when the earthquake happened.
Now the reason we know it's 1584 is that these corals have growth bands.
When you cut them, slice those cores in half and x-ray them, you see these light and dark bands.
Each one of those is a year.
We know these corals grow about a centimeter and a half a year.
And we just count on down to the bottom.
Then their other attribute is that they have this great chemistry.
We can analyze the carbonate that makes up the coral, and there's a whole bunch of things we can do.
But in this case, we measured the different isotopes of oxygen.
Their ratio tells us the water temperature.
In this example here, we had monitored this reef in Galapagos with temperature recorders, so we know the temperature of the water the coral's growing in.
Then after we harvest a coral, we measure this ratio, and now you can see, those curves match perfectly.
In this case, at these islands, you know, corals are instrumental-quality recorders of change in the water.
And of course, our thermometers only take us back 50 years or so here.
The coral can take us back hundreds and thousands of years.
So, what we do: we've merged a lot of different data sets.
It's not just my group; there's maybe 30 groups worldwide doing this.
But we get these instrumental- and near-instrumental-quality records of temperature change that go back hundreds of years, and we put them together.
Here's a synthetic diagram.
There's a whole family of curves here.
But what's happening: we're looking at the last thousand years of temperature on the planet.
And there's five or six different compilations there, But each one of those compilations reflects input from hundreds of these kinds of records from corals.
We do similar things with ice cores.
We work with tree rings.
And that's how we discover what is truly natural and how different is the last century, right?
And I chose this one because it's complicated and messy looking, right.
This is as messy as it gets.
You can see there's some signals there.
Some of the records show lower temperatures than others.
Some of them show greater variability.
But they all tell us what the natural variability is.
Some of them are from the northern hemisphere; some are from the entire globe.
But here's what we can say: what's natural in the last thousand years is that the planet was cooling down.
It was cooling down until about 1900 or so.
And there is natural variability caused by the Sun, caused by El Ninos.
A century-scale, decadal-scale variability, and we know the magnitude; it's about two-tenths to four-tenths of a degree Centigrade.
But then at the very end is where we have the instrumental record in black.
And there's the temperature up there in 2009.
You know, we've warmed the globe about a degree Centigrade in the last century, and there's nothing in the natural part of that record that resembles what we've seen in the last century.
You know, that's the strength of our argument, that we are doing something that's truly different.
So I'll close with a short discussion of ocean acidification.
I like it as a component of global change to talk about, because, even if you are a hard-bitten global warming skeptic, and I talk to that community fairly often, you cannot deny the simple physics of CO2 dissolving in the ocean.
You know, we're pumping out lots of CO2 into the atmosphere, from fossil fuels, from cement production.
Right now, about a third of that carbon dioxide is dissolving straight into the sea, right?
And as it does so, it makes the ocean more acidic.
So, you cannot argue with that.
That is what's happening right now, and it's a very different issue than the global warming issue.
It has many consequences.
There's consequences for carbonate organisms.
There are many organisms that build their shells out of calcium carbonate -- plants and animals both.
The main framework material of coral reefs is calcium carbonate.
That material is more soluble in acidic fluid.
So one of the things we're seeing is organisms are having to spend more metabolic energy to build and maintain their shells.
At some point, as this transience, as this CO2 uptake in the ocean continues, that material's actually going to start to dissolve.
And on coral reefs, where some of the main framework organisms disappear, we will see a major loss of marine biodiversity.
But it's not just the carbonate producers that are affected.
There's many physiological processes that are influenced by the acidity of the ocean.
So many reactions involving enzymes and proteins are sensitive to the acid content of the ocean.
So, all of these things -- greater metabolic demands, reduced reproductive success, changes in respiration and metabolism.
You know, these are things that we have good physiological reasons to expect to see stressed caused by this transience.
So we figured out some pretty interesting ways to track CO2 levels in the atmosphere, going back millions of years.
We used to do it just with ice cores, but in this case, we're going back 20 million years.
And we take samples of the sediment, and it tells us the CO2 level of the ocean, and therefore the CO2 level of the atmosphere.
And here's the thing: you have to go back about 15 million years to find a time when CO2 levels were about what they are today.
You have to go back about 30 million years to find a time when CO2 levels were double what they are today.
Now, what that means is that all of the organisms that live in the sea have evolved in this chemostatted ocean, with CO2 levels lower than they are today.
That's the reason that they're not able to respond or adapt to this rapid acidification that's going on right now.
So, Charlie Veron came up with this statement last year: "The prospect of ocean acidification may well be the most serious of all of the predicted outcomes of anthropogenic CO2 release."
And I think that may very well be true, so I'll close with this.
You know, we do need the protected areas, absolutely, but for the sake of the oceans, we have to cap or limit CO2 emissions as soon as possible.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
If nothing else, at least I've discovered what it is we put our speakers through: sweaty palms, sleepless nights, a wholly unnatural fear of clocks.
I mean, it's quite brutal.
And I'm also a little nervous about this.
There are nine billion humans coming our way.
Now, the most optimistic dreams can get dented by the prospect of people plundering the planet.
But recently, I've become intrigued by a different way of thinking of large human crowds, because there are circumstances where they can do something really cool.
It's a phenomenon that I think any organization or individual can tap into.
It certainly impacted the way we think about TED's future, and perhaps the world's future overall.
So, let's explore.
The story starts with just a single person, a child, behaving a little strangely.
This kid is known online as Lil Demon.
He's doing tricks here, dance tricks, that probably no six-year-old in history ever managed before.
How did he learn them?
And what drove him to spend the hundreds of hours of practice this must have taken?
Here's a clue.
(Video) Lil Demon:  Step your game up. Oh. Oh.   Step your game up. Oh. Oh.  Chris Anderson: So, that was sent to me by this man, a filmmaker, Jonathan Chu, who told me that was the moment he realized the Internet was causing dance to evolve.
This is what he said at TED in February.
In essence, dancers were challenging each other online to get better; incredible new dance skills were being invented; even the six-year-olds were joining in.
It felt like a revolution.
And so Jon had a brilliant idea: He went out to recruit the best of the best dancers off of YouTube to create this dance troupe -- The League of Extraordinary Dancers, the LXD.
I mean, these kids were web-taught, but they were so good that they got to play at the Oscars this year.
And at TED here in February, their passion and brilliance just took our breath away.
So, this story of the evolution of dance seems strangely familiar.
You know, a while after TEDTalks started taking off, we noticed that speakers were starting to spend a lot more time in preparation.
It was resulting in incredible new talks like these two.
... Months of preparation crammed into 18 minutes, raising the bar cruelly for the next generation of speakers, with the effects that we've seen this week.
It's not as if J.J. and Jill actually ended their talks saying, "Step your game up," but they might as well have.
So, in both of these cases, you've got these cycles of improvement, apparently driven by people watching web video.
What is going on here?
Well, I think it's the latest iteration of a phenomenon we can call "crowd-accelerated innovation."
And there are just three things you need for this thing to kick into gear.
You can think of them as three dials on a giant wheel.
You turn up the dials, the wheel starts to turn.
And the first thing you need is ... a crowd, a group of people who share a common interest.
The bigger the crowd, the more potential innovators there are.
That's important, but actually most people in the crowd occupy these other roles.
They're creating the ecosystem from which innovation emerges.
The second thing you need is light.
You need clear, open visibility of what the best people in that crowd are capable of, because that is how you will learn how you will be empowered to participate.
And third, you need desire.
You know, innovation's hard work.
It's based on hundreds of hours of research, of practice.
Absent desire, not going to happen.
Now, here's an example -- pre-Internet -- of this machine in action.
Dancers at a street corner -- it's a crowd, a small one, but they can all obviously see what each other can do.
And the desire part comes, I guess, from social status, right?
Best dancer walks tall, gets the best date.
There's probably going to be some innovation happening here.
But on the web, all three dials are ratcheted right up.
The dance community is now global.
There's millions connected.
And amazingly, you can still see what the best can do, because the crowd itself shines a light on them, either directly, through comments, ratings, email, Facebook, Twitter, or indirectly, through numbers of views, through links that point Google there.
So, it's easy to find the good stuff, and when you've found it, you can watch it in close-up repeatedly and read what hundreds of people have written about it.
That's a lot of light.
But the desire element is really dialed way up.
I mean, you might just be a kid with a webcam, but if you can do something that goes viral, you get to be seen by the equivalent of sports stadiums crammed with people.
You get hundreds of strangers writing excitedly about you.
And even if it's not that eloquent -- and it's not -- it can still really make your day.
So, this possibility of a new type of global recognition, I think, is driving huge amounts of effort.
And it's important to note that it's not just the stars who are benefiting: because you can see the best, everyone can learn.
Also, the system is self-fueling.
It's the crowd that shines the light and fuels the desire, but the light and desire are a lethal one-two combination that attract new people to the crowd.
So, this is a model that pretty much any organization could use to try and nurture its own cycle of crowd-accelerated innovation.
Invite the crowd, let in the light, dial up the desire.
And the hardest part about that is probably the light, because it means you have to open up, you have to show your stuff to the world.
It's by giving away what you think is your deepest secret that maybe millions of people are empowered to help improve it.
And, very happily, there's one class of people who really can't make use of this tool.
The dark side of the web is allergic to the light.
I don't think we're going to see terrorists, for example, publishing their plans online and saying to the world, "Please, could you help us to actually make them work this time?"
But you can publish your stuff online.
And if you can get that wheel to turn, look out.
So, at TED, we've become a little obsessed with this idea of openness.
In fact, my colleague, June Cohen, has taken to calling it "radical openness," because it works for us each time.
We opened up our talks to the world, and suddenly there are millions of people out there helping spread our speakers' ideas, and thereby making it easier for us to recruit and motivate the next generation of speakers.
By opening up our translation program, thousands of heroic volunteers -- some of them watching online right now, and thank you! -- have translated our talks into more than 70 languages, thereby tripling our viewership in non-English-speaking countries.
By giving away our TEDx brand, we suddenly have a thousand-plus live experiments in the art of spreading ideas.
And these organizers, they're seeing each other, they're learning from each other.
We are learning from them.
We're getting great talks back from them.
The wheel is turning.
Okay, step back a minute.
I mean, it's really not news for me to tell you that innovation emerges out of groups.
You know, we've heard that this week -- this romantic notion of the lone genius with the "eureka!" moment that changes the world is misleading.
Even he said that, and he would know.
We're a social species.
We spark off each other.
It's also not news to say that the Internet has accelerated innovation.
For the past 15 years, powerful communities have been connecting online, sparking off each other.
If you take programmers, you know, the whole open-source movement is a fantastic instance of crowd-accelerated innovation.
But what's key here is, the reason these groups have been able to connect is because their work output is of the type that can be easily shared digitally -- a picture, a music file, software.
And that's why what I'm excited about, and what I think is under-reported, is the significance of the rise of online video.
This is the technology that's going to allow the rest of the world's talents to be shared digitally, thereby launching a whole new cycle of crowd-accelerated innovation.
The first few years of the web were pretty much video-free, for this reason: video files are huge; the web couldn't handle them.
But in the last 10 years, bandwidth has exploded a hundredfold.
Suddenly, here we are.
Humanity watches 80 million hours of YouTube every day.
Cisco actually estimates that, within four years, more than 90 percent of the web's data will be video.
If it's all puppies, porn and piracy, we're doomed.
I don't think it will be.
Video is high-bandwidth for a reason.
It packs a huge amount of data, and our brains are uniquely wired to decode it.
Here, let me introduce you to Sam Haber.
He's a unicyclist.
Before YouTube, there was no way for him to discover his sport's true potential, because you can't communicate this stuff in words, right?
But looking at video clips posted by strangers, a world of possibility opens up for him.
Suddenly, he starts to emulate and then to innovate.
And a global community of unicyclists discover each other online, inspire each other to greatness.
And there are thousands of other examples of this happening -- of video-driven evolution of skills, ranging from the physical to the artful.
And I have to tell you, as a former publisher of hobbyist magazines, I find this strangely beautiful.
I mean, there's a lot of passion right here on this screen.
But if Rube Goldberg machines and video poetry aren't quite your cup of tea, how about this.
Jove is a website that was founded to encourage scientists to publish their peer-reviewed research on video.
There's a problem with a traditional scientific paper.
It can take months for a scientist in another lab to figure out how to replicate the experiments that are described in print.
Here's one such frustrated scientist, Moshe Pritsker, the founder of Jove.
He told me that the world is wasting billions of dollars on this.
But look at this video.
I mean, look: if you can show instead of just describing, that problem goes away.
So it's not far-fetched to say that, at some point, online video is going to dramatically accelerate scientific advance.
Here's another example that's close to our hearts at TED, where video is sometimes more powerful than print -- the sharing of an idea.
Why do people like watching TEDTalks?
All those ideas are already out there in print.
It's actually faster to read than to view.
Why would someone bother?
Well, so, there's some showing as well as telling.
But even leaving the screen out of it, there's still a lot more being transferred than just words.
And in that non-verbal portion, there's some serious magic.
Somewhere hidden in the physical gestures, the vocal cadence, the facial expressions, the eye contact, the passion, the kind of awkward, British body language, the sense of how the audience are reacting, there are hundreds of subconscious clues that go to how well you will understand, and whether you're inspired -- light, if you like, and desire.
Incredibly, all of this can be communicated on just a few square inches of a screen.
Reading and writing are actually relatively recent inventions.
Face-to-face communication has been fine-tuned by millions of years of evolution.
That's what's made it into this mysterious, powerful thing it is.
Someone speaks, there's resonance in all these receiving brains, the whole group acts together.
I mean, this is the connective tissue of the human superorganism in action.
It's probably driven our culture for millennia.
500 years ago, it ran into a competitor with a lethal advantage.
It's right here.
Print scaled.
The world's ambitious innovators and influencers now could get their ideas to spread far and wide, and so the art of the spoken word pretty much withered on the vine.
But now, in the blink of an eye, the game has changed again.
It's not too much to say that what Gutenberg did for writing, online video can now do for face-to-face communication.
So, that primal medium, which your brain is exquisitely wired for ...
that just went global.
Now, this is big.
We may have to reinvent an ancient art form.
I mean, today, one person speaking can be seen by millions, shedding bright light on potent ideas, creating intense desire for learning and to respond -- and in his case, intense desire to laugh.
For the first time in human history, talented students don't have to have their potential and their dreams written out of history by lousy teachers.
They can sit two feet in front of the world's finest.
Now, TED is just a small part of this.
I mean, the world's universities are opening up their curricula.
Thousands of individuals and organizations are sharing their knowledge and data online.
Thousands of people are figuring out new ways to learn and, crucially, to respond, completing the cycle.
And so, as we've thought about this, you know, it's become clear to us what the next stage of TED's evolution has to be.
TEDTalks can't be a one-way process, one-to-many.
Our future is many-to-many.
So, we're dreaming of ways to make it easier for you, the global TED community, to respond to speakers, to contribute your own ideas, maybe even your own TEDTalks, and to help shine a light on the very best of what's out there.
Because, if we can bubble up the very best from a vastly larger pool, this wheel turns.
Now, is it possible to imagine a similar process to this, happening to global education overall?
I mean, does it have to be this painful, top-down process?
Why not a self-fueling cycle in which we all can participate?
It's the participation age, right?
Schools can't be silos.
We can't stop learning at age 21.
What if, in the coming crowd of nine billion ...
what if that crowd could learn enough to be net contributors, instead of net plunderers?
That changes everything, right?
I mean, that would take more teachers than we've ever had.
But the good news is they are out there.
They're in the crowd, and the crowd is switching on lights, and we can see them for the first time, not as an undifferentiated mass of strangers, but as individuals we can learn from.
Who's the teacher?
You're the teacher.
You're part of the crowd that may be about to launch the biggest learning cycle in human history, a cycle capable of carrying all of us to a smarter, wiser, more beautiful place.
Here's a group of kids in a village in Pakistan near where I grew up.
Within five years, each of these kids is going to have access to a cellphone capable of full-on web video and capable of uploading video to the web.
I mean, is it crazy to think that this girl, in the back, at the right, in 15 years, might be sharing the idea that keeps the world beautiful for your grandchildren?
It's not crazy; it's actually happening right now.
I want to introduce you to a good friend of TED who just happens to live in Africa's biggest shantytown.
(Video) Christopher Makau: Hi. My name is Christopher Makau.
I'm one of the organizers of TEDxKibera.
There are so many good things which are happening right here in Kibera.
There's a self-help group.
They turned a trash place into a garden.
The same spot, it was a crime spot where people were being robbed.
They used the same trash to form green manure.
The same trash site is feeding more than 30 families.
We have our own film school.
They are using Flip cameras to record, edit, and reporting to their own channel, Kibera TV.
Because of a scarcity of land, we are using the sacks to grow vegetables, and also [we're] able to save on the cost of living.
Change happens when we see things in a different way.
Today, I see Kibera in a different way.
My message to TEDGlobal and the entire world is: Kibera is a hotbed of innovation and ideas.
(Applause) CA: You know what?
I bet Chris has always been an inspiring guy.
What's new -- and it's huge -- is that, for the first time, we get to see him, and he can see us.
Right now, Chris and Kevin and Dennis and Dickson and their friends are watching us, in Nairobi, right now.
Guys, we've learned from you today.
Thank you.
And thank you.
(Applause)
Let's start with day and night.
Life evolved under conditions of light and darkness, light and then darkness.
And so plants and animals developed their own internal clocks so that they would be ready for these changes in light.
These are chemical clocks, and they're found in every known being that has two or more cells and in some that only have one cell.
I'll give you an example -- if you take a horseshoe crab off the beach, and you fly it all the way across the continent, and you drop it into a sloped cage, it will scramble up the floor of the cage as the tide is rising on its home shores, and it'll skitter down again right as the water is receding thousands of miles away.
It'll do this for weeks, until it kind of gradually loses the plot.
And it's incredible to watch, but there's nothing psychic or paranormal going on; it's simply that these crabs have internal cycles that correspond, usually, with what's going on around it.
So, we have this ability as well.
And in humans, we call it the "body clock."
You can see this most clearly when you take away someone's watch and you shut them into a bunker, deep underground, for a couple of months. (Laughter) People actually volunteer for this, and they usually come out kind of raving about their productive time in the hole.
So, no matter how atypical these subjects would have to be, they all show the same thing.
They get up just a little bit later every day -- say 15 minutes or so -- and they kind of drift all the way around the clock like this over the course of the weeks.
And so, in this way we know that they are working on their own internal clocks, rather than somehow sensing the day outside.
So fine, we have a body clock, and it turns out that it's incredibly important in our lives.
It's a huge driver for culture and I think that it's the most underrated force on our behavior.
We evolved as a species near the equator, and so we're very well-equipped to deal with 12 hours of daylight and 12 hours of darkness.
But of course, we've spread to every corner of the globe and in Arctic Canada, where I live, we have perpetual daylight in summer and 24 hours of darkness in winter.
So the culture, the northern aboriginal culture, traditionally has been highly seasonal.
In winter, there's a lot of sleeping going on; you enjoy your family life inside.
And in summer, it's almost manic hunting and working activity very long hours, very active.
So, what would our natural rhythm look like?
What would our sleeping patterns be in the sort of ideal sense?
Well, it turns out that when people are living without any sort of artificial light at all, they sleep twice every night.
They go to bed around 8:00 p.m.
until midnight and then again, they sleep from about 2:00 a.m. until sunrise.
And in-between, they have a couple of hours of sort of meditative quiet in bed.
And during this time, there's a surge of prolactin, the likes of which a modern day never sees.
The people in these studies report feeling so awake during the daytime, that they realize they're experiencing true wakefulness for the first time in their lives.
So, cut to the modern day.
We're living in a culture of jet lag, global travel, 24-hour business, shift work.
And you know, our modern ways of doing things have their advantages, but I believe we should understand the costs.
Thank you.
(Applause)
For the last 10 years, I've been spending my time trying to figure out how and why human beings assemble themselves into social networks.
And the kind of social network I'm talking about is not the recent online variety, but rather, the kind of social networks that human beings have been assembling for hundreds of thousands of years, ever since we emerged from the African savannah.
So, I form friendships and co-worker and sibling and relative relationships with other people who in turn have similar relationships with other people.
And this spreads on out endlessly into a distance.
And you get a network that looks like this.
Every dot is a person.
Every line between them is a relationship between two people -- different kinds of relationships.
And you can get this kind of vast fabric of humanity, in which we're all embedded.
And my colleague, James Fowler and I have been studying for quite sometime what are the mathematical, social, biological and psychological rules that govern how these networks are assembled and what are the similar rules that govern how they operate, how they affect our lives.
But recently, we've been wondering whether it might be possible to take advantage of this insight, to actually find ways to improve the world, to do something better, to actually fix things, not just understand things.
So one of the first things we thought we would tackle would be how we go about predicting epidemics.
And the current state of the art in predicting an epidemic -- if you're the CDC or some other national body -- is to sit in the middle where you are and collect data from physicians and laboratories in the field that report the prevalence or the incidence of certain conditions.
So, so and so patients have been diagnosed with something, or other patients have been diagnosed, and all these data are fed into a central repository, with some delay.
And if everything goes smoothly, one to two weeks from now you'll know where the epidemic was today.
And actually, about a year or so ago, there was this promulgation of the idea of Google Flu Trends, with respect to the flu, where by looking at people's searching behavior today, we could know where the flu -- what the status of the epidemic was today, what's the prevalence of the epidemic today.
But what I'd like to show you today is a means by which we might get not just rapid warning about an epidemic, but also actually early detection of an epidemic.
And, in fact, this idea can be used not just to predict epidemics of germs, but also to predict epidemics of all sorts of kinds.
For example, anything that spreads by a form of social contagion could be understood in this way, from abstract ideas on the left like patriotism, or altruism, or religion to practices like dieting behavior, or book purchasing, or drinking, or bicycle-helmet [and] other safety practices, or products that people might buy, purchases of electronic goods, anything in which there's kind of an interpersonal spread.
A kind of a diffusion of innovation could be understood and predicted by the mechanism I'm going to show you now.
So, as all of you probably know, the classic way of thinking about this is the diffusion-of-innovation, or the adoption curve.
So here on the Y-axis, we have the percent of the people affected, and on the X-axis, we have time.
And at the very beginning, not too many people are affected, and you get this classic sigmoidal, or S-shaped, curve.
And the reason for this shape is that at the very beginning, let's say one or two people are infected, or affected by the thing and then they affect, or infect, two people, who in turn affect four, eight, 16 and so forth, and you get the epidemic growth phase of the curve.
And eventually, you saturate the population.
There are fewer and fewer people who are still available that you might infect, and then you get the plateau of the curve, and you get this classic sigmoidal curve.
And this holds for germs, ideas, product adoption, behaviors, and the like.
But things don't just diffuse in human populations at random.
They actually diffuse through networks.
Because, as I said, we live our lives in networks, and these networks have a particular kind of a structure.
Now if you look at a network like this -- this is 105 people.
And the lines represent -- the dots are the people, and the lines represent friendship relationships.
You might see that people occupy different locations within the network.
And there are different kinds of relationships between the people.
You could have friendship relationships, sibling relationships, spousal relationships, co-worker relationships, neighbor relationships and the like.
And different sorts of things spread across different sorts of ties.
For instance, sexually transmitted diseases will spread across sexual ties.
Or, for instance, people's smoking behavior might be influenced by their friends.
Or their altruistic or their charitable giving behavior might be influenced by their coworkers, or by their neighbors.
But not all positions in the network are the same.
So if you look at this, you might immediately grasp that different people have different numbers of connections.
Some people have one connection, some have two, some have six, some have 10 connections.
And this is called the "degree" of a node, or the number of connections that a node has.
But in addition, there's something else.
So, if you look at nodes A and B, they both have six connections.
But if you can see this image [of the network] from a bird's eye view, you can appreciate that there's something very different about nodes A and B.
So, let me ask you this -- I can cultivate this intuition by asking a question -- who would you rather be if a deadly germ was spreading through the network, A or B?
(Audience: B.) Nicholas Christakis: B, it's obvious.
B is located on the edge of the network.
Now, who would you rather be if a juicy piece of gossip were spreading through the network?
A. And you have an immediate appreciation that A is going to be more likely to get the thing that's spreading and to get it sooner by virtue of their structural location within the network.
A, in fact, is more central, and this can be formalized mathematically.
So, if we want to track something that was spreading through a network, what we ideally would like to do is to set up sensors on the central individuals within the network, including node A, monitor those people that are right there in the middle of the network, and somehow get an early detection of whatever it is that is spreading through the network.
So if you saw them contract a germ or a piece of information, you would know that, soon enough, everybody was about to contract this germ or this piece of information.
And this would be much better than monitoring six randomly chosen people, without reference to the structure of the population.
And in fact, if you could do that, what you would see is something like this.
On the left-hand panel, again, we have the S-shaped curve of adoption.
In the dotted red line, we show what the adoption would be in the random people, and in the left-hand line, shifted to the left, we show what the adoption would be in the central individuals within the network.
On the Y-axis is the cumulative instances of contagion, and on the X-axis is the time.
And on the right-hand side, we show the same data, but here with daily incidence.
And what we show here is -- like, here -- very few people are affected, more and more and more and up to here, and here's the peak of the epidemic.
But shifted to the left is what's occurring in the central individuals.
And this difference in time between the two is the early detection, the early warning we can get, about an impending epidemic in the human population.
The problem, however, is that mapping human social networks is not always possible.
It can be expensive, not feasible, unethical, or, frankly, just not possible to do such a thing.
So, how can we figure out who the central people are in a network without actually mapping the network?
What we came up with was an idea to exploit an old fact, or a known fact, about social networks, which goes like this: Do you know that your friends have more friends than you do?
Your friends have more friends than you do, and this is known as the friendship paradox.
Imagine a very popular person in the social network -- like a party host who has hundreds of friends -- and a misanthrope who has just one friend, and you pick someone at random from the population; they were much more likely to know the party host.
And if they nominate the party host as their friend, that party host has a hundred friends, therefore, has more friends than they do.
And this, in essence, is what's known as the friendship paradox.
The friends of randomly chosen people have higher degree, and are more central than the random people themselves.
And you can get an intuitive appreciation for this if you imagine just the people at the perimeter of the network.
If you pick this person, the only friend they have to nominate is this person, who, by construction, must have at least two and typically more friends.
And that happens at every peripheral node.
And in fact, it happens throughout the network as you move in, everyone you pick, when they nominate a random -- when a random person nominates a friend of theirs, you move closer to the center of the network.
So, we thought we would exploit this idea in order to study whether we could predict phenomena within networks.
Because now, with this idea we can take a random sample of people, have them nominate their friends, those friends would be more central, and we could do this without having to map the network.
And we tested this idea with an outbreak of H1N1 flu at Harvard College in the fall and winter of 2009, just a few months ago.
We took 1,300 randomly selected undergraduates, we had them nominate their friends, and we followed both the random students and their friends daily in time to see whether or not they had the flu epidemic.
And we did this passively by looking at whether or not they'd gone to university health services.
And also, we had them [actively] email us a couple of times a week.
Exactly what we predicted happened.
So the random group is in the red line.
The epidemic in the friends group has shifted to the left, over here.
And the difference in the two is 16 days.
By monitoring the friends group, we could get 16 days advance warning of an impending epidemic in this human population.
Now, in addition to that, if you were an analyst who was trying to study an epidemic or to predict the adoption of a product, for example, what you could do is you could pick a random sample of the population, also have them nominate their friends and follow the friends and follow both the randoms and the friends.
Among the friends, the first evidence you saw of a blip above zero in adoption of the innovation, for example, would be evidence of an impending epidemic.
Or you could see the first time the two curves diverged, as shown on the left.
When did the randoms -- when did the friends take off and leave the randoms, and [when did] their curve start shifting?
And that, as indicated by the white line, occurred 46 days before the peak of the epidemic.
So this would be a technique whereby we could get more than a month-and-a-half warning about a flu epidemic in a particular population.
I should say that how far advanced a notice one might get about something depends on a host of factors.
It could depend on the nature of the pathogen -- different pathogens, using this technique, you'd get different warning -- or other phenomena that are spreading, or frankly, on the structure of the human network.
Now in our case, although it wasn't necessary, we could also actually map the network of the students.
So, this is a map of 714 students and their friendship ties.
And in a minute now, I'm going to put this map into motion.
We're going to take daily cuts through the network for 120 days.
The red dots are going to be cases of the flu, and the yellow dots are going to be friends of the people with the flu.
And the size of the dots is going to be proportional to how many of their friends have the flu.
So bigger dots mean more of your friends have the flu.
And if you look at this image -- here we are now in September the 13th -- you're going to see a few cases light up.
You're going to see kind of blooming of the flu in the middle.
Here we are on October the 19th.
The slope of the epidemic curve is approaching now, in November.
Bang, bang, bang, bang, bang -- you're going to see lots of blooming in the middle, and then you're going to see a sort of leveling off, fewer and fewer cases towards the end of December.
And this type of a visualization can show that epidemics like this take root and affect central individuals first, before they affect others.
Now, as I've been suggesting, this method is not restricted to germs, but actually to anything that spreads in populations.
Information spreads in populations, norms can spread in populations, behaviors can spread in populations.
And by behaviors, I can mean things like criminal behavior, or voting behavior, or health care behavior, like smoking, or vaccination, or product adoption, or other kinds of behaviors that relate to interpersonal influence.
If I'm likely to do something that affects others around me, this technique can get early warning or early detection about the adoption within the population.
The key thing is that for it to work, there has to be interpersonal influence.
It cannot be because of some broadcast mechanism affecting everyone uniformly.
Now the same insights can also be exploited -- with respect to networks -- can also be exploited in other ways, for example, in the use of targeting specific people for interventions.
So, for example, most of you are probably familiar with the notion of herd immunity.
So, if we have a population of a thousand people, and we want to make the population immune to a pathogen, we don't have to immunize every single person.
If we immunize 960 of them, it's as if we had immunized a hundred [percent] of them.
Because even if one or two of the non-immune people gets infected, there's no one for them to infect.
They are surrounded by immunized people.
So 96 percent is as good as 100 percent.
Well, some other scientists have estimated what would happen if you took a 30 percent random sample of these 1000 people, 300 people and immunized them.
Would you get any population-level immunity?
And the answer is no.
But if you took this 30 percent, these 300 people and had them nominate their friends and took the same number of vaccine doses and vaccinated the friends of the 300 -- the 300 friends -- you can get the same level of herd immunity as if you had vaccinated 96 percent of the population at a much greater efficiency, with a strict budget constraint.
And similar ideas can be used, for instance, to target distribution of things like bed nets in the developing world.
If we could understand the structure of networks in villages, we could target to whom to give the interventions to foster these kinds of spreads.
Or, frankly, for advertising with all kinds of products.
If we could understand how to target, it could affect the efficiency of what we're trying to achieve.
And in fact, we can use data from all kinds of sources nowadays [to do this].
This is a map of eight million phone users in a European country.
Every dot is a person, and every line represents a volume of calls between the people.
And we can use such data, that's being passively obtained, to map these whole countries and understand who is located where within the network.
Without actually having to query them at all, we can get this kind of a structural insight.
And other sources of information, as you're no doubt aware are available about such features, from email interactions, online interactions, online social networks and so forth.
And in fact, we are in the era of what I would call "massive-passive" data collection efforts.
They're all kinds of ways we can use massively collected data to create sensor networks to follow the population, understand what's happening in the population, and intervene in the population for the better.
Because these new technologies tell us not just who is talking to whom, but where everyone is, and what they're thinking based on what they're uploading on the Internet, and what they're buying based on their purchases.
And all this administrative data can be pulled together and processed to understand human behavior in a way we never could before.
So, for example, we could use truckers' purchases of fuel.
So the truckers are just going about their business, and they're buying fuel.
And we see a blip up in the truckers' purchases of fuel, and we know that a recession is about to end.
Or we can monitor the velocity with which people are moving with their phones on a highway, and the phone company can see, as the velocity is slowing down, that there's a traffic jam.
And they can feed that information back to their subscribers, but only to their subscribers on the same highway located behind the traffic jam!
Or we can monitor doctors prescribing behaviors, passively, and see how the diffusion of innovation with pharmaceuticals occurs within [networks of] doctors.
Or again, we can monitor purchasing behavior in people and watch how these types of phenomena can diffuse within human populations.
And there are three ways, I think, that these massive-passive data can be used.
One is fully passive, like I just described -- as in, for instance, the trucker example, where we don't actually intervene in the population in any way.
One is quasi-active, like the flu example I gave, where we get some people to nominate their friends and then passively monitor their friends -- do they have the flu, or not? -- and then get warning.
Or another example would be, if you're a phone company, you figure out who's central in the network and you ask those people, "Look, will you just text us your fever every day?
Just text us your temperature."
And collect vast amounts of information about people's temperature, but from centrally located individuals.
And be able, on a large scale, to monitor an impending epidemic with very minimal input from people.
Or, finally, it can be more fully active -- as I know subsequent speakers will also talk about today -- where people might globally participate in wikis, or photographing, or monitoring elections, and upload information in a way that allows us to pool information in order to understand social processes and social phenomena.
In fact, the availability of these data, I think, heralds a kind of new era of what I and others would like to call "computational social science."
It's sort of like when Galileo invented -- or, didn't invent -- came to use a telescope and could see the heavens in a new way, or Leeuwenhoek became aware of the microscope -- or actually invented -- and could see biology in a new way.
But now we have access to these kinds of data that allow us to understand social processes and social phenomena in an entirely new way that was never before possible.
And with this science, we can understand how exactly the whole comes to be greater than the sum of its parts.
And actually, we can use these insights to improve society and improve human well-being.
Thank you.
Now, since this is TEDGlobal, who can tell me what this is called in French?
I see you're all up on the history of hurdy-gurdy -- "vielle  roue."
And in Spanish, "zanfona."
And in Italian, "ghironda," okay?
Hurdy-gurdy, or wheel fiddle.
So, these are the different kinds and shapes of the hurdy-gurdy.
The hurdy-gurdy is the only musical instrument that uses a crank to turn a wheel to rub strings, like the bow of a violin, to produce music.
It has three different kinds of strings.
The first string is the drone string, which plays a continuous sound like the bagpipe.
The second string is a melody string, which is played with a wooden keyboard tuned like a piano.
And the third string is pretty innovative.
It's also the only instrument that uses this kind of technique.
It activates what's called the buzzing bridge, or the dog.
When I turn the crank and I apply pressure, it makes a sound like a barking dog.
So all of this is pretty innovative, if you consider that the hurdy-gurdy appeared about a thousand years ago and it took two people to play it; one to turn the crank, and another person -- yes -- to play the melody by physically pulling up large wooden pegs.
Luckily, all of this changed a couple of centuries later.
So, one person could actually play and almost -- this is pretty heavy -- carry the hurdy-gurdy.
The hurdy-gurdy has been used, historically, through the centuries in mostly dance music because of the uniqueness of the melody combined with the acoustic boombox here.
And today, the hurdy-gurdy is used in all sorts of music -- traditional folk music, dance, contemporary and world music -- in the U.K., in France, in Spain and in Italy.
And this kind of hurdy-gurdy takes anywhere from three to five years [to order and receive it].
It's made by specialized luthiers, also in Europe.
And it's very difficult to tune.
So without further ado, would you like to hear it?
(Audience: Yes.) Caroline Phillips: I didn't hear you. Would you like to hear it? (Audience: Yes!) CP: Okay.
I'd like to sing in Basque, which is the language spoken in the Basque Country where I live, in the region in France and Spain.
(Music) [Basque] (Music) Thank you.
(Applause) This is a song that I wrote based on traditional Basque rhythms.
And this is a song that has a kind of a Celtic feel.
(Music) Thank you. Thank you.
(Applause)
Hello. I would like to start my talk with actually two questions, and the first one is: How many people here actually eat pig meat?
Please raise your hand -- oh, that's a lot.
And how many people have actually seen a live pig producing this meat?
In the last year?
In the Netherlands -- where I come from -- you actually never see a pig, which is really strange, because, on a population of 16 million people, we have 12 million pigs.
And well, of course, the Dutch can't eat all these pigs.
They eat about one-third, and the rest is exported to all kinds of countries in Europe and the rest of the world.
A lot goes to the U.K., Germany.
And what I was curious about -- because historically, the whole pig would be used up until the last bit so nothing would be wasted -- and I was curious to find out if this was actually still the case.
And I spent about three years researching.
And I followed this one pig with number "05049," all the way up until the end and to what products it's made of.
And in these years, I met all kinds people like, for instance, farmers and butchers, which seems logical.
But I also met aluminum mold makers, ammunition producers and all kinds of people.
And what was striking to me is that the farmers actually had no clue what was made of their pigs, but the consumers -- as in us -- had also no idea of the pigs being in all these products.
So what I did is, I took all this research and I made it into a -- well, basically it's a product catalog of this one pig, and it carries a duplicate of his ear tag on the back.
And it consists of seven chapters -- the chapters are skin, bones, meat, internal organs, blood, fat and miscellaneous.
(Laughter) In total, they weigh 103.7 kilograms.
And to show you how often you actually meet part of this pig in a regular day, I want to show you some images of the book.
You probably start the day with a shower.
So, in soap, fatty acids made from boiling pork bone fat are used as a hardening agent, but also for giving it a pearl-like effect.
Then if you look around you in the bathroom, you see lots more products like shampoo, conditioner, anti-wrinkle cream, body lotion, but also toothpaste.
Then, so, before breakfast, you've already met the pig so many times.
Then, at breakfast, the pig that I followed, the hairs off the pig or proteins from the hairs off the pig were used as an improver of dough.
(Laughter) Well, that's what the producer says: it's "improving the dough, of course."
In low-fat butter, or actually in many low-fat products, when you take the fat out, you actually take the taste and the texture out.
So what they do is they put gelatin back in, in order to retain the texture.
Well, when you're off to work, under the road or under the buildings that you see, there might very well be cellular concrete, which is a very light kind of concrete that's actually got proteins from bones inside and it's also fully reusable.
In the train brakes -- at least in the German train brakes -- there's this part of the brake that's made of bone ash.
And in cheesecake and all kinds of desserts, like chocolate mousse, tiramisu, vanilla pudding, everything that's cooled in the supermarket, there's gelatin to make it look good.
Fine bone china -- this is a real classic.
Of course, the bone in fine-bone china gives it its translucency and also its strength, in order to make these really fine shapes, like this deer.
In interior decorating, the pig's actually quite there.
It's used in paint for the texture, but also for the glossiness.
In sandpaper, bone glue is actually the glue between the sand and the paper.
And then in paintbrushes, hairs are used because, apparently, they're very suitable for making paintbrushes because of their hard-wearing nature.
I was not planning on showing you any meat because, of course, half the book's meat and you probably all know what meats they are.
But I didn't want you to miss out on this one, because this, well, it's called "portion-controlled meat cuts."
And this is actually sold in the frozen area of the supermarket.
And what it is -- it's actually steak.
So, this is sold as cow, but what happens when you slaughter a cow -- at least in industrial factory farming -- they have all these little bits of steak left that they can't actually sell as steak, so what they do is they glue them all together with fibrin from pig blood into this really large sausage, then freeze the sausage, cut it in little slices and sell those as steak again.
And this also actually happens with tuna and scallops.
So, with the steak, you might drink a beer.
In the brewing process, there's lots of cloudy elements in the beer, so to get rid of these cloudy elements, what some companies do is they pour the beer through a sort of gelatin sieve in order to get rid of that cloudiness.
This actually also goes for wine as well as fruit juice.
There's actually a company in Greece that produces these cigarettes that actually contain hemoglobin from pigs in the filter.
And according to them, this creates an artificial lung in the filter.
(Laughter) So, this is actually a healthier cigarette.
(Laughter) Injectable collagen -- or, since the '70s, collagen from pigs -- has been used for injecting into wrinkles.
And the reason for this is that pigs are actually quite close to human beings, so the collagen is as well.
Well, this must be the strangest thing I found.
This is a bullet coming from a very large ammunition company in the United States.
And while I was making the book, I contacted all the producers of products because I wanted them to send me the real samples and the real specimens.
So I sent this company an email saying, "Hello. I'm Christien. I'm doing this research.
And can you send me a bullet?"
(Laughter) And well, I didn't expect them to even answer my email.
But they answered and they said, "Why, thank you for your email. What an interesting story.
Are you in anyway related to the Dutch government?"
I thought that was really weird, as if the Dutch government sends emails to anyone.
(Laughter) So, the most beautiful thing I found -- at least what I think is the most beautiful -- in the book, is this heart valve.
It's actually a very low-tech and very high-tech product at the same time.
The low-tech bit is that it's literally a pig's heart valve mounted in the high-tech bit, which is a memory metal casing.
And what happens is this can be implanted into a human heart without open heart surgery.
And once it's in the right spot, they remove the outer shell, and the heart valve, well, it gets this shape and at that moment it starts beating, instantly.
It's really a sort of magical moment.
So this is actually a Dutch company, so I called them up, and I asked, "Can I borrow a heart valve from you?"
And the makers of this thing were really enthusiastic.
So they were like, "Okay, we'll put it in a jar for you with formalin, and you can borrow it."
Great -- and then I didn't hear from them for weeks, so I called, and I asked, "What's going on with the heart valve?"
And they said, "Well the director of the company decided not to let you borrow this heart valve, because want his product to be associated with pigs."
(Laughter) Well, the last product from the book that I'm showing you is renewable energy -- actually, to show that my first question, if pigs are still used up until the last bit, was still true.
Well it is, because everything that can't be used for anything else is made into a fuel that can be used as renewable energy source.
In total, I found 185 products.
And what they showed me is that, well, firstly, it's at least to say odd that we don't treat these pigs as absolute kings and queens.
And the second, is that we actually don't have a clue of what all these products that surround us are made of.
And you might think I'm very fond of pigs, but actually -- well, I am a little bit -- but I'm more fond of raw materials in general.
And I think that, in order to take better care of what's behind our products -- so, the livestock, the crops, the plants, the non-renewable materials, but also the people that produce these products -- the first step would actually be to know that they are there.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
Fifty-two minutes ago, I took this picture about 10 blocks from here.
This is the Grand Caf here in Oxford.
I took this picture because this turns out to be the first coffeehouse to open in England, in 1650.
That's its great claim to fame.
And I wanted to show it to you, not because I want to give you the Starbucks tour of historic England -- (Laughter) but rather because the English coffeehouse was crucial to the development and spread of one of the great intellectual flowerings of the last 500 years, what we now call the Enlightenment.
And the coffeehouse played such a big role in the birth of the Enlightenment in part because of what people were drinking there.
Because, before the spread of coffee and tea through British culture, what people drank -- both elite and mass folks drank -- day in and day out, from dawn until dusk, was alcohol.
Alcohol was the daytime beverage of choice.
You would drink a little beer with breakfast and have a little wine at lunch, a little gin, particularly around 1650, and top it off with a little beer and wine at the end of the day.
That was the healthy choice, because the water wasn't safe to drink.
And so, effectively, until the rise of the coffeehouse, you had an entire population that was effectively drunk all day.
(Laughter) And you can imagine what that would be like in your own life -- and I know this is true of some of you -- if you were drinking all day -- (Laughter) and then you switched from a depressant to a stimulant in your life.
You would have better ideas.
You would be sharper and more alert.
So it's not an accident that a great flowering of innovation happened as England switched to tea and coffee.
But the other thing that makes the coffeehouse important is the architecture of the space.
It was a space where people would get together, from different backgrounds, different fields of expertise, and share.
It was a space, as Matt Ridley talked about, where ideas could have sex.
This was their conjugal bed, in a sense; ideas would get together there.
And an astonishing number of innovations from this period have a coffeehouse somewhere in their story.
I've been spending a lot of time thinking about coffeehouses for the last five years because I've been kind of on this quest to investigate this question of where good ideas come from.
What are the environments that lead to unusual levels of innovation, unusual levels of creativity?
What's the kind of environmental -- what is the space of creativity?
And what I've done is, I've looked at both environments like the coffeehouse, I've looked at media environments like the World Wide Web, that have been extraordinarily innovative; I've gone back to the history of the first cities; I've even gone to biological environments, like coral reefs and rain forests, that involve unusual levels of biological innovation.
And what I've been looking for is shared patterns, signature behavior that shows up again and again in all of these environments.
Are there recurring patterns that we can learn from, that we can take and apply to our own lives or our own organizations or our own environments to make them more creative and innovative?
But what you have to do to make sense of this and to really understand these principles is, you have to do away with the way in which our conventional metaphors and language steers us towards certain concepts of idea creation.
We have this very rich vocabulary to describe moments of inspiration.
We have the "flash" of insight, the "stroke" of insight, we have "epiphanies," we have eureka moments, we have the "light bulb" moments, right?
All of these concepts, as rhetorically florid as they are, share this basic assumption, which is that an idea is a single thing.
It's something that happens often in a wonderful, illuminating moment.
But, in fact, what I would argue and what you really need to begin with is this idea that an idea is a network on the most elemental level.
I mean, this is what is happening inside your brain.
An idea -- a new idea -- is a new network of neurons firing in sync with each other inside your brain.
It's a new configuration that has never formed before.
And the question is: How do you get your brain into environments where these new networks are going to be more likely to form?
And it turns out that, in fact, the network patterns of the outside world mimic a lot of the network patterns of the internal world of a human brain.
So the metaphor I'd like to use, I can take from a story of a great idea that's quite recent -- a lot more recent than the 1650s.
A wonderful guy named Timothy Prestero has an organization called Design That Matters.
They decided to tackle this really pressing problem of the terrible problems we have with infant mortality rates in the developing world.
One of the things that's very frustrating about this is that we know by getting modern neonatal incubators into any context, if we can keep premature babies warm, basically -- it's very simple -- we can halve infant mortality rates in those environments.
So the technology is there.
These are standard in all the industrialized worlds.
The problem is, if you buy a $40,000 incubator, and you send it off to a midsized village in Africa, it will work great for a year or two years, and then something will go wrong and it will break, and it will remain broken forever, because you don't have a whole system of spare parts, and you don't have the on-the-ground expertise to fix this $40,000 piece of equipment.
So you end up having this problem where you spend all this money getting aid and all these advanced electronics to these countries, and it ends up being useless.
So what Prestero and his team decided to do was to look around and see: What are the abundant resources in these developing world contexts?
And what they noticed was, they don't have a lot of DVRs, they don't have a lot of microwaves, but they seem to do a pretty good job of keeping their cars on the road.
There's a Toyota 4Runner on the street in all these places.
They seem to have the expertise to keep cars working.
So they started to think, "Could we build a neonatal incubator that's built entirely out of automobile parts?"
And this is what they came up with.
It's called the NeoNurture device.
From the outside, it looks like a normal little thing you'd find in a modern Western hospital.
In the inside, it's all car parts.
It's got a fan, it's got headlights for warmth, it's got door chimes for alarm, it runs off a car battery.
And so all you need is the spare parts from your Toyota and the ability to fix a headlight, and you can repair this thing.
Now that's a great idea, but I'd like to say that, in fact, this is a great metaphor for the way ideas happen.
We like to think our breakthrough ideas, you know, are like that $40,000, brand-new incubator, state-of-the-art technology.
But more often than not, they're cobbled together from whatever parts that happen to be around nearby.
We take ideas from other people, people we've learned from, people we run into in the coffee shop, and we stitch them together into new forms and we create something new.
That's really where innovation happens.
And that means we have to change some of our models of what innovation and deep thinking really looks like, right?
I mean, this is one vision of it.
Another is Newton and the apple, when Newton was at Cambridge.
This is a statue from Oxford.
You know, you're sitting there, thinking a deep thought, the apple falls from the tree, and you have the theory of gravity.
In fact, the spaces that have historically led to innovation tend to look like this.
This is Hogarth's famous painting of a kind of political dinner at a tavern, but this is what the coffee shops looked like back then.
This is the kind of chaotic environment where ideas were likely to come together, where people were likely to have new, interesting, unpredictable collisions, people from different backgrounds.
So if we're trying to build organizations that are more innovative, we have to build spaces that, strangely enough, look a bit more like this.
This is what your office should look like, it's part of my message here.
And one of the problems with this is that, when you research this field, people are notoriously unreliable when they actually self-report on where they have their own good ideas, or their history of their best ideas.
And a few years ago, a wonderful researcher named Kevin Dunbar decided to go around and basically do the Big Brother approach to figuring out where good ideas come from.
He went to a bunch of science labs around the world and videotaped everyone as they were doing every little bit of their job: when they were sitting in front of the microscope, when they were talking to colleagues at the watercooler ...
And he recorded all these conversations and tried to figure out where the most important ideas happened.
And when we think about the classic image of the scientist in the lab, we have this image -- you know, they're poring over the microscope, and they see something in the tissue sample, and -- "Eureka!" -- they've got the idea.
What happened, actually, when Dunbar looked at the tape, is that, in fact, almost all of the important breakthrough ideas did not happen alone in the lab, in front of the microscope.
They happened at the conference table at the weekly lab meeting, when everybody got together and shared their latest data and findings, oftentimes when people shared the mistakes they were having, the error, the noise in the signal they were discovering.
And something about that environment -- and I've started calling it the "liquid network," where you have lots of different ideas that are together, different backgrounds, different interests, jostling with each other, bouncing off each other -- that environment is, in fact, the environment that leads to innovation.
The other problem that people have is, they like to condense their stories of innovation down to shorter time frames.
So they want to tell the story of the eureka moment.
They want to say, "There I was, I was standing there, and I had it all, suddenly, clear in my head."
But, in fact, if you go back and look at the historical record, it turns out that a lot of important ideas have very long incubation periods.
I call this the "slow hunch."
We've heard a lot recently about hunch and instinct and blink-like sudden moments of clarity, but, in fact, a lot of great ideas linger on, sometimes for decades, in the back of people's minds.
They have a feeling that there's an interesting problem, but they don't quite have the tools yet to discover them.
They spend all this time working on certain problems, but there's another thing lingering there that they're interested in, but can't quite solve.
Darwin himself, in his autobiography, tells the story of coming up with the idea for natural selection as a classic eureka moment.
He's in his study, it's October of 1838, and he's reading Malthus, actually, on population.
And all of a sudden, the basic algorithm of natural selection kind of pops into his head, and he says, "Ah, at last, I had a theory with which to work."
That's in his autobiography.
About a decade or two ago, a wonderful scholar named Howard Gruber went back and looked at Darwin's notebooks from this period.
Darwin kept these copious notebooks, where he wrote down every little idea he had, every little hunch.
And what Gruber found was that Darwin had the full theory of natural selection for months and months and months before he had his alleged epiphany reading Malthus in October of 1838.
There are passages where you can read it, and you think you're reading from a Darwin textbook, from the period before he has his epiphany.
And so what you realize is that Darwin, in a sense, had the idea, he had the concept, but was unable to fully think it yet.
And that is, actually, how great ideas often happen -- they fade into view over long periods of time.
Now the challenge for all of us is: How do you create environments that allow these ideas to have this long half-life?
It's hard to go to your boss and say, "I have an excellent idea for our organization.
It will be useful in 2020."
(Laughter) "Could you just give me some time to do that?"
Now a couple of companies like Google have innovation time off, 20 percent time.
In a sense, those are hunch-cultivating mechanisms in an organization.
But that's a key thing.
And the other thing is to allow those hunches to connect with other people's hunches; that's what often happens.
You have half of an idea, somebody else has the other half, and if you're in the right environment, they turn into something larger than the sum of their parts.
So in a sense, we often talk about the value of protecting intellectual property -- you know, building barricades, having secretive R and D labs, patenting everything that we have so that those ideas will remain valuable, and people will be incentivized to come up with more ideas, and the culture will be more innovative.
But I think there's a case to be made that we should spend at least as much time, if not more, valuing the premise of connecting ideas and not just protecting them.
And I'll leave you with this story, which I think captures a lot of these values.
It's just a wonderful tale of innovation, and how it happens in unlikely ways.
It's October of 1957, and Sputnik has just launched.
And we're in Laurel, Maryland, at the Applied Physics Lab associated with Johns Hopkins University.
It's Monday morning, and the news has just broken about this satellite that's now orbiting the planet.
And, of course, this is nerd heaven, right?
There are all these physics geeks who are there, thinking, "Oh my gosh! This is incredible. I can't believe this has happened."
And two of them, two twentysomething researchers at the APL, are there at the cafeteria table, having an informal conversation with a bunch of their colleagues.
And these two guys are named Guier and Weiffenbach.
They start talking, and one of them says, "Hey, has anybody tried to listen for this thing?
There's this, you know, man-made satellite up there in outer space that's obviously broadcasting some kind of signal.
So they ask around to a couple of their colleagues, and everybody's like, "No, I hadn't thought of doing that.
That's an interesting idea."
And it turns out Weiffenbach is kind of an expert in microwave reception, and he's got a little antenna set up with an amplifier in his office.
So Guier and Weiffenbach go back to Weiffenbach's office, and they start noodling around -- "hacking," as we might call it now.
And after a couple of hours, they start picking up the signal, because the Soviets made Sputnik very easy to track; it was right at 20 MHz, so you could pick it up really easily, because they were afraid people would think it was a hoax, basically, so they made it really easy to find.
So these guys are sitting there, listening to this signal, and people start coming into the office and saying, "That's pretty cool. Can I hear?"
And before long, they think, "Jeez, this is kind of historic.
We may be the first people in the United States listening to this.
We should record it."
So they bring in this big, clunky analog tape recorder and start recording these little bleep, bleeps.
And they start writing down the date stamp, time stamps for each little bleep that they record.
And then they start thinking, "Well, gosh, we're noticing small little frequency variations here.
We could probably calculate the speed that the satellite is traveling if we do a little basic math here using the Doppler effect."
And they played around with it a little bit more and talked to a couple of their colleagues who had other specialties.
And they said, "You know, we could actually look at the slope of the Doppler effect to figure out the points at which the satellite is closest to our antenna and the points at which it's furthest away.
That's pretty cool."
Eventually, they get permission -- this is all a little side project that hadn't been officially part of their job description -- they get permission to use the new UNIVAC computer that takes up an entire room that they'd just gotten at the APL.
And they run some more of the numbers, and at the end of about three or four weeks, turns out they have mapped the exact trajectory of this satellite around the Earth, just from listening to this one little signal, going off on this little side hunch that they'd been inspired to do over lunch one morning.
A couple weeks later, their boss, Frank McClure, pulls them into the room and says, "Hey, you guys, I have to ask you something about that project you were working on.
You've figured out an unknown location of a satellite orbiting the planet from a known location on the ground.
Could you go the other way?
Could you figure out an unknown location on the ground if you knew the location of the satellite?"
And they thought about it and they said, "Well, I guess maybe you could. Let's run the numbers here."
So they went back and thought about it and came back and said, "Actually, it'll be easier."
And he said, "Oh, that's great, because, see, I have these new nuclear submarines" (Laughter) "that I'm building.
And it's really hard to figure out how to get your missile so that it will land right on top of Moscow if you don't know where the submarine is in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.
So we're thinking we could throw up a bunch of satellites and use it to track our submarines and figure out their location in the middle of the ocean.
Could you work on that problem?"
Thirty years later, Ronald Reagan, actually, opened it up and made it an open platform that anybody could build upon, and anybody could come along and build new technology that would create and innovate on top of this open platform, left it open for anyone to do pretty much anything they wanted with it.
And now, I guarantee you, certainly half of this room, if not more, has a device sitting in their pocket right now that is talking to one of these satellites in outer space.
And I bet you one of you, if not more, has used said device and said satellite system to locate a nearby coffeehouse somewhere in the last -- (Laughter) in the last day or last week, right?
(Applause) And that, I think, is a great case study, a great lesson in the power -- the marvelous, unplanned, emergent, unpredictable power -- of open innovative systems.
When you build them right, they will be led to completely new directions the creators never even dreamed of.
I mean, here you have these guys who basically thought they were just following this hunch, this little passion that had developed, then they thought they were fighting the Cold War, and then, it turns out, they're just helping somebody find a soy latte.
(Laughter) That is how innovation happens.
Chance favors the connected mind.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
I want you to take a trip with me.
Picture yourself driving down a small road in Africa, and as you drive along, you look off to the side, and this is what you see: you see a field of graves.
And you stop, and you get out of your car and you take a picture.
And you go into the town, and you inquire, "What's going on here?"
and people are initially reluctant to tell you.
And then someone says, "These are the recent AIDS deaths in our community."
HIV isn't like other medical conditions; it's stigmatizing.
People are reluctant to talk about it -- there's a fear associated with it.
And I'm going to talk about HIV today, about the deaths, about the stigma.
It's a medical story, but more than that, it's a social story.
This map depicts the global distribution of HIV.
And as you can see, Africa has a disproportionate share of the infection.
There are 33 million people living with HIV in the world today.
Of these, two-thirds, 22 million are living in sub-Saharan Africa.
There are 1.4 million pregnant women in low- and middle-income countries living with HIV and of these, 90 percent are in sub-Saharan Africa.
We talk about things in relative terms.
And I'm going to talk about annual pregnancies and HIV-positive mothers.
The United States -- a large country -- each year, 7,000 mothers with HIV who give birth to a child.
But you go to Rwanda -- a very small country -- 8,000 mothers with HIV who are pregnant.
And then you go to Baragwanath Hospital, outside of Johannesburg in South Africa, and 8,000 HIV-positive pregnant women giving birth -- a hospital the same as a country.
And to realize that this is just the tip of an iceberg that when you compare everything here to South Africa, it just pales, because in South Africa, each year 300,000 mothers with HIV give birth to children.
So we talk about PMTCT, and we refer to PMTCT, prevention of mother to child transmission.
I think there's an assumption amongst most people in the public that if a mother is HIV-positive, she's going to infect her child.
The reality is really, very different.
In resource-rich countries, with all the tests and treatment we currently have, less than two percent of babies are born HIV-positive -- 98 percent of babies are born HIV-negative.
And yet, the reality in resource-poor countries, in the absence of tests and treatment, 40 percent -- 40 percent of children are infected -- 40 percent versus two percent -- an enormous difference.
So these programs -- and I'm going to refer to PMTCT though my talk -- these prevention programs, simply, they're the tests and the drugs that we give to mothers to prevent them from infecting their babies, and also the medicines we give to mothers to keep them healthy and alive to raise their children.
So it's the test a mother gets when she comes in.
It's the drugs she receives to protect the baby that's inside the uterus and during delivery.
It's the guidance she gets around infant feeding and safer sex.
It's an entire package of services, and it works.
So in the United States, since the advent of treatment in the middle of the 1990s, there's been an 80-percent decline in the number of HIV-infected children.
Less than 100 babies are born with HIV each year in the United States and yet, still, over 400,000 children are born every year in the world today with HIV.
What does that mean?
It means 1,100 children infected each day -- 1,100 children each day, infected with HIV.
And where do they come from?
Well, less than one comes from the United States.
One, on average, comes from Europe.
100 come from Asia and the Pacific.
And each day, a thousand babies -- a thousand babies are born each day with HIV in Africa.
So again, I look at the globe here and the disproportionate share of HIV in Africa.
And let's look at another map.
And here, again, we see Africa has a disproportionate share of the numbers of doctors.
That thin sliver you see here, that's Africa.
And it's the same with nurses.
The truth is sub-Saharan Africa has 24 percent of the global disease burden and yet only three percent of the world's health care workers.
That means doctors and nurses simply don't have the time to take care of patients.
A nurse in a busy clinic will see 50 to 100 patients in a day, which leaves her just minutes per patient -- minutes per patient.
And so when we look at these PMTCT programs, what does it mean?
Well, back in 2001, when there was just a simple test and a single dose of a drug, a nurse, in the course of her few minutes with a patient, would have to counsel for the HIV test, perform the HIV test, explain the results, dispense a single dose of the drug, Nevirapine, explain how to take it, discuss infant feeding options, reinforce infant feeding, and test the baby -- in minutes.
Well, fortunately since 2001, we've got new treatments, new tests, and we're far more successful, but we don't have any more nurses.
And so these are the tests a nurse now has to do in those same few minutes.
It's not possible -- it doesn't work.
And so we need to find better ways of providing care.
This is a picture of a maternal health clinic in Africa -- mothers coming, pregnant and with their babies.
These women are here for care, but we know that just doing a test, just giving someone a drug, it's not enough.
Meds don't equal medical care.
Doctors and nurses, frankly, don't have the time or skills to tell people what to do in ways they understand.
I'm a doctor -- I tell people things to do, and I expect them to follow my guidance -- because I'm a doctor; I went to Harvard -- but the reality is, if I tell a patient, "You should have safer sex.
You should always use a condom," and yet, in her relationship, she's not empowered -- what's going to happen?
If I tell her to take her medicines every day and yet, no one in the household knows about her illness, so it's just not going to work.
And so we need to do more, we need to do it differently, we need to do it in ways that are affordable and accessible and can be taken to scale, which means it can be done everywhere.
So, I want to tell you a story -- I want to take you on a little trip.
Imagine yourself, if you can, you're a young woman in Africa, you're going to the hospital or clinic.
You go in for a test and you find out that you're pregnant, and you're delighted.
And then they give you another test and they tell you you're HIV-positive, and you're devastated.
And the nurse takes you into a room, and she tells you about the tests and HIV and the medicines you can take and how to take care of yourself and your baby, and you hear none of it.
All you're hearing is, "I'm going to die, and my baby is going to die."
And then you're out on the street, and you don't know where to go.
And you don't know who you can talk to, because the truth is, HIV is so stigmatizing that if you partner, your family, anyone in your home, you're likely to be thrown out without any means of support.
And this -- this is the face and story of HIV in Africa today.
But we're here to talk about possible solutions and some good news.
And I want to change the story a little bit.
Take the same mother, and the nurse, after she gives her her test, takes her to a room.
The door opens and there's a room full of mothers, mothers with babies, and they're sitting, and they're talking, they're listening.
They're drinking tea, they're having sandwiches.
And she goes inside, and woman comes up to her and says, "Welcome to mothers2mothers.
Have a seat. You're safe here.
We're all HIV-positive.
You're going to be okay. You're going to live.
Your baby is going to be HIV-negative."
We view mothers as a community's single greatest resource.
Mothers take care of the children, take care of the home.
So often the men are gone.
They're working, or they're not part of the household.
Our organization, mothers2mothers, enlists women with HIV as care providers.
We bring mothers who have HIV, who've been through these PMTCT programs in the very facilities, to come back and work side by side with doctors and nurses as part of the health care team.
These mothers, we call them mentor mothers, are able to engage women who, just like themselves, pregnant with babies, have found out about being HIV-positive, who need support and education.
And they support them around the diagnosis and educate them about how to take their medicines, how to take care of themselves, how to take care of their babies.
Consider: if you needed surgery, you would want the best possible technical surgeon, right?
But if you wanted to understand what that surgery would do to your life, you'd like to engage someone, someone who's had the procedure.
Patients are experts on their own experience, and they can share that experience with others.
This is the medical care that goes beyond just medicines.
So the mothers who work for us, they come from the communities in which they work.
They're hired -- they're paid as professional members of the health care teams, just like doctors and nurses.
And we open bank accounts for them and they're paid directly into the accounts, because their money's protected; the men can't take it away from them.
They go through two to three weeks of rigorous curriculum-based education, training.
Now, doctors and nurses -- they too get trained.
But so often, they only get trained once, so they're not aware of new medicines, new guidelines as they come out.
Our mentor mothers get trained every single year and retrained.
And so doctors and nurses -- they look up to them as experts.
Imagine that: a woman, a former patient, being able to educate her doctor for the first time and educate the other patients that she's taking care of.
Our organization has three goals.
The first, to prevent mother-to-child transmission.
The second: keep mothers healthy, keep mothers alive, keep the children alive -- no more orphans.
And the third, and maybe the most grand, is to find ways to empower women, enable them to fight the stigma and to live positive and productive lives with HIV.
So how do we do it?
Well, maybe the most important engagement is the one-to-one, seeing patients one-to-one, educating them, supporting them, explaining how they can take care of themselves.
We go beyond that; we try to bring in the husbands, the partners.
In Africa, it's very, very hard to engage men.
Men are not frequently part of pregnancy care.
But in Rwanda, in one country, they've got a policy that a woman can't come for care unless she brings the father of the baby with her -- that's the rule.
And so the father and the mother, together, go through the counseling and the testing.
The father and the mother, together, they get the results.
And this is so important in breaking through the stigma.
Disclosure is so central to prevention.
How do you have safer sex, how do you use a condom regularly if there hasn't been disclosure?
Disclosure is so important to treatment, because again, people need the support of family members and friends to take their medicines regularly.
We also work in groups.
Now the groups, it's not like me lecturing, but what happens is women, they come together -- under the support and guidance of our mentor mothers -- they come together, and they share their personal experiences.
And it's through the sharing that people get tactics of how to take care of themselves, how to disclose how to take medicines.
And then there's the community outreach, engaging women in their communities.
If we can change the way households believe and think, we can change the way communities believe and think.
And if we can change enough communities, we can change national attitudes.
We can change national attitudes to women and national attitudes to HIV.
The hardest barrier really is around stigma reduction.
We have the medicines, we have the tests, but how do you reduce the stigma?
And it's important about disclosure.
So, a couple years ago, one of the mentor mothers came back, and she told me a story.
She had been asked by one of the clients to go to the home of the client, because the client wanted to tell the mother and her brothers and sisters about her HIV status, and she was afraid to go by herself.
And so the mentor mother went along with.
And the patient walked into the house and said to her mother and siblings, "I have something to tell you. I'm HIV-positive."
And everybody was quiet.
And then her oldest brother stood up and said, "I too have something to tell you.
I'm HIV-positive.
I've been afraid to tell everybody."
And then this older sister stood up and said, "I too am living with the virus, and I've been ashamed."
And then her younger brother stood up and said, "I'm also positive.
I thought you were going to throw me out of the family."
And you see where this is going.
The last sister stood up and said, "I'm also positive.
I thought you were going to hate me."
And there they were, all of them together for the first time being able to share this experience for the first time and to support each other for the first time.
(Video) Female Narrator: Women come to us, and they are crying and scared.
I tell them my story, that I am HIV-positive, but my child is HIV-negative.
I tell them, "You are going to make it, and you will raise a healthy baby."
I am proof that there is hope.
Mitchell Besser: Remember the images I showed you of how few doctors and nurses there are in Africa.
And it is a crisis in health care systems.
Even as we have more tests and more drugs, we can't reach people; we don't have enough providers.
So we talk in terms of what we call task-shifting.
Task-shifting is traditionally when you take health care services from one provider and have another provider do it.
Typically, it's a doctor giving a job to a nurse.
And the issue in Africa is that there are fewer nurses, really than doctors, and so we need to find new paradigm for health care.
How do you build a better health care system?
We've chosen to redefine the health care system as a doctor, a nurse and a mentor mother.
And so what nurses do is that they ask the mentor mothers to explain how to take the drugs, the side effects.
They delegate education about infant feeding, family planning, safer sex, actions that nurses simple just don't have time for.
So we go back to the prevention of mother to child transmission.
The world is increasingly seeing these programs as the bridge to comprehensive maternal and child health.
And our organization helps women across that bridge.
The care doesn't stop when the baby's born -- we deal with the ongoing health of the mother and baby, ensuring that they live healthy, successful lives.
Our organization works on three levels.
The first, at the patient level -- mothers and babies keeping babies from getting HIV, keeping mothers healthy to raise them.
The second, communities -- empowering women.
They become leaders within their communities.
They change the way communities think -- we need to change attitudes to HIV.
We need to change attitudes to women in Africa.
We have to do that.
And then rework the level of the health care systems, building stronger health care systems.
Our health care systems are broken.
They're not going to work the way they're currently designed.
And so doctors and nurses who need to try to change people's behaviors don't have the skills, don't have the time -- our mentor mothers do.
And so in redefining the health care teams by bringing the mentor mothers in, we can do that.
I started the program in Capetown, South Africa back in 2001.
It was at that point, just the spark of an idea.
Referencing Steven Johnson's very lovely speech yesterday on where ideas come from, I was in the shower at the time -- I was alone.
(Laughter) The program is now working in nine countries, we have 670 program sites, we're seeing about 230,000 women every month, we're employing 1,600 mentor mothers, and last year, they enrolled 300,000 HIV-positive pregnant women and mothers.
That is 20 percent of the global HIV-positive pregnant women -- 20 percent of the world.
What's extraordinary is how simple the premise is.
Mothers with HIV caring for mothers with HIV.
Past patients taking care of present patients.
And empowerment through employment -- reducing stigma.
(Video) Female Narrator: There is hope, hope that one day we shall win this fight against HIV and AIDS.
Each person must know their HIV status.
Those who are HIV-negative must know how to stay negative.
Those who are HIV-infected must know how to take care of themselves.
HIV-positive pregnant women must get PMTCT services in order to have HIV-negative babies.
All of this is possible, if we each contribute to this fight.
MB: Simple solutions to complex problems.
Mothers caring for mothers.
It's transformational.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I'm going to share with you the story as to how I have become an HIV/AIDS campaigner.
And this is the name of my campaign: SING Campaign.
In November of 2003, I was invited to take part in the launch of Nelson Mandela's 46664 Foundation -- that is his HIV/AIDS foundation.
And 46664 is the number that Mandela had when he was imprisoned in Robben Island.
And that's me with Youssou N'Dour, onstage, having the time of my life.
The next day, all the artists were invited to join Mandela in Robben Island, where he was going to give a conference to the world's press, standing in front of his former prison cell.
You can see the bars of the window there.
It was quite a momentous occasion for all of us.
In that moment in time, Mandela told the world's press that there was a virtual genocide taking place in his country; that post-apartheid Rainbow Nation, a thousand people were dying on a daily basis and that the front line victims, the most vulnerable of all, were women and children.
This was a huge impact on my mind, because I am a woman and I am a mother, and I hadn't realized that the HIV/AIDS pandemic was directly affecting women in such a way.
And so I committed -- when I left South Africa, when I left Capetown, I told myself, "This is going to be something that I have to talk about.
I have to serve."
And so, subsequently I participated in every single 46664 event that I could take part in and gave news conferences, interviews, talking and using my platform as a musician, with my commitment to Mandela -- out of respect for the tremendous, unbelievable work that he had done.
Everyone in the world respects Nelson Mandela, everyone reveres Nelson Mandela.
But do they all know about what has been taking place in South Africa, his country, the country that had one of the highest incidents of transmission of the virus?
I think that if I went out into the street now and I told people what was happening there, they would be shocked.
I was very, very fortunate a couple of years later to have met Zackie Achmat, the founder of Treatment Action Campaign, an incredible campaigner and activist.
I met him at a 46664 event.
He was wearing a t-shirt like the one I wear now.
This is a tool -- this tells you I am in solidarity with people who have HIV, people who are living with HIV.
And in a way because of the stigma, by wearing this t-shirt I say, "Yes, we can talk about this issue.
It doesn't have to be in the closet."
I became a member of Treatment Action Campaign and I'm very proud to be a member of that incredible organization.
It's a grassroots campaign with 80 percent membership being women, most of whom are HIV-positive.
They work in the field.
They have tremendous outreach to the people who are living directly with the effects of the virus.
They have education programs.
They bring out the issues of stigma.
It's quite extraordinary what they do.
And yes, my SING Campaign has supported Treatment Action Campaign in the way that I have tried to raise awareness and to try to also raise funds.
A lot of the funding that I have managed to raise has gone directly to Treatment Action Campaign and the incredible work that they do, and are still continuing to do in South Africa.
So this is my SING Campaign.
SING Campaign is basically just me and about three or four wonderful people who help to support me.
I've traveled all over the world in the last two and a half years -- I went to about 12 different countries.
Here I am in Oslo in Norway, getting a nice, fat check; singing in Hong Kong, trying to get people to raise money.
In Johannesburg, I had the opportunity to play to a mainly white, middle-class South African audience who ended up in tears because I use film clips that really touch the heart, the whole nature, of this terrible tragedy that is taking place, that people are tending to avoid, because they are fatigued, and they really don't quite know what the solutions are.
Aaron Motsoaledi, the current health minister, attended that concert and I had an opportunity to meet with him, and he gave his absolute commitment to try to making a change, which is absolutely necessary.
This is in the Scottish Parliament.
I've subsequently become an envoy for Scotland and HIV.
And I was showing them my experiences and trying to, again, raise awareness.
And once again, in Edinburgh with the wonderful African Children's Choir who I simply adore.
And it's children like this, many of whom have been orphaned because of their family being affected by the AIDS virus.
I'm sitting here in New York with Michel Sidibe -- he's the director of UNAIDS.
And I'm very honored by the fact that Michel invited me, only a few months ago, to become a UNAIDS ambassador.
And in this way, I've been strengthening my platform and broadening my outreach.
The message that UNAIDS are currently sending out to the world is that we would like to see the virtual elimination of the transmission of the virus from mother to child by 2015.
It's a very ambitious goal but we believe it can be achieved with political will.
This can happen.
And here I am with a pregnant woman, who is HIV positive and we're smiling, both of us are smiling, because we're very confident, because we know that that young woman is receiving treatment so her life can be extended to take care of the baby she's about to give birth to.
And her baby will receive PMTCT, which will mean that that baby can be born free of the virus.
Now that is prevention at the very beginning of life.
It's one way to start looking at intervention with the AIDS pandemic.
Now, I just would like to finish off to tell you the little story about Avelile.
This is Avelile -- she goes with me wherever I go.
I tell her story to everyone because she represents one of millions of HIV/AIDS orphans.
Avelile's mother had HIV virus -- she died from AIDS-related illness.
Avelile had the virus, she was born with the virus.
And here she is at seven years old, weighing no more than a one year-old baby.
At this point in her life, she's suffering with full-blown AIDS and had pneumonia.
We met her in a hospital in the Eastern Cape and spent a whole afternoon with her -- an adorable child.
The doctors and nurses were phenomenal.
They put her on very special nutritious diet and took great care of her.
And we didn't know when we left the hospital -- because we filmed her story -- we didn't know if she was going to survive.
So, it was obviously -- it was a very emotional encounter and left us feeling very resonant with this direct experience, this one child, you know, that story.
Five months later, we went back to South Africa to meet Avelile again.
And I'm getting -- the hairs on my -- I don't know if you can see the hairs on my arms.
They're standing up because I know what I'm going to show you.
This is the transformation that took place.
Isn't it extraordinary?
(Applause) That round of applause is actually for the doctors and nurses of the hospital who took care of Avelile.
And I take it that you appreciate that kind of transformation.
So, I would like to say to you, each one in the audience, if you feel that every mother and every child in the world has the right to have access to good nutrition and good medical care, and you believe that the Millennium Development Goals, specifically five and six, should be absolutely committed to by all governments around the world -- especially in sub-Saharan Africa -- could you please stand up.
I think that's fair to say, it's almost everyone in the hall.
Thank you very much.
(Applause)
My name is Mwende Katwiwa and I am a poet, a Pan-Africanist and a freedom fighter.
I was 23 years old when I first heard about Reproductive Justice.
I was working at Women with a Vision, where I learned that Reproductive Justice was defined by Sister Song as: One: A woman's right to decide if and when she will have a baby and the conditions under which she will give birth.
Two: A woman's right to decide if she will not have a baby and her options for preventing or ending a pregnancy.
And three: A woman's right to parent the children she already has in safe and healthy environments without fear of violence from individuals or the government.
I've always wanted to be a mother.
Growing up, I heard all about the joys of motherhood.
I used to dream of watching my womb weave wonder into this world.
See, I knew I was young.
But I figured, it couldn't hurt to start planning for something so big, so early.
But now, I'm 26 years old.
And I don't know if I have what it takes to stomach motherhood in this country.
See, over the years, America has taught me more about parenting than any book on the subject.
It has taught me how some women give birth to babies and others to suspects.
It has taught me that this body will birth kin who are more likely to be held in prison cells than to hold college degrees.
There is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood seem complicated.
Seem like, I don't know what to do to raise my kids right and keep them alive.
Do I tell my son not to steal because it is wrong, or because they will use it to justify his death?
Do I tell him that even if he pays for his Skittles and sweet tea there will still be those who will watch him and see a criminal before child; who will call the police and not wait for them to come.
Do I even want the police to come?
Too many Sean Bells go off in my head when I consider calling 911.
I will not take it for Oscar Grant-ed that they will not come and kill my son.
So, we may have gotten rid of the nooses, but I still consider it lynching when they murder Black boys and leave their bodies for four hours in the sun.
As a historical reminder that there is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood sound like mourning.
Sound like one morning I could wake up and see my son as a repeat of last week's story.
Sound like I could wake up and realize the death of my daughter wouldn't even be newsworthy.
So you can't tell me that Sandra Bland is the only Black woman whose violence deserves more than our silence.
What about our other dark-skinned daughters in distress whose deaths we have yet to remember?
What about our children whose lives don't fit neatly between the lives of your genders?
See, apparently, nothing is a great protector if you come out of a body that looks like this.
See, there is something about being Black in America that has made motherhood sound like something I'm not sure I look forward to.
I've written too many poems about dead Black children to be nave about the fact that there could one day be a poem written about my kids.
But I do not want to be a mother who gave birth to poems.
I do not want a stanza for a son nor a line for a little girl nor a footnote for a child who doesn't fit into this world.
No.
I do not want children who will live forever in the pages of poetry, yet can't seem to outlive me.
(Applause) I was invited to the TEDWomen conference to perform a poem.
But for me, poetry is not about art and performance.
It is a form of protest.
Yesterday, during rehearsal, I was told that there had been two to three recent TED Talks about Black Lives Matter.
That maybe I should cut down my TED Talk so it could "just" be about Reproductive Justice.
But that poem and this talk is fundamentally about my inability to separate the two.
I was 21 years old -- (Applause) I was 21 years old when Trayvon Martin was murdered.
Trayvon Martin, a 17-year-old Black boy, a Black child, reminded me reminded us how little this nation actually values Black life.
The hashtag #BlackLivesMatter became the most recognized call for Black people and our children to live in safe environments and healthy communities without fear from violence from individuals or the state or government.
Months later, when George Zimmerman was not held responsible for murdering Trayvon Martin, I heard Sybrina Fulton, Trayvon Martin's mother, speak.
Her testimony so deeply impacted me that I found myself constantly asking, what would it mean to mother in the United Stated of America in this skin?
What does motherhood really mean, when for so many who look like me it is synonymous with mourning?
Without realizing it, I had begun to link the Reproductive Justice framework and the Movement for Black Lives.
As I learned more about Reproductive Justice at Women With A Vision, and as I continued to be active in the Movement for Black Lives, I found myself wanting others to see and feel these similarities.
I found myself asking: Whose job is it in times like this to connect ideas realities and people?
I want to dedicate this talk and that poem to Constance Malcolm.
She is the mother of Ramarley Graham who was another Black child who was murdered before their time.
She reminded me once over dinner, as I was struggling to write that poem, that it is the artist's job to unearth stories that people try to bury with shovels of complacency and time.
Recently, Toni Morrison wrote, "In times of dread, artists must never choose to remain silent.
There is no time for self-pity, no room for fear."
Yesterday, during rehearsal, when I was told that I should "maybe cut the Black Lives Matter portion from my talk," I found myself fearful for a moment.
Fearful that again our stories were being denied the very stages they deserve to be told on.
And then I remembered the words I had just spoken.
"In times of dread, artists must never choose to remain silent.
There is no time for self-pity.
(Applause) There is no time for self-pity.
And no room for fear."
And I have made my choice.
And I am always choosing.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I am a PhD student.
And that means I have a question: How can we make digital content graspable?
Because you see, on the one hand, there is the digital world and no question, many things are happening there right now.
And for us humans, it's not quite material, it's not really there -- it's virtual.
On the other hand, we're humans, we live in a physical world.
It's rich, it tastes good, it feels good, it smells good.
So the question is: How do we get the stuff over from the digital into the physical?
That's my question.
If you look at the iPhone with its touch and the Wii with its bodily activity, you can see the tendency; it's getting physical.
The question is: What's next?
Now, I have three options that I would like to show you.
The first one is mass.
As humans, we are sensitive to where an object in our hand is heavy.
So could we use that in mobile phones?
Let me show you the weight-shifting mobile.
It is a mobile phone-shaped box that has an iron weight inside, which we can move around, and you can feel where it's heavy.
We shift the gravitational center of it.
For example, we can augment digital content with physical mass.
So you move around the content on the display, but you can also feel where it is just from the weight of the device.
Another thing it's good for is navigation.
It can guide you around in a city.
It can tell you by its weight, "OK, move right. Walk ahead. Make a left here."
And the good thing about that is, you don't have to look at the device all the time; you have your eyes free to see the city.
Now, mass is the first thing -- the second thing, that's shape.
We're also sensitive to the shape of objects we have in our hands.
So if I download an e-book and it has 20 pages -- well, they could be thin, right?
But if it has 500 pages, I want to feel that "Harry Potter" -- it's thick.
(Laughter) So let me show you the shape-changing mobile.
Again, it's a mobile phone-shaped box, and this one can change its shape.
We can play with the shape itself.
For example, it can be thin in your pocket, which we of course want it to be.
But then if you hold it in your hand, it can lean towards you, be thick.
It's like tapered to the downside.
If you change the grasp, it can adjust to that.
It's also useful if you want to put it down on your nightstand to watch a movie or use as an alarm clock.
It stands.
Another thing is, sometimes we watch things on a mobile phone that are bigger than the phone itself.
In that case -- like here, there's an app that's bigger than the phone's screen -- the shape of the phone could tell you, "OK, off the screen, right here, there is more content.
You can't see it, but it's there."
The shape is the second thing.
The third thing operates on a different level.
As humans, we are social, we are empathic, and that's great.
Wouldn't that be a way to make mobile phones more intuitive?
Think of a hamster in the pocket.
Well, I can feel it, it's doing all right. I don't have to check it.
(Laughter) Let me show you the living mobile phone.
So, once again, a mobile phone-shaped box.
But this one, it has a breath and a heartbeat, and it feels very organic.
(Laughter) And you can tell, it's relaxed right now.
Oh, now -- missed call, a new call, new girlfriend, maybe -- very exciting.
(Laughter) How do we calm it down?
You give it a pat behind the ears, and everything is all right again.
That's very intuitive, and that's what we want.
So what we have seen are three ways to make the digital graspable for us.
And I think making it physical is a good way to do that.
What's behind that is a postulation, namely, not that humans should get much more technical in the future; rather than that, technology, a bit more human.
(Applause)
The Hindus say, "Nada brahma," one translation of which is, "The world is sound."
And in a way, that's true, because everything is vibrating.
In fact, all of you as you sit here right now are vibrating.
Every part of your body is vibrating at different frequencies.
So you are, in fact, a chord -- each of you an individual chord.
One definition of health may be that that chord is in complete harmony.
Your ears can't hear that chord; they can actually hear amazing things. Your ears can hear 10 octaves.
Incidentally, we see just one octave.
Your ears are always on -- you have no ear lids.
They work even when you sleep.
The smallest sound you can perceive moves your eardrum just four atomic diameters.
The loudest sound you can hear is a trillion times more powerful than that.
Ears are made not for hearing, but for listening.
Listening is an active skill, whereas hearing is passive, listening is something that we have to work at -- it's a relationship with sound.
And yet it's a skill that none of us are taught.
For example, have you ever considered that there are listening positions, places you can listen from?
Here are two of them.
Reductive listening is listening "for."
It reduces everything down to what's relevant and it discards everything that's not relevant.
Men typically listen reductively.
So he's saying, "I've got this problem."
He's saying, "Here's your solution. Thanks very much. Next."
That's the way we talk, right guys?
Expansive listening, on the other hand, is listening "with," not listening "for."
It's got no destination in mind -- it's just enjoying the journey.
Women typically listen expansively.
If you look at these two, eye contact, facing each other, possibly both talking at the same time.
(Laughter) Men, if you get nothing else out of this talk, practice expansive listening, and you can transform your relationships.
The trouble with listening is that so much of what we hear is noise, surrounding us all the time.
Noise like this, according to the European Union, is reducing the health and the quality of life of 25 percent of the population of Europe.
Two percent of the population of Europe -- that's 16 million people -- are having their sleep devastated by noise like that.
Noise kills 200,000 people a year in Europe.
It's a really big problem.
Now, when you were little, if you had noise and you didn't want to hear it, you'd stick your fingers in your ears and hum.
These days, you can do a similar thing, it just looks a bit cooler.
It looks a bit like this.
The trouble with widespread headphone use is it brings three really big health issues.
The first really big health issue is a word that Murray Schafer coined: "schizophonia."
It's a dislocation between what you see and what you hear.
So, we're inviting into our lives the voices of people who are not present with us.
I think there's something deeply unhealthy about living all the time in schizophonia.
The second problem that comes with headphone abuse is compression.
We squash music to fit it into our pocket and there is a cost attached to this.
Listen to this -- this is an uncompressed piece of music.
(Music) And now the same piece of music with 98 percent of the data removed.
(Music) I do hope that some of you at least can hear the difference between those two.
There is a cost of compression.
It makes you tired and irritable to have to make up all of that data.
You're having to imagine it.
It's not good for you in the long run.
The third problem with headphones is this: deafness -- noise-induced hearing disorder.
Ten million Americans already have this for one reason or another, but really worryingly, 16 percent -- roughly one in six -- of American teenagers suffer from noise-induced hearing disorder as a result of headphone abuse.
One study at an American university found that 61 percent of college freshmen had damaged hearing as a result of headphone abuse.
We may be raising an entire generation of deaf people.
Now that's a really serious problem.
I'll give you three quick tips to protect your ears and pass these on to your children, please.
Professional hearing protectors are great; I use some all the time.
If you're going to use headphones, buy the best ones you can afford because quality means you don't have to have it so loud.
If you can't hear somebody talking to you in a loud voice, it's too loud.
And thirdly, if you're in bad sound, it's fine to put your fingers in your ears or just move away from it.
Protect your ears in that way.
Let's move away from bad sound and look at some friends that I urge you to seek out.
WWB: Wind, water, birds -- stochastic natural sounds composed of lots of individual random events, all of it very healthy, all of it sound that we evolved to over the years.
Seek those sounds out; they're good for you and so it this.
Silence is beautiful.
The Elizabethans described language as decorated silence.
I urge you to move away from silence with intention and to design soundscapes just like works of art.
Have a foreground, a background, all in beautiful proportion.
It's fun to get into designing with sound.
If you can't do it yourself, get a professional to do it for you.
Sound design is the future, and I think it's the way we're going to change the way the world sounds.
I'm going to just run quickly through eight modalities, eight ways sound can improve health.
First, ultrasound: we're very familiar with it from physical therapy; it's also now being used to treat cancer.
Lithotripsy -- saving thousands of people a year from the scalpel by pulverizing stones with high-intensity sound.
Sound healing is a wonderful modality.
It's been around for thousands of years.
I do urge you to explore this.
There are great things being done there, treating now autism, dementia and other conditions.
And music, of course. Just listening to music is good for you, if it's music that's made with good intention, made with love, generally.
Devotional music, good -- Mozart, good.
There are all sorts of types of music that are very healthy.
And four modalities where you need to take some action and get involved.
First of all, listen consciously.
I hope that that after this talk you'll be doing that.
It's a whole new dimension to your life and it's wonderful to have that dimension.
Secondly, get in touch with making some sound -- create sound.
The voice is the instrument we all play, and yet how many of us are trained in using our voice? Get trained; learn to sing, learn to play an instrument.
Musicians have bigger brains -- it's true.
You can do this in groups as well.
It's a fantastic antidote to schizophonia; to make music and sound in a group of people, whichever style you enjoy particularly.
And let's take a stewarding role for the sound around us.
Protect your ears? Yes, absolutely.
Design soundscapes to be beautiful around you at home and at work.
And let's start to speak up when people are assailing us with the noise that I played you early on.
So I'm going to leave you with seven things you can do right now to improve your health with sound.
My vision is of a world that sounds beautiful and if we all start doing these things, we will take a very big step in that direction.
So I urge you to take that path.
I'm leaving you with a little more birdsong, which is very good for you.
I wish you sound health.
(Applause)
I got up this morning at 6:10 a.m.
after going to sleep at 12:45 a.m.
I was awakened once during the night.
My heart rate was 61 beats per minute -- my blood pressure, 127 over 74.
I had zero minutes of exercise yesterday, so my maximum heart rate during exercise wasn't calculated.
I had about 600 milligrams of caffeine, zero of alcohol.
And my score on the Narcissism Personality Index, or the NPI-16, is a reassuring 0.31.
We know that numbers are useful for us when we advertise, manage, govern, search.
I'm going to talk about how they're useful when we reflect, learn, remember and want to improve.
A few years ago, Kevin Kelly, my partner, and I noticed that people were subjecting themselves to regimes of quantitative measurement and self-tracking that went far beyond the ordinary, familiar habits such as stepping on a scale every day.
People were tracking their food via Twitter, their kids' diapers on their iPhone.
They were making detailed journals of their spending, their mood, their symptoms, their treatments.
Now, we know some of the technological facts that are driving this change in our lifestyle -- the uptake and diffusion of mobile devices, the exponential improvement in data storage and data processing, and the remarkable improvement in human biometric sensors.
This little black dot there is a 3D accelerometer.
It tracks your movement through space.
It is, as you can see, very small and also very cheap.
They're now down to well under a dollar a piece, and they're going into all kinds of devices.
But what's interesting is the incredible detailed information that you can get from just one sensor like this.
This kind of sensor is in the hit biometric device -- among early adopters at the moment -- the Fitbit.
This tracks your activity and also your sleep.
It has just that sensor in it.
You're probably familiar with the Nike+ system.
I just put it up because that little blue dot is the sensor.
It's really just a pressure sensor like the kind that's in a doorbell.
And Nike knows how to get your pace and distance from just that sensor.
This is the strap that people use to transmit heart-rate data to their Nike+ system.
This is a beautiful, new device that gives you detailed sleep tracking data, not just whether you're asleep or awake, but also your phase of sleep -- deep sleep, light sleep, REM sleep.
The sensor is just a little strip of metal in that headband there.
The rest of it is the bedside console; just for reference, this is a sleep tracking system from just a few years ago -- I mean, really until now.
And this is the sleep tracking system of today.
This just was presented at a health care conference in D.C.
Most of what you see there is an asthma inhaler, but the top is a very small GPS transceiver, which gives you the date and location of an asthma incident, giving you a new awareness of your vulnerability in relation to time and environmental factors.
Now, we know that new tools are changing our sense of self in the world -- these tiny sensors that gather data in nature, the ubiquitous computing that allows that data to be understood and used, and of course the social networks that allow people to collaborate and contribute.
But we think of these tools as pointing outward, as windows and I'd just like to invite you to think of them as also turning inward and becoming mirrors.
So that when we think about using them to get some systematic improvement, we also think about how they can be useful for self-improvement, for self-discovery, self-awareness, self-knowledge.
Here's a biometric device: a pair of Apple Earbuds.
Last year, Apple filed some patents to get blood oxygenation, heart rate and body temperature via the Earbuds.
What is this for?
What should it be for?
Some people will say it's for biometric security.
Some people will say it's for public health research.
Some people will say it's for avant-garde marketing research.
I'd like to tell you that it's also for self-knowledge.
And the self isn't the only thing; it's not even most things.
The self is just our operation center, our consciousness, our moral compass.
So, if we want to act more effectively in the world, we have to get to know ourselves better.
Thank you.
We live in in a remarkable time, the age of genomics.
Your genome is the entire sequence of your DNA.
Your sequence and mine are slightly different.
That's why we look different.
I've got brown eyes; you might have blue or gray.
But it's not just skin-deep.
The headlines tell us that genes can give us scary diseases, maybe even shape our personality, or give us mental disorders.
Our genes seem to have awesome power over our destinies.
And yet, I would like to think that I am more than my genes.
What do you guys think?
Are you more than your genes?
(Audience: Yes.) Yes?
I think some people agree with me.
I think we should make a statement.
I think we should say it all together.
All right: "I'm more than my genes" -- all together.
Everybody: I am more than my genes.
(Cheering) Sebastian Seung: What am I?
(Laughter) I am my connectome.
Now, since you guys are really great, maybe you can humor me and say this all together too.
(Laughter) Right. All together now.
Everybody: I am my connectome.
SS: That sounded great.
You know, you guys are so great, you don't even know what a connectome is, and you're willing to play along with me.
I could just go home now.
Well, so far only one connectome is known, that of this tiny worm.
Its modest nervous system consists of just 300 neurons.
And in the 1970s and '80s, a team of scientists mapped all 7,000 connections between the neurons.
In this diagram, every node is a neuron, and every line is a connection.
This is the connectome of the worm C. elegans.
Your connectome is far more complex than this because your brain contains 100 billion neurons and 10,000 times as many connections.
There's a diagram like this for your brain, but there's no way it would fit on this slide.
Your connectome contains one million times more connections than your genome has letters.
That's a lot of information.
What's in that information?
We don't know for sure, but there are theories.
Since the 19th century, neuroscientists have speculated that maybe your memories -- the information that makes you, you -- maybe your memories are stored in the connections between your brain's neurons.
And perhaps other aspects of your personal identity -- maybe your personality and your intellect -- maybe they're also encoded in the connections between your neurons.
And so now you can see why I proposed this hypothesis: I am my connectome.
I didn't ask you to chant it because it's true; I just want you to remember it.
And in fact, we don't know if this hypothesis is correct, because we have never had technologies powerful enough to test it.
Finding that worm connectome took over a dozen years of tedious labor.
And to find the connectomes of brains more like our own, we need more sophisticated technologies, that are automated, that will speed up the process of finding connectomes.
And in the next few minutes, I'll tell you about some of these technologies, which are currently under development in my lab and the labs of my collaborators.
Now you've probably seen pictures of neurons before.
You can recognize them instantly by their fantastic shapes.
They extend long and delicate branches, and in short, they look like trees.
But this is just a single neuron.
In order to find connectomes, we have to see all the neurons at the same time.
So let's meet Bobby Kasthuri, who works in the laboratory of Jeff Lichtman at Harvard University.
Bobby is holding fantastically thin slices of a mouse brain.
And we're zooming in by a factor of 100,000 times to obtain the resolution, so that we can see the branches of neurons all at the same time.
Except, you still may not really recognize them, and that's because we have to work in three dimensions.
If we take many images of many slices of the brain and stack them up, we get a three-dimensional image.
And still, you may not see the branches.
So we start at the top, and we color in the cross-section of one branch in red, and we do that for the next slice and for the next slice.
And we keep on doing that, slice after slice.
If we continue through the entire stack, we can reconstruct the three-dimensional shape of a small fragment of a branch of a neuron.
And we can do that for another neuron in green.
And you can see that the green neuron touches the red neuron at two locations, and these are what are called synapses.
Let's zoom in on one synapse, and keep your eyes on the interior of the green neuron.
You should see small circles -- these are called vesicles.
They contain a molecule know as a neurotransmitter.
And so when the green neuron wants to communicate, it wants to send a message to the red neuron, it spits out neurotransmitter.
At the synapse, the two neurons are said to be connected like two friends talking on the telephone.
So you see how to find a synapse.
How can we find an entire connectome?
Well, we take this three-dimensional stack of images and treat it as a gigantic three-dimensional coloring book.
We color every neuron in, in a different color, and then we look through all of the images, find the synapses and note the colors of the two neurons involved in each synapse.
If we can do that throughout all the images, we could find a connectome.
Now, at this point, you've learned the basics of neurons and synapses.
And so I think we're ready to tackle one of the most important questions in neuroscience: how are the brains of men and women different?
(Laughter) According to this self-help book, guys brains are like waffles; they keep their lives compartmentalized in boxes.
Girls' brains are like spaghetti; everything in their life is connected to everything else.
(Laughter) You guys are laughing, but you know, this book changed my life.
(Laughter) But seriously, what's wrong with this?
You already know enough to tell me -- what's wrong with this statement?
It doesn't matter whether you're a guy or girl, everyone's brains are like spaghetti.
Or maybe really, really fine capellini with branches.
Just as one strand of spaghetti contacts many other strands on your plate, one neuron touches many other neurons through their entangled branches.
One neuron can be connected to so many other neurons, because there can be synapses at these points of contact.
By now, you might have sort of lost perspective on how large this cube of brain tissue actually is.
And so let's do a series of comparisons to show you.
I assure you, this is very tiny. It's just six microns on a side.
So, here's how it stacks up against an entire neuron.
And you can tell that, really, only the smallest fragments of branches are contained inside this cube.
And a neuron, well, that's smaller than brain.
And that's just a mouse brain -- it's a lot smaller than a human brain.
So when show my friends this, sometimes they've told me, "You know, Sebastian, you should just give up.
Neuroscience is hopeless."
Because if you look at a brain with your naked eye, you don't really see how complex it is, but when you use a microscope, finally the hidden complexity is revealed.
In the 17th century, the mathematician and philosopher, Blaise Pascal, wrote of his dread of the infinite, his feeling of insignificance at contemplating the vast reaches of outer space.
And, as a scientist, I'm not supposed to talk about my feelings -- too much information, professor.
(Laughter) But may I?
(Laughter) (Applause) I feel curiosity, and I feel wonder, but at times I have also felt despair.
Why did I choose to study this organ that is so awesome in its complexity that it might well be infinite?
It's absurd.
How could we even dare to think that we might ever understand this?
And yet, I persist in this quixotic endeavor.
And indeed, these days I harbor new hopes.
Someday, a fleet of microscopes will capture every neuron and every synapse in a vast database of images.
And some day, artificially intelligent supercomputers will analyze the images without human assistance to summarize them in a connectome.
I do not know, but I hope that I will live to see that day, because finding an entire human connectome is one of the greatest technological challenges of all time.
It will take the work of generations to succeed.
At the present time, my collaborators and I, what we're aiming for is much more modest -- just to find partial connectomes of tiny chunks of mouse and human brain.
But even that will be enough for the first tests of this hypothesis that I am my connectome.
For now, let me try to convince you of the plausibility of this hypothesis, that it's actually worth taking seriously.
As you grow during childhood and age during adulthood, your personal identity changes slowly.
Likewise, every connectome changes over time.
What kinds of changes happen?
Well, neurons, like trees, can grow new branches, and they can lose old ones.
Synapses can be created, and they can be eliminated.
And synapses can grow larger, and they can grow smaller.
Second question: what causes these changes?
Well, it's true.
To some extent, they are programmed by your genes.
But that's not the whole story, because there are signals, electrical signals, that travel along the branches of neurons and chemical signals that jump across from branch to branch.
These signals are called neural activity.
And there's a lot of evidence that neural activity is encoding our thoughts, feelings and perceptions, our mental experiences.
And there's a lot of evidence that neural activity can cause your connections to change.
And if you put those two facts together, it means that your experiences can change your connectome.
And that's why every connectome is unique, even those of genetically identical twins.
The connectome is where nature meets nurture.
And it might true that just the mere act of thinking can change your connectome -- an idea that you may find empowering.
What's in this picture?
A cool and refreshing stream of water, you say.
What else is in this picture?
Do not forget that groove in the Earth called the stream bed.
Without it, the water would not know in which direction to flow.
And with the stream, I would like to propose a metaphor for the relationship between neural activity and connectivity.
Neural activity is constantly changing.
It's like the water of the stream; it never sits still.
The connections of the brain's neural network determines the pathways along which neural activity flows.
And so the connectome is like bed of the stream; but the metaphor is richer than that, because it's true that the stream bed guides the flow of the water, but over long timescales, the water also reshapes the bed of the stream.
And as I told you just now, neural activity can change the connectome.
And if you'll allow me to ascend to metaphorical heights, I will remind you that neural activity is the physical basis -- or so neuroscientists think -- of thoughts, feelings and perceptions.
And so we might even speak of the stream of consciousness.
Neural activity is its water, and the connectome is its bed.
So let's return from the heights of metaphor and return to science.
Suppose our technologies for finding connectomes actually work.
How will we go about testing the hypothesis "I am my connectome?"
Well, I propose a direct test.
Let us attempt to read out memories from connectomes.
Consider the memory of long temporal sequences of movements, like a pianist playing a Beethoven sonata.
According to a theory that dates back to the 19th century, such memories are stored as chains of synaptic connections inside your brain.
Because, if the first neurons in the chain are activated, through their synapses they send messages to the second neurons, which are activated, and so on down the line, like a chain of falling dominoes.
And this sequence of neural activation is hypothesized to be the neural basis of those sequence of movements.
So one way of trying to test the theory is to look for such chains inside connectomes.
But it won't be easy, because they're not going to look like this.
They're going to be scrambled up.
So we'll have to use our computers to try to unscramble the chain.
And if we can do that, the sequence of the neurons we recover from that unscrambling will be a prediction of the pattern of neural activity that is replayed in the brain during memory recall.
And if that were successful, that would be the first example of reading a memory from a connectome.
(Laughter) What a mess -- have you ever tried to wire up a system as complex as this?
I hope not.
But if you have, you know it's very easy to make a mistake.
The branches of neurons are like the wires of the brain.
Can anyone guess: what's the total length of wires in your brain?
I'll give you a hint. It's a big number.
(Laughter) I estimate, millions of miles, all packed in your skull.
And if you appreciate that number, you can easily see there is huge potential for mis-wiring of the brain.
And indeed, the popular press loves headlines like, "Anorexic brains are wired differently," or "Autistic brains are wired differently."
These are plausible claims, but in truth, we can't see the brain's wiring clearly enough to tell if these are really true.
And so the technologies for seeing connectomes will allow us to finally read mis-wiring of the brain, to see mental disorders in connectomes.
Sometimes the best way to test a hypothesis is to consider its most extreme implication.
Philosophers know this game very well.
If you believe that I am my connectome, I think you must also accept the idea that death is the destruction of your connectome.
I mention this because there are prophets today who claim that technology will fundamentally alter the human condition and perhaps even transform the human species.
One of their most cherished dreams is to cheat death by that practice known as cryonics.
If you pay 100,000 dollars, you can arrange to have your body frozen after death and stored in liquid nitrogen in one of these tanks in an Arizona warehouse, awaiting a future civilization that is advanced to resurrect you.
Should we ridicule the modern seekers of immortality, calling them fools?
Or will they someday chuckle over our graves?
I don't know -- I prefer to test their beliefs, scientifically.
I propose that we attempt to find a connectome of a frozen brain.
We know that damage to the brain occurs after death and during freezing.
The question is: has that damage erased the connectome?
If it has, there is no way that any future civilization will be able to recover the memories of these frozen brains.
Resurrection might succeed for the body, but not for the mind.
On the other hand, if the connectome is still intact, we cannot ridicule the claims of cryonics so easily.
I've described a quest that begins in the world of the very small, and propels us to the world of the far future.
Connectomes will mark a turning point in human history.
As we evolved from our ape-like ancestors on the African savanna, what distinguished us was our larger brains.
We have used our brains to fashion ever more amazing technologies.
Eventually, these technologies will become so powerful that we will use them to know ourselves by deconstructing and reconstructing our own brains.
I believe that this voyage of self-discovery is not just for scientists, but for all of us.
And I'm grateful for the opportunity to share this voyage with you today.
Thank you.
(Applause)
So I want to tell you a story -- an encouraging story -- about addressing desperation, depression and despair in Afghanistan, and what we have learned from it, and how to help people to overcome traumatic experiences and how to help them to regain some confidence in the time ahead -- in the future -- and how to participate again in everyday life.
So, I am a Jungian psychoanalyst, and I went to Afghanistan in January 2004, by chance, on an assignment for Medica Mondiale.
Jung in Afghanistan -- you get the picture.
Afghanistan is one of the poorest countries in the world, and 70 percent of the people are illiterate.
War and malnutrition kills people together with hope.
You may know this from the media, but what you may not know is that the average age of the Afghan people is 17 years old, which means they grow up in such an environment and -- I repeat myself -- in 30 years of war.
So this translates into ongoing violence, foreign interests, bribery, drugs, ethnic conflicts, bad health, shame, fear and cumulative traumatic experiences.
Local and foreign military are supposed to build peace together with the donors and the governmental and non-governmental organizations.
And people had hope, yes, but until they realized their situation worsens every day -- either because they are being killed or because, somehow, they are poorer than eight years ago.
One figure for that: 54 percent of the children under the age of five years suffer from malnutrition.
Yet, there is hope.
One day a man told me, "My future does not look brilliant, but I want to have a brilliant future for my son."
This is a picture I took in 2005, walking on Fridays over the hills in Kabul, and for me it's a symbolic picture of an open future for a young generation.
So, doctors prescribe medication.
And donors are supposed to bring peace by building schools and roads.
Military collect weapons, and depression stays intact.
Why?
Because people don't have tools to cope with it, to get over it.
So, soon after my arrival, I had confirmed something which I had already known; that my instruments come from the heart of modern Europe, yes.
However, what can wound us and our reaction to those wounds -- they are universal.
And the big challenge was how to understand the meaning of the symptom in this specific cultural context.
After a counseling session, a woman said to me, "Because you have felt me, I can feel myself again, and I want to participate again in my family life."
This was very important, because the family is central in Afghans' social system.
No one can survive alone.
And if people feel used, worthless and ashamed, because something horrible has happened to them, then they retreat, and they fall into social isolation, and they do not dare to tell this evil to other people or to their loved ones, because they do not want to burden them.
And very often violence is a way to cope with it.
Traumatized people also easily lose control -- symptoms are hyper-arousal and memory flashbacks -- so people are in a constant fear that those horrible feelings of that traumatic event might come back unexpectedly, suddenly, and they cannot control it.
To compensate this loss of inner control, they try to control the outside, very understandably -- mostly the family -- and unfortunately, this fits very well into the traditional side, regressive side, repressive side, restrictive side of the cultural context.
So, husbands start beating wives, mothers and fathers beat their children, and afterward, they feel awful.
They did not want to do this, it just happened -- they lost control.
The desperate try to restore order and normality, and if we are not able to cut this circle of violence, it will be transferred to the next generation without a doubt.
And partly this is already happening.
So everybody needs a sense for the future, and the Afghan sense of the future is shattered.
But let me repeat the words of the woman.
"Because you have felt me, I can feel myself again."
So the key here is empathy.
Somebody has to be a witness to what has happened to you.
Somebody has to feel how you felt.
And somebody has to see you and listen to you.
Everybody must be able to know what he or she has experienced is true, and this only goes with another person.
So everybody must be able to say, "This happened to me, and it did this with me, but I'm able to live with it, to cope with it, and to learn from it.
And I want to engage myself in the bright future for my children and the children of my children, and I will not marry-off my 13 year-old daughter," -- what happens too often in Afghanistan.
So something can be done, even in such extreme environments as Afghanistan.
And I started thinking about a counseling program.
But, of course, I needed help and funds.
And one evening, I was sitting next to a very nice gentleman in Kabul, and he asked what I thought would be good in Afghanistan.
And I explained to him quickly, I would train psycho-social counselors, I would open centers, and I explained to him why.
This man gave me his contact details at the end of the evening and said, "If you want to do this, call me."
At that time, it was the head of Caritas Germany.
So, I was able to launch a three-year project with Caritas Germany, and we trained 30 Afghan women and men, and we opened 15 counseling centers in Kabul.
This was our sign -- it's hand-painted, and we had 45 all over Kabul.
Eleven thousand people came -- more than that.
And 70 percent regained their lives.
This was a very exciting time, developing this with my wonderful Afghan team.
And they are working with me up to today.
We developed a culturally-sensitive psycho-social counseling approach.
So, from 2008 up until today, a substantial change and step forward has been taking place.
The European Union delegation in Kabul came into this and hired me to work inside the Ministry of Public Health, to lobby this approach -- we succeeded.
We revised the mental health component of the primary health care services by adding psycho-social care and psycho-social counselors to the system.
This means, certainly, to retrain all health staff.
But for that, we already have the training manuals, which are approved by the Ministry and moreover, this approach is now part of the mental health strategy in Afghanistan.
So we also have implemented it already in some selected clinics in three provinces, and you are the first to see the results.
We wanted to know if what is being done is effective.
And here you can see the patients all had symptoms of depression, moderate and severe.
And the red line is the treatment as usual -- medication with a medical doctor.
And all the symptoms stayed the same or even got worse.
And the green line is treatment with psycho-social counseling only, without medication.
And you can see the symptoms almost completely go away, and the psycho-social stress has dropped significantly, which is explicable, because you cannot take away the psycho-social stresses, but you can learn how to cope with them.
So this makes us very happy, because now we also have some evidence that this is working.
So here you see, this is a health facility in Northern Afghanistan, and every morning it looks like this all over.
And doctors usually have three to six minutes for the patients, but now this will change.
They go to the clinics, because they want to cure their immediate symptoms, and they will find somebody to talk to and discuss these issues and talk about what is burdening them and find solutions, develop their resources, learn tools to solve their family conflicts and gain some confidence in the future.
And I would like to share one short vignette.
One Hazara said to his Pashtun counselor, "If we were to have met some years ago, then we would have killed each other.
And now you are helping me to regain some confidence in the future."
And another counselor said to me after the training, "You know, I never knew why I survived the killings in my village, but now I know, because I am part of a nucleus of a new peaceful society in Afghanistan."
So I believe this kept me running.
And this is a really emancipatory and political contribution to peace and reconciliation.
And also -- I think -- without psycho-social therapy, and without considering this in all humanitarian projects, we cannot build-up civil societies.
I thought it was an idea worth spreading, and I think it must be, can be, could be replicated elsewhere.
I thank you for your attention.
(Applause)
On a beautiful day, just a few years ago my wife and I entered a hospital near our home in Oakland, California for the birth of our first daughter, Maya.
We had responsibly toured the birthing center in advance and yet we were somehow still startled to find ourselves in the place where we would experience one of the most significant moments of our lives.
We were stuck in a windowless room with no hint of the bright and sunny day that we had left.
Fluorescent lights buzzed overhead, the paint on the walls was beige and machines beeped inexplicably as a wall clock indicated day turning to night.
That clock was placed above a door in direct line of sight to where my wife lay as her contractions increased hour after hour.
Now, I've never given birth -- (Laughter) but she assured me that the last thing that a birthing woman would ever want is to watch the seconds tick by.
(Laughter) An architect by training, I've always been fascinated watching people experience design in the world around them.
I believe design functions like the soundtrack that we're not even fully aware is playing.
It sends us subconscious messages about how to feel and what to expect.
That room that we were in seemed completely misaligned with the moment that we were experiencing -- welcoming a human being, our daughter, into this world.
At one point a nurse, without any prompt, turned to us and said, "I always think to myself, 'I wish I had become an architect, because I could have designed rooms like this better.'" I said to her, "An architect did design this room."
(Laughter) Despite the immense joy of our daughter's birth, the messages of that hospital room stick with she and I to this day.
Those messages are, "You are not at home, you are in a foreign place."
"You are not in control of anything.
Not even the lighting."
"Your comfort, simply, is secondary."
At best, a hospital room like this might just be described or dismissed as uninspiring.
At worst, it is undignifying.
And I use it to point out that none of us, anywhere in the world, are immune from bad design.
I went into architecture because I believed it was about creating spaces for people to live their best lives.
And yet what I found is a profession largely disconnected from the people most directly impacted by its work.
I believe this is because architecture remains a white, male, elitist profession -- seemingly unconcerned with some of the greatest needs in the world or even the relatively simple needs of an expectant mother.
Students are trained in school using highly theoretical projects, rarely interacting with real people or actual communities.
Graduates are funneled through a long, narrow unforgiving path to licensure.
Meanwhile, the profession holds up a select few through relentless award programs focused almost exclusively on the aesthetics of buildings, rather than the societal impact or contributions of them.
It only goes to reinforce a warped view of professional responsibility and success and yet this isn't why so many young, hopeful people go into architecture.
It's not why I did.
I believed then, though I didn't have a language for it, and I know now, that design has a unique ability to dignify.
It can make people feel valued, respected, honored and seen.
Now I'd like for you to just think about some of the spaces that you inhabit.
And I'd like to have you think about how they make you feel.
Now, there are places that make us feel unhappy, unhealthy or uninspiring.
They may be the places that you work or where you heal or even where you live.
And I ask, how might these places be better designed with you in mind?
It's a really simple question and it can somehow, sometimes be very difficult to answer.
Because we are conditioned to feel like we don't have much agency over the spaces and places that we live, work and play.
And in many cases we don't.
But we all should.
Now, here's a potentially dumb question for any women watching: Have you ever stood in a disproportionately long bathroom line?
(Laughter) Did you ever think to yourself, "What is wrong with this picture?"
Well, what if the real question is, "What is wrong with the men that designed these bathrooms?"
(Applause) It may seem like a small thing, but it's representative of a much more serious issue.
The contemporary world was literally built by men who have rarely taken the time to understand how people unlike them experience their designs.
A long bathroom line might seem like a minor indignity.
But the opposite can also be true.
Thoughtful design can make people feel respected and seen.
I've come to believe that dignity is to design what justice is to law and health is to medicine.
In the simplest of terms, it's about having the spaces you inhabit reflect back your value.
Over the past two years I had the opportunity to interview over 100 people from all walks of life about their experience of design.
I wanted to test my hunch that dignity and design are uniquely related.
I listened to Gregory, a resident of this cottage community designed specifically for the 50 most chronically homeless people in Dallas.
Gregory had been living on the streets, drifting from town to town for over 30 years.
A broad coalition of social service agencies, funders and designers, created this place.
Each 400 square foot cottage is designed beautifully as a permanent home.
Gregory now has a key to a door to his own house.
He describes the sense of security that it brings him.
Something he had lived without for three decades.
When he arrived with little more than the clothes on his back, he found everything: from a toaster, Crock-Pot and stove to a toothbrush and toothpaste awaiting for him.
He describes it simply as heaven.
On the other side of the world, I listened to Antoinette, the director of this training and community center for women in rural Rwanda.
Hundreds of women come to this place daily -- to learn new skills, be in community, and continue rebuilding their lives following the country's civil war.
These women literally pressed the 500,000 bricks that make up the 17 classroom pavilions like this one.
Antoinette told me, "Everyone is so proud of it."
And then back here in the US I listened to Monika, the director of a free clinic primarily serving the uninsured in Arkansas.
Monika loves telling me that the doctors, who volunteer at her free clinic routinely tell her that they've never worked in such a beautiful, light-filled place.
Monika believes that even people experiencing poverty deserve quality health care.
And what's more, she believes they deserve to receive that care in a dignified setting.
People like these are invaluable ambassadors for design and yet they are roundly absent from architectural discourse.
Similarly, the people who can most benefit from good design often have the least access to it.
Your cousin, a homeless veteran; your grandma or grandpa who live in a house with a kitchen that's no longer accessible to them; your wheelchair-bound sister in a suburban area planned without sidewalks.
If good design is only for a privileged few, what good is it?
It's time designers change this by dedicating their practices to the public good in the model of firms like Orkidstudio, Studio Gang and MASS Design Group.
Their clients are orphaned children in Kenya, foster children in Chicago and pregnant women in Malawi.
Their practices are premised on the belief that everyone deserves good design.
Dedicating more practices to the public good will not only create more design that is dignifying, but it will also dignify the practice of design.
It will not only diversify the client base of design, but it will also create new, more diverse forms of design for the world.
Now, in order to do this, my architecture and design friends, especially my fellow white guys, we must simultaneously and significantly diversify our ranks.
If we want the public to believe that design is for them and for everyone.
Today, barely 15 percent of registered architects in the United States are women.
And a far smaller percentage are persons of color.
Other professions, like law and medicine had made far greater strides in these crucial areas.
How might our shared built environment -- our homes, our hospitals, our schools, our public spaces -- be shaped differently if women and people of color were behind half of the proverbial blueprints?
It is not a question of whether, but to what extent our buildings, our landscapes, our cities and our rural communities are less beautiful, less functional, less equitable and less dignifying because women and people of color are less likely to be creating them.
As Winston Churchill famously noted in 1943 when he called for the rebuilding of London's war-damaged parliamentary chambers, "We shape our buildings, and afterward, they shape us."
The good news is that we can change how we build and who we build for.
Be that a health worker in rural Rwanda, or a birthing mother and nervous new father in the United States.
We can do this by recommitting architecture to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
This will pay dividends.
Because once you see what design can do, you can't unsee it.
And once you experience dignity, you can't accept anything less.
Both become part of your possible.
One of my favorite conversation partners is my 90-year-old grandmother, Audrey Gorwitz, from Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
After one of our conversations about design, she wrote me a letter.
She said, "Dear Johnny, I thought the other day, as I sat in my doctor's office, how depressing it was, from the color on the wall, to the carpet on the floor.
(Laughter) Now I will have to call to see who is responsible for the drabness in that place."
(Laughter) In the same letter, mind you, she said, "I did call, and I got the man in charge, and he said he appreciated someone calling him.
My doctor's office is now on the list for an upgrade."
(Laughter) She signed it by saying, "It is always good to express one's opinion if done in a proper manner."
(Laughter) (Applause) I love my grandma.
(Laughter) Like my grandma Audrey, you deserve good design.
Because well-designed spaces are not just a matter of taste or a questions of aesthetics.
They literally shape our ideas about who we are in the world and what we deserve.
That is the essence of dignity.
And both the opportunity and the responsibility of design for good and for all.
Thank you.
(Applause)
When you have 21 minutes to speak, two million years seems like a really long time.
But evolutionarily, two million years is nothing.
And yet, in two million years, the human brain has nearly tripled in mass, going from the one-and-a-quarter-pound brain of our ancestor here, Habilis, to the almost three-pound meatloaf everybody here has between their ears.
What is it about a big brain that nature was so eager for every one of us to have one?
Well, it turns out when brains triple in size, they don't just get three times bigger; they gain new structures.
And one of the main reasons our brain got so big is because it got a new part, called the "frontal lobe," particularly, a part called the "prefrontal cortex."
What does a prefrontal cortex do for you that should justify the entire architectural overhaul of the human skull in the blink of evolutionary time?
Well, it turns out the prefrontal cortex does lots of things, but one of the most important things it does is it's an experience simulator.
Pilots practice in flight simulators so that they don't make real mistakes in planes.
Human beings have this marvelous adaptation that they can actually have experiences in their heads before they try them out in real life.
This is a trick that none of our ancestors could do, and that no other animal can do quite like we can.
It's a marvelous adaptation.
It's up there with opposable thumbs and standing upright and language as one of the things that got our species out of the trees and into the shopping mall.
(Laughter) All of you have done this.
Ben and Jerry's doesn't have "liver and onion" ice cream, and it's not because they whipped some up, tried it and went, "Yuck!"
It's because, without leaving your armchair, you can simulate that flavor and say "yuck" before you make it.
Let's see how your experience simulators are working.
Let's just run a quick diagnostic before I proceed with the rest of the talk.
Here's two different futures that I invite you to contemplate.
You can try to simulate them and tell me which one you think you might prefer.
One of them is winning the lottery. This is about 314 million dollars.
And the other is becoming paraplegic.
(Laughter) Just give it a moment of thought.
You probably don't feel like you need a moment of thought.
Interestingly, there are data on these two groups of people, data on how happy they are.
And this is exactly what you expected, isn't it?
But these aren't the data. I made these up!
These are the data.
You failed the pop quiz, and you're hardly five minutes into the lecture.
Because the fact is that a year after losing the use of their legs and a year after winning the lotto, lottery winners and paraplegics are equally happy with their lives.
Don't feel too bad about failing the first pop quiz, because everybody fails all of the pop quizzes all of the time.
The research that my laboratory has been doing, that economists and psychologists around the country have been doing, has revealed something really quite startling to us, something we call the "impact bias," which is the tendency for the simulator to work badly, for the simulator to make you believe that different outcomes are more different than, in fact, they really are.
From field studies to laboratory studies, we see that winning or losing an election, gaining or losing a romantic partner, getting or not getting a promotion, passing or not passing a college test, on and on, have far less impact, less intensity and much less duration than people expect them to have.
A recent study -- this almost floors me -- a recent study showing how major life traumas affect people suggests that if it happened over three months ago, with only a few exceptions, it has no impact whatsoever on your happiness.
Why?
Because happiness can be synthesized.
Sir Thomas Brown wrote in 1642, "I am the happiest man alive.
I have that in me that can convert poverty to riches, adversity to prosperity.
I am more invulnerable than Achilles; fortune hath not one place to hit me."
What kind of remarkable machinery does this guy have in his head?
Well, it turns out it's precisely the same remarkable machinery that all of us have.
Human beings have something that we might think of as a "psychological immune system," a system of cognitive processes, largely nonconscious cognitive processes, that help them change their views of the world, so that they can feel better about the worlds in which they find themselves.
Like Sir Thomas, you have this machine.
Unlike Sir Thomas, you seem not to know it.
We synthesize happiness, but we think happiness is a thing to be found.
Now, you don't need me to give you too many examples of people synthesizing happiness, I suspect, though I'm going to show you some experimental evidence.
You don't have to look very far for evidence.
I took a copy of the "New York Times" and tried to find some instances of people synthesizing happiness.
Here are three guys synthesizing happiness.
"I'm better off physically, financially, mentally ..."
"I don't have one minute's regret. It was a glorious experience."
"I believe it turned out for the best."
Who are these characters who are so damn happy?
The first one is Jim Wright.
Some of you are old enough to remember: he was the chairman of the House of Representatives, and he resigned in disgrace when this young Republican named Newt Gingrich found out about a shady book deal that he had done.
He lost everything.
The most powerful Democrat in the country lost everything: he lost his money, he lost his power.
What does he have to say all these years later about it?
"I am so much better off physically, financially, mentally and in almost every other way."
What other way would there be to be better off?
Vegetably? Minerally? Animally?
He's pretty much covered them there.
Moreese Bickham is somebody you've never heard of.
Moreese Bickham uttered these words upon being released.
He was 78 years old.
He'd spent 37 years in Louisiana State Penitentiary for a crime he didn't commit.
He was ultimately [released for good behavior halfway through his sentence.] What did he have to say about his experience?
"I don't have one minute's regret. It was a glorious experience."
Glorious!
This guy's not saying, "There were some nice guys. They had a gym."
"Glorious" -- a word we usually reserve for something like a religious experience.
Harry S. Langerman uttered these words.
He's somebody you might have known but didn't, because in 1949, he read a little article in the paper about a hamburger stand owned by these two brothers named McDonald.
And he thought, "That's a really neat idea!"
So he went to find them.
They said, "We can give you a franchise on this for 3,000 bucks."
Harry went back to New York, asked his brother, an investment banker, to loan him 3,000 dollars, and his brother's immortal words were, "You idiot, nobody eats hamburgers."
He wouldn't lend him the money.
Of course, six months later, Ray Kroc had exactly the same idea.
It turns out, people do eat hamburgers, and Ray Kroc, for a while, became the richest man in America.
And then, finally, some of you recognize this young photo of Pete Best, who was the original drummer for the Beatles, until they, you know, sent him out on an errand and snuck away and picked up Ringo on a tour.
Well, in 1994, when Pete Best was interviewed -- yes, he's still a drummer; yes, he's a studio musician -- he had this to say: "I'm happier than I would have been with the Beatles."
OK, there's something important to be learned from these people, and it is the secret of happiness.
Here it is, finally to be revealed.
First: accrue wealth, power and prestige, then lose it.
(Laughter) Second: spend as much of your life in prison as you possibly can.
(Laughter) Third: make somebody else really, really rich.
And finally: never, ever join the Beatles.
(Laughter) Yeah, right.
Because when people synthesize happiness, as these gentlemen seem to have done, we all smile at them, but we kind of roll our eyes and say, "Yeah, right, you never really wanted the job."
"Oh yeah, right -- you really didn't have that much in common with her, and you figured that out just about the time she threw the engagement ring in your face."
We smirk, because we believe that synthetic happiness is not of the same quality as what we might call "natural happiness."
What are these terms?
Natural happiness is what we get when we get what we wanted, and synthetic happiness is what we make when we don't get what we wanted.
And in our society, we have a strong belief that synthetic happiness is of an inferior kind.
Why do we have that belief?
Well, it's very simple.
What kind of economic engine would keep churning if we believed that not getting what we want could make us just as happy as getting it?
With all apologies to my friend Matthieu Ricard, a shopping mall full of Zen monks is not going to be particularly profitable, because they don't want stuff enough.
(Laughter) I want to suggest to you that synthetic happiness is every bit as real and enduring as the kind of happiness you stumble upon when you get exactly what you were aiming for.
Now, I'm a scientist, so I'm going to do this not with rhetoric, but by marinating you in a little bit of data.
Let me first show you an experimental paradigm that's used to demonstrate the synthesis of happiness among regular old folks.
This isn't mine, it's a 50-year-old paradigm called the "free choice paradigm."
It's very simple.
You bring in, say, six objects, and you ask a subject to rank them from the most to the least liked.
In this case, because this experiment uses them, these are Monet prints.
Everybody ranks these Monet prints from the one they like the most to the one they like the least.
Now we give you a choice: "We happen to have some extra prints in the closet.
We're going to give you one as your prize to take home.
We happen to have number three and number four," we tell the subject.
This is a bit of a difficult choice, because neither one is preferred strongly to the other, but naturally, people tend to pick number three, because they liked it a little better than number four.
Sometime later -- it could be 15 minutes, it could be 15 days -- the same stimuli are put before the subject, and the subject is asked to re-rank the stimuli.
"Tell us how much you like them now."
What happens?
Watch as happiness is synthesized.
This is the result that's been replicated over and over again.
You're watching happiness be synthesized.
Would you like to see it again?
Happiness!
"The one I got is really better than I thought!
That other one I didn't get sucks!"
That's the synthesis of happiness.
(Laughter) Now, what's the right response to that?
"Yeah, right!"
Now, here's the experiment we did, and I hope this is going to convince you that "Yeah, right!" was not the right response.
We did this experiment with a group of patients who had anterograde amnesia.
These are hospitalized patients.
Most of them have Korsakoff syndrome, a polyneuritic psychosis.
They drank way too much, and they can't make new memories.
They remember their childhood, but if you walk in and introduce yourself and then leave the room, when you come back, they don't know who you are.
We took our Monet prints to the hospital.
And we asked these patients to rank them from the one they liked the most to the one they liked the least.
We then gave them the choice between number three and number four.
Like everybody else, they said, "Gee, thanks Doc! That's great! I could use a new print.
I'll take number three."
We explained we would have number three mailed to them.
We gathered up our materials, and we went out of the room and counted to a half hour.
(Laughter) Back into the room, we say, "Hi, we're back."
The patients, bless them, say, "Ah, Doc, I'm sorry, I've got a memory problem; that's why I'm here.
If I've met you before, I don't remember."
"Really, Jim, you don't remember? I was just here with the Monet prints?"
"Sorry, Doc, I just don't have a clue."
"No problem, Jim.
All I want you to do is rank these for me, from the one you like the most to the one you like the least."
What do they do?
Well, let's first check and make sure they're really amnesiac.
We ask these amnesiac patients to tell us which one they own, which one they chose last time, which one is theirs.
And what we find is, amnesiac patients just guess.
These are normal controls, where if I did this with you, all of you would know which print you chose.
But if I do this with amnesiac patients, they don't have a clue.
They can't pick their print out of a lineup.
Here's what normal controls do: they synthesize happiness. Right?
This is the change in liking score, the change from the first time they ranked to the second time they ranked.
Normal controls show -- that was the magic I showed you; now I'm showing it to you in graphical form -- "The one I own is better than I thought.
The one I didn't own, the one I left behind, is not as good as I thought."
Amnesiacs do exactly the same thing. Think about this result.
These people like better the one they own, but they don't know they own it.
"Yeah, right" is not the right response!
What these people did when they synthesized happiness is they really, truly changed their affective, hedonic, aesthetic reactions to that poster.
They're not just saying it because they own it, because they don't know they own it.
When psychologists show you bars, you know that they are showing you averages of lots of people.
And yet, all of us have this psychological immune system, this capacity to synthesize happiness, but some of us do this trick better than others.
And some situations allow anybody to do it more effectively than other situations do.
It turns out that freedom, the ability to make up your mind and change your mind, is the friend of natural happiness, because it allows you to choose among all those delicious futures and find the one that you would most enjoy.
But freedom to choose, to change and make up your mind, is the enemy of synthetic happiness, and I'm going to show you why.
"Dogbert's tech support. How may I abuse you?"
"My printer prints a blank page after every document."
"Why complain about getting free paper?"
"Free? Aren't you just giving me my own paper?"
"Look at the quality of the free paper compared to your lousy regular paper!
Only a fool or a liar would say that they look the same!"
"Now that you mention it, it does seem a little silkier!"
"What are you doing?"
"I'm helping people accept the things they cannot change." Indeed.
The psychological immune system works best when we are totally stuck, when we are trapped.
This is the difference between dating and marriage.
You go out on a date with a guy, and he picks his nose; you don't go out on another date.
You're married to a guy and he picks his nose?
He has a heart of gold. Don't touch the fruitcake!
You find a way to be happy with what's happened.
(Laughter) Now, what I want to show you is that people don't know this about themselves, and not knowing this can work to our supreme disadvantage.
Here's an experiment we did at Harvard.
We created a black-and-white photography course, and we allowed students to come in and learn how to use a darkroom.
So we gave them cameras, they went around campus, they took 12 pictures of their favorite professors and their dorm room and their dog, and all the other things they wanted to have Harvard memories of.
They bring us the camera, we make up a contact sheet, they figure out which are the two best pictures.
We now spend six hours teaching them about darkrooms, and they blow two of them up.
They have two gorgeous 8 x 10 glossies of meaningful things to them, and we say, "Which one would you like to give up?"
"I have to give one up?"
"Yes, we need one as evidence of the class project.
So you have to give me one. You have to make a choice.
You get to keep one, and I get to keep one."
Now, there are two conditions in this experiment.
In one case, the students are told, "But you know, if you want to change your mind, I'll always have the other one here, and in the next four days, before I actually mail it to headquarters" -- yeah, "headquarters" -- (Laughter) "I'll be glad to swap it out with you.
In fact, I'll come to your dorm room, just give me an email.
Better yet, I'll check with you.
You ever want to change your mind, it's totally returnable."
The other half of the students are told exactly the opposite: "Make your choice, and by the way, the mail is going out, gosh, in two minutes, to England.
Your picture will be winging its way over the Atlantic.
You will never see it again."
Half of the students in each of these conditions are asked to make predictions about how much they're going to come to like the picture that they keep and the picture they leave behind.
Other students are just sent back to their little dorm rooms and they are measured over the next three to six days on their satisfaction with the pictures.
Look at what we find.
First of all, here's what students think is going to happen.
They think they're going to maybe come to like the picture they chose a little more than the one they left behind.
But these are not statistically significant differences.
It's a very small increase, and it doesn't much matter whether they were in the reversible or irreversible condition.
Wrong-o.
Both right before the swap and five days later, people who are stuck with that picture, who have no choice, who can never change their mind, like it a lot.
And people who are deliberating -- "Should I return it?
Have I gotten the right one?
Maybe this isn't the good one. Maybe I left the good one?" -- have killed themselves.
They don't like their picture.
In fact, even after the opportunity to swap has expired, they still don't like their picture.
Why?
Because the [reversible] condition is not conducive to the synthesis of happiness.
So here's the final piece of this experiment.
We bring in a whole new group of naive Harvard students and we say, "You know, we're doing a photography course, and we can do it one of two ways.
We could do it so that when you take the two pictures, you'd have four days to change your mind, or we're doing another course where you take the two pictures and you make up your mind right away and you can never change it.
Which course would you like to be in?" Duh!
Sixty-six percent of the students, two-thirds, prefer to be in the course where they have the opportunity to change their mind.
Hello? Sixty-six percent of the students choose to be in the course in which they will ultimately be deeply dissatisfied with the picture -- (Laughter) because they do not know the conditions under which synthetic happiness grows.
The Bard said everything best, of course, and he's making my point here but he's making it hyperbolically: "'Tis nothing good or bad But thinking makes it so."
It's nice poetry, but that can't exactly be right.
Is there really nothing good or bad?
Is it really the case that gall bladder surgery and a trip to Paris are just the same thing?
(Laughter) That seems like a one-question IQ test.
They can't be exactly the same.
In more turgid prose, but closer to the truth, was the father of modern capitalism, Adam Smith, and he said this.
This is worth contemplating: "The great source of both the misery and disorders of human life seems to arise from overrating the difference between one permanent situation and another.
Some of these situations may, no doubt, deserve to be preferred to others, but none of them can deserve to be pursued with that passionate ardor which drives us to violate the rules either of prudence or of justice, or to corrupt the future tranquility of our minds, either by shame from the remembrance of our own folly, or by remorse for the horror of our own injustice."
In other words: yes, some things are better than others.
We should have preferences that lead us into one future over another.
But when those preferences drive us too hard and too fast because we have overrated the difference between these futures, we are at risk.
When our ambition is bounded, it leads us to work joyfully.
When our ambition is unbounded, it leads us to lie, to cheat, to steal, to hurt others, to sacrifice things of real value.
When our fears are bounded, we're prudent, we're cautious, we're thoughtful.
When our fears are unbounded and overblown, we're reckless, and we're cowardly.
The lesson I want to leave you with, from these data, is that our longings and our worries are both to some degree overblown, because we have within us the capacity to manufacture the very commodity we are constantly chasing when we choose experience.
Thank you.
(Applause)
Welcome to Thailand.
Now, when I was a young man -- 40 years ago, the country was very, very poor with lots and lots and lots of people living in poverty.
We decided to do something about it, but we didn't begin with a welfare program or a poverty reduction program.
But we began with a family-planning program, following a very successful maternal child health activity, sets of activities.
So basically, no one would accept family planning if their children didn't survive.
So the first step: get to the children, get to the mothers, and then follow up with family planning.
Not just child mortality alone, you need also family planning.
Now let me take you back as to why we needed to do it.
In my country, that was the case in 1974.
Seven children per family -- tremendous growth at 3.3 percent.
There was just no future.
We needed to reduce the population growth rate.
So we said, "Let's do it."
The women said, "We agree. We'll use pills, but we need a doctor to prescribe the pills," and we had very, very few doctors.
We didn't take no as an answer; we took no as a question.
We went to the nurses and the midwives, who were also women, and did a fantastic job at explaining how to use the pill.
That was wonderful, but it covered only 20 percent of the country.
What do we do for the other 80 percent -- leave them alone and say, "Well, they're not medical personnel."
No, we decided to do a bit more.
So we went to the ordinary people that you saw.
Actually, below that yellow sign -- I wish they hadn't wiped that, because there was "Coca-Cola" there.
We were so much bigger than Coca-Cola in those days.
And no difference, the people they chose were the people we chose.
They were well-known in the community, they knew that customers were always right, and they were terrific, and they practiced their family planning themselves.
So they could supply pills and condoms throughout the country, in every village of the country.
So there we are. We went to the people who were seen as the cause of the problem to be the solution.
Wherever there were people -- and you can see boats with the women, selling things -- here's the floating market selling bananas and crabs and also contraceptives -- wherever you find people, you'll find contraceptives in Thailand.
And then we decided, why not get to religion because in the Philippines, the Catholic Church was pretty strong, and Thai people were Buddhist.
We went to them and they said, "Look, could you help us?"
I'm there -- the one in blue, not the yellow -- holding a bowl of holy water for the monk to sprinkle holy water on pills and condoms for the sanctity of the family.
And this picture was sent throughout the country.
So some of the monks in the villages were doing the same thing themselves.
And the women were saying, "No wonder we have no side-effects.
It's been blessed."
That was their perception.
And then we went to teachers.
You need everybody to be involved in trying to provide whatever it is that make humanity a better place.
So we went to the teachers.
Over a quarter of a million were taught about family planning with a new alphabet -- A, B for birth, C for condom, I for IUD, V for vasectomy.
And then we had a snakes and ladders game, where you throw dice.
If you land on anything pro-family planning, you move ahead.
Like, "Mother takes the pill every night.
Very good, mother. Move ahead.
Uncle buys a condom. Very good, uncle. Move ahead.
Uncle gets drunk, doesn't use condom. Come back, start again."
(Laughter) Again, education, class entertainment.
And the kids were doing it in school too.
We had relay races with condoms, we had children's condom-blowing championship.
And before long, the condom was know as the girl's best friend.
In Thailand, for poor people, diamonds don't make it -- so the condom is the girl's best friend.
We introduced our first microcredit program in 1975, and the women who organized it said, "We only want to lend to women who practice family planning.
If you're pregnant, take care of your pregnancy.
If you're not pregnant, you can take a loan out from us."
And that was run by them.
And after 35/36 years, it's still going on.
It's a part of the Village Development Bank; it's not a real bank, but it's a fund -- microcredit.
And we didn't need a big organization to run it -- it was run by the villagers themselves.
And you probably hardly see a Thai man there, it's always women, women, women, women.
And then we thought we'd help America, because America's been helping everyone, whether they want help or not.
(Laughter) And this is on the Fourth of July.
We decided to provide vasectomy to all men, but in particular, American men to the front of the queue, right up to the Ambassador's residence during his vin d'honneur.
And the hotel gave us the ballroom for it -- very appropriate room.
(Laughter) And since it was near lunch time, they said, "All right, we'll give you some lunch.
Of course, it must be American cola.
You get two brands, Coke and Pepsi.
And then the food is either hamburger or hotdog."
And I thought a hotdog will be more symbolic.
(Laughter) And here is this, then, young man called Willy Bohm who worked for the USAID.
Obviously, he's had his vasectomy because his hotdog is half eaten, and he was very happy.
It made a lot of news in America, and it angered some people also.
I said, "Don't worry. Come over and I'll do the whole lot of you."
(Laughter) And what happened?
In all this thing, from seven children to 1.5 children, population growth rate of 3.3 to 0.5.
You could call it the Coca-Cola approach if you like -- it was exactly the same thing.
I'm not sure whether Coca-Cola followed us, or we followed Coca-Cola, but we're good friends.
And so that's the case of everyone joining in.
We didn't have a strong government. We didn't have lots of doctors.
But it's everybody's job who can change attitude and behavior.
Then AIDS came along and hit Thailand, and we had to stop doing a lot of good things to fight AIDS.
But unfortunately, the government was in denial, denial, denial.
So our work wasn't affected.
So I thought, "Well, if you can't go to the government, go to the military."
So I went to the military and asked to borrow 300 radio stations.
They have more than the government, and they've got more guns than the government.
So I asked them, could they help us in our fight against HIV.
And after I gave them statistics, they said, "Yes. Okay. You can use all the radio stations, television stations."
And that's when we went onto the airwaves.
And then we got a new prime minister soon after that.
And he said, "Mechai, could you come and join?"
He asked me in because he liked my wife a lot.
So I said, "Okay."
He became the chairman of the National AIDS Committee and increased the budget fifty-fold.
Every ministry, even judges, had to be involved in AIDS education -- everyone -- and we said the public, institutions, religious institutions, schools -- everyone was involved.
And here, every media person had to be trained for HIV.
And we gave every station half a minute extra for advertising to earn more money.
So they were happy with that.
And then AIDS education in all schools, starting from university.
And these are high school kids teaching high school kids.
And the best teachers were the girls, not the boys, and they were terrific.
And these girls who go around teaching about safe sex and HIV were known as Mother Theresa.
And then we went down one more step.
These are primary school kids -- third, fourth grade -- going to every household in the village, every household in the whole of Thailand, giving AIDS information and a condom to every household, given by these young kids.
And no parents objected, because we were trying to save lives, and this was a lifesaver.
And we said, "Everyone needs to be involved."
So you have the companies also realizing that sick staff don't work, and dead customers don't buy.
So they all trained.
And then we have this Captain Condom, with his Harvard MBA, going to schools and night spots.
And they loved him. You need a symbol of something.
In every country, every program, you need a symbol, and this is probably the best thing he's ever done with his MBA.
(Laughter) And then we gave condoms out everywhere on the streets -- everywhere, everywhere.
In taxis, you get condoms.
And also, in traffic, the policemen give you condoms -- our "cops and rubbers" programs.
(Laughter) So, can you imagine New York policemen giving out condoms?
Of course I can. And they'd enjoy it immensely; I see them standing around right now, everywhere.
Imagine if they had condoms, giving out to all sorts of people.
And then, new change, we had hair bands, clothing and the condom for your mobile phone during the rainy season.
(Laughter) And these were the condoms that we introduced.
One says, "Weapon of mass protection."
We found -- you know -- somebody here was searching for the weapon of mass destruction, but we have found the weapon of mass protection: the condom.
And then it says here, with the American flag, "Don't leave home without it."
But I have some to give out afterward.
But let me warn you, these are Thai-sized, so be very careful.
(Laughter) And so you can see that condoms can do so many things.
Look at this -- I gave this to Al Gore and to Bill Senior also.
Stop global warming; use condoms.
And then this is the picture I mentioned to you -- the weapon of mass protection.
And let the next Olympics save some lives.
Why just run around?
(Laughter) And then finally, in Thailand we're Buddhist, we don't have a God, so instead, we say, "In rubber we trust."
(Laughter) So you can see that we added everything to our endeavor to make life better for the people.
We had condoms in all the refrigerators in the hotels and the schools, because alcohol impairs judgment.
And then what happened?
After all this time, everybody joined in.
According to the U.N., new cases of HIV declined by 90 percent, and according to the World Bank, 7.7 million lives were saved.
Otherwise there wouldn't be many Thais walking around today.
So it just showed you, you could do something about it.
90 percent of the funding came from Thailand.
There was political commitment, some financial commitment, and everybody joined in the fight.
So just don't leave it to the specialists and doctors and nurses.
We all need to help.
And then we decided to help people out of poverty, now that we got AIDS somewhat out of the way -- this time, not with government alone, but in cooperation with the business community.
Because poor people are business people who lack business skills and access to credit.
Those are the things to be provided by the business community.
We're trying to turn them into barefoot entrepreneurs, little business people.
The only way out of poverty is through business enterprise.
So, that was done.
The money goes from the company into the village via tree-planting.
It's not a free gift.
They plant the trees, and the money goes into their microcredit fund, which we call the Village Development Bank.
Everybody joins in, and they feel they own the bank, because they have brought the money in.
And before you can borrow the money, you need to be trained.
And we believe if you want to help the poor, those who are living in poverty, access to credit must be a human right.
Access to credit must be a human right.
Otherwise they'll never get out of poverty.
And then before getting a loan, you must be trained.
Here's what we call a "barefoot MBA," teaching people how to do business so that, when they borrow money, they'll succeed with the business.
These are some of the businesses: mushrooms, crabs, vegetables, trees, fruits, and this is very interesting -- Nike ice cream and Nike biscuits; this is a village sponsored by Nike.
They said, "They should stop making shoes and clothes.
Make these better, because we can afford them."
And then we have silk, Thai silk.
Now we're making Scottish tartans, as you can see on the left, to sell to all people of Scottish ancestors.
So anyone sitting in and watching TV, get in touch with me.
And then this is our answer to Starbucks in Thailand -- "Coffee and Condoms."
See, Starbucks you awake, we keep you awake and alive.
That's the difference.
Can you imagine, at every Starbucks that you can also get condoms?
You can order your condoms with your with your cappuccino.
And then now, finally in education, we want to change the school as being underutilized into a place where it's a lifelong learning center for everyone.
We call this our School-Based Integrated Rural Development.
And it's a center, a focal point for economic and social development.
Re-do the school, make it serve the community needs.
And here is a bamboo building -- all of them are bamboo.
This is a geodesic dome made of bamboo.
And I'm sure Buckminster Fuller would be very, very proud to see a bamboo geodesic dome.
And we use vegetables around the school ground, so they raise their own vegetables.
And then, finally, I firmly believe, if we want the MDGs to work -- the Millennium Development Goals -- we need to add family planning to it.
Of course, child mortality first and then family planning -- everyone needs family planning service -- it's underutilized.
So we have now found the weapon of mass protection.
And we also ask the next Olympics to be involved in saving lives.
And then, finally, that is our network.
And these are our Thai tulips.
(Laughter) Thank you very much indeed.
(Applause)
So, I'd like to spend a few minutes with you folks today imagining what our planet might look like in a thousand years.
But before I do that, I need to talk to you about synthetic materials like plastics, which require huge amounts of energy to create and, because of their disposal issues, are slowly poisoning our planet.
I also want to tell you and share with you how my team and I have been using mushrooms over the last three years.
Not like that. (Laughter) We're using mushrooms to create an entirely new class of materials, which perform a lot like plastics during their use, but are made from crop waste and are totally compostable at the end of their lives.
(Cheering) But first, I need to talk to you about what I consider one of the most egregious offenders in the disposable plastics category.
This is a material you all know is Styrofoam, but I like to think of it as toxic white stuff.
In a single cubic foot of this material -- about what would come around your computer or large television -- you have the same energy content of about a liter and a half of petrol.
Yet, after just a few weeks of use, you'll throw this material in the trash.
And this isn't just found in packaging.
20 billion dollars of this material is produced every year, in everything from building materials to surfboards to coffee cups to table tops.
And that's not the only place it's found.
The EPA estimates, in the United States, by volume, this material occupies 25 percent of our landfills.
Even worse is when it finds its way into our natural environment -- on the side of the road or next to a river.
If it's not picked up by a human, like me and you, it'll stay there for thousands and thousands of years.
Perhaps even worse is when it finds its way into our oceans, like in the great plastic gyre, where these materials are being mechanically broken into smaller and smaller bits, but they're not really going away.
They're not biologically compatible.
They're basically fouling up Earth's respiratory and circulatory systems.
And because these materials are so prolific, because they're found in so many places, there's one other place you'll find this material, styrene, which is made from benzene, a known carcinogen.
You'll find it inside of you.
So, for all these reasons, I think we need better materials, and there are three key principles we can use to guide these materials.
The first is feedstocks.
Today, we use a single feedstock, petroleum, to heat our homes, power our cars and make most of the materials you see around you.
We recognize this is a finite resource, and it's simply crazy to do this, to put a liter and a half of petrol in the trash every time you get a package.
Second of all, we should really strive to use far less energy in creating these materials.
I say far less, because 10 percent isn't going to cut it.
We should be talking about half, a quarter, one-tenth the energy content.
And lastly, and I think perhaps most importantly, we should be creating materials that fit into what I call nature's recycling system.
This recycling system has been in place for the last billion years.
I fit into it, you fit into it, and a hundred years tops, my body can return to the Earth with no preprocessing.
Yet that packaging I got in the mail yesterday is going to last for thousands of years.
This is crazy.
But nature provides us with a really good model here.
When a tree's done using its leaves -- its solar collectors, these amazing molecular photon capturing devices -- at the end of a season, it doesn't pack them up, take them to the leaf reprocessing center and have them melted down to form new leaves.
It just drops them, the shortest distance possible, to the forest floor, where they're actually upcycled into next year's topsoil.
And this gets us back to the mushrooms.
Because in nature, mushrooms are the recycling system.
And what we've discovered is, by using a part of the mushroom you've probably never seen -- analogous to its root structure; it's called mycelium -- we can actually grow materials with many of the same properties of conventional synthetics.
Now, mycelium is an amazing material, because it's a self-assembling material.
It actually takes things we would consider waste -- things like seed husks or woody biomass -- and can transform them into a chitinous polymer, which you can form into almost any shape.
In our process, we basically use it as a glue.
And by using mycelium as a glue, you can mold things just like you do in the plastic industry, and you can create materials with many different properties, materials that are insulating, fire-resistant, moisture-resistant, vapor-resistant -- materials that can absorb impacts, that can absorb acoustical impacts.
But these materials are grown from agricultural byproducts, not petroleum.
And because they're made of natural materials, they are 100 percent compostable in you own backyard.
So I'd like to share with you the four basic steps required to make these materials.
The first is selecting a feedstock, preferably something that's regional, that's in your area, right -- local manufacturing.
The next is actually taking this feedstock and putting in a tool, physically filling an enclosure, a mold, in whatever shape you want to get.
Then you actually grow the mycelium through these particles, and that's where the magic happens, because the organism is doing the work in this process, not the equipment.
The final step is, of course, the product, whether it's a packaging material, a table top, or building block.
Our vision is local manufacturing, like the local food movement, for production.
So we've created formulations for all around the world using regional byproducts.
If you're in China, you might use a rice husk or a cottonseed hull.
If you're in Northern Europe or North America, you can use things like buckwheat husks or oat hulls.
We then process these husks with some basic equipment.
And I want to share with you a quick video from our facility that gives you a sense of how this looks at scale.
So what you're seeing here is actually cotton hulls from Texas, in this case.
It's a waste product.
And what they're doing in our equipment is going through a continuous system, which cleans, cooks, cools and pasteurizes these materials, while also continuously inoculating them with our mycelium.
This gives us a continuous stream of material that we can put into almost any shape, though today we're making corner blocks.
And it's when this lid goes on the part, that the magic really starts.
Because the manufacturing process is our organism.
It'll actually begin to digest these wastes and, over the next five days, assemble them into biocomposites.
Our entire facility is comprised of thousands and thousands and thousands of these tools sitting indoors in the dark, quietly self-assembling materials -- and everything from building materials to, in this case, a packaging corner block.
So I've said a number of times that we grow materials.
And it's kind of hard to picture how that happens.
So my team has taken five days-worth of growth, a typical growth cycle for us, and condensed it into a 15-second time lapse.
And I want you to really watch closely these little white dots on the screen, because, over the five-day period, what they do is extend out and through this material, using the energy that's contained in these seed husks to build this chitinous polymer matrix.
This matrix self-assembles, growing through and around the particles, making millions and millions of tiny fibers.
And what parts of the seed husk we don't digest, actually become part of the final, physical composite.
So in front of your eyes, this part just self-assembled.
It actually takes a little longer. It takes five days.
But it's much faster than conventional farming.
The last step, of course, is application.
In this case, we've grown a corner block.
A major Fortune 500 furniture maker uses these corner blocks to protect their tables in shipment.
They used to use a plastic packaging buffer, but we were able to give them the exact same physical performance with our grown material.
Best of all, when it gets to the customer, it's not trash.
They can actually put this in their natural ecosystem without any processing, and it's going to improve the local soil.
So, why mycelium?
The first reason is local open feedstocks.
You want to be able to do this anywhere in the world and not worry about peak rice hull or peak cottonseed hulls, because you have multiple choices.
The next is self-assembly, because the organism is actually doing most of the work in this process.
You don't need a lot of equipment to set up a production facility.
So you can have lots of small facilities spread all across the world.
Biological yield is really important.
And because 100 percent of what we put in the tool become the final product, even the parts that aren't digested become part of the structure, we're getting incredible yield rates.
Natural polymers, well ... I think that's what's most important, because these polymers have been tried and tested in our ecosystem for the last billion years, in everything from mushrooms to crustaceans.
They're not going to clog up Earth's ecosystems. They work great.
And while, today, we can practically guarantee that yesterday's packaging is going to be here in 10,000 years, what I want to guarantee is that in 10,000 years, our descendants, our children's children, will be living happily and in harmony with a healthy Earth.
And I think that can be some really good news.
Thank you.
(Applause)
I want to talk to you today about prosperity, about our hopes for a shared and lasting prosperity.
And not just us, but the two billion people worldwide who are still chronically undernourished.
And hope actually is at the heart of this.
In fact, the Latin word for hope is at the heart of the word prosperity.
"Pro-speras," "speras," hope -- in accordance with our hopes and expectations.
The irony is, though, that we have cashed-out prosperity almost literally in terms of money and economic growth.
And we've grown our economies so much that we now stand in a real danger of undermining hope -- running down resources, cutting down rainforests, spilling oil into the Gulf of Mexico, changing the climate -- and the only thing that has actually remotely slowed down the relentless rise of carbon emissions over the last two to three decades is recession.
And recession, of course, isn't exactly a recipe for hope either, as we're busy finding out.
So we're caught in a kind of trap.
It's a dilemma, a dilemma of growth.
We can't live with it; we can't live without it.
Trash the system or crash the planet -- it's a tough choice; it isn't much of a choice.
And our best avenue of escape from this actually is a kind of blind faith in our own cleverness and technology and efficiency and doing things more efficiently.
Now I haven't got anything against efficiency.
And I think we are a clever species sometimes.
But I think we should also just check the numbers, take a reality check here.
So I want you to imagine a world, in 2050, of around nine billion people, all aspiring to Western incomes, Western lifestyles.
And I want to ask the question -- and we'll give them that two percent hike in income, in salary each year as well, because we believe in growth.
And I want to ask the question: how far and how fast would be have to move?
How clever would we have to be?
How much technology would we need in this world to deliver our carbon targets?
And here in my chart -- on the left-hand side is where we are now.
This is the carbon intensity of economic growth in the economy at the moment.
It's around about 770 grams of carbon.
In the world I describe to you, we have to be right over here at the right-hand side at six grams of carbon.
It's a 130-fold improvement, and that is 10 times further and faster than anything we've ever achieved in industrial history.
Maybe we can do it, maybe it's possible -- who knows?
Maybe we can even go further and get an economy that pulls carbon out of the atmosphere, which is what we're going to need to be doing by the end of the century.
But shouldn't we just check first that the economic system that we have is remotely capable of delivering this kind of improvement?
So I want to just spend a couple of minutes on system dynamics.
It's a bit complex, and I apologize for that.
What I'll try and do, is I'll try and paraphrase it is sort of human terms.
So it looks a little bit like this.
Firms produce goods for households -- that's us -- and provide us with incomes, and that's even better, because we can spend those incomes on more goods and services.
That's called the circular flow of the economy.
It looks harmless enough.
I just want to highlight one key feature of this system, which is the role of investment.
Now investment constitutes only about a fifth of the national income in most modern economies, but it plays an absolutely vital role.
And what it does essentially is to stimulate further consumption growth.
It does this in a couple of ways -- chasing productivity, which drives down prices and encourages us to buy more stuff.
But I want to concentrate on the role of investment in seeking out novelty, the production and consumption of novelty.
Joseph Schumpeter called this "the process of creative destruction."
It's a process of the production and reproduction of novelty, continually chasing expanding consumer markets, consumer goods, new consumer goods.
And this, this is where it gets interesting, because it turns out that human beings have something of an appetite for novelty.
We love new stuff -- new material stuff for sure -- but also new ideas, new adventures, new experiences.
But the materiality matters too, because in every society that anthropologists have looked at, material stuff operates as a kind of language -- a language of goods, a symbolic language that we use to tell each other stories -- stories, for example, about how important we are.
Status-driven, conspicuous consumption thrives from the language of novelty.
And here, all of a sudden, we have a system that is locking economic structure with social logic -- the economic institutions, and who we are as people, locked together to drive an engine of growth.
And this engine is not just economic value; it is pulling material resources relentlessly through the system, driven by our own insatiable appetites, driven in fact by a sense of anxiety.
Adam Smith, 200 years ago, spoke about our desire for a life without shame.
A life without shame: in his day, what that meant was a linen shirt, and today, well, you still need the shirt, but you need the hybrid car, the HDTV, two holidays a year in the sun, the netbook and iPad, the list goes on -- an almost inexhaustible supply of goods, driven by this anxiety.
And even if we don't want them, we need to buy them, because, if we don't buy them, the system crashes.
And to stop it crashing over the last two to three decades, we've expanded the money supply, expanded credit and debt, so that people can keep buying stuff.
And of course, that expansion was deeply implicated in the crisis.
But this -- I just want to show you some data here.
This is what it looks like, essentially, this credit and debt system, just for the U.K.
This was the last 15 years before the crash, and you can see there, consumer debt rose dramatically.
It was above the GDP for three years in a row just before the crisis.
And in the mean time, personal savings absolutely plummeted.
The savings ratio, net savings, were below zero in the middle of 2008, just before the crash.
This is people expanding debt, drawing down their savings, just to stay in the game.
This is a strange, rather perverse, story, just to put it in very simple terms.
It's a story about us, people, being persuaded to spend money we don't have on things we don't need to create impressions that won't last on people we don't care about.
(Laughter) (Applause) But before we consign ourselves to despair, maybe we should just go back and say, "Did we get this right?
Is this really how people are?
Is this really how economies behave?"
And almost straightaway we actually run up against a couple of anomalies.
The first one is in the crisis itself.
In the crisis, in the recession, what do people want to do?
They want to hunker down, they want to look to the future.
They want to spend less and save more.
But saving is exactly the wrong thing to do from the system point of view.
Keynes called this the "paradox of thrift" -- saving slows down recovery.
And politicians call on us continually to draw down more debt, to draw down our own savings even further, just so that we can get the show back on the road, so we can keep this growth-based economy going.
It's an anomaly, it's a place where the system actually is at odds with who we are as people.
Here's another one -- completely different one: Why is it that we don't do the blindingly obvious things we should do to combat climate change, very, very simple things like buying energy-efficient appliances, putting in efficient lights, turning the lights off occasionally, insulating our homes?
These things save carbon, they save energy, they save us money.
So is it that, though they make perfect economic sense, we don't do them?
Well, I had my own personal insight into this a few years ago.
It was a Sunday evening, Sunday afternoon, and it was just after -- actually, to be honest, too long after -- we had moved into a new house.
And I had finally got around to doing some draft stripping, installing insulation around the windows and doors to keep out the drafts.
And my, then, five year-old daughter was helping me in the way that five year-olds do.
And we'd been doing this for a while, when she turned to me very solemnly and said, "Will this really keep out the giraffes?"
(Laughter) "Here they are, the giraffes."
You can hear the five-year-old mind working.
These ones, interestingly, are 400 miles north of here outside Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria.
Goodness knows what they make of the Lake District weather.
But actually that childish misrepresentation stuck with me, because it suddenly became clear to me why we don't do the blindingly obvious things.
We're too busy keeping out the giraffes -- putting the kids on the bus in the morning, getting ourselves to work on time, surviving email overload and shop floor politics, foraging for groceries, throwing together meals, escaping for a couple of precious hours in the evening into prime-time TV or TED online, getting from one end of the day to the other, keeping out the giraffes.
(Laughter) What is the objective?
"What is the objective of the consumer?"
Mary Douglas asked in an essay on poverty written 35 years ago.
"It is," she said, "to help create the social world and find a credible place in it."
That is a deeply humanizing vision of our lives, and it's a completely different vision than the one that lies at the heart of this economic model.
So who are we?
Who are these people?
Are we these novelty-seeking, hedonistic, selfish individuals?
Or might we actually occasionally be something like the selfless altruist depicted in Rembrandt's lovely, lovely sketch here?
Well psychology actually says there is a tension -- a tension between self-regarding behaviors and other regarding behaviors.
And these tensions have deep evolutionary roots, so selfish behavior is adaptive in certain circumstances -- fight or flight.
But other regarding behaviors are essential to our evolution as social beings.
And perhaps even more interesting from our point of view, another tension between novelty-seeking behaviors and tradition or conservation.
Novelty is adaptive when things are changing and you need to adapt yourself.
Tradition is essential to lay down the stability to raise families and form cohesive social groups.
So here, all of a sudden, we're looking at a map of the human heart.
And it reveals to us, suddenly, the crux of the matter.
What we've done is we've created economies.
We've created systems, which systematically privilege, encourage, one narrow quadrant of the human soul and left the others unregarded.
And in the same token, the solution becomes clear, because this isn't, therefore, about changing human nature.
It isn't, in fact, about curtailing possibilities.
It is about opening up.
It is about allowing ourselves the freedom to become fully human, recognizing the depth and the breadth of the human psyche and building institutions to protect Rembrandt's fragile altruist within.
What does all this mean for economics?
What would economies look like if we took that vision of human nature at their heart and stretched them along these orthogonal dimensions of the human psyche?
Well, it might look a little bit like the 4,000 community-interest companies that have sprung up in the U.K. over the last five years and a similar rise in B corporations in the United States, enterprises that have ecological and social goals written into their constitution at their heart -- companies, in fact, like this one, Ecosia.
And I just want to, very quickly, show you this.
Ecosia is an Internet search engine.
Internet search engines work by drawing revenues from sponsored links that appear when you do a search.
And Ecosia works in pretty much the same way.
So we can do that here -- we can just put in a little search term.
There you go, Oxford, that's where we are. See what comes up.
The difference with Ecosia though is that, in Ecosia's case, it draws the revenues in the same way, but it allocates 80 percent of those revenues to a rainforest protection project in the Amazon.
And we're going to do it.
We're just going to click on Naturejobs.uk.
In case anyone out there is looking for a job in a recession, that's the page to go to.
And what happened then was the sponsor gave revenues to Ecosia, and Ecosia is giving 80 percent of those revenues to a rainforest protection project.
It's taking profits from one place and allocating them into the protection of ecological resources.
It's a different kind of enterprise for a new economy.
It's a form, if you like, of ecological altruism -- perhaps something along those lines. Maybe it's that.
Whatever it is, whatever this new economy is, what we need the economy to do, in fact, is to put investment back into the heart of the model, to re-conceive investment.
Only now, investment isn't going to be about the relentless and mindless pursuit of consumption growth.
Investment has to be a different beast.
Investment has to be, in the new economy, protecting and nurturing the ecological assets on which our future depends.
It has to be about transition.
It has to be investing in low-carbon technologies and infrastructures.
We have to invest, in fact, in the idea of a meaningful prosperity, providing capabilities for people to flourish.
And of course, this task has material dimensions.
It would be nonsense to talk about people flourishing if they didn't have food, clothing and shelter.
But it's also clear that prosperity goes beyond this.
It has social and psychological aims -- family, friendship, commitments, society, participating in the life of that society.
And this too requires investment, investment -- for example, in places -- places where we can connect, places where we can participate, shared spaces, concert halls, gardens, public parks, libraries, museums, quiet centers, places of joy and celebration, places of tranquility and contemplation, sites for the "cultivation of a common citizenship," in Michael Sandel's lovely phrase.
An investment -- investment, after all, is just such a basic economic concept -- is nothing more nor less than a relationship between the present and the future, a shared present and a common future.
And we need that relationship to reflect, to reclaim hope.
So let me come back, with this sense of hope, to the two billion people still trying to live each day on less than the price of a skinny latte from the cafe next door.
What can we offer those people?
It's clear that we have a responsibility to help lift them out of poverty.
It's clear that we have a responsibility to make room for growth where growth really matters in those poorest nations.
And it's also clear that we will never achieve that unless we're capable of redefining a meaningful sense of prosperity in the richer nations, a prosperity that is more meaningful and less materialistic than the growth-based model.
So this is not just a Western post-materialist fantasy.
In fact, an African philosopher wrote to me, when "Prosperity Without Growth" was published, pointing out the similarities between this view of prosperity and the traditional African concept of ubuntu.
Ubuntu says, "I am because we are."
Prosperity is a shared endeavor.
Its roots are long and deep -- its foundations, I've tried to show, exist already, inside each of us.
So this is not about standing in the way of development.
It's not about overthrowing capitalism.
It's not about trying to change human nature.
What we're doing here is we're taking a few simple steps towards an economics fit for purpose.
And at the heart of that economics, we're placing a more credible, more robust, and more realistic vision of what it means to be human.
Thank you very much.
(Applause) Chris Anderson: While they're taking the podium away, just a quick question.
First of all, economists aren't supposed to be inspiring, so you may need to work on the tone a little.
(Laughter) Can you picture the politicians ever buying into this?
I mean, can you picture a politician standing up in Britain and saying, "GDP fell two percent this year. Good news!
We're actually all happier, and a country's more beautiful, and our lives are better."
Tim Jackson: Well that's clearly not what you're doing.
You're not making news out of things falling down.
You're making news out of the things that tell you that we're flourishing.
Can I picture politicians doing it?
Actually, I already am seeing a little bit of it.
When we first started this kind of work, politicians would stand up, treasury spokesmen would stand up, and accuse us of wanting to go back and live in caves.
And actually in the period through which we've been working over the last 18 years -- partly because of the financial crisis and a little bit of humility in the profession of economics -- actually people are engaging in this issue in all sorts of countries around the world.
CA: But is it mainly politicians who are going to have to get their act together, or is it going to be more just civil society and companies?
TJ: It has to be companies. It has to be civil society.
But it has to have political leadership.
This is a kind of agenda, which actually politicians themselves are kind of caught in that dilemma, because they're hooked on the growth model themselves.
But actually opening up the space to think about different ways of governing, different kinds of politics, and creating the space for civil society and businesses to operate differently -- absolutely vital.
CA: And if someone could convince you that we actually can make the -- what was it? -- the 130-fold improvement in efficiency, of reduction of carbon footprint, would you then actually like that picture of economic growth into more knowledge-based goods?
TJ: I would still want to know that you could do that and get below zero by the end of the century, in terms of taking carbon out of the atmosphere, and solve the problem of biodiversity and reduce the impact on land use and do something about the erosion of topsoils and the quality of water.
If you can convince me we can do all that, then, yes, I would take the two percent.
CA: Tim, thank you for a very important talk. Thank you.
(Applause)
I've been fascinated for a lifetime by the beauty, form and function of giant bluefin tuna.
Bluefin are warmblooded like us.
They're the largest of the tunas, the second-largest fish in the sea -- bony fish.
They actually are a fish that is endothermic -- powers through the ocean with warm muscles like a mammal.
That's one of our bluefin at the Monterey Bay Aquarium.
You can see in its shape and its streamlined design it's powered for ocean swimming.
It flies through the ocean on its pectoral fins, gets lift, powers its movements with a lunate tail.
It's actually got a naked skin for most of its body, so it reduces friction with the water.
This is what one of nature's finest machines.
Now, bluefin were revered by Man for all of human history.
For 4,000 years, we fished sustainably for this animal, and it's evidenced in the art that we see from thousands of years ago.
Bluefin are in cave paintings in France.
They're on coins that date back 3,000 years.
This fish was revered by humankind.
It was fished sustainably till all of time, except for our generation.
Bluefin are pursued wherever they go -- there is a gold rush on Earth, and this is a gold rush for bluefin.
There are traps that fish sustainably up until recently.
And yet, the type of fishing going on today, with pens, with enormous stakes, is really wiping bluefin ecologically off the planet.
Now bluefin, in general, goes to one place: Japan.
Some of you may be guilty of having contributed to the demise of bluefin.
They're delectable muscle, rich in fat -- absolutely taste delicious.
And that's their problem; we're eating them to death.
Now in the Atlantic, the story is pretty simple.
Bluefin have two populations: one large, one small.
The North American population is fished at about 2,000 ton.
The European population and North African -- the Eastern bluefin tuna -- is fished at tremendous levels: 50,000 tons over the last decade almost every year.
The result is whether you're looking at the West or the Eastern bluefin population, there's been tremendous decline on both sides, as much as 90 percent if you go back with your baseline to 1950.
For that, bluefin have been given a status equivalent to tigers, to lions, to certain African elephants and to pandas.
These fish have been proposed for an endangered species listing in the past two months.
They were voted on and rejected just two weeks ago, despite outstanding science that shows from two committees this fish meets the criteria of CITES I.
And if it's tunas you don't care about, perhaps you might be interested that international long lines and pursing chase down tunas and bycatch animals such as leatherbacks, sharks, marlin, albatross.
These animals and their demise occurs in the tuna fisheries.
The challenge we face is that we know very little about tuna, and everyone in the room knows what it looks like when an African lion takes down its prey.
I doubt anyone has seen a giant bluefin feed.
This tuna symbolizes what's the problem for all of us in the room.
It's the 21st century, but we really have only just begun to really study our oceans in a deep way.
Technology has come of age that's allowing us to see the Earth from space and go deep into the seas remotely.
And we've got to use these technologies immediately to get a better understanding of how our ocean realm works.
Most of us from the ship -- even I -- look out at the ocean and see this homogeneous sea.
We don't know where the structure is.
We can't tell where are the watering holes like we can on an African plain.
We can't see the corridors, and we can't see what it is that brings together a tuna, a leatherback and an albatross.
We're only just beginning to understand how the physical oceanography and the biological oceanography come together to create a seasonal force that actually causes the upwelling that might make a hot spot a hope spot.
The reasons these challenges are great is that technically it's difficult to go to sea.
It's hard to study a bluefin on its turf, the entire Pacific realm.
It's really tough to get up close and personal with a mako shark and try to put a tag on it.
And then imagine being Bruce Mate's team from OSU, getting up close to a blue whale and fixing a tag on the blue whale that stays, an engineering challenge we've yet to really overcome.
So the story of our team, a dedicated team, is fish and chips.
We basically are taking the same satellite phone parts, or the same parts that are in your computer, chips.
We're putting them together in unusual ways, and this is taking us into the ocean realm like never before.
And for the first time, we're able to watch the journey of a tuna beneath the ocean using light and photons to measure sunrise and sunset.
Now, I've been working with tunas for over 15 years.
I have the privilege of being a partner with the Monterey Bay Aquarium.
We've actually taken a sliver of the ocean, put it behind glass, and we together have put bluefin tuna and yellowfin tuna on display.
When the veil of bubbles lifts every morning, we can actually see a community from the Pelagic ocean, one of the only places on Earth you can see giant bluefin swim by.
We can see in their beauty of form and function, their ceaseless activity.
They're flying through their space, ocean space.
And we can bring two million people a year into contact with this fish and show them its beauty.
Behind the scenes is a working lab at Stanford University partnered with the Monterey Bay Aquarium.
Here, for over 14 or 15 years, we've actually brought in both bluefin and yellowfin in captivity.
We'd been studying these fish, but first we had to learn how to husbandry them.
What do they like to eat?
What is it that they're happy with?
We go in the tanks with the tuna -- we touch their naked skin -- it's pretty amazing. It feels wonderful.
And then, better yet, we've got our own version of tuna whisperers, our own Chuck Farwell, Alex Norton, who can take a big tuna and in one motion, put it into an envelope of water, so that we can actually work with the tuna and learn the techniques it takes to not injure this fish who never sees a boundary in the open sea.
Jeff and Jason there, are scientists who are going to take a tuna and put it in the equivalent of a treadmill, a flume.
And that tuna thinks it's going to Japan, but it's staying in place.
We're actually measuring its oxygen consumption, its energy consumption.
We're taking this data and building better models.
And when I see that tuna -- this is my favorite view -- I begin to wonder: how did this fish solve the longitude problem before we did?
So take a look at that animal.
That's the closest you'll probably ever get.
Now, the activities from the lab have taught us now how to go out in the open ocean.
So in a program called Tag-A-Giant we've actually gone from Ireland to Canada, from Corsica to Spain.
We've fished with many nations around the world in an effort to basically put electronic computers inside giant tunas.
We've actually tagged 1,100 tunas.
And I'm going to show you three clips, because I tagged 1,100 tunas.
It's a very hard process, but it's a ballet.
We bring the tuna out, we measure it.
A team of fishers, captains, scientists and technicians work together to keep this animal out of the ocean for about four to five minutes.
We put water over its gills, give it oxygen.
And then with a lot of effort, after tagging, putting in the computer, making sure the stalk is sticking out so it senses the environment, we send this fish back into the sea.
And when it goes, we're always happy.
We see a flick of the tail.
And from our data that gets collected, when that tag comes back, because a fisher returns it for a thousand-dollar reward, we can get tracks beneath the sea for up to five years now, on a backboned animal.
Now sometimes the tunas are really large, such as this fish off Nantucket.
But that's about half the size of the biggest tuna we've ever tagged.
It takes a human effort, a team effort, to bring the fish in.
In this case, what we're going to do is put a pop-up satellite archival tag on the tuna.
This tag rides on the tuna, senses the environment around the tuna and actually will come off the fish, detach, float to the surface and send back to Earth-orbiting satellites position data estimated by math on the tag, pressure data and temperature data.
And so what we get then from the pop-up satellite tag is we get away from having to have a human interaction to recapture the tag.
Both the electronic tags I'm talking about are expensive.
These tags have been engineered by a variety of teams in North America.
They are some of our finest instruments, our new technology in the ocean today.
One community in general has given more to help us than any other community.
And that's the fisheries off the state of North Carolina.
There are two villages, Harris and Morehead City, every winter for over a decade, held a party called Tag-A-Giant, and together, fishers worked with us to tag 800 to 900 fish.
In this case, we're actually going to measure the fish.
We're going to do something that in recent years we've started: take a mucus sample.
Watch how shiny the skin is; you can see my reflection there.
And from that mucus, we can get gene profiles, we can get information on gender, checking the pop-up tag one more time, and then it's out in the ocean.
And this is my favorite.
With the help of my former postdoc, Gareth Lawson, this is a gorgeous picture of a single tuna.
This tuna is actually moving on a numerical ocean.
The warm is the Gulf Stream, the cold up there in the Gulf of Maine.
That's where the tuna wants to go -- it wants to forage on schools of herring -- but it can't get there. It's too cold.
But then it warms up, and the tuna pops in, gets some fish, maybe comes back to home base, goes in again and then comes back to winter down there in North Carolina and then on to the Bahamas.
And my favorite scene, three tunas going into the Gulf of Mexico.
Three tunas tagged.
Astronomically, we're calculating positions.
They're coming together. That could be tuna sex -- and there it is.
That is where the tuna spawn.
So from data like this, we're able now to put the map up, and in this map you see thousands of positions generated by this decade and a half of tagging.
And now we're showing that tunas on the western side go to the eastern side.
So two populations of tunas -- that is, we have a Gulf population, one that we can tag -- they go to the Gulf of Mexico, I showed you that -- and a second population.
Living amongst our tunas -- our North American tunas -- are European tunas that go back to the Med.
On the hot spots -- the hope spots -- they're mixed populations.
And so what we've done with the science is we're showing the International Commission, building new models, showing them that a two-stock no-mixing model -- to this day, used to reject the CITES treaty -- that model isn't the right model.
This model, a model of overlap, is the way to move forward.
So we can then predict where management places should be.
Places like the Gulf of Mexico and the Mediterranean are places where the single species, the single population, can be captured.
These become forthright in places we need to protect.
The center of the Atlantic where the mixing is, I could imagine a policy that lets Canada and America fish, because they manage their fisheries well, they're doing a good job.
But in the international realm, where fishing and overfishing has really gone wild, these are the places that we have to make hope spots in.
That's the size they have to be to protect the bluefin tuna.
Now in a second project called Tagging of Pacific Pelagics, we took on the planet as a team, those of us in the Census of Marine Life.
And, funded primarily through Sloan Foundation and others, we were able to actually go in, in our project -- we're one of 17 field programs and begin to take on tagging large numbers of predators, not just tunas.
So what we've done is actually gone up to tag salmon shark in Alaska, met salmon shark on their home territory, followed them catching salmon and then went in and figured out that, if we take a salmon and put it on a line, we can actually take up a salmon shark -- This is the cousin of the white shark -- and very carefully -- note, I say "very carefully," -- we can actually keep it calm, put a hose in its mouth, keep it off the deck and then tag it with a satellite tag.
That satellite tag will now have your shark phone home and send in a message.
And that shark leaping there, if you look carefully, has an antenna.
It's a free swimming shark with a satellite tag jumping after salmon, sending home its data.
Salmon sharks aren't the only sharks we tag.
But there goes salmon sharks with this meter-level resolution on an ocean of temperature -- warm colors are warmer.
Salmon sharks go down to the tropics to pup and come into Monterey.
Now right next door in Monterey and up at the Farallones are a white shark team led by Scott Anderson -- there -- and Sal Jorgensen.
They can throw out a target -- it's a carpet shaped like a seal -- and in will come a white shark, a curious critter that will come right up to our 16-ft. boat.
It's a several thousand-pound animal.
And we'll wind in the target.
And we'll place an acoustic tag that says, "OMSHARK 10165," or something like that, acoustically with a ping.
And then we'll put on a satellite tag that will give us the long-distance journeys with the light-based geolocation algorithms solved on the computer that's on the fish.
So in this case, Sal's looking at two tags there, and there they are: the white sharks of California going off to the white shark cafe and coming back.
We also tag makos with our NOAA colleagues, blue sharks.
And now, together, what we can see on this ocean of color that's temperature, we can see ten-day worms of makos and salmon sharks.
We have white sharks and blue sharks.
For the first time, an ecoscape as large as ocean-scale, showing where the sharks go.
The tuna team from TOPP has done the unthinkable: three teams tagged 1,700 tunas, bluefin, yellowfin and albacore all at the same time -- carefully rehearsed tagging programs in which we go out, pick up juvenile tunas, put in the tags that actually have the sensors, stick out the tuna and then let them go.
They get returned, and when they get returned, here on a NASA numerical ocean you can see bluefin in blue go across their corridor, returning to the Western Pacific.
Our team from UCSC has tagged elephant seals with tags that are glued on their heads, that come off when they slough.
These elephant seals cover half an ocean, take data down to 1,800 feet -- amazing data.
And then there's Scott Shaffer and our shearwaters wearing tuna tags, light-based tags, that now are going to take you from New Zealand to Monterey and back, journeys of 35,000 nautical miles we had never seen before.
But now with light-based geolocation tags that are very small, we can actually see these journeys.
Same thing with Laysan albatross who travel an entire ocean on a trip sometimes, up to the same zone the tunas use.
You can see why they might be caught.
Then there's George Schillinger and our leatherback team out of Playa Grande tagging leatherbacks that go right past where we are.
And Scott Benson's team that showed that leatherbacks go from Indonesia all the way to Monterey.
So what we can see on this moving ocean is we can finally see where the predators are.
We can actually see how they're using ecospaces as large as an ocean.
And from this information, we can begin to map the hope spots.
So this is just three years of data right here -- and there's a decade of this data.
We see the pulse and the seasonal activities that these animals are going on.
So what we're able to do with this information is boil it down to hot spots, 4,000 deployments, a huge herculean task, 2,000 tags in an area, shown here for the first time, off the California coast, that appears to be a gathering place.
And then for sort of an encore from these animals, they're helping us.
They're carrying instruments that are actually taking data down to 2,000 meters.
They're taking information from our planet at very critical places like Antarctica and the Poles.
Those are seals from many countries being released who are sampling underneath the ice sheets and giving us temperature data of oceanographic quality on both poles.
This data, when visualized, is captivating to watch.
We still haven't figured out best how to visualize the data.
And then, as these animals swim and give us the information that's important to climate issues, we also think it's critical to get this information to the public, to engage the public with this kind of data.
We did this with the Great Turtle Race -- tagged turtles, brought in four million hits.
And now with Google's Oceans, we can actually put a white shark in that ocean.
And when we do and it swims, we see this magnificent bathymetry that the shark knows is there on its path as it goes from California to Hawaii.
But maybe Mission Blue can fill in that ocean that we can't see.
We've got the capacity, NASA has the ocean.
We just need to put it together.
So in conclusion, we know where Yellowstone is for North America; it's off our coast.
We have the technology that's shown us where it is.
What we need to think about perhaps for Mission Blue is increasing the biologging capacity.
How is it that we can actually take this type of activity elsewhere?
And then finally -- to basically get the message home -- maybe use live links from animals such as blue whales and white sharks.
Make killer apps, if you will.
A lot of people are excited when sharks actually went under the Golden Gate Bridge.
Let's connect the public to this activity right on their iPhone.
That way we do away with a few internet myths.
So we can save the bluefin tuna.
We can save the white shark.
We have the science and technology.
Hope is here. Yes we can.
We need just to apply this capacity further in the oceans.
Thank you.
(Applause)
We are here today because [the] United Nations have defined goals for the progress of countries.
They're called Millennium Development Goals.
And the reason I really like these goals is that there are eight of them.
And by specifying eight different goals, the United Nations has said that there are so many things needed to change in a country in order to get the good life for people.
Look here -- you have to end poverty, education, gender, child and maternal health, control infections, protect the environment and get the good global links between nations in every aspect from aid to trade.
There's a second reason I like these development goals, and that is because each and every one is measured.
Take child mortality; the aim here is to reduce child mortality by two-thirds, from 1990 to 2015.
That's a four percent reduction per year -- and this, with measuring.
That's what makes the difference between political talking like this and really going for the important thing, a better life for people.
And what I'm so happy about with this is that we have already documented that there are many countries in Asia, in the Middle East, in Latin America and East Europe that [are] reducing with this rate.
And even mighty Brazil is going down with five percent per year, and Turkey with seven percent per year.
So there's good news.
But then I hear people saying, "There is no progress in Africa.
And there's not even statistics on Africa to know what is happening."
I'll prove them wrong on both points.
Come with me to the wonderful world of statistics.
I bring you to the webpage, ChildMortality.org, where you can take deaths in children below five years of age for all countries -- it's done by U.N. specialists.
And I will take Kenya as an example.
Here you see the data.
Don't panic -- don't panic now, I'll help you through this.
It looks nasty, like in college when you didn't like statistics.
But first thing, when you see dots like this, you have to ask yourself: from where do the data come?
What is the origin of the data?
Is it so that in Kenya, there are doctors and other specialists who write the death certificate at the death of the child and it's sent to the statistical office?
No -- low-income countries like Kenya still don't have that level of organization.
It exists, but it's not complete because so many deaths occur in the home with the family, and it's not registered.
What we rely on is not an incomplete system.
We have interviews, we have surveys.
